 Carey Hannah Mulligan ( born 28 May 1985 ) is an English actress . She made her acting debut on stage in London in the Kevin Elyot play Forty Winks in 2004 . Mulligan 's feature film debut was as Kitty Bennet in the 2005 film adaptation of Pride & Prejudice . Mulligan had early roles on British television in such programs as Bleak House , and Doctor Who . In 2008 , Mulligan made her Broadway debut in a revival of Chekhov 's The Seagull to critical acclaim . 
 Mulligan received widespread recognition for her performance in the film An Education ( 2009 ) . For her role as Jenny Mellor ( based on the memoir of journalist Lynn Barber ) , Mulligan was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress , a Golden Globe , a Screen Actors Guild Award , and won the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . In 2015 , Mulligan was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Lead Actress in a Play for her performance in the Broadway revival of David Hare 's Skylight . She is also known for her roles in Never Let Me Go ( 2010 ) , Drive ( 2011 ) , Shame ( 2011 ) , The Great Gatsby ( 2013 ) , Inside Llewyn Davis ( 2013 ) , Far from the Madding Crowd ( 2015 ) , and Suffragette ( 2015 ) . 
 Mulligan is the ambassador for the Alzheimer 's Society and War Child . Mulligan is married to British musician Marcus Mumford , with whom she has a daughter . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mulligan was born in Westminster , London , to a middle @-@ class family , the daughter of Nano ( née Booth ) and Stephen Mulligan . Her father is of Irish descent and was originally from Liverpool . Her mother is from Llandeilo , Wales . She has an older brother , Owain , who was formerly a captain in the British Army who served in Iraq and Afghanistan . Mulligan 's mother is a university lecturer and her father is a hotel manager . Her parents met while they were both working in a hotel in their twenties . When she was three years old , her family moved to Germany when her father was hired to manage a hotel there . While living in Germany , Mulligan and her brother attended the International School of Düsseldorf . When she was eight , she and her family moved back to England . As a teenager , she was educated at Woldingham School in Surrey . 
 Her interest in acting sparked from watching her brother perform in a school production of The King and I when she was six . During his rehearsals , she pleaded with his teachers to let her be in the play . They let her join the chorus . While enrolled in Woldingham School as teen , she was heavily involved in theatre . She was the student head of the drama department there , performing in plays and musicals , conducting workshops with younger students , and helping put on productions . When Mulligan was 16 , she attended a production of Henry V starring Kenneth Branagh . His performance emboldened her and reinforced her belief that she wanted to pursue a career in acting . Mulligan wrote a letter to Branagh 's mail listing asking him for advice . " I explained that my parents didn 't want me to act , but that I felt it was my vocation in life , " she said . Kenneth Branagh 's sister wrote back to Mulligan saying , " Kenneth says that if you feel such a strong need to be an actress , you must be an actress . " 
 Mulligan 's parents disapproved of her acting ambitions and wished for her to attend a university like her brother . At age 17 , Mulligan applied to three London drama schools , instead of the universities that she was expected to submit an application to , but did not receive a subsequent offer . During Mulligan 's final year at Woldingham School , actor / screenwriter Julian Fellowes delivered a lecture at her school on the production of the film Gosford Park . Mulligan briefly talked to Fellowes after the lecture and asked him for advice on an acting career . However , Fellowes dissuaded her from the profession and suggested that she " marry a lawyer " instead . Undeterred , Mulligan later sent Fellowes a letter in which she stated that she was serious about acting and that the vocation was her purpose in life . Several weeks later , Fellowes 's wife Emma invited Mulligan to a dinner for young , aspiring actors that she and her husband were hosting to offer advice . The dinner event facilitated an introduction between Mulligan and a casting assistant that led to an audition for a role in Pride and Prejudice . Mulligan auditioned on three occasions and eventually attained the role of Kitty Bennett . During her late teens and early twenties , Mulligan worked as a pub barmaid and an errand @-@ runner for Ealing Studios in between acting jobs . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 2004 , at the age of 19 , Mulligan began her acting career on stage in the play Forty Winks at the Royal Court Theatre in London . She made her film debut the following year in Pride & Prejudice , the 2005 film adaptation of the Jane Austen novel , portraying Kitty Bennet . Later that year , she auditioned for and won the role of orphan Ada Clare in the BAFTA award @-@ winning BBC adaption of Charles Dickens ' Bleak House , her television debut . Among her 2007 projects were My Boy Jack , starring Daniel Radcliffe , that features her in a supporting role , and Northanger Abbey . Mulligan identified with her role Elsie , the daughter of writer Rudyard Kipling , who vociferously opposes her brother going to war . She earned a Constellation Award for playing the main character Sally Sparrow in the Doctor Who episode " Blink " . She rounded out 2007 by appearing in an acclaimed revival of The Seagull , in which she played Nina to Kristin Scott Thomas 's Arkadina and Chiwetel Ejiofor 's Trigorin . The Daily Telegraph said her performance was " quite extraordinarily radiating ' " and The Observer called her " almost unbearably affecting . " While in the middle of the production , she had to have an appendectomy , preventing her from being able to perform for a week . For her debut Broadway performance in the 2008 American transfer of The Seagull , she was nominated for a Drama Desk Award , but lost to Angela Lansbury . 
 Her big breakthrough came when , at 22 , she was cast in her first leading role as Jenny in the 2009 independent film An Education , directed by Danish filmmaker Lone Scherfig and written by Nick Hornby . Over a hundred actresses auditioned for the part , but Mulligan 's audition impressed Scherfig the most . The film and Mulligan 's performance received rave reviews , and she was nominated for an Academy Award , Screen Actors Guild , Golden Globe , and won a BAFTA Award . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly and Todd McCarthy of Variety both compared her performance to that of Audrey Hepburn . Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers described her as having given a " sensational , <unk> performance , " while Claudia Puig of USA Today felt that Mulligan had one of the year 's best performances , and Toby Young of The Times felt she anchored the film . Writing in The Guardian , Peter Bradshaw concluded that she gave a " wonderful performance . " Mulligan was a recipient of the Shooting Stars Award from the 2009 Berlin International Film Festival and received a BAFTA Rising Star Award nomination , which is voted on by the British public . 
 Mulligan next starred in independent film The Greatest ( 2009 ) as the pregnant girlfriend of a boy who dies . Her involvement with the project helped it " tremendously " , according to the director . After being selected to join The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences , she won a British Independent Award for Never Let Me Go , an adaption of the 2005 Kazuo Ishiguro 's novel , in which she starred and narrated . It was released in September 2010 , competing against her other project , the Oliver Stone @-@ directed film Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps . Screened out of competition at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival , it was her first major studio project . Later that year she also provided vocals for the song " Write About Love " by Belle & Sebastian . 
 Mulligan returned to the stage in the Atlantic Theater Company 's off @-@ Broadway play adaptation of Ingmar Bergman 's Through a Glass , Darkly , from 13 May – 3 July 2011 . Mulligan played the central character , a mentally unstable woman , and received glowing praise from reviewers . Ben Brantley , theater critic for The New York Times , wrote that Mulligan 's performance was " acting of the highest order " ; he also described her as " extraordinary " and " one of the finest actresses of her generation . " , 
 Mulligan co @-@ starred in the critically acclaimed 2011 neo @-@ noir thriller Drive , directed by Danish filmmaker Nicholas Winding Refn . She was nominated for her second BAFTA award — Best Supporting Actress — for the film . Drive garnered a total of 4 BAFTA award nominations , including Best Picture and Best Director . Mulligan began filming Steve McQueen 's sex @-@ addiction drama Shame alongside Michael Fassbender in New York in January 2011 . Drive debuted at 2011 Cannes Film Festival and Shame debuted at 2011 Venice Film Festival , both to good reviews . Of her performance in Shame , Rolling Stone film critic Peter Travers wrote , " Mulligan is in every way sensational . " 
 She starred as Daisy Buchanan , opposite Leonardo DiCaprio , in The Great Gatsby , which was released in May 2013 . Mulligan auditioned for the role of Daisy in late 2010 . While attending a Vogue fashion dinner in New York City in November , Baz Luhrmann ’ s wife , Catherine Martin , told her she had the part . In May 2012 , Mulligan was a co @-@ chair alongside Anna Wintour for the Gatsby @-@ themed 2012 Met Ball Gala . 
 Mulligan stars in the film adaptation of Thomas Hardy 's novel Far from the Madding Crowd with Tom Sturridge , Matthias Schoenaerts , and Michael Sheen for director Thomas <unk> and Fox Searchlight . 
 Mulligan starred in the June 2014 revival of the play Skylight with Bill Nighy and Matthew Beard , directed by Stephen Daldry , at Wyndham 's Theatre in London 's West End . It won the 2014 Evening Standard Theatre Award for Revival of the Year and was nominated for the 2014 Olivier Award for Best Revival Mulligan returned to Broadway when Skylight transferred in April 2015 . Her performance as Kyra Hollis was received with critical acclaim and she has received a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play . 
 She stars in Suffragette for director Sarah Gavron and screenwriter Abi Morgan , to be released October 2015 . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Aside from acting , Mulligan was among the actresses who took part in the Safe Project — each was photographed in the place she feels safest — for a 2010 series to raise awareness of sex trafficking . She donated the Vionnet gown she wore at the 2010 BAFTAs to the Curiosity Shop , which sells its donations to raise money for Oxfam . 
 Mulligan became the ambassador of the Alzheimer 's Society in 2012 , with the goal of raising awareness and research funding for Alzheimers and dementia . Her grandmother suffers from Alzheimers and no longer recognizes her . She helped host and participated in the 2012 Alzheimer 's Society Memory Walk and was one of the sponsored Alzheimer 's Society runners in the 2013 Nike Run to the Beat half @-@ marathon in London . 
 In 2014 , Carey became an ambassador for the charity War Child ; in 2014 she visited the Democratic Republic of Congo in this role . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mulligan is married to Marcus Mumford , the lead singer of Mumford & Sons . They were childhood pen pals who lost touch and reconnected as adults . They married on 21 April 2012 , a few weeks after wrapping production on the film Inside Llewyn Davis , in which they were both involved . They have a daughter , Evelyn Grace Mumford , born in September 2015 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Theatre = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Bleed Like Me = 
 Bleed Like Me is the fourth studio album by American @-@ Scottish alternative rock band Garbage . It was released on April 11 , 2005 by A & E Records and Warner Bros. Records . The group chose a straight rock sound reminiscent of Garbage 's live performances instead of the electronica that permeated the previous album , Beautiful Garbage ( 2001 ) . 
 The first recording sessions for Bleed Like Me took place in March 2003 , but were mostly unproductive due to passive aggression between the band members , and a general lack of direction . As Garbage struggled to create the album , the band quietly split for four months starting October 2003 . They reunited under producer John King in Los Angeles , and following a guest appearance by Dave Grohl on " Bad Boyfriend " , the band found a renewed focus on production . Garbage recruited drummer Matt Walker and bassist Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen for new recording sessions , and completed the album by the end of 2004 . 
 Following critical praise and high chart positions for its lead single " Why Do You Love Me " , Bleed Like Me had a strong opening week globally , debuting in the top five in eight countries , including the United Kingdom , Australia , and the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 Garbage 's third album , Beautiful Garbage , had been promoted by a fourteen @-@ month world tour , which culminated in a run of North American shows co @-@ headlined with No Doubt and supported by The Distillers in October and November 2002 . Before the tour started , the band spent two weeks in Smart Studios — their recording studio in Madison , Wisconsin — to write new material for their upcoming album . Upon completion of the tour in December 2002 , the group took some time off ; Shirley Manson returned to her native Scotland , while Butch Vig completed production work on albums by AFI and Jessy Moss . The band regrouped in February 2003 to perform " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " at a MusiCares tribute to U2 frontman Bono . Immediately after the event , they returned to Madison to continue working on their follow @-@ up record . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 = = = Initial recording and band breakdown = = = 
 On the first day in the studio , Garbage composed a new track , " Right Between the Eyes " , in thirty minutes . Other tracks written during the early sessions were " Hangin ' with the Bitches " and " Never Be Free " ( with John 5 ) . Vig said that the quick start made the band feel optimistic and gave the impression that the album would be completed as rapidly as in six months , but " [ the album ] took a slow spiral downhill " . Recording for the album was halted during the summer when Manson underwent surgery to remove a cyst on her right vocal cord , forcing her to recuperate until August 2003 . On September 10 , a backhoe careened into the outer walls of Smart Studios , causing extensive damage . Both Garbage and the band Paris , Texas had been working on their albums . The sessions were permeated by passive @-@ aggressive tensions and an overall lack of artistic focus . According to Vig , " there were a lot of personal arguments and we couldn 't agree on songs " . Manson suffered writer 's block and had trouble writing lyrics , and Vig did not like the way the songs sounded . The drummer said that the group frequently argued during production , and that the entire band almost quit . Duke Erikson said that nobody could agree about the music 's direction , and the band was on the verge of breaking up . He said , " when you lose that common bond of the music , you 've got nothing " . Eventually , the group suffered " a complete and utter band meltdown " in October , leading the band members splitting and taking a break from the sessions . 
 Vig left the studio and returned to Los Angeles . Over the Christmas period , he encountered excited Garbage fans eager to hear about the album 's progress . Not wanting to disappoint them , he disclosed some song titles to them ; after this encounter he realised that the band still had a future . During the break , Vig met Dave Grohl of Foo Fighters in a party , and casually asked if he would drum on a Garbage track , " Bad Boyfriend " , as Vig had been frustrated with the song 's existing drum track . 
 = = = Regrouping = = = 
 At the beginning of 2004 , the band decided to try to salvage the album , taking their management 's suggestion to work with an external producer for the first time . The musicians also decided that neutral territory would be beneficial , and went to Los Angeles . Dust Brother John King was hired to produce " Bad Boyfriend " , " Space Can Come Through Anyone " , and " It 's All Over But the Crying " . Drummer Matt Chamberlain and bassist Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen were hired to perform on the songs . The recordings were completed in King 's studio The Boat and Sound City in Van Nuys . Towards the end of the recording sessions , Grohl spent a day performing on drums for " Bad Boyfriend " . The band said his performance was " raising the bar " for the record , and Vig said that Grohl " brought a different energy level to the song " , which Erikson and Steve Marker tried to follow with their guitar playing . This influenced most of the songs that followed ; the musicians wanted the songs to be " scrappy and primal sounding " . 
 The experience with King , despite only resulting in the completion of one track , " Bad Boyfriend " , gave the band perspective and direction . Manson said that because the band members still had problems speaking to each other , King could not get much work out of the band , so they realized that they needed to work out their differences and was the catalyst for the band getting back together and working harmoniously . Vig said that the tensions led the band members to become " burned out on each other " , and that reuniting made them feel able to play " ... fast and furious — as if our lives depended on it " . Manson overcame her writer 's block and began to inject political slants into her lyrics , matching them with some new material the band wrote immediately after the King sessions ; both " Metal Heart " and " Boys Wanna Fight " referenced the 2003 Invasion of Iraq . Despite a plan to record some material with producer Tony Hoffer , the band decided to complete the rest of the album themselves . Erikson later said , " It was kind of seductive to think that maybe someone else [ would ] solve all of our problems , but in the end you gotta do it yourself " . 
 Feeling that previous album Beautiful Garbage seemed fractured , the band decided to use their live sound ; Vig said that he wanted " the pumping energy that all the best raw rock records have " . The band decided that their fourth album would have a straightforward rock sound , instead of a reliance upon electronica and computer interventions . The musicians composed separately at their home studios , sending each other tracks through e @-@ mail and couriers , and the band returned to Wisconsin to finish the album . Bleed Like Me emerged from a collage of samples and loops , and this time the sound was simpler . Erikson said that rather than production , they depended on the songs . Vig opted to focus on the production duties and leave the drums to guest musicians such as Grohl , whom he considered better at the instrument than him . He also played more guitars on the album , which he found liberating . As a result , drummer Matt Walker also played on several tracks on the album , while Meldal @-@ Johnsen played bass guitar . Most of Manson 's vocals were recorded at Vig 's home studio , GrungeIsDead . 
 On October 18 , the band began mixing the album . Some songs were mixed several times ; " Sex Is Not the Enemy " was re @-@ recorded three times during the mixing process , " Right Between the Eyes " was recalled from mastering twice , and the band included live strings at the last minute on " Happy Home " . While the project 's working title was Hands on a Hard Body , after the 1997 documentary of the same name , when Manson announced the album 's release in November 2004 , she confirmed that it would be titled Bleed Like Me . By December 6 , 2004 , the album was officially completed . It was mastered in New York City ; the initial mastering was completed on December 15 , 2004 , and the final master was ready for January 6 , 2005 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Bleed Like Me is a departure from the heavily @-@ electronic music of previous albums Version 2 @.@ 0 and Beautiful Garbage in favor of a basic alternative rock sound . Vig said that while the band tried to figure out a new sound for the record , they " went back to getting great sounds from guitars " . The band tried a more spontaneous approach ; Manson did most of her singing in the first take and the drums were recorded in a way " that everything was not perfectly balanced — and not so electronic " . The band members tried to translate the energy of the band 's live performances onto the album ; Marker said that the album showed that above all , Garbage is " a loud rock band " . Vig still thought that some of the songs resembled the band 's earlier material , such as " Metal Heart " , with " a lot of weird electronics that Steve and Duke did , as well as some pretty gnarly guitar . " 
 The lyrics of Bleed Like Me talk about relationships and political themes ; Manson said , " the last few years ... have been very worrying and you 'd have to be dead to not have some kind of political view at the moment " , and that after many years being insecure about articulating her feelings writing lyrics , she found herself confident that she could express her ideas and sentiment of being " very out of kilter with a lot of the common thoughts of today " in her music . " Boys Wanna Fight " criticizes world affairs and " Sex Is Not the Enemy " is about moral guardians , inspired by the outcry caused by Janet Jackson 's wardrobe malfunction at the 2004 Super Bowl . The songs about relationships follow Manson 's tendency to discuss dark topics and emotions ; " Bleed Like Me " discusses problems with empathy and " Bad Boyfriend " is about " a predatory female meeting a predatory man " . The album closer " Happy Home " is about conflict within the band and in the wider world during production , the search of forgiveness , peace and coming to terms with one 's place in a chaotic world . 
 = = Promotional tour = = 
 Garbage launched the Bleed Like Me World Tour promoting the record on March 29 , 2005 , with a concert in Paris . The tour visited North America , Europe and Australia , and encompassed headline performances , rock festivals , and television and radio shows . Former Jane 's Addiction bassist Eric Avery left Alanis Morissette 's backing band to perform with Garbage for the tour . Matt Walker played drums in the August 22 concert in Chicago because Vig had to depart for his mother 's funeral . After being initially organized low @-@ key , the tour was moved into large venues when Bleed Like Me and its lead single " Why Do You Love Me " became surprise hits outside the U.S. In September , the band canceled concerts planned for the following month in Europe , and released a press statement saying that the band members had overextended themselves . The tour concluded with a concert in Perth , Australia on October 1 , after six months of concerts . 
 In 2012 , Manson recalled , " The making of this record was very sad for me . Being the only girl in a gang of four can get pretty lonely . We were all struggling to find our chemistry together , and as a result , the experience of making and promoting this was tense and unenjoyable . Ironically , our shows were selling out every night . But after a while , we decided that we needed to go home to lick our wounds . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Bleed Like Me received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Review aggregator Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , reported an average score of 56 based on 18 reviews . Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair rated the album a B + , complimenting the " humongous hooks " , and Kerrang ! gave Bleed Like Me 4 out of 5 , describing it as the " most exciting , touching , and most painfully human material they ’ ve put out in years " . Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke awarded the album three and a half stars out of five , writing that " the first two @-@ thirds of Bleed Like Me is easily the best sustained run of studio Garbage since the opening half of their 1995 debut " , but that the final tracks had " a sameness — a feeling of roaring in circles " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant also awarded it three and a half stars out of five ; he praised the new sound and wrote that " a few of the songs ( " Run Baby Run " and " Right Between the Eyes " in particular ) have all the right ingredients but lack the venom present on the group 's first two releases " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave Bleed Like Me three stars out of five , writing that the album was enjoyable if outdated in its musical approach " as if the band doesn 't quite know how to do anything else but sound like it 's the heyday of post @-@ grunge alt @-@ rock . " This opinion was shared by Yahoo ! Music 's Sharon O ’ Connell , who wrote that despite the intelligent songs with expertise in " muscly , alt. rock lick or the bubblegum pop hook " , Bleed Like Me " strikes a depressingly dated note " . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Nathan Rabin said the album 's lyrics lacked an emotional punch . He wrote stating that it " approaches a kind of shimmering technical perfection , but remains strangely , stubbornly uninvolving " . Betty Clarke of The Guardian wrote , " while Manson 's changeling vocals are always worth listening to , Garbage 's songs often aren 't . " Philip Robertson of PopMatters awarded the album four out of ten , and said the music sounds manufactured in its too @-@ polished manner , and that " much of what is brought to the fore on this latest musical foray is an earnest attempt at building on the marginal success of their previous power @-@ pop / rock submissions . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Bleed Like Me debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 with 73 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week , becoming the band 's first top @-@ 10 album on the chart . It fell to number 24 the following week , selling 32 @,@ 000 copies . By 2011 , the album had sold 284 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Bleed Like Me debuted at number four on the UK Albums Chart , selling 27 @,@ 375 copies in its first week . The album had sold 84 @,@ 339 copies in the United Kingdom as of July 2007 , and on July 22 , 2013 , it was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . Bleed Like Me also charted within the top 10 in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Finland , France , Mexico , and Sweden . 
 The album was preceded by the lead single " Why Do You Love Me " , which peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart — Garbage 's highest @-@ charting single since 1996 's " Stupid Girl " — while also making the top 10 of the Modern Rock Tracks in the United States , and becoming their first single since 1999 's " Special " to enter the Billboard Hot 100 , at number 97 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Garbage , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve = 
 Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve is a National Monument and Preserve in the northern Siskiyou Mountains of southwestern Oregon in the United States . The main part of the 4 @,@ 558 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 845 ha ) park , including the marble cave and a visitor center , is located 20 miles ( 32 km ) east of Cave Junction , on Oregon Route 46 . A separate visitor center in Cave Junction occupies 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) of the total . Both parts of the monument , managed by the National Park Service , are in southwestern Josephine County , near the Oregon – California border . The climate is generally mild even at the cave 's elevation of about 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) above sea level , but icicles can form at the cave entrance , and winter snow sometimes blocks the park highway . 
 Elijah Davidson , a resident of nearby Williams , discovered the cave in 1874 . Over the next two decades , private investors failed in efforts to run successful tourist ventures at the publicly owned site . After passage of the Antiquities Act by the United States Congress , President William Howard Taft established Oregon Caves National Monument , to be managed by the United States Forest Service , in 1909 . The popularity of the automobile , construction of paved highways , and promotion of tourism by boosters from Grants Pass led to large increases in cave visitation during the late 1920s and thereafter . Among the attractions at the remote monument is the Oregon Caves Chateau , a six @-@ story hotel built in a rustic style in 1934 . It is a National Historic Landmark and is part of the Oregon Caves Historic District within the monument . The Park Service , which assumed control of the monument in 1933 , offers tours of the cave from mid @-@ April through early November . In 2014 , the monument was expanded by about 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) and re @-@ designated a National Monument and Preserve . In addition , the River Styx , which flows through the cave and emerges as Cave Creek , was named to the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System . 
 Oregon Caves is a solutional cave , with passages totaling about 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) , that formed in marble . The parent rock was originally limestone that metamorphosed to marble during the geologic processes that created the Klamath Mountains , including the <unk> . Although the limestone formed about 190 million years ago , the cave itself is no older than a few million years . Valued as a tourist cave , the cavern also has scientific value ; sections of the cave that are not on tour routes contain fossils of national importance . 
 In addition to cave touring , activities at the park include hiking , photography , and wildlife viewing . One of the park trails leads through the forest to Big Tree , which at 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) is the thickest Douglas @-@ fir known in Oregon . Lodging and food are available at The Chateau and in Cave Junction . Camping is available at Forest Service campgrounds and private sites in the area . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve is in the Siskiyou Mountains , a coastal range that is part of the Klamath Mountains of northwestern California and southwestern Oregon . The main part of the park originally consisted of 484 acres ( 196 ha ) in the Rogue River – Siskiyou National Forest , about 6 miles ( 10 km ) north of the Oregon – California border in Josephine County , Oregon . An additional visitor center occupies 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) in the city of Cave Junction . The city is in the Illinois River valley , about 40 miles ( 64 km ) east of the Pacific Ocean . Elevations within the main part of the monument range from 3 @,@ 680 to 5 @,@ 480 feet ( 1 @,@ 120 to 1 @,@ 670 m ) ; the visitor center in Cave Junction is 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) above sea level . 
 In December 2014 , the U.S. Congress enlarged the protected area that includes the cave and changed its name to Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve . This means that two distinct contiguous units of the national park system share the Oregon Caves name . The preserve covers 4 @,@ 070 acres ( 1 @,@ 650 ha ) , and both it and the monument are administered by the same staff . 
 By highway , Oregon Caves is 55 miles ( 89 km ) southwest of Grants Pass , 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of Portland and 450 miles ( 720 km ) north of San Francisco . The caves are 20 miles ( 32 km ) east of Cave Junction via Oregon Route 46 , which intersects U.S. Route 199 at Cave Junction . 
 Despite the monument 's name , the main cave is a single system with known passages totaling about 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) in length . Eight separate smaller caves have also been discovered in the monument . 
 Runoff from the heavily wooded monument forms small headwater streams of the Illinois River , a major tributary of the Rogue River . One of five small springs in the monument becomes Upper Cave Creek , which flows on the surface before disappearing into its bed and entering the cave . Supplemented by water entering the cave from above , the stream emerges from the main entrance as Cave Creek . Within the cave , Cave Creek is known as the River Styx . In late 2014 , as part of other changes to the protected area and its name , Congress added the River Styx to the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System . It is the only subterranean river in the Wild Rivers system . 
 = = History = = 
 Archeologists believe the first humans to inhabit the Rogue River region were nomadic hunters and gatherers . Radiocarbon dating suggests that they arrived in southwestern Oregon at least 8 @,@ 500 years ago . At least 1 @,@ 500 years before the first contact with whites , the natives established permanent villages along streams . Even so , no evidence has been found to suggest that any of the native peoples , such as the Takelma who lived along the Rogue and Applegate rivers in the 19th century , used the cave . 
 Largely bypassed by the early non @-@ native explorers , fur traders , and settlers because of its remote location , the region attracted newcomers in quantity when prospectors found gold near Jacksonville in the Rogue River valley in 1851 . This led to the creation of Jackson County in 1852 and , after gold discoveries near Waldo in the Illinois River valley , to the creation of Josephine County , named for the daughter of a gold miner . Even with an influx of miners and of settlers who farmed donation land claims , Josephine County 's population was only 1 @,@ 204 in 1870 . 
 Elijah Jones Davidson , who discovered the cave in 1874 , emigrated from Illinois to Oregon with his parents , who eventually settled along Williams Creek in Josephine County . Williams , as the community came to be called , is about 12 miles ( 19 km ) northeast of the cave . 
 Only a few people visited the cave during the next decade . Among them was Thomas Condon , professor of geology at the University of Oregon . Guided by Davidson 's brother , in 1884 he and a group of students hiked from Williams to the cavern , which they inspected by candlelight . Shortly thereafter , Walter Burch , an acquaintance of the Davidson family , tried to develop the cave as a business . Burch and his partners opened what they called Limestone Caves and charged visitors $ 1 each for a guided cave trip , a camping spot , pasture for horses , and cave water they described as medicinal . Although Burch and others hacked crude trails to the cave from Cave Junction and Williams , the trip was too difficult for most tourists , and Limestone Caves ceased operations in 1888 . 
 In the early 1890s , the Oregon Caves Improvement Company , headed by Alfonso B. Smith of San Diego and two men from Kerby , Oregon , tried to raise capital for a larger tourist business at Oregon Caves . Smith made outlandish claims about the cave and its business potential , saying that it was 22 miles ( 35 km ) long , that an ordinary horse and buggy could be driven through 10 miles ( 16 km ) of it , that it had 600 separate chambers , and that the company planned to build something like a streetcar line from Williams to the cave . Smith succeeded in wooing The San Francisco Examiner , which twice sent reporters to the site . The second occasion involved a cave expedition that lasted about 10 days and involved " an orgy of destruction " in which passages were widened , formations broken or deliberately removed , and directional arrows added to the cave walls . After Smith had spent all of the company 's money and borrowed more in its name , he disappeared in 1894 , and the business collapsed . 
 Neither Burch nor Smith had owned the cave or the land around it , which belonged to the public . Beginning in the 1890s , the Federal government began regulating the use of public lands like these . In 1903 , President Theodore Roosevelt designated millions of acres of forest lands for protection , including what became Siskiyou National Forest , which surrounds the cave . The United States Forest Service was created in 1905 to manage these reserves . Three years later , Congress passed the Antiquities Act , which allowed the President to designate protected areas called National Monuments on public lands . In 1909 , President William Howard Taft established Oregon Caves National Monument , to be managed by the Forest Service . A year later the Forest Service employed men to guard the cave and to serve as tour guides . 
 Isolated and difficult to reach , the monument attracted only 1 @,@ 800 visitors in 1920 . The situation changed markedly when large numbers of Americans began to travel by automobile on roads paid for largely with government funds . One highway connected Grants Pass with the California coast at Crescent City . Another new road , the Oregon Caves Highway , led from the Grants Pass – Crescent City highway to the cave . Campaigns to attract car @-@ driving tourists included those of the Cavemen , a booster group from Grants Pass that dressed in animal skins , posed along tour routes , and staged annual events to promote the monument . By 1928 , the number of visitors to the cave had risen to about 24 @,@ 000 a year . 
 The visitors ' need for overnight lodging led to creation of public and private campsites and rustic cabins along highways near Cave Junction and the monument . In 1923 , the Forest Service signed a contract with the Oregon Caves Company , based in Grants Pass , to run the cave tours and improve the park accommodations . The Chalet , a building with a kitchen , dining room , gift shop , ticket sales area , and a dormitory for women on the Oregon Caves Company staff , was completed later that year . Three years later , the company added seven two @-@ bedroom cabins for tourists and a dormitory for male employees . In 1928 , an Oregon Caves bill written by the Forest Service and introduced by Senator Charles McNary of Oregon won Congressional approval . It provided funds for electric lights , a power plant , a formation @-@ washing system , and an artificial exit tunnel to eliminate the crowding that occurred when two groups on round @-@ trip tours had to pass one another in the cave . The 500 @-@ foot ( 150 m ) tunnel was completed in 1931 . 
 Management of the monument was transferred from the Forest Service to the National Park Service in 1933 , and a six @-@ story hotel , the Oregon Caves Chateau , was completed at the site in 1934 . Gust <unk> , a builder from Grants Pass , oversaw construction of the Chateau and some of the park 's other buildings , which he designed in a rustic style . Mason Manufacturing of Los Angeles produced the Chateau 's furniture in a style called Monterey , valued in the 21st century at up to $ 5 @,@ 000 for a single chair . During the 1930s and early 1940s , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) installed water and telephone lines , improved trails , and worked on landscaping at the park . The Chalet was rebuilt in 1942 to include a third story and a larger dormitory for women . 
 Although the Chateau suffered $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage from a 1964 flood , it was repaired . By 1968 , a total of one million people had visited the cave . In 1987 , the Chateau was declared a National Historic Landmark , and in 1992 , 60 acres ( 24 ha ) of the monument , including the Chateau and other rustic structures , were listed as the Oregon Caves Historic District on the National Register of Historic Places . In 2001 , the Park Service began running the cave tours formerly offered by private contractors , and two years later all the structures at the monument became public property managed by the Park Service . The Illinois Valley Community Development Organization , a non @-@ profit based in Cave Junction , runs the monument 's gift shop . In 2014 , the protected area was expanded by 4 @,@ 070 acres ( 1 @,@ 650 ha ) to include the preserve as well as the monument . 
 = = Geology and paleontology = = 
 Oregon Caves is unusual in that it was formed in marble . Most caves created by dissolving of rocks are formed in limestone or dolomite . Of the more than 3 @,@ 900 caves managed by the National Park Service , only those in Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve , Kings Canyon National Park , and Great Basin National Park have marble caves . 
 The parent rock in which the cave developed was formed about 190 million years ago as limestone that was part of a tectonic plate beneath the Pacific Ocean . <unk> plutons intruded this part of the ocean crust , the Applegate terrane , about 160 million years ago . As the oceanic crust carrying the terrane subducted under the North American plate , the terrane accreted onto the North American Plate and the limestone was subjected to heat and pressure that metamorphosed it to marble . Further tectonic movements eventually lifted the marble to about 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) above sea level . The marble block containing the cave is at least 1 @,@ 080 feet ( 330 m ) long , 490 feet ( 150 m ) wide , and about 390 feet ( 120 m ) high . 
 The cave 's creation took place long after the marble formed . As groundwater seeped into cracks in the marble , it eventually dissolved enough rock to expand some of the cracks to the size of tunnels . Generally , the age of a cave cannot be determined directly because the cave itself is an empty space . However , scientists can sometimes determine the age of speleothems or sediments in a cave . An early 21st @-@ century study of <unk> development in Oregon Caves focused on the past 380 @,@ 000 years . Based on the available evidence , the cave is thought to be at least a million years old and " probably not much older than a few million " years . 
 Marble has a more coarse @-@ grained texture than limestone , but both are made of calcite ( CaCO3 ) . Caves often develop when slightly acidic groundwater dissolves calcite along natural fractures in the rock . A reversal of the dissolving process can create <unk> and <unk> such as stalactites , that hang from cave ceilings like icicles , and stalagmites , cone @-@ shaped masses that form on cave floors , usually directly below stalactites . These structures form when acidic groundwater with a high concentration of dissolved calcite drips slowly from the ceiling of an air @-@ filled cave , becomes less acidic , and leaves some of its calcite behind as a solid precipitate . Oregon Caves includes a variety of cave formations created through precipitation of calcite . Although many of the speleothems in the public sections of the cave have been broken , discolored by human skin oils , or otherwise damaged , the narrow twisting passages of the " show cave " provide enduring tourist value . 
 The cave is not pure marble . Dikes of diorite , an igneous rock that was part of a pluton , cut through the marble in places . Shales and sandstones , which are sedimentary rocks , are in places interbedded with the marble . In addition , streams have carried silts and gravels from the surface into the cave . 
 The monument has more than 50 paleontological sites ranging in age from Late Pleistocene to Holocene . A fossil of a grizzly bear more than 50 @,@ 000 years old and a jaguar fossil between 40 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 years old have been found in the cave . Other fossils include amphibians , and rare finds of the mountain beaver , and the blue grouse . The monument 's mammalian fossils , found in non @-@ public sections of the cave , are of national significance . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The main unit of the monument is located in the mountains at elevations varying from 3 @,@ 680 to 5 @,@ 480 feet ( 1 @,@ 120 to 1 @,@ 670 m ) above sea level . The park 's nearness to the ocean contributes to its relatively mild climate . Temperatures generally range between 20 and 40 ° F ( − 7 and 4 ° C ) in winter and 50 and 90 ° F ( 10 and 32 ° C ) in summer . However , inside the cave , the temperature is always about 44 ° F ( 7 ° C ) . Annual precipitation , arriving mostly as wet snow , averages 55 inches ( 1 @,@ 400 mm ) . Moderate winds are common . 
 The climate in Cave Junction , at 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) above sea level , is warmer and wetter than the climate at the main unit . December and January are the coldest months , when highs average about 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) and lows average about 33 ° F ( 1 ° C ) . July and August are the warmest months , with an average high of 94 ° F ( 34 ° C ) and an average low of about 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) . Between 1962 and 2015 , the highest recorded temperature at Cave Junction was 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) in 2008 , and the lowest was − 6 ° F ( − 21 ° C ) in 1972 . November through January are the wettest , averaging about 10 to 11 inches ( 250 to 280 mm ) each month . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Located within the Klamath – Siskiyou region , known for its high biodiversity , the monument supports 391 vascular plant species as well as many species of bryophyte , lichen , and macrofungi . Trees in the monument include Douglas @-@ fir , oak , white fir , and alder . Among the oldest trees is Big Tree , thought to be the thickest Douglas @-@ fir in the state . It is 41 feet ( 12 m ) in circumference near the base . Its age is estimated at 600 to 800 years and it was described in the 1930s as 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) in diameter . The monument contains no plants with special conservation status . 
 Species lists for the park include about 50 mammals , 86 birds , 11 reptiles and amphibians , 8 bats , more than 200 arthropods , 8 snails and slugs , 75 butterflies , more than 55 moths , and 8 aquatic macroinvertebrates . Of these species , 160 are found inside the cave . Outside the cave , black @-@ tailed deer , Steller 's jay , common raven , and Townsend 's chipmunk are among animals often seen in the park . Less commonly sighted are black bear , cougar , northern flying squirrel , and Pacific giant salamander . Springs and other wet places support flatworms , frogs , and snails . 
 Animal species in the park with special conservation status are the northern spotted owl , California mountain kingsnake , tailed frog , Del Norte salamander , northern goshawk , olive @-@ sided flycatcher , little willow flycatcher , Siskiyou gazelle beetle , and Pacific fisher . Five at @-@ risk species are found in the cave : Townsend 's big @-@ eared bat , long @-@ eared myotis , fringed myotis , long @-@ legged myotis , and Yuma myotis . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve is open year @-@ round , although snow sometimes blocks the road to the park . Cave tours are offered from mid @-@ spring ( mid @-@ April ) to late fall ( early November ) , and the visitor center is open when the cave is open for tours . The schedule varies from season to season , but tours generally start no earlier than 9 a.m. and no later than 6 p.m. except for candlelight tours offered on Fridays and Saturdays at 6 : 30 p.m. between late May and early September . 
 Cave @-@ tour tickets are available only at the monument and are sold on a first @-@ come , first @-@ served basis . Tours are 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) long and last 90 minutes , although visitors can choose to leave the cave about halfway through the tour . The route requires negotiating more than 500 steep and uneven stairs and passageways with as little as 45 inches ( 110 cm ) between floor and ceiling . Not recommended by the Park Service for anyone with heart , lung , or mobility problems , the tour involves a total climb of 230 feet ( 70 m ) . Children less than 42 inches ( 110 cm ) tall or who are unable to climb a set of test stairs on their own are not allowed on the full cave tour . The Park Service offers a limited number of off @-@ trail " Introduction to Caving " tours by advanced reservation only . 
 Since the cave is only 44 ° F ( 7 ° C ) inside regardless of the outdoor temperature , the Park Service recommends warm clothing for its tours . Good walking shoes are needed to negotiate slippery and uneven surfaces . Not allowed on the tours are flashlights , backpacks , large purses , tripods , or pets . To protect bats from white nose syndrome , visitors must not take any clothing or equipment into Oregon Caves that entered any cave in Europe or any cave , mine , or bat hibernation site east of the Rocky Mountains in North America after 2005 . 
 Several hiking trails wind through the monument and adjacent forest lands . Big Tree Trail , 3 @.@ 3 miles ( 5 @.@ 3 km ) long , gains 1 @,@ 100 feet ( 340 m ) in elevation between the visitor center and Big Tree . No Name Trail , 1 @.@ 3 miles ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) long , begins behind the visitor center , follows Cave Creek , crosses it , and then climbs steeply to the west side of the monument . Two short side trails lead from the main trail to waterfalls along No Name Creek . Cliff Nature Trail , passing over marble outcrops and through fir forests , winds for about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from near the cave entrance past the cave exit to Big Tree Trail . Old Growth Trail , 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) long , links the Chateau and visitor center to the main parking lot . Other named trails entering the park include Cave Creek , Mt . Elijah , and Limestone . In 2012 , the Oregon Caves Historic District was expanded to include several segments of the trail system . 
 Lodging is available in the monument at the six @-@ story Chateau , which has 23 rooms to rent . Hotels , bed and breakfasts , motels , and resorts in the vicinity offer a variety of accommodations . Although no camping is allowed in the monument , the Forest Service maintains two campgrounds nearby , and there are private campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks in the vicinity . The Chateau , generally open from early May to late October , has a restaurant , coffee shop , and delicatessen , and Cave Junction has several restaurants . The monument grounds include several picnic tables . 
 = WBCM @-@ LP = 
 WBCM @-@ LP is a classic country , bluegrass , and Americana @-@ formatted broadcast radio station . Licensed to Bristol , Virginia , the station serves the twin cities of Bristol in Virginia and in Tennessee . The Birthplace of Country Music owns and operates WBCM @-@ LP . 
 The station , a working exhibit inside of the museum , went on the air for the first time in August 2015 . The planning for the station dates back to late 2013 . Programming includes live concerts held at the museum and the revival of " Farm and Fun Time " . The latter program , a live and local radio music show , aired on Bristol 's <unk> from the 1940s to the 1960s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Birthplace of Country Music applied for a construction permit to start a new low @-@ power radio station , as part of the FCC 's October 18 , 2013 , <unk> filing window . The application was granted and the construction permit issued on March 13 , 2014 . The station was to originally launch on 103 @.@ 5 FM . 
 The company proposed , in its original application , that the station would " produce content that looks back at recording and radio technologies ' impact on the world " along with " early country music , and current trends in roots and traditional music " . It was also proposed that the station would " broadcast archival recordings of a variety of influential sources " . The station would broadcast from inside The Birthplace of Country Music museum , located in Bristol , Virginia . Using vintage restored broadcasting equipment , the station would be a working exhibit inside the museum . The station 's antenna would be placed on the <unk> tower , located on Delaney Street in Bristol , Virginia . 
 On April 14 , 2014 , the station received its call sign , WBCM @-@ LP . The museum opened to the public on August 2 , 2014 . In March 2015 , Tony Lawson , founder of Knoxville , Tennessee , radio station <unk> , was hired by the museum as station manager . He was tasked to " create a radio station and media center for the museum " . Lawson had been consulting with The Birthplace of Country Music prior to being hired . 
 The Birthplace of Country Music received an email on May 27 , 2015 , voicing concern about WBCM @-@ LP 's potential interference with full @-@ power station WIMZ @-@ FM . WIMZ @-@ FM , licensed to Knoxville , Tennessee , also broadcasting on 103 @.@ 5 FM , can be heard in the Bristol area . The Birthplace of Country Music requested a new frequency for WBCM @-@ LP , on June 10 , 2015 , out " of an overabundance of caution and to eliminate potential interference " to WIMZ @-@ FM . On June 18 , 2015 , the frequency of the station was changed from 103 @.@ 5 to 100 @.@ 1 FM . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 WBCM @-@ LP began operations , with " program testing " , on August 8 , 2015 . Six days later , the station was issued a License to Cover , allowing it to begin official operations . The official launch of the station took place at 4 : 00pm on August 27 , 2015 . A " launch event " , held at The Birthplace of Country Music museum , included studio tours , a live concert broadcast on WBCM @-@ LP , and a reception . Two online music streams and a mobile app , as well as the station 's livestream , were also launched on the same day . 
 The museum plans to include the broadcast of numerous live concerts in the future . 
 = = Programming and Reception = = 
 In addition to live concerts , WBCM @-@ LP will air a revival of the Radio program " Farm and Fun Time " . " Farm and Fun Time " aired on <unk> Radio ( now <unk> ) during the 1940s through the 1960s . Each edition of the program is broadcast live from The Birthplace of Country Music museum . 
 While focused on serving Bristol in Virginia and in Tennessee , the signal of WBCM @-@ LP can be heard up to 30 miles away . 
 = Jethro Sumner = 
 Jethro Exum Sumner ( c . 1733 – c . March 18 , 1785 ) was a North Carolina landowner and businessman , and an officer in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War . Born in Virginia , Sumner 's military service began in the French and Indian War as a member of the state 's Provincial forces . After the conclusion of that conflict , he moved to Bute County , North Carolina , where he acquired a substantial area of land and operated a tavern . He served as Sheriff of Bute County , but with the coming of the American Revolution , he became a strident Patriot , and was elected to North Carolina 's Provincial Congress . 
 Sumner was named the commanding officer of the 3rd North Carolina Regiment of the North Carolina Line , a formation of the Continental Army , in 1776 , and served in both the Southern theater and Philadelphia campaign . He was one of five brigadier generals from North Carolina in the Continental Army , in which capacity he served between 1779 and 1783 . He served with distinction in the battles of Stono Ferry and Eutaw Springs , but recurring bouts of poor health often forced him to play an administrative role , or to convalesce in North Carolina . Following a drastic reduction in the number of North Carolinians serving with the Continental Army , Sumner became a general in the state 's militia but resigned in protest after the North Carolina Board of War awarded overall command of the militia to William Smallwood , a Continental Army general from Maryland . After the end of the war in 1783 , Sumner helped to establish the North Carolina Chapter of the Society of the Cincinnati , and became its first president . He died in 1785 with extensive landholdings and 35 slaves . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sumner was born in Nansemond County , Virginia , in 1733 to Jethro and Margaret Sullivan Sumner . His family had originally settled in Nansemond County in 1691 . Between 1758 and 1761 , during the French and Indian War , he was a lieutenant in the Virginia Provincial forces in Pennsylvania under the command of William Byrd III . On November 25 , 1758 , Sumner participated in the capture of Fort Duquesne . He was made commander at Pennsylvania 's Fort Bedford in 1760 . After his regiment was disbanded in 1761 , he returned home to Nansemond County . Between 1761 and 1764 , he moved to Bute County in North Carolina , and married Mary Hurst of Granville County , with whom he would have three children . One daughter , Mary , went on to wed Thomas Blount , who would later serve multiple terms in the United States House of Representatives . 
 Sumner owned substantial property inherited through his wife 's family in Bute County , where he also owned and possibly operated a tavern on land that he leased for £ 36 annually . Like many former Virginians who moved across the border into North Carolina during the colonial era , it is likely that Sumner would have retained close business ties with the province of his birth . Between 1772 and 1776 , he served as sheriff of Bute County , resigning when he became an officer during the American Revolutionary War . Sumner was active in pre @-@ Revolution protests and politics , as he believed a separation from Great Britain was inevitable . 
 = = American Revolutionary War = = 
 In 1775 , the North Carolina Provincial Congress passed legislation to raise militia forces throughout the state , and to that end it organized six militia districts , including one , centered on the town of Halifax , which contained Sumner 's home . The soldiers comprising the militia throughout the state were to enlist for six @-@ month periods . Sumner was chosen to be a major in the Halifax District militia , and was instructed to drill his men so that they would be prepared for the expected conflict . Between August and September of 1775 , he served as Bute County 's representative at the Third North Provincial Congress . In November 1775 , Sumner summoned his militia into active service , and marched north to join Robert Howe in capturing ( and later burning ) Norfolk , Virginia . 
 = = = Southern theater , 1776 = = = 
 On April 4 , 1776 , after the American Revolutionary war had been raging in Massachusetts for nearly a year , the Provincial Congress at Halifax chose Sumner to be colonel , and thus commanding officer , of the 3rd North Carolina Regiment . He likely participated in the defense of Charleston against a British invasion attempt in 1776 , after which he was involved in the aborted plans of Major General Charles Lee to invade British Florida . During the planning stages for the Florida invasion , Sumner disagreed with Peter Muhlenberg of the 8th Virginia Regiment over which of the two was to be given command over Lee 's Virginia and North Carolina troops while the commanding general was traveling in advance of his men . This dispute was resolved only when a military court of inquiry awarded Muhlenberg temporary command after Sumner failed to appear and plead his case . By August 18 , 1776 , Sumner 's 3rd Regiment had reached Savannah , Georgia , where they joined Lee , who had arrived earlier in the month . The planned invasion of Florida did not materialize , though , and Sumner left his regiment at Savannah in September 1776 to recruit more soldiers from North Carolina . 
 = = = Philadelphia campaign and Valley Forge = = = 
 In early 1777 , Sumner resumed command of the 3rd North Carolina regiment , and marched the unit north to serve under George Washington in the Philadelphia campaign . In early and mid @-@ 1777 , he remained encamped with the main portion of the Continental Army at Morristown , New Jersey . He and his men drilled regularly and had their supplies and arms inspected and repaired , although many of the North Carolinians had such poor muskets that a substantial number were discarded . Sumner and his regiment fought in the battles of Brandywine and Germantown , and spent the winter of 1777 to 1778 in Valley Forge with Washington 's army . 
 After the death at Germantown of General Francis Nash , the regiments of his North Carolina brigade were left without a commanding general . Generals Alexander McDougall of New York and Lachlan McIntosh of Georgia were appointed in succession to temporary command of the North Carolinians while in winter quarters . Many North Carolina officers believed the state was due the appointment of two additional brigadier generals based on the number of soldiers it provided to the Continental Army . At Valley Forge , the North Carolina brigade had a total strength of 1 @,@ 051 , but 353 were ill , and 164 lacked sufficient clothes to be fit for service . Sumner himself became ill in early 1778 , and was forced to return home to recuperate ; he continued to recruit soldiers in North Carolina during his recovery . Despite his recruitment efforts , in February 1778 , North Carolina 's regiments were consolidated because of a lack of available soldiers , and Sumner 's 3rd Regiment absorbed the 5th North Carolina Regiment . 
 = = = Promotion and campaigning in the Carolinas = = = 
 Although North Carolina believed it was owed additional general officer positions , conflicts between members of the North Carolina General Assembly over who was to be considered for the positions stalled the appointment of officers to assume those positions . Thomas Burke , one of North Carolina 's leading delegates to the Continental Congress , apparently lacked interest in any of the suggested candidates . To complicate matters further , Alexander Martin , once a leading candidate for generalship , resigned after charges of cowardice were leveled against him , and was no longer seen as an appropriate candidate . The General Assembly deferred discussion of possible replacement generals for more than a month after convening on November 7 , 1777 . By December 15 , the North Carolina General Assembly instructed its representatives in the Second Continental Congress to nominate Sumner for promotion to general . It was not until January 9 , 1779 , though , that the Continental Congress commissioned Sumner as brigadier general ( along with fellow North Carolinian James Hogun ) , and ordered him to join General Benjamin Lincoln in South Carolina . Sumner received the highest number of congressional votes , thirteen to Hogun 's nine and Thomas Clark 's four . 
 On June 20 , 1779 , Sumner led a Continental Army brigade at the Battle of Stono Ferry , assaulting the British right flank and routing the Hessian von <unk> Regiment . The Continentals and the Patriot militia began to run out of ammunition during the battle , and Lincoln was forced to order a general retreat . At least seven Continental officers under Sumner 's command were wounded , and future United States President Andrew Jackson 's brother Hugh was among ten North Carolinians killed . After the engagement at Stono Ferry , Sumner experienced another bout of poor health . He returned to North Carolina to recover , continuing to recruit troops during his convalescence . He suffered financially during his recovery , as a monetary crisis at the time left many officers in his position barely able to support themselves at home . He was also tasked by Lincoln with finding deserters in North Carolina and pressing them back into service . Sumner was on a leave of absence in September and October 1779 , during the Patriot defeat at the Siege of Savannah . 
 = = = Militia command = = = 
 Between the Siege of Charleston in May 1780 and the Battle of Camden in August that year , the North Carolina Line ( a loose organizational structure that encompassed all of North Carolina 's Continental Army units ) was virtually annihilated , suffering substantial casualties and the loss of many men as prisoners of war . During at least part of the intervening time , Sumner was in North Carolina on a recruiting mission . Rather than rebuild the Line , the North Carolina General Assembly determined to rely on militia for the defense of the state . In September 1780 , Sumner temporarily transferred to command of the Hillsborough District militia , under the statewide leadership of Richard Caswell . As commander of a brigade of North Carolina militia , Sumner was tasked with defending the state from the advances of British General Charles Cornwallis , but the militiamen were poorly equipped and ill @-@ trained . 
 In late 1780 , the North Carolina Board of War removed Caswell from command of North Carolina 's militia , and the General Assembly awarded command of the militia to Continental Army Brigadier General William Smallwood of Maryland , citing the Assembly 's lack of confidence in their own state 's military commanders . Sumner was further offended when command of the dwindling number of North Carolina Continentals in the southern theater was given to Smallwood as well . Despite persistent urging from Alexander Martin and others , Sumner resigned from his militia command in October 1780 , and returned to the Continental service . A political backlash by prominent militia commanders like Caswell and Martin and their supporters led to the abolition of the Board of War by the General Assembly soon after Sumner 's resignation , and Caswell in particular came back to power on the Board 's replacement organ , called the " Council Extraordinary " . 
 = = = Return to the Continental Army = = = 
 Sumner next served under General Nathanael Greene , who arrived in the southern theater in December 1780 and directed Sumner to recruit further Continental soldiers from North Carolina . On June 2 , 1781 , Greene ordered Sumner to join him in South Carolina , which he did along with 350 new recruits on August 1 . Despite the passage of a draft law in North Carolina , the number of men under his command fluctuated from day to day because of both temporary and permanent desertions . These desertions eventually elicited his personal apology to Greene , as Sumner felt unable to control the ebb of soldiers in camp . On September 8 , his regiments were positioned on the right flank of the Continental Army at the Battle of Eutaw Springs , where his units served a vital role in halting several British assaults . Greene commented on the North Carolinians ' actions at Eutaw Springs , stating that they " fought with a degree of obstinacy that would do honor to the best of veterans " . 
 Following his success at Eutaw Springs , Sumner was made commanding officer of Continental Army forces in North Carolina by Greene in 1781 . Greene primarily wanted him to regain control of the military situation in the state , as then @-@ Governor and former Continental Congress delegate Thomas Burke had been captured by David Fanning in a stunning daylight raid on Hillsborough , North Carolina on September 12 , 1781 . Combat between the British and Continental armies effectively ceased in late 1781 . After that point , Sumner failed to make any reports to Greene , who remained his commanding officer , for several months at a time , partly because of Sumner 's recurring bouts of illness . 
 = = Post @-@ war activities , death , and legacy = = 
 Following the war 's end in 1783 , Sumner returned to Bute County , which had been renamed Warren County after Joseph Warren , the hero of the Battle of Bunker Hill . It appears that Sumner 's wife died at some point between 1781 and 1785 . For his service in the Continental Army , he received a land warrant on October 23 , 1783 , which represented compensation for 84 months of service . Sumner helped create North Carolina 's chapter of the Society of the Cincinnati in October 1783 , and served as its first president . 
 Sumner died in Warren County between March 15 and March 19 , 1785 , at the age of 52 . At his death , he owned 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 000 ha ) of land in North Carolina and Tennessee ( much of which in the latter was part of the Continental Army land warrant he received ) , as well as 35 slaves . He was originally buried eight miles ( 13 km ) outside of Warrenton , but in 1891 his remains were moved to the Guilford Courthouse Battlefield , where they were interred under a monument intended as part of a " shrine to patriots " . In March 2012 , a driver struck Sumner 's monument after going off @-@ road to avoid hitting a deer , nearly destroying the stone structure . The monument was restored by May 2012 , and Sumner was reburied in a public ceremony . Sumner County , Tennessee , originally in the western portion of North Carolina , was named for him , although Sumner never visited the county . 
 = Davis Theater = 
 The Davis Theater , originally known as the Pershing Theater , is a first run movie theater located in the Lincoln Square neighborhood of Chicago . Built in 1918 , the theater has operated in different capacities in its history , showing silent films , German @-@ language films , and various forms of stage performance . In 1999 , the Davis was planned to be demolished to build residential condos , but the plans were cancelled in part due to a negative response from the community . It is one of the few operating neighborhood movie theaters in Chicago . Its building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Pershing Theater was built in 1918 and was named after First World War General of the Armies , John J. Pershing . It is the only remaining theater of five built in Lincoln Square , and one of the few neighborhood theaters still operating in Chicago . The building was designed by architect Walter W. <unk> , who was also responsible for the design of other famous buildings such as the Uptown Broadway Building in Chicago and the Roxy Theater in New York City . The Pershing opened showing silent films , its first being The Forbidden City and later Pals First . In the 1930s , the Pershing was converted to show talkies at a cost of approximately $ 10 @,@ 000 and was renamed to the Davis Theater . 
 The Pershing had some involvement in The Case of the Ragged Stranger , an infamous Chicago murder case of the early 1920s . Carl Wanderer and Ruth Johnson , husband and wife , left the theater shortly before Johnson was murdered . Although the murder was initially pinned on a stranger dressed in ragged clothing , an investigation revealed new evidence that suggested that Wanderer was , in fact , guilty of the murder . Wanderer was ultimately convicted and executed . 
 Starting in the 1952 , the theater attempted to appeal to the cultural influences in the neighborhood by showing German @-@ language films in addition to American films . The theater eventually transformed to a German film house , even acting as host for the Chicago International Film Festival in 1972 where they opened with Signs of Life . The Davis continued to show German films through the end of the decade . The theater then transitioned to showing a variety of entertainment including puppet shows , second run films , and revivals through the 1970s . In 1979 , a plan to revitalize the theater by modernizing it and concentrating on movie revivals was supported by film critic and Chicago resident Gene Siskel , but it was unsuccessful within months . 
 In June 1980 , the Davis hosted the Chicago International Film Festival 's Dance Film Festival , which featured a week @-@ long showcase of dance @-@ themed films such as Divine Madness and Non @-@ Stop Astaire , the latter of which was a collection of film dance routines featuring Fred Astaire with other notable dancers such as Judy Garland and Ginger Rogers . 
 = = Planned demolition = = 
 In October 1999 , the Davis was put up for sale at an asking price of $ 1.6M with the description , " This ornate theater is waiting to be developed into a shopping mall " . The realtor , Edward Vanek , showed the property to several interested developers who considered turning the complex into condominiums , a mall , or even a theater with food and liquor services . The Davis was eventually sold to developer Jim Jaeger later that year , who was rumored to be planning its demolition and replacement with residential housing . 
 Soon after , a " Save the Davis " campaign was organized to prevent the theater 's demolition , and included a community meeting at the Conrad Sulzer Regional Library , where over 500 people voiced opposition to the demolition of the theater . Participants in the meeting argued that demolishing the building would be a historical loss and expressed frustration that useful small businesses had been lost to the community in order to build more residential units . The campaign was supported by alderman Eugene <unk> , who refused to rezone the property to accommodate the redevelopment plans . 
 The property was bid on in December 1999 , and acquired by a non @-@ profit , Davis Theater Preservation Corporation , headed by community resident Mary <unk> . The property was sold to Special Real Estate Services in 2000 , and thereafter the theater began to show first run films once again . 
 = = Present operations = = 
 The Davis Theater is currently operated as a first run theater , containing four screens . It also occasionally shows second runs of older films . It is owned by the Value Theater Corporation , which specializes in maintaining smaller movie theaters in the United States . It was renovated to replace its film projectors with digital film . The Davis participated in the Chicago International Children 's Film Festival in 2008 . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 958 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 958 ( also designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR <unk> ) is an 8 @.@ 63 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 89 km ) state highway located in Warren County , Pennsylvania . The designation 's southern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Route 6 in Pittsfield Township . The route heads through several small communities , including Lottsville , where it goes on a short concurrency with Pennsylvania Route 957 . The northern terminus is at the New York state line at Freehold Township , just east of Bear Lake . There , the route continues through New York as Chautauqua County Route 33 . Route 958 was designated in 1928 as a connector from U.S. Route 6 to the community of Wrightsville , where the designation terminated . The route was extended northward along its current alignment in 1936 and has remained unchanged since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 958 begins at an intersection with a two @-@ lane U.S. Route 6 east of the city of Corry . The route progresses northward as a two @-@ lane roadway through the rural regions of western Pennsylvania . Route 958 soon enters the community of Wrightsville , a small community of a few residences and mostly fields . At <unk> Run Road , the highway begins to cross through a populated area , however , it soon leaves Wrightsville and turns to the northwest in the deep fields north of the community . The northwestern bend curves back to the northward progression and Route 958 passes through a large farm near an intersection with Kidder Road . Some residences parallel the highway as it makes another northwestern bend and soon comes on a northward stretch into the community of Lottsville , where the highway intersects with Route 957 . 
 At the intersection , Routes 957 and 958 become concurrent along a westbound residential street , until leaving Lottsville , where the two routes turn to the southwest in fields . As Routes 957 and 958 approach a railroad line used by Norfolk Southern ( and previously the Erie Railroad ) , Route 958 forks to the north , paralleling and soon crossing the rails northwest of Lottsville . The distinctively rural surroundings for Route 958 return , and the Norfolk Southern line parallels to the east as the highway curves northwestward . Soon , Route 958 returns to a farming region and curves away from the railroad on a mountainside . After passing a large pond , the route intersects Greeley Street a t @-@ intersection in Bear Lake , where Route 958 turns eastward through the rural areas before intersecting with North Road , where the route turns northward and reaches the New York state line near Niobe , New York . Route 958 terminates here , and the right @-@ of @-@ way continues northward as Chautauqua County Route 33 ( Panama – Bear Lake Road ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 958 was first designated among many regional highways in the 1928 mass renumbering of state highways throughout Pennsylvania . The alignment , however was only a stub designation , connecting the southern terminus of U.S. Route 6 ( formerly State Route 7 ) to the borough of Wrightsville , only a short distance away . The alignment designed in 1928 only remained intact eight years into 1936 , when it was extended northward to its current terminus at the New York state line near Bear Lake , Pennsylvania and Niobe , New York in 1936 . The alignment has remained unchanged since the 1936 extension . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Warren County . 
 = Kaiser @-@ class battleship = 
 The Kaiser class was a class of five battleships that were built in Germany prior to World War I and served in the Imperial German Navy during the war . They were the third class of German dreadnoughts , and the first to feature turbine engines and superfiring turrets . The five ships were Kaiser , Friedrich der Grosse , Kaiserin , Prinzregent Luitpold , and König Albert . As was usual for German battleships of the period , the Kaiser class mounted main guns that were smaller than those of their British rivals : 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) , compared to the 34 @.@ 3 cm ( 13 @.@ 5 in ) guns of the British Orion class . 
 All five ships saw action in the North Sea during the war ; they served together as the VI Division of the III Battle Squadron . Four were present during the Battle of Jutland ; König Albert was in dock at the time . Of the four ships that took part in the battle , only Kaiser was damaged , being struck by two heavy @-@ caliber shells . The ships also took part in Operation Albion in the Baltic Sea ; during the operation they were reorganized as the IV Battle Squadron , under the command of Vice Admiral Wilhelm Souchon . 
 At the end of the war , all five ships were interned at the British naval base in Scapa Flow . On 21 June 1919 , they were scuttled to prevent their seizure by the Royal Navy . The ships were subsequently raised and broken up for scrap between 1929 and 1937 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Kaiser @-@ class ships were ordered under the same Second Naval Law as the preceding Helgoland @-@ class battleships . The law provided that the life expectancy of capital ships was to be reduced from 25 to 20 years , a measure designed to necessitate construction of newer battleships . This meant that the six Siegfried @-@ class coastal defense ships , the two Odin @-@ class coastal defense ships , as well as the four Brandenburg @-@ class battleships would have to be replaced . The five Kaisers were to replace the remaining three Siegfried @-@ class ships : Hildebrand , Heimdall , and Hagen , as well as the two Odin @-@ class ships : Odin and Ägir . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Kaiser class were 171 @.@ 8 m ( 563 ft 8 in ) long at the waterline , and 172 @.@ 4 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall . The ships had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) , a draft of 9 @.@ 1 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward , 8 @.@ 8 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft , and displaced a maximum of 27 @,@ 000 tonnes . The ships had a double bottom for 88 percent of the length of the hull and 17 watertight compartments . The ships had a crew of 41 officers and 1 @,@ 043 seamen . While serving as squadron flagship , the ships had an additional 14 officers and 80 men , and as the second command flagship , the ships were manned by another 2 officers and 23 men . 
 The Kaiser @-@ class ships were excellent sea boats , but were very stiff , suffering a slight loss of speed in heavy swells . They were responsive to commands from the helm ; they turned quickly initially , but suffered from severe torque at a hard rudder . With the rudder hard over , the ships would lose up to 66 percent of their speed and heel over as much as 8 degrees . The Kaiser @-@ class ships had a transverse metacentric height of 2 @.@ 59 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Kaiser @-@ class ships were the first German battleships to be powered by turbines . They used turbines from several different manufacturers as the Reichsmarineamt and German shipyards attempted to find an alternative to a Parsons turbine monopoly . Nevertheless , Kaiser and Kaiserin were both equipped with three sets of Parsons turbines . Friedrich der Grosse had three sets of AEG @-@ Curtis turbines , while König Albert was powered by Schichau turbines . The turbines drove three @-@ bladed screws that were 3 @.@ 75 m ( 12 @.@ 3 ft ) in diameter , providing a design speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The ships had two rudders . 
 Prinzregent Luitpold was equipped with two sets of Parsons turbines on the outer shafts . It was intended that a single 12 @,@ 000 bhp Germania 6 @-@ cylinder 2 @-@ stroke diesel engine would drive the center shaft . However , the diesel power plant was not ready in time to be installed in Prinzregent Luitpold , so the ship sailed with only two shafts . On trials , Prinzregent Luitpold was approximately one half knot slower than her sisters . 
 Steam was provided by 16 Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers , except in Prinzregent Luitpold , which had only 14 boilers . Hollow grates were fitted to the boilers between 1916 and 1917 . The three @-@ shaft ships carried 3 @,@ 600 metric tons of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 600 km ; 9 @,@ 100 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Prinzregent Luitpold carried a reduced bunkerage — 3 @,@ 200 metric tons — but was designed to carry 400 tons of oil for the diesel engine . On diesel power alone , Prinzregent Luitpold would have had a range of 2 @,@ 000 nautical miles at 12 knots . 
 Electrical power was provided by four double turbo @-@ generators and two diesel generators . They produced a total output of 1 @,@ 800 kilowatts at 225 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Kaiser @-@ class ships each carried ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns mounted in five twin turrets . One turret was mounted fore , two were mounted en echelon amidships , and the fourth and fifth turrets were mounted in a superfiring pair aft . The guns were supplied with a total of 860 shells , for 86 rounds per gun . The shells were 894 lb ( 406 kg ) , and were fired at a muzzle velocity of 854 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 805 feet per second ) . The guns were placed in Drh LC / 1909 mountings , which were very similar to the older LC / 1908 gun mounts used in the preceding Helgoland @-@ class ships . The mountings were initially capable of depression to − 8 degrees and elevation to 13 @.@ 5 degrees . At maximum elevation , the guns had a range of up to 16 @,@ 299 m ( 17 @,@ 825 yd ) . The mountings were later modified to depress to − 5 @.@ 5 degrees and elevate to 16 degrees . This extended the maximum range of 20 @,@ 400 m ( 22 @,@ 300 yd ) . 
 The ships had a secondary battery of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , each mounted in casemates . The guns each had a supply of one hundred and sixty 99 @.@ 9 lb ( 45 @.@ 3 kg ) shells , for a total of 2240 . Firing at a muzzle velocity of 835 m / s ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) , the guns could hit targets at a distance 13 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 yd ) , and after modifications in 1915 , the range was extended to 16 @,@ 800 m ( 18 @,@ 400 yd ) . The ships were also equipped with eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns . They were eventually rearmed with four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 Flak guns , two of which were later removed . As was customary for capital ships of the period , the Kaiser @-@ class ships were armed with five 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , while the other four were placed on the broadside , two on each flank of the ship . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 As with all major contemporary German warships , the Kaiser @-@ class ships were protected by Krupp cemented steel armor . The deck armor ranged in thickness , from 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in more critical areas of the ship , down to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) in less important areas . The armored belt was 35 cm ( 14 in ) thick in the central citadel , and tapered down to 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) forward and 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) aft . Behind the armored belt , the ships had a torpedo bulkhead 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The forward conning tower had sides that were 40 cm ( 16 in ) thick and the roof was 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The aft conning tower was significantly less well @-@ armored ; the sides were 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick , and the roof was only 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The main battery turrets were protected by 30 cm of armor on the sides and 22 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) of armor on the roofs . The 15 cm guns had 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) of armor plating on their mounts , and 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) on their gun shields . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Kaiser , the name ship of the class , was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft Kiel in December 1909 under construction number 35 . The ship was launched on 22 March 1911 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 August 1912 . Friedrich der Grosse followed on 26 January 1910 , at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Hamburg . She was launched on 10 June 1911 and commissioned as the flagship of the High Seas Fleet on 15 October 1912 . Kaiserin , the third ship of the class , was laid down in the Howaldtswerke in Kiel in November 1910 . She was launched on 11 November 1911 , and commissioned on 14 May 1913 . 
 König Albert was laid down at Schichau in Danzig on 17 July 1910 , and launched on 27 April 1912 . She was commissioned into the fleet on 31 July 1913 . Prinzregent Luitpold , the last ship of the class , was laid down in January 1911 at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel . The ship was launched on 17 February 1912 and commissioned on 19 August 1913 . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ war = = = 
 In 1913 – 1914 two Kaiser @-@ class ships , Kaiser and König Albert took part in a major overseas tour to South America and South Africa . The cruise was designed to demonstrate German power projection , as well as to test the reliability of the new turbine engines on long @-@ range operations . Both ships had returned to the German bases in the North Sea by the outbreak of World War I. 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby = = = = 
 The first major operation of the war in which the Kaiser @-@ class ships participated was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . The raid was primarily conducted by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . The Kaiser @-@ class ships , along with the Nassau , Helgoland , and König classes steamed in distant support of Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers . Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , decided to take up station approximately in the center of the North Sea , about 130 miles east of Scarborough . 
 The Royal Navy , which had recently received the German code books captured from the beached cruiser Magdeburg , was aware that an operation was taking place , but uncertain as to where the Germans would strike . Therefore , the Admiralty ordered David Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , the six battleships of the 2nd Battle Squadron , and a number of cruisers and destroyers to attempt to intercept the German battlecruisers . However , Beatty 's task force nearly ran headlong into the entire High Seas Fleet . At 6 : 20 , Beatty 's destroyer screen came into contact with the German torpedo boat V155 . This began a confused 2 @-@ hour battle between the British destroyers and the German cruiser and destroyer screen , frequently at very close range . At the time of the first encounter , the Kaiser @-@ class battleships were less than 10 miles away from the 6 British dreadnoughts ; this was well within firing range , but in the darkness , neither British nor German admiral were aware of the composition of their opponents ' fleets . Admiral Ingenohl , loathe to disobey the Kaiser 's order to not risk the battlefleet without his express approval , concluded that his forces were engaging the screen of the entire Grand Fleet , and so 10 minutes after the first contact , he ordered a turn to port on a south @-@ east course . Continued attacks delayed the turn , but by 6 : 42 , it had been carried out . For about 40 minutes , the two fleets were steaming on a parallel course . At 7 : 20 , Ingenohl ordered a further turn to port , which put his ships on a course for German waters . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = = 
 The Kaiser @-@ class ships took part in another raid on the English coast , again as support for the German battlecruiser force in the I Scouting Group . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April 1916 , and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft largely without incident , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short artillery duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Four of the ships participated in the fleet sortie that resulted in the battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . The operation was a repeat of earlier plans that intended to draw out a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it . Kaiser , Kaiserin , Prinzregent Luitpold , and Friedrich der Grosse , Scheer 's flagship , made up the VI Division of the III Battle Squadron . The III Battle Squadron was the first of three battleship units ; however , the König @-@ class battleships of the V Division , III Battle Squadron were the vanguard of the fleet . Directly astern of the Kaiser @-@ class ships were the Helgoland and Nassau @-@ class battleships of the I Battle Squadron ; in the rear guard were the elderly Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 CET , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than a half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south in order to draw the British ships towards the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König , the leading German battleship , spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming down to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers . Shortly thereafter the order was given to commence firing ; the Kaiser @-@ class ships , with the exception of Prinzregent Luitpold , were not yet within range to engage the British battlecruisers . Prinzregent Luitpold managed to fire eight salvos at 22 @,@ 300 – 21 @,@ 300 yards ( 20 @,@ 400 – 19 @,@ 500 m ) before the range again widened sufficiently to prevent further firing . In the meantime , Kaiser and Friedrich der Grosse , along with the battleships of II Battle Squadron , were within range of the British 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron . However , the massed fire from the ten battleships interfered with accurate spotting , and after only a few salvos fire was largely ceased . 
 At around 19 : 00 , the cruiser Wiesbaden , which had earlier been disabled , was coming under attack from British light forces , and so Scheer ordered his ships to turn in order to cover an attempt to bring the ship under tow . At 19 : 05 , the British armored cruisers Defence and Warrior began firing on the crippled Wiesbaden . However , by 19 : 15 , Hipper 's battlecruisers and the battleships of III Battle Squadron appeared on the scene , and began to hammer the British ships at a range of less than 8 @,@ 000 yards . Kaiser and three König @-@ class battleships concentrated their fire on the two cruisers until one of Defence 's magazines was detonated , which caused a massive explosion that destroyed the ship . Warrior , badly damaged and afire , managed to limp northward towards the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron . 
 While Warrior was retreating northward under the cover of her own smoke , the battleship Warspite came too close to her sister Valiant , and had to turn to starboard in order to avoid collision . At that moment , a shell from Kaiser struck Warspite 's steering gear and jammed them , temporarily leaving the ship only able to steam in a large circle . Friedrich der Grosse , König , two Nassau and three Helgoland @-@ class battleships fired on Warspite for a period of about 20 minutes ; Warspite was hit 11 times before the Germans lost sight of her . Because her steering gear could not be adequately repaired , Warspite was forced to withdraw from the battle ; her absence prompted the Germans to believe they had sunk her . 
 Upon returning to the Jade estuary , the Nassau @-@ class battleships Nassau , Westfalen , and Posen and the Helgoland @-@ class battleships Helgoland and Thüringen took up guard duties in the outer roadstead . Kaiser , Kaiserin , and Prinzregent Luitpold , largely undamaged during the battle , took up defensive positions outside the Wilhelmshaven locks . The other capital ships — those that were still in fighting condition — had their fuel and ammunition stocks replenished . 
 During the battle , Kaiser had fired 224 heavy battery and 41 secondary battery shells ; Kaiserin fired 160 and 135 respectively , Prinzregent Luitpold fired 169 and 106 respectively , and Friedrich der Grosse fired 72 and 151 shells , respectively . Kaiser was hit twice by heavy @-@ caliber shells during the battle , the only ship of the class to have been hit ; however the ship only suffered a single wounded casualty . 
 = = = = Operation Albion = = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to expunge the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . To this end , the Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation in the Moonsund archipelago , particularly targeting the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe peninsula of Ösel . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint Army @-@ Navy operation to capture Ösel and Moon islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The V Division included the four Königs , and was by this time augmented with the new battleship Bayern . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , and was supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsarevitch , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , several torpedo boats and gunboats , and a garrison on Ösel of some 14 @,@ 000 men with shore batteries . 
 The operation began on 12 October , when the Kaiser @-@ class battleships engaged the batteries on the Sworbe peninsula . Simultaneously , Moltke , Bayern , and the Königs began firing on the Russian shore batteries at Tagga Bay . Stiff Russian resistance in the Kassar Wick , the entrance to Moon Sound , slowed the German advance . On 14 October , Kaiser was detached from the bombardment force to deal with the Russian destroyers holding up the German minesweepers . Under the cover of Kaiser 's 30 @.@ 5 cm guns , the German torpedo boats dashed into the Sound . During the ensuing clash , the Russian destroyer Grom was disabled and eventually sunk . 
 The Russian 30 @.@ 5 cm shore batteries at Zerel remained a significant problem , and so while Kaiser was disrupting the Russian destroyers , Kaiserin , König Albert , and Friedrich der Grosse bombarded Zerel at ranges of between 7 @.@ 5 and 12 @.@ 5 miles . Russian counter @-@ fire proved accurate , and so the German dreadnoughts were forced to continually alter course to avoid being hit . The attack lasted only about an hour , due to fears of mines and submarines . The following morning , two König @-@ class battleships were sent into Moon Sound to destroy the Russian ships stationed there . König sank the pre @-@ dreadnought Slava , while Kronprinz forced the withdrawal of the remaining warships . By 20 October , the naval operations were effectively over ; the Russian ships had been destroyed or forced to withdraw , and the German army attained its objectives . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , was interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . It became apparent to Reuter that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered his ships be sunk . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers ; at 10 : 00 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . 
 Friedrich der Grosse was the first ship of the fleet to be scuttled , sinking at 12 : 16 . She was raised on 29 April 1937 and towed to Rosyth for scrapping . The ship 's bell was returned to Germany in 1965 , and is currently in the Fleet Headquarters in Glücksburg . König Albert followed at 12 : 54 , the second ship of the fleet to sink . The ship was later raised on 31 July 1935 and broken up in Rosyth over the following year . Kaiser sank at 13 : 25 , and was raised for scrapping on 20 March 1929 ; breaking work was conducted in Rosyth by 1930 . Prinzregent Luitpold sank five minutes later , at 13 : 30 . She too was raised , on 9 July 1931 , and broken up in Rosyth . Kaiserin , the last ship of the class to be sunk , slipped beneath the surface at 14 : 00 . She was raised on 14 May 1936 , and broken up that year in Rosyth . 
 = Italian ironclad Caio Duilio = 
 Caio Duilio was the lead ship of the Caio Duilio class of ironclad turret ships built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . Named for the Roman admiral Gaius <unk> , the ship was laid down in January 1873 , was launched in May 1876 , and was completed in January 1880 . She was armed with a main battery of four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) guns , then the largest gun afloat , and she was capable of a top speed of around 15 kn ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 Caio Duilio 's career was uneventful . She spent her first two decades in service with the Active and Reserve Squadrons , primarily tasked with training maneuvers and exercises . She was withdrawn from front @-@ line duty in 1902 and thereafter employed as a training ship , though this role only lasted until 1909 when she was converted into a floating oil tank and renamed <unk> . The ship 's ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = = Design = = 
 Caio Duilio was 109 @.@ 16 meters ( 358 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19 @.@ 74 m ( 64 @.@ 8 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 31 m ( 27 @.@ 3 ft ) . She displaced 10 @,@ 962 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 789 long tons ; 12 @,@ 084 short tons ) normally and up to 12 @,@ 071 t ( 11 @,@ 880 long tons ; 13 @,@ 306 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 15 @.@ 04 knots ( 27 @.@ 85 km / h ; 17 @.@ 31 mph ) at 7 @,@ 711 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 750 kW ) . She could steam for 3 @,@ 760 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 960 km ; 4 @,@ 330 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 420 officers and men , which later increased to 515 . 
 Caio Duilio was armed with a main battery of four 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) 20 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two turrets placed en echelon amidships . These were the largest naval guns in use at the time . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried three 14 in ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes . Caio Duilio was protected by belt armor that was 21 @.@ 5 in ( 550 mm ) thick at its strongest section , which protected the ship 's magazines and machinery spaces . Both ends of the belt were connected by transverse bulkheads that were 15 @.@ 75 in ( 400 mm ) thick . She had an armored deck that was 1 @.@ 1 to 2 in ( 28 to 51 mm ) thick . Her gun turrets were armored with 17 in of steel plate . The ship 's bow and stern were not armored , but they were extensively subdivided into a cellular " raft " that was intended to reduce the risk of flooding . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Caio Duilio was laid down at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard in Castellammare di Stabia on 6 January 1873 , the same day that the keel for her sister ship Enrico Dandolo was laid down at the Arsenale di La Spezia . Construction on Caio Duilio proceeded much faster than on her sister ; she was launched on 8 May 1876 and completed on 6 January 1880 , more than two years before Enrico Dandolo would be finished . On 8 March , shortly after Caio Duilio entered service , one of her 17 @.@ 7 in guns exploded . The inexperienced gun crew had accidentally double @-@ loaded the gun . During the annual fleet maneuvers held in 1885 , Caio Duilio served in the 1st Division of the " Western Squadron " ; she was joined by her sister Enrico Dandolo , the protected cruiser Giovanni Bausan , and a sloop . The " Western Squadron " attacked the defending " Eastern Squadron " , simulating a Franco @-@ Italian conflict , with operations conducted off Sardinia . 
 Caio Duilio took part in the annual 1888 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclads Lepanto , Italia , Enrico Dandolo , and San Martino , one protected cruiser , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Later that year , the ship was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy . In 1890 , Caio Duilio received a secondary battery of three 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns to defend the ship against torpedo boats . Caio Duilio served with the 1st Division of the Reserve Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Re Umberto , which served as the divisional flagship , the torpedo cruiser Minerva , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Reserve Squadron defended against a simulated attack by the Active Squadron , which gamed a French attack on the Italian fleet . 
 For the periodic fleet maneuvers of 1897 , Caio Duilio was assigned to the First Division of the Reserve Squadron , which also included the ironclads Ruggiero di Lauria and Lepanto and the protected cruiser Lombardia . In 1900 , the ship 's secondary battery was supplemented with two 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , eight 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber quick @-@ firing guns , and four 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ caliber revolver cannon . By 1902 , the ship had been removed from front line service and was employed as a boys ' training ship ; she was at that time the flagship of the Training Division . The Italian Navy had considered rebuilding the ship along the same lines as her sister Enrico Dandolo , but the cost of the project proved to be prohibitive , and by 1902 they had abandoned the plan . In early 1909 , Caio Duilio was stricken from the naval register , and on 27 June she was disarmed . The ship was converted into a coal and oil storage hulk and was renamed <unk> . Her ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = King & Queen = 
 King & Queen is a studio album by American recording artists Otis Redding and Carla Thomas . It is Thomas ' fourth album and Redding 's sixth and the final studio album before his death on December 10 , 1967 . Influenced by Marvin Gaye 's duets , the album features ten covers of soul classics and the eleventh finishing song co @-@ written by Redding . 
 The album includes crossover hits " Tramp " and " Knock on Wood " . Following Redding 's death , the single " Lovey Dovey " was also released . The original album 's liner notes were written by Tennessee Senator Howard H. Baker , Jr . It was released on March 16 , 1967 , by Stax Records . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Producer Jim Stewart had the idea to produce a duet album with Otis Redding and Carla Thomas , as he thought it would help their musical careers ' progress , and that " [ Redding 's ] rawness and [ Thomas 's ] sophistication would work " well together . Another reason to combine the two artists was in the hopes of achieving a success similar to that which Motown singer Marvin Gaye had with both Tammi Terrell and Kim Weston . Carla Thomas was already successful in the R & B business ; she had already had many singles appear in both the Hot 100 and Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles charts , most recently her 1966 song " B @-@ A @-@ B @-@ Y " . Redding agreed to record with Thomas , simply stating , " Well , hey , you from Memphis , you from Tennessee , you can hang " . At the time the album was recorded in January 1967 , Thomas was studying at Howard University in Washington D.C. for an M.A. in English . Recorded in about six days ( another source states only three days ) , the album features eleven songs : ten covers of soul classics , and an eleventh song , " Ooh Carla , Ooh Otis " , that Redding co @-@ wrote with Al Bell . It features house band Booker T. & the M.G. ' s , pianist Isaac Hayes , and the brass section The Memphis Horns . Six out of eleven songs were cut during their session ; the rest were overdubbed by Redding in the following days owing to their concert obligations . 
 = = Release = = 
 Three singles were released from the album : " Tramp " , the first cut song , was released as a single in April and peaked at number two on Billboard Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles chart and at number twenty @-@ six on Billboard Hot 100 ; " Knock on Wood " peaked in September at number eight on the Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles chart and number thirty on the Hot 100 charts ; and " Lovey Dovey " was released late in 1968 , and charted at number twenty @-@ one on the Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles list and number sixty on the Hot 100 . The album was released on March 16 , 1967 . 
 = = Retrospective reviews = = 
 In retrospective reviews King & Queen has gained positive comments . Jason Ankeny of Allmusic gives the album 4 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 . He states that " Redding and Thomas enjoy an undeniable chemistry , and they play off each other wonderfully " , and summarizes the album as follows : " Otis Redding never recorded a lighter , more purely entertaining record than King & Queen " . Robert Christgau gives it an " A- " ; although he says the album was " pretty ephemeral " , he praises the exciting music , and writes that it sounds " vivacious , catchier and funnier [ than ] most soul music " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : Allmusic 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 1st Brigade , 7th Infantry Division ( United States ) = 
 The 1st Brigade , 7th Infantry Division was an infantry brigade of the United States Army , and a part of the 7th Infantry Division . The brigade was based at Fort Ord , California for most of its history . After the Korean War , it was activated as a brigade in 1963 , and was returned to the United States where it saw action in Operation Just Cause and Operation Golden Pheasant before being finally deactivated in 1995 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Post @-@ Korean War = = = 
 In the wake of the Korean War , between 1953 and 1971 , the 7th Infantry Division defended the Korean Demilitarized Zone . Its main garrison was Camp Casey , South Korea . During this period , the division was restructured in compliance with the Reorganization Objective Army Divisions tables of organization . In 1963 , the division 's former headquarters company grew into the 1st Brigade , 7th Infantry Division . On 2 April 1971 , the division and its brigades returned to the United States and inactivated at Fort Lewis , Washington . 
 In October 1974 the 7th and two brigades reactivated at their former garrison , Fort Ord. The division was tasked to keep a close watch on South American developments . It trained at Fort Ord , Camp Roberts , and Fort Hunter Liggett . On 1 October 1985 the division redesignated as the 7th Infantry Division ( Light ) , organized again as a light infantry division . The various battalions of the 17th , 31st , and 32nd Regiments moved from the division , replaced by battalions from other regiments , including battalions from the 21st Infantry Regiment , the 27th Infantry Regiment , and the 9th Infantry Regiment . The 27th Infantry and the 9th Infantry Regiment participated in Operation Golden Pheasant in Honduras . In 1989 the 1st Brigade ( or 9th Infantry Regiment as it was more commonly known ) , 7th Infantry Division participated in Operation Just Cause in Panama . 
 The 1991 Base Realignment and Closure Commission recommended the closing of Fort Ord due to the escalating cost of living on the central California coastline . By 1994 , the garrison was to be closed and the division was to relocate to Fort Lewis , Washington . 
 In 1993 the division was slated to move to Fort Lewis , WA and inactivate as part of the post @-@ Cold War drawdown of the US Army . The 1st Brigade relocated to Ft . Lewis and was later reflagged as the 2nd Brigade of the 2nd Infantry Division while the division headquarters formally inactivated on 16 June 1994 at Fort Lewis . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Osprey = 
 The osprey ( Pandion haliaetus ) — also called fish eagle , sea hawk , river hawk , and fish hawk — is a diurnal , fish @-@ eating bird of prey with a cosmopolitan range . It is a large raptor , reaching more than 60 cm ( 24 in ) in length and 180 cm ( 71 in ) across the wings . It is brown on the upperparts and predominantly greyish on the head and underparts . 
 The osprey tolerates a wide variety of habitats , nesting in any location near a body of water providing an adequate food supply . It is found on all continents except Antarctica , although in South America it occurs only as a non @-@ breeding migrant . 
 As its other common names suggest , the osprey 's diet consists almost exclusively of fish . It possesses specialised physical characteristics and exhibits unique behaviour to assist in hunting and catching prey . As a result of these unique characteristics , it has been given its own taxonomic genus , Pandion and family , Pandionidae . Four subspecies are usually recognized , one of which has recently been given full species status ( see below ) . Despite its propensity to nest near water , the osprey is not classed as a sea eagle . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The osprey was one of the many species described by Carl Linnaeus in his 18th @-@ century work , Systema Naturae , and named as Falco <unk> . The genus , Pandion , is the sole member of the family of Pandionidae , and used to contain only one species , the osprey ( P. haliaetus ) . The genus Pandion was described by the French zoologist Marie Jules César Savigny in 1809 . 
 The osprey differs in several respects from other diurnal birds of prey . Its toes are of equal length , its tarsi are reticulate , and its talons are rounded , rather than grooved . The osprey and owls are the only raptors whose outer toe is reversible , allowing them to grasp their prey with two toes in front and two behind . This is particularly helpful when they grab slippery fish . It has always presented something of a riddle to taxonomists , but here it is treated as the sole living member of the family Pandionidae , and the family listed in its traditional place as part of the order Falconiformes . Other schemes place it alongside the hawks and eagles in the family Accipitridae — which itself can be regarded as making up the bulk of the order <unk> or else be lumped with the Falconidae into Falconiformes . The Sibley @-@ Ahlquist taxonomy has placed it together with the other diurnal raptors in a greatly enlarged Ciconiiformes , but this results in an unnatural paraphyletic classification . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 The osprey is unusual in that it is a single living species that occurs nearly worldwide . Even the few subspecies are not unequivocally separable . There are four generally recognised subspecies , although differences are small , and ITIS lists only the first two . 
 P. h. haliaetus – ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) : Palearctic . 
 P. h. carolinensis – ( Gmelin , 1788 ) : North America . This form is larger , darker bodied and has a paler breast than nominate haliaetus . 
 P. h. ridgwayi – Maynard , 1887 : Caribbean islands . This form has a very pale head and breast compared with nominate haliaetus , with only a weak eye mask . It is non @-@ migratory . Its scientific name commemorates American ornithologist Robert Ridgway . 
 P. h. cristatus – ( Vieillot , 1816 ) : coastline and some large rivers of Australia and Tasmania . The smallest and most distinctive subspecies , also non @-@ migratory . 
 Recently , P. h. cristatus has been given full species status as eastern osprey . 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 To date there have been two extinct species named from the fossil record . Pandion <unk> was named by Stuart L. <unk> in 1976 from fossils of Middle Miocene , Barstovian age , found in marine deposits in the southern part of California . The second named species Pandion <unk> , was described in 1985 by Jonathan J. Becker from fossils found in Florida and dating to the latest <unk> and possibly representing a separate lineage from that of P. <unk> and P. haliaetus . A number of claw fossils have been recovered from Pliocene and Pleistocene sediments in Florida and South Carolina . The oldest recognized Pandionidae family fossils have been recovered from the Oligocene age Jebel <unk> Formation , of Faiyum , Egypt . However they are not complete enough to assign to a specific genus . Another Pandionidae claw fossil was recovered from Early Oligocene deposits in the Mainz basin , Germany , and was described in 2006 by Gerald Mayr . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The genus name Pandion derives from the mythical Greek king of Athens and grandfather of Theseus , Pandion II . Although Pandion II was not used to name a bird of prey , Nisus , a king of Megara , was used for the genus . The species name haliaetus comes from Ancient Greek <unk> <unk> from <unk> <unk> , " sea- " and aetos <unk> , " eagle " . 
 The origins of osprey are obscure ; the word itself was first recorded around 1460 , derived via the Anglo @-@ French <unk> and the Medieval Latin avis <unk> " bird of prey , " from the Latin avis <unk> though the Oxford English Dictionary notes a connection with the Latin <unk> or " bone breaker " of Pliny the Elder . However , this term referred to the <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The osprey is 0 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 6 lb ) in weight and 50 – 66 cm ( 20 – 26 in ) in length with a 127 – 180 cm ( 50 – 71 in ) wingspan . It is , thus , of similar size to the largest members of the Buteo or Falco genera . The subspecies are fairly close in size , with the nominate subspecies averaging 1 @.@ 53 kg ( 3 @.@ 4 lb ) , P. h. carolinensis averaging 1 @.@ 7 kg ( 3 @.@ 7 lb ) and P. h. cristatus averaging 1 @.@ 25 kg ( 2 @.@ 8 lb ) . The wing chord measures 38 to 52 cm ( 15 to 20 in ) , the tail measures 16 @.@ 5 to 24 cm ( 6 @.@ 5 to 9 @.@ 4 in ) and the tarsus is 5 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) . The upperparts are a deep , glossy brown , while the breast is white and sometimes streaked with brown , and the underparts are pure white . The head is white with a dark mask across the eyes , reaching to the sides of the neck . The irises of the eyes are golden to brown , and the transparent nictitating membrane is pale blue . The bill is black , with a blue cere , and the feet are white with black talons . A short tail and long , narrow wings with four long , finger @-@ like feathers , and a shorter fifth , give it a very distinctive appearance . 
 The sexes appear fairly similar , but the adult male can be distinguished from the female by its slimmer body and narrower wings . The breast band of the male is also weaker than that of the female , or is non @-@ existent , and the underwing coverts of the male are more uniformly pale . It is straightforward to determine the sex in a breeding pair , but harder with individual birds . 
 The juvenile osprey may be identified by buff fringes to the plumage of the upperparts , a buff tone to the underparts , and streaked feathers on the head . During spring , barring on the underwings and flight feathers is a better indicator of a young bird , due to wear on the upperparts . 
 In flight , the osprey has arched wings and drooping " hands " , giving it a gull @-@ like appearance . The call is a series of sharp whistles , described as cheep , cheep or yewk , yewk . If disturbed by activity near the nest , the call is a frenzied <unk> ! 
 Osprey call 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The osprey is the second most widely distributed raptor species , after the peregrine falcon . It has a worldwide distribution and is found in temperate and tropical regions of all continents except Antarctica . In North America it breeds from Alaska and Newfoundland south to the Gulf Coast and Florida , wintering further south from the southern United States through to Argentina . It is found in summer throughout Europe north into Ireland , Scandinavia , Finland and Scotland , England , and Wales though not Iceland , and winters in North Africa . In Australia it is mainly sedentary and found patchily around the coastline , though it is a non @-@ breeding visitor to eastern Victoria and Tasmania . There is a 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) gap , corresponding with the coast of the Nullarbor Plain , between its westernmost breeding site in South Australia and the nearest breeding sites to the west in Western Australia . In the islands of the Pacific it is found in the Bismarck Islands , Solomon Islands and New Caledonia , and fossil remains of adults and juveniles have been found in Tonga , where it probably was wiped out by arriving humans . It is possible it may once have ranged across Vanuatu and Fiji as well . It is an uncommon to fairly common winter visitor to all parts of South Asia , and Southeast Asia from Myanmar through to Indochina and southern China , Indonesia , Malaysia and the Philippines . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Fish make up 99 % of the osprey 's diet . It typically takes fish weighing 150 – 300 g ( 5 @.@ 3 – 10 @.@ 6 oz ) and about 25 – 35 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 8 in ) in length , but the weight can range from 50 g ( 1 @.@ 8 oz ) to 2 kg ( 4 @.@ 4 lb ) . Virtually any type of fish in that size range are taken . 
 Ospreys have vision that is well adapted to detecting underwater objects from the air . Prey is first sighted when the osprey is 10 – 40 m ( 33 – 131 ft ) above the water , after which the bird hovers momentarily then plunges feet first into the water . 
 Occasionally , the osprey may prey on rodents , rabbits , hares , amphibians , other birds , and small reptiles . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 The osprey has several adaptations that suit its piscivorous lifestyle : 
 reversible outer toes , 
 sharp spicules on the underside of the toes , 
 closable nostrils to keep out water during dives , and 
 backwards @-@ facing scales on the talons which act as barbs to help hold its catch . 
 dense plumage which is oily and prevents its feathers from getting waterlogged . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The osprey breeds near freshwater lakes and rivers , and sometimes on coastal brackish waters . Rocky outcrops just offshore are used in Rottnest Island off the coast of Western Australia , where there are 14 or so similar nesting sites of which five to seven are used in any one year . Many are renovated each season , and some have been used for 70 years . The nest is a large heap of sticks , driftwood , turf or seaweed built in forks of trees , rocky outcrops , utility poles , artificial platforms or offshore islets . As wide as 2 meters and weighing about 135 kg , large nests on utility poles may be fire hazards and have caused power outages . 
 Generally , ospreys reach sexual maturity and begin breeding around the age of three to four , though in some regions with high osprey densities , such as Chesapeake Bay in the U.S. , they may not start breeding until five to seven years old , and there may be a shortage of suitable tall structures . If there are no nesting sites available , young ospreys may be forced to delay breeding . To ease this problem , posts are sometimes erected to provide more sites suitable for nest building . In some regions ospreys prefer transmission towers as nesting sites , e.g. in East Germany . 
 The platform design developed by one organization , Citizens United to Protect the Maurice River and Its Tributaries , Inc. has become the official design of the State of New Jersey , U.S. The platform plans and materials list , available online , have been utilized by people from a number of different geographical regions . Osprey @-@ <unk> is the global site for mapping osprey nest locations and logging observations on reproductive success . 
 Ospreys usually mate for life . Rarely , polyandry has been recorded . The breeding season varies according to latitude ; spring ( September – October ) in southern Australia , April to July in northern Australia and winter ( June – August ) in southern Queensland . In spring the pair begins a five @-@ month period of partnership to raise their young . The female lays two to four eggs within a month , and relies on the size of the nest to conserve heat . The eggs are whitish with bold splotches of reddish @-@ brown and are about 6 @.@ 2 cm × 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in × 1 @.@ 8 in ) and weigh about 65 g ( 2 @.@ 3 oz ) . The eggs are incubated for about 35 – 43 days to hatching . 
 The newly hatched chicks weigh only 50 – 60 g ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 1 oz ) , but fledge in 8 – 10 weeks . A study on Kangaroo Island , South Australia , had an average time between hatching and fledging of 69 days . The same study found an average of 0 @.@ 66 young fledged per year per occupied territory , and 0 @.@ 92 young fledged per year per active nest . Some 22 % of surviving young either remained on the island or returned at maturity to join the breeding population . When food is scarce , the first chicks to hatch are most likely to survive . The typical lifespan is 7 – 10 years , though rarely individuals can grow to as old as 20 – 25 years . The oldest European wild osprey on record lived to be over thirty years of age . In North America , great horned owls ( Bubo virginianus ) , golden eagles ( Aquila chrysaetos ) , and bald eagles ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus ) are the only major predators of ospreys , capable of taking both nestlings and adults . However , kleptoparasitism by bald eagles , where the larger raptor steals the osprey 's catch , is more common than predation . The white @-@ tailed eagle ( Haliaeetus albicilla ) , which is very similar to the bald eagle , may harass or predate the osprey in Eurasia . Raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) can be a serious threat to nestlings or eggs if they can access the nest . <unk> trematodes ( <unk> <unk> and <unk> spp . ) have been recorded in wild ospreys . 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 European breeders winter in Africa . American and Canadian breeders winter in South America , although some stay in the southernmost U.S. states such as Florida and California . Some ospreys from Florida migrate to South America . Australasian ospreys tend not to migrate . 
 Studies of Swedish ospreys showed that females tend to migrate to Africa earlier than the males . More stopovers are made during their autumn migration . The variation of timing and duration in autumn was more variable than in spring . Although migrating predominantly in the day , they sometimes fly in the dark hours particularly in crossings over water and cover on average 260 – 280 km ( 160 – 170 mi ) per day with a maximum of 431 km ( 268 mi ) per day . European birds may also winter in South Asia , an osprey ringed in Norway has been recovered in western India . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 The osprey has a large range , covering 9 @,@ 670 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 730 @,@ 000 sq mi ) in just Africa and the Americas , and has a large global population estimated at 460 @,@ 000 individuals . Although global population trends have not been quantified , the species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List ( i.e. , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and for these reasons , the species is evaluated as Least Concern . There is evidence for regional decline in South Australia where former territories at locations in the Spencer Gulf and along the lower Murray River have been vacant for decades . 
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the main threats to osprey populations were egg collectors and hunting of the adults along with other birds of prey , but osprey populations declined drastically in many areas in the 1950s and 1960s ; this appeared to be in part due to the toxic effects of insecticides such as DDT on reproduction . The pesticide interfered with the bird 's calcium metabolism which resulted in thin @-@ shelled , easily broken or infertile eggs . Possibly because of the banning of DDT in many countries in the early 1970s , together with reduced persecution , the osprey , as well as other affected bird of prey species , have made significant recoveries . In South Australia , nesting sites on the Eyre Peninsula and Kangaroo Island are vulnerable to unmanaged coastal recreation and encroaching urban development . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The Roman writer Pliny the Elder reported that parent ospreys made their young fly up to the sun as a test , and dispatch any that failed . 
 Another odd legend regarding this fish @-@ eating bird of prey , derived from the writings of Albertus Magnus and recorded in Holinshed 's Chronicles , was that it had one webbed foot and one taloned foot . 
 There was a medieval belief that fish were so mesmerised by the osprey that they turned belly @-@ up in surrender , and this is referenced by Shakespeare in Act 4 Scene 5 of Coriolanus : 
 I think he 'll be to Rome 
 As is the osprey to the fish , who takes it 
 By sovereignty of nature . 
 In Buddhism , the osprey is sometimes represented as the " King of Birds " , especially in the ' The <unk> : Or , Stories of the Buddha ’ s Former Births ' , <unk> 
 The osprey is mentioned in the famous Chinese folk poem " guan guan ju jiu " ( <unk> ) ; " ju jiu " <unk> refers to the osprey , and " guan guan " ( <unk> ) to its voice . In the poem , the osprey is considered as an icon of fidelity and harmony between wife and husband , due to its highly monogamous habits . Some commentators have claimed that " ju jiu " in the poem is not the osprey but the mallard duck , since the osprey cannot make the sound " guan guan " . 
 So @-@ called " osprey " plumes were an important item in the plume trade of the late 19th century and used in hats including those used as part of the army uniform . Despite their name , these plumes were actually obtained from egrets . 
 The Irish poet William Butler Yeats used a grey wandering osprey as a representation of sorrow in The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems ( 1889 ) . 
 The osprey is depicted as a white eagle in heraldry , and more recently has become a symbol of positive responses to nature , and has been featured on more than 50 international postage stamps . 
 The cap badge of Rhodesia 's Selous Scouts ( 1973 @-@ 1980 ) was a stylized osprey . 
 In 1994 , the osprey was declared the provincial bird of Nova Scotia , Canada . It is also the official bird of Södermanland , Sweden . 
 The osprey is used as a brand name for various products and sports teams . Examples include : the Ospreys ( a Welsh Rugby team ) ; the Richard Stockton College Osprey , ( a NCAA Division III intercollegiate athletics team of the U.S. State of New Jersey ) ; the first college in the nation ( and the only one for many years ) to adopt the osprey as its mascot and athletic team name , North Florida Ospreys ( a NCAA Division I intercollegiate athletics team ) , the Missoula Osprey ( a minor league baseball team ) ; the Seattle Seahawks ( an American football team of the National Football League ) ; the Wagner Seahawks ( a NCAA Division I intercollegiate athletics team ) ; the Cold Spring Harbor Seahawks ( a High school football team in Cold Spring Harbor , New York ) ; the Peninsula High School Seahawks ( a High School Football Team in Gig Harbor , Washington ) ; and the St. Mary 's College of Maryland Seahawks ( a NCAA Division III intercollegiate athletics team ) . 
 Examples of the osprey used as a mascot include : Ozzie Osprey ( of the University of North Florida ) ; Talon the Osprey of New Jersey 's Stockton University ; Sammy the Seahawk ( of University of North Carolina Wilmington ) ; the Wells International Seahawks ( of Bangkok , Thailand ) ; the Salve Regina Seahawks ( of Newport , Rhode Island ) ; the LA Harbor College Seahawks ( of South Bay ) ; and " Rowdy the <unk> " ( of the University of Massachusetts Lowell ) . 
 = Initiations ( Star Trek : Voyager ) = 
 " Initiations " is the second episode of the second season , and eighteenth episode overall of the American science fiction television program Star Trek : Voyager . The episode originally aired on September 4 , 1995 , and tells the story of Commander Chakotay 's capture at the hands of a young Kazon . Originally intended to open the second season , " Initiations " was bumped to second by " The 37 's " . 
 To better utilize the character , this is one of several second @-@ season episodes that focuses on Chakotay . It was written with a mind to recall the action story of Chakotay from the pilot . Writer Kenneth Biller extensively rewrote the episode after input from series co @-@ creators Jeri Taylor and Michael Piller ; whereas the Kazon originally came across as too much like the Klingons , Biller 's research helped emphasize their more street @-@ gang nature . This substantial rewrite of the episode required an overhaul of production work already invested in the episode . 
 Aron Eisenberg guest starred as Kar , the young Kazon warrior . Though his performance was lauded , he was deemed too recognizable from his recurring role on Star Trek : Deep Space Nine and was a regret of the executive producers . Mixed reviews noted the familiarity of both Eisenberg and the shooting location of Vasquez Rocks . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On stardate <unk> @.@ 3 , to commemorate the anniversary of his father 's death , Commander Chakotay takes a shuttlecraft to perform the pakra ceremony . Inadvertently straying into Kazon @-@ Ogla space , he is attacked by a young Kazon ( Aron Eisenberg as Kar ) on his first mission . Destroying the Kazon 's vessel , Chakotay beams the young Kar aboard . 
 Captured by a Kazon vessel soon thereafter , Chakotay learns from Kar that Kazon earn their titles through conquest or death , and he has robbed Kar of that opportunity by saving him . The vessel 's commander Razik ( Patrick Kilpatrick ) speaks with Chakotay , explaining his disservice to Kar and that the young Kazon is scheduled for execution . When later presented with a weapon to kill Kar as a lesson to other Kazon youth , Chakotay instead holds Razik hostage in exchange for his shuttle . Kar , seeing no future or opportunities with the Ogla , flees with Chakotay . Unable to elude the Kazon , Chakotay beams himself and Kar to a nearby Class @-@ M moon , a Kazon training ground . Kar , having eschewed an opportunity to kill Chakotay in his sleep , later explains how he has no options open to him and admits that Chakotay may be his only friend now . 
 Meanwhile , having tracked the shuttle 's probable course , Captain Janeway ( Kate Mulgrew ) , Lieutenant Tuvok ( Tim Russ ) , and Kes ( Jennifer Lien ) proceed to the moon 's surface to rescue Chakotay . On the moon , they meet up with Razik and his men who offer to lead the away team to Chakotay . When Chakotay and Kar detect their approach , Chakotay offers to help Kar earn his name by becoming his prisoner . Coordinating with Voyager to prepare for resuscitation , Chakotay allows Kar to shoot him ; Kar instead shoots Razik , earning his Ogla name and promoting his second @-@ in @-@ command , <unk> ( Tim de <unk> ) . The Ogla allow the Voyager crew to leave , with Kar 's promise that he will kill Chakotay if they meet again . Later , when performing his pakra ceremony aboard Voyager , Chakotay adds Kar to his prayers . 
 = = Writing = = 
 " Initiations " is Kenneth Biller 's first solo writing credit on Star Trek : Voyager ; he summarized the episode as " the Kazon put a hit out on Chakotay " . The Chakotay @-@ focused episode was meant to correct what co @-@ creator and executive producer Jeri Taylor felt was an underutilization of the character in the first season . Biller felt the character needed more action stories as shown in the pilot , and wrote " Initiations " to address that . Producer Winrich Kolbe did not care for the aspects of Chakotay 's character that the episode played up ; where the episode focused on his Native American heritage , Kolbe felt it should have emphasized his Maquis aspects . 
 Executive producer Michael Piller was displeased with the depiction of the Kazon in Biller 's first draft of the episode ; where they were supposed to be analogous to street gangs in Los Angeles , they were instead " coming across as warmed @-@ over Klingons . " In addition to Jari Taylor 's already extensive notes on the draft , Piller suggested Biller get in touch with actual gang members or a police officer who could better clue the writer into street gang culture for the episode . Instead , Biller picked up a copy of <unk> , a book by convicted murderer and former gang member " <unk> " Cody . The book 's insight into gang life and culture was a guiding light for Biller 's second draft , which he worked up with Piller , endeavoring to set the Kazon apart " from Romulans , Cardassians , and Klingons . " 
 The final draft of the episode was submitted on July 10 , 1995 . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Playing a recurring character on sister series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , guest star Aron Eisenberg ( Kar ) quelled rumors that he was given the part simply because of his Star Trek heritage . He emphasized that he read for the part like any other actor , and felt that he was chosen because the Voyager crew could not find a child actor who could meet muster , nor an adult actor who looked young enough for the part . In an interview with Star Trek : The Official Monthly Magazine , Eisenberg felt that he worked very hard on the episode , and that his musculature was a boon to playing " a warrior kid . " Fellow DS9 actor Max Grodénchik was his acting coach for " Initiations " . On Kar , Eisenberg played the character on the other end of the spectrum from his Nog character , so much so that he wasn 't worried about any of Nog 's characterizations or idiosyncrasies showing through . 
 Eisenberg fondly recalled working on " Initiations " both because of his familiarity with much of the crew who had previously worked on Deep Space Nine , as well as the opportunity to " goof around " with Robert Beltran ( Chakotay ) on set . He would later say to Cinefantastique that he " had a blast " working on the episode , especially the opportunity to play someone " really trying to kill someone . " Beltran would later compare the fun they had on set as akin to working with Don Rickles and that Eisenberg was " very quick @-@ witted and not afraid to cut you down . " 
 Co @-@ creator and executive producer Michael Piller called the casting of Eisenberg a " big mistake " . Because Eisenberg also played the recurring Ferengi character Nog on Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , and though he was under heavy prosthetics , his voice was too recognizable to fans of both shows . Piller praised his performance , but felt it was a casting mistake to crossover the actor in both shows . Fellow co @-@ creator and executive producer Jeri Taylor echoed Piller 's sentiments saying that though Eisenberg was the best actor that auditioned for the part , he was too recognizable as Nog and distracted the viewers . As for Eisenberg himself , he dismissed the people on the Internet saying he was too recognizable saying , " ' Come on people , it 's the same person . ' I was really proud of it . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Biller and Piller 's dramatic second draft changes required changes in the episode 's sets and shooting schedule , what Piller described as " [ having ] to change the whole thing overnight . " The chaos of the changes prompted a meeting with Piller and the production staff where he defended the upheaval as response to improving the script and overall episode . 
 In Robert Beltran 's portrayal of Chakotay in the episode , the actor bucked what he felt was viewers ' expectations . Instead of playing a " mad " Chakotay , he toned it down and made it more of about trying ( and failing ) to change Kar through kindness and tenderness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cinefantastique 's Dale Kutzera gave the episode 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars in his review , saying that the episode failed to define the Kazon as an enemy . Kutzera 's suspension of disbelief was rocked by the casting of Aron Eisenberg ( who Kutzera felt was too synonymous with his Star Trek : Deep Space Nine character , Nog ) , and the reuse of the immediately @-@ identifiable Vasquez Rocks shooting location . In his book Delta Quadrant : The unofficial guide to Voyager , David McIntee also lamented Eisenberg 's recognizability from his other Star Trek series . For the episode itself , McIntee felt the first half has some interesting potential in the culture clashes presented , but that it fell too hard on the " enemies @-@ must @-@ team @-@ up @-@ to @-@ survive " cliché ; he gave the episode a 7 out of 10 , calling it " watchable , and occasionally quite strong . " 
 Robert Beltran ( Chakotay ) said that " Initiations " " summed up in one episode basically what Chakotay is about as a person , " and that it was one of three Chakotay @-@ centric episodes ( including " Tattoo " and " Maneuvers " ) he really enjoyed . Jeri Taylor called the episode " reasonably successful . " 
 = Victory of the Daleks = 
 " Victory of the Daleks " is the third episode in the fifth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Written by Mark Gatiss and directed by Andrew Gunn , it was first broadcast on BBC One on 17 April 2010 . 
 In the episode , the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) arrive in London during the Blitz , where Winston Churchill ( Ian McNeice ) has employed " Ironsides " , a scientific creation from Professor Bracewell ( Bill Paterson ) to be used as weapons in the war effort . However , the Doctor recognises the Ironsides as his archenemies the Daleks , who plan to destroy Earth by activating a device located inside Bracewell , an android . 
 Wishing to incorporate the popular Daleks into the series , showrunner Steven Moffat instructed Gatiss to write an episode about Churchill and the Daleks . The episode introduces a new " Paradigm " of Daleks , which were designed by Gatiss to be bigger and more colourful than the previous variant . " Victory of the Daleks " was seen by 8 @.@ 2 million viewers on BBC One and BBC HD , placing second for the night it aired . Critical reception was mixed ; both McNeice and Paterson 's performances were praised , but some felt that the episode was too rushed and would have worked better if it was spread over two episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor and Amy take the TARDIS to the Cabinet War Rooms during The Blitz of the Second World War , one month after Winston Churchill requested the Doctor 's help in the war effort . As the Doctor arrived late , Churchill turned to the scientific advances of Professor Edwin Bracewell , including robotic devices called " Ironsides " , which are recognised immediately by the Doctor as his archenemies the Daleks . The Doctor tries to understand their purpose in being on Earth at this time , but they continue to act as Bracewell 's inventions , ready to serve Britain 's war efforts . Angrily , the Doctor attacks the devices , shouting , " I am the Doctor and you are the Daleks ! " Unbeknown to the Doctor and the humans , a Dalek ship is in orbit near the moon ; upon hearing the Doctor 's " testimony " , the Dalek aboard uses it to activate a " Progenator Device " and alerts its comrades on Earth . The Daleks reveal their intent and turn hostile , killing several guards and exposing Bracewell as an android before <unk> to their ship . The Doctor follows in the TARDIS , leaving Amy behind for her protection . 
 The Doctor learns that the ship escaped destruction at the moment of the collapse of the Dalek flagship Crucible after it fell through Time by accident , leaving it nearly drained of power . The Daleks ' objective is to restart the Progenator , which contains pure Dalek DNA , thus restoring their race ; since these particular Daleks were created by Davros from his DNA , the Progenator could not properly accept them as " Daleks " , and thus they required a testimony from their greatest enemy to activate it . The Doctor threatens to destroy the ship , including himself , before the Progenitor completes , but the Daleks fire an energy beam at London that lights up the entire city minutes before an air raid by the Luftwaffe , leaving the Doctor 's allies vulnerable and creating a stalemate . 
 When the Progenator completes , five brand new Daleks in larger , redesigned casings emerge from the Progenator Chamber ( The Scientist , the Drone , the Strategist , the Eternal and the Supreme ) . They disintegrate the older " inferior " models , who die willingly . At the same time , Amy convinces Churchill and Bracewell to use the technological know @-@ how they have obtained from the Daleks to modify three Spitfires so that they can fly in space . The pilots attack and destroy the dish on the underside of the Dalek ship that was firing the energy beam , saving London before it can be destroyed by the approaching German bombers . 
 The battle has claimed the lives of two of the pilots , and the Doctor orders the last Spitfire pilot to continue his attack and destroy the Dalek ship , hoping to rid the universe of them forever . The Daleks retaliate by triggering the " Oblivion Continuum " , the power source inside Bracewell that contains an unstable wormhole that will consume the planet if released . The Doctor , torn over defeating the Daleks or saving Earth , orders the Spitfire to stop its attack and returns to Earth . With Amy 's help , the Doctor is able to convince Bracewell that he is more human than machine , deactivating the device . The Daleks , having played on the Doctor 's compassion for Earth , announce their victory and retreat into hyperspace . The Doctor and Amy remove all the advanced technology borrowed from the Daleks despite Churchill wanting to use it for the war , and convince Bracewell that he need not be deactivated because he helped save the world . As they leave , the Doctor ponders why Amy does not remember the Daleks from their previous invasions of the Earth . As the TARDIS dematerialises , another crack is revealed in the wall behind it . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Several allusions are made to previous Dalek adventures . In The Power of the Daleks , a resuscitated Dalek declared " I am your servant ! " , similar to the line " I am your soldier " as used in this episode . The Doctor also expresses a desire to see " the final end " of the Daleks — a direct quotation from The Evil of the Daleks , when his second incarnation expresses the hope that the Daleks have finally been destroyed for good . 
 The Doctor refers to the events of the previous Dalek invasion of Earth ( in " The Stolen Earth " and " Journey 's End " ) when talking to Amy about the Daleks , becoming concerned when Amy does not remember these events . At the end of the episode , a crack is shown in the wall behind where the TARDIS had been parked . The crack , having first appeared in Amy 's bedroom when she was a little girl , has been a recurring theme ; in " Flesh and Stone " the Doctor discovers it has the power to erase things from existence , the reason Amy cannot remember the Daleks . 
 = = Production = = 
 Showrunner Steven Moffat wished to bring back the Daleks , as they were popular among children and had become " one of the regulars " . He stated in March 2010 that he and the production team had considered redesigning the Daleks . Mark Gatiss , the writer of the episode , was instructed by Moffat to write an episode about " Churchill versus the Daleks " . Gatiss was not sure what to do with the premise at first , but then became excited about doing a war movie , of which he was fond , and his own Dalek story . For research , he visited the real Cabinet War Rooms and read diaries and first @-@ hand accounts of the war . Gatiss 's inspiration was the 1966 serial The Power of the Daleks , though he had never seen it due to it being lost , which depicted them as more sly and silent , an aspect he called " very scary , more than when they 're just barking orders " . 
 When Gatiss wrote the first draft of the episode Matt Smith had not been cast as the Doctor . Gatiss wrote this early draft for a generic Doctor , though Moffat commented it sounded like Jon Pertwee and Gatiss agreed . Once Smith had been cast , Gatiss watched Party Animals , a television series Smith had previously starred in , as well as anything else Smith was in that he could find . Gatiss used these to " download [ his ] speech patterns " and examine his energy and phrasing . 
 Gatiss noted that the Daleks belonged in World War II , as their mission to destroy everything that was not a Dalek was a very Nazi concept . In fact , Terry Nation , the creator of the Daleks who had grown up during World War II , consciously based the Daleks on the Nazis . Smith also drew a parallel between Churchill and the Doctor , as both of them were very intelligent and also had known each other for a long time . A scene cut from the final episode explained how the two had known each other for a while . Gatiss included one of Churchill 's favourite expressions " Keep buggering on " ( abbreviated KBO ) into the script , which he was " delighted " to do . Ian McNeice , who portrayed Churchill , previously played the villain Zeus in the Eighth Doctor Big Finish audio play Immortal Beloved in 2007 . 
 Gatiss wrote in the script for the Daleks ' redesign to be " big buggers ... bigger than we 've seen them before " . The eyestalk was designed to be level with Smith 's eyeline . Moffat and Gatiss wanted the new Daleks to be very colourful , similar to the Daleks of films from the 60s . Gatiss originally wanted there to be a green Dalek , but he decided that green " just doesn 't seem to work somehow " . Nick Briggs , who voiced the Daleks , planned to counter their bright colours with a more vicious voice . Moffat wanted to somehow incorporate " Spitfires in space " . A replica of a World War Two Spitfire was used in front of a greenscreen to shoot the live action parts of the scene and the image of the Spitfire , while the rest of the scene was computer @-@ generated . The sequence contained the line " <unk> to Danny Boy " , a reference to a similar line in the film Where Eagles Dare . Gatiss provided the voice of the Spitfire pilot himself , doing one version clean and another with his hand over his mouth . In an interview in April 2010 , Gatiss described how the cameo came about : 
 " When we were filming last summer someone came up to me and said , ' Is it true you ’ re going to play the voice of the Spitfire pilot ? ' And I said , ' No ... ' The next day two people approached me and said , ' Oh , that 's clever – are you doing a cameo as the Spitfire pilot ? ' And I said , ' No ... ' And then a few weeks ago Andy Pryor , the casting director , emailed me and said , ' I understand you want to play the Spitfire pilot ... ' I emailed him back and said , ' No ! But I will if you want me to ! ' 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Victory of the Daleks " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One 17 April 2010 . Initial overnight figures showed that the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 2 million viewers on BBC One and 231 @,@ 000 watching a simulcast on BBC HD , making it the second most watched programme of the day . Final consolidated ratings for BBC One were 7 @.@ 92 million and 381 @,@ 000 for BBC HD , therefore making the total 8 @.@ 2 million viewers . This made the programme the fourth most watched on BBC One for the week ending 18 April and the eleventh most watched across all UK TV Channels for the same week . It was second for Saturday 17 April , behind Britain 's Got Talent , which achieved 11 @.@ 87 million viewers . It received an Appreciation Index of 84 , a little down on the previous two episodes . 
 On 7 June 2010 , " Victory of the Daleks " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray along with the previous episodes " The Eleventh Hour " and " The Beast Below " . It was then re @-@ released as part of the complete series five DVD on 8 November 2010 . This episode was also released as part of the Doctor Who DVD Files in issue 75 , alongside " The Time of Angels " on 16 November 2011 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Victory of the Daleks " received mixed reviews . It received a positive review from Daniel Martin of The Guardian . Martin called it " the best [ Mark ] Gatiss has written for the show " , and praised the writer 's investigation of " the idea of [ the Daleks ] as ' man @-@ made ' war machines " for not being " as heavy @-@ handed as you might have expected " . He also was positive towards the acting of McNeice and Paterson , the developing storyline between the Doctor and Amy , and positively compared the Daleks ' menace to the first series . Patrick Mulkern of the Radio Times hailed the episode as " a victory for all " , and praised Gatiss for the character of Professor Bracewell , commenting favourably on how the writer " turns him into an emotive robot like Star Trek 's Data , and gives Bill Paterson material worthy of his status . " 
 Jordan Farley of SFX magazine gave " Victory of the Daleks " three and a half out of five stars , praising the redesigned Daleks for being " equally intimidating " and the episode " rollicking good fun " , though " a little undercooked " . However , he thought that the second half was " a little rushed " and wondered if the episode would have been more successful if it were a two @-@ parter . He also was disappointed with a " lack of quotable dialogue " and less of the Doctor 's " playful banter and wacky mannerisms " . 
 Matt Wales of IGN , however , was less positive , and rated the episode 5 out of 10 . He called it " a flimsy ( if much @-@ needed ) excuse to reboot the series ' long @-@ time villains rather than an attempt to provide any real narrative meat " but praised the World War II period sets . Brian J. Robb of Total Sci @-@ Fi Online praised McNeice 's Churchill , but thought some of his dialogue was over @-@ the @-@ top due to the script which he believed had traces of " having been tampered with " by Moffat . Like Farley , he commented that the episode 's pacing was off and would have been more successful as a two @-@ parter . Robb was also critical of Smith 's performances , negatively comparing the scenes when he was angry to Sylvester McCoy , as well as the new Dalek design . He gave the episode a final score of 7 out of 10 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Victory of the Daleks " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = WindSeeker = 
 WindSeeker ( known as SteelHawk at Worlds of Fun ) is a 301 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 92 m ) swing ride at several Cedar Fair parks . The rides are Wind Seeker models manufactured by Mondial . They opened for the 2011 season at Canada 's Wonderland in Ontario , Cedar Point and Kings Island in Ohio , and Knott 's Berry Farm in California . Carowinds in North Carolina and Kings Dominion in Virginia opened their WindSeekers in 2012 . The first four each cost US $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , and the next two each cost $ 6 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . Cedar Fair relocated the Knott 's Berry Farm WindSeeker to Worlds of Fun in 2014 , where it is known as SteelHawk . 
 The three @-@ minute ride features 32 suspended twin seats ( 64 seats altogether ) spinning around a central tower . A lighting package was installed on all four WindSeekers , consisting of strips of LED lights mounted on the arms that support the swings and ( except at Knott 's Berry Farm ) colored floodlights to illuminate towers from above . 
 Canada 's Wonderland was the first of the four parks to open its WindSeeker in 2011 . On May 24 , 2011 , the ride was only open for a brief time before problems caused it to be closed for repairs ; it re @-@ opened the week of June 10 . The second WindSeeker was opened to the public at Cedar Point on June 14 , 2011 , the third on June 21 , 2011 , at Kings Island , the fourth in mid @-@ August 2011 at Knott 's Berry Farm , the fifth WindSeeker to open was Carowinds ' model which soft @-@ opened on March 30 , 2012 and officially opened to the public on March 31 , 2012 and the latest one to open was the sixth WindSeeker at Kings Dominion which officially opened to the public on April 6 , 2012 . 
 On September 21 , 2012 , Cedar Fair announced the temporary closure of all WindSeekers in response to two incidents at Knott 's Berry Farm . All the installations , excluding Knott 's Berry Farm , later reopened . The Knott 's Berry Farm installation remain closed for 11 months until it was announced it would be relocated to Worlds of Fun . 
 = = History = = 
 On their Facebook pages throughout August 2010 , several Cedar Fair amusement parks hinted frequently at a new ride to be opened in 2011 . On August 24 , 2010 , Canada 's Wonderland , Cedar Point , Kings Island , and Knott 's Berry Farm all announced that they would be adding a Mondial WindSeeker , to open sometime in spring 2011 . 
 Construction of the WindSeekers at Canada 's Wonderland , Cedar Point , and Kings Island began in late October and early November 2010 . To install them , Canada 's Wonderland 's Jet Scream ride was removed and Cedar Point 's Ocean Motion was moved to the former Demon Drop site . Construction was scheduled to begin around the same time at Knott 's Berry Farm , where the Sky Cabin observation tower was to be removed to make way for it . On January 7 , 2011 , however , it was announced that their WindSeeker would not replace Sky Cabin but instead be located in the Fiesta Village section of the park . Work began almost immediately after this announcement . 
 Kings Island 's WindSeeker was originally scheduled to be the first to open , on April 30 , 2011 , but the opening was delayed because of bad weather and eventually took place on the morning of June 21 , 2011 . It was the first WindSeeker to use the Fast Lane program . 
 The WindSeeker at Canada 's Wonderland was originally scheduled to open on May 8 , 2011 , one week after that of Kings Island . On May 24 , 2011 , after problems were discovered during testing , Canada 's Wonderland announced on their Facebook page that it would open to the public later that day , but it was quickly closed again when further mechanical problems were discovered . From May 24 to mid @-@ June 2011 , the ride was intermittently closed because of a variety of problems , most of which have since been resolved . At the beginning of October 2011 , the hydraulic dampers used on the Knott 's Berry Farm model were added to reduce the amount of swing movement even more . 
 Cedar Point 's WindSeeker was originally scheduled to open on May 14 , 2011 , two weeks after that of Kings Island . After almost a month delays in construction and testing due to bad weather , it opened on June 14 , 2011 . 
 Before the decision to keep the Sky Cabin at Knott 's Berry Farm and to place its WindSeeker elsewhere , their WindSeeker was to have the same color scheme as others . Also , instead of there being the red " UFO " on the top of the tower , original promotional materials show that a large purple " K " was to be placed on the top of the ride . The ride opened in mid @-@ August 2011 after three months of delays . In late 2011 , Fast Lane became available on the Knott 's Berry Farm WindSeeker . On September 7 , the ride stalled for nearly three hours , and on September 19 , it stalled again at the top of the tower for three and a half hours . Both incidents prompted Cedar Fair to close all other WindSeekers until an internal investigation is completed . After the investigation was complete , all WindSeekers reopened except Knott 's ' model which was dismantled by December 11 , 2013 to be sent to Worlds of Fun . 
 Throughout August 2011 , the Carowinds web site had six different QR codes , each of which led the user to a web site giving a clue as to what the 2012 attraction might be . When all six clues were put together , they made a picture that read " Voiceless it cries , wingless flutters , toothless bites , <unk> mutters , fun soars to new heights ... August 24 " . On August 24 , 2011 , it was officially announced that Carowinds would receive the fifth WindSeeker , and on September 1 , 2011 , Kings Dominion officially announced that the sixth would open at the park in 2012 . The WindSeekers at Carowinds and Kings Dominion will have the same appearance as those at Canada 's Wonderland , Cedar Point , and Kings Island and are expected to open in 2012 . Their construction started in early November 2011 , after the parks closed for the season . At Kings Dominion , El Dorado was removed at the end of the 2011 season to make room for WindSeeker . The first WindSeeker tower piece was installed there on January 20 , 2012 , and at Carowinds on January 23 , 2012 . Carowinds soft @-@ opened their version on March 30 , 2012 to media and invited guests ; it opened to the public on March 31 , 2012 . Kings Dominion officially opened their model on April 6 , 2012 . 
 On August 30 , 2013 , Worlds of Fun announced that they would be adding SteelHawk , the relocated WindSeeker from Knott 's Berry Farm . 
 = = = Accidents = = = 
 Aside from the many minor problems all WindSeekers had in 2011 , the first major accident occurred on June 2 , 2012 on the Cedar Point installation . According to numerous news and rider reports , WindSeeker operated normally as the gondola made its way up the tower . Attached to the tower and gondola are a set of electrical cables that are located inside a plastic casing and are secured by two side panels to prevent the cables from moving around . At the top of the tower , winds were reportedly strong enough to push the electrical cables out of the socket on the tower causing the cables to move around freely . According to a rider riding WindSeeker at the time of the accident , as the gondola made its way back down the tower , the cables got stuck in the rotating gondola . The plastic casing began to be ripped apart as well as the cables causing the ride to come to a complete stop just over half way up the tower . Because the electrical cables had been damaged , Cedar Point employees had to manually bring down the gondola . Riders were stuck on the ride for over an hour and no one was injured . WindSeeker at Cedar Point remained closed until the cause of the accident was found and fixed . The ride reopened on June 5 , 2012 . 
 = = Problems = = 
 The four WindSeekers opened in 2011 are based on the same prototype design by Dutch amusement ride manufacturer Mondial Rides . The WindSeeker at Canada 's Wonderland was the first to be completed and thus the first to be tested . It was discovered during testing that the swings could rock back and forth once rotation reached full speed , and were close to hitting each other in some cases . Therefore , hydraulic dampers not included in the original design were added to all four WindSeekers to reduce this rocking . Nevertheless , there were still incidents : on June 14 , 2011 , the swings on Cedar Point 's WindSeeker began to sway in different directions , and some seats almost collided with each other . In one reported case , a rider had to extend his leg to stop the seat in front from hitting him . In another , a car collided with the kneecap of a rider who had closed their eyes . Official explanations suggested that the hydraulic dampers could fail under high winds : apparently , high winds and the imbalance arising when some swings are full and others not could cause the swings to collide . On June 29 , 2011 , Jennifer <unk> of Breakfast Television Toronto rode the WindSeeker at Canada 's Wonderland for her " Live @-@ Eye " spot on the show . When the swings reached the top of the tower , the seats began swinging and hitting each other . As the ride continued , Breakfast Television hosts Kevin Frankish and Dina Pugliese asked whether the seats were supposed to touch each other , but received no response . 
 Additional problems were discovered when the ride opened to the public . The WindSeeker at Canada 's Wonderland underwent repairs for just over a week when it was discovered that one of the 32 pairs of seats had been removed for an unstated reason . They were replaced and testing began shortly after . In another case at the same installation , riders were stuck at the top of the WindSeeker tower for 20 minutes when the swings did not come down . Since these incidents , ride operations are suspended during high winds or heavy rain . 
 During the 2012 season , all of the WindSeekers except Kings Island 's experienced incidents in which the ride stopped , stranding riders in the air . Two such incidents occurred in September at Knott 's Berry Farm , in one case leaving riders stranded at the top of the ride for nearly four hours , prompting the California Occupational Safety and Health Administration to order the ride shut down indefinitely on September 19 pending investigation of both the length of time riders were stranded and the actual causes of the incidents . Two days later on September 21 , Cedar Fair announced the closure of all other WindSeekers to conduct an internal review . The company said that until the review concludes , none of the rides would operate again . The rides remained closed through the remainder of the 2012 season at the five seasonal parks but reopened at all parks in 2013 , excluding Knott 's Berry Farm 's version which has been relocated . 
 = = Structure = = 
 All six WindSeekers consist of the same parts in an identical structure . The 301 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 92 m ) center tower is made up of eight parts . The base section is different from the other seven tower pieces because it supports the rest of the tower . On top of the eighth tower piece , there is a steel platform where workers and mechanics can observe the operation of the ride and perform maintenance . Above this platform is an element called the " red UFO " or the " Crown " . The gondola itself has a number of parts . In the middle of the structure there are wheels that allow the swings to rotate as they go up and down the tower . The gondola is raised and lowered by cables linking the gondola structure to four sets of yellow wheels , each attached to a different section of the steel platform at the top of the tower . Hydraulic dampers that were not in the original design were added to all the WindSeeker installations to reduce the movement of the swings while in operation . The illustrations below show where the parts are located and what they look like . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Riders sit in one of 64 seats placed around a central tower , which brings the gondola up and down . A restraint bar is fixed over the rider 's lap to keep them firmly in their seat . There is no seat belt across the rider 's lap , but there is one from the seat to the restraint bar in case the lock on the restraint bar fails . After the operators determine that it is safe to proceed , the gondola rises to the top of the tower to a musical accompaniment , beginning to spin slowly around the central tower and picking up speed as it ascends further . By the time it reaches the top , it is rotating around the tower at its full speed of approximately 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) . The gondola remains at the top of the tower for just over a minute before starting its descent and immediately beginning to slow down . By the time it reaches the bottom of the tower , all rotation has ceased . One cycle of the ride lasts three minutes . 
 = = Ride features = = 
 All the WindSeekers have speakers mounted to the inside of the gondola structure . They play 18 different tracks , among which are Hedwig 's theme from the Harry Potter films , the theme songs from E.T. , Star Trek : The Motion Picture , and Superman , and songs from Flight of the Valkyries . At Cedar Point and Kings Island , the WindSeeker sign changes colors during night operation . At Cedar Point , as the gondola makes its way up the tower , the LED lights at the top of the tower go out , making the tower invisible , though the LED lights on the gondola remains lit . When the gondola comes back down , the lights at the top of the tower come on again . At Canada 's Wonderland , the LED lights at the top of the tower remain on throughout the cycle , keeping the tower visible at all times . 
 The WindSeeker at Knott 's Berry Farm differed from the other five in several ways . Rather than white , blue , and green on the tower , Knott 's adopted a color scheme using orange , purple , and yellow to reflect the Spanish California theme of the Fiesta Village section of the park . The tower at Knott 's had no lights at the top . The ride 's sign had a Mexican theme and did not light up . 
 = = Reception = = 
 One week after the official opening of the ride at Cedar Point , attraction reviewer Brian <unk> of Theme Park Tourist submitted an online review saying that it was " truly breathtaking " . The review applauded " the inclusion of on @-@ ride audio and such an exemplary lighting package " , commenting that it was " more than anyone expected or could 've asked for " . <unk> pointed out that , because of the location of the ride beside Lake Erie and the hot summers , the lights on the ride attract massive " clouds " of bugs . He felt the ride cycle might be too short for the type of ride , particularly the time spent at the top . On July 13 , 2011 , Nick Sim , also from Theme Park Tourist , reviewed the ride at Kings Island and made similar remarks . Los Angeles Times blogger Brady MacDonald complimented the " impressive nighttime spectacular from anywhere in the park " . He reported having thoroughly enjoyed the ride at Knott 's Berry Farm and said that he would ride it every time he visited the park . Tom Sherer of the Sandusky Register praised Cedar Point 's WindSeeker for having one of the best views of the park and commented that it " isn 't as extreme as a lot of people fear , unless you ’ re afraid of heights . " He criticized the name WindSeeker , pointing out that the ride closes in high winds . Another reviewer called the view from Knott 's Berry Farm 's version " simply breathtaking " and urged readers to " get a ride on it as soon as you can " . The same reviewer , however , also criticized the choice of music , suggesting that the park should have used " themes from more ' southwestern ' films " to fit with the overall theme of the Fiesta Village area . Members of the general public have also applauded the addition . 
 = The Nation of Ulysses = 
 The Nation of Ulysses was an American punk rock band from Washington , D.C. , formed in spring 1988 with four members . Originally known as simply " Ulysses , " the first mark of the group consisted of Ian Svenonius on vocals and trumpet , Steve Kroner on guitar , Steve Gamboa on bass guitar , and James Canty on drums . Tim Green joined the band late in 1989 as a guitarist and the band became " Nation of Ulysses . " Nation of Ulysses disbanded in the autumn of 1992 , having failed to complete their third album . After the breakup , Svenonius , Canty , and Gamboa went on to form the short @-@ lived Cupid Car Club and The Make @-@ Up . Tim Green went on to help create The Fucking Champs , a mostly @-@ instrumental progressive hard rock / math metal trio with indie pop appeal out of San Francisco , and later <unk> , a solo project with a focus on ambient music . 
 Nation of Ulysses was known for their tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , far @-@ left political concepts , their extremely physical live performances , and their unique take on punk culture and fashion . In total , Nation of Ulysses released three full @-@ length albums , and two vinyl EPs released on Dischord Records , and were featured on a number of compilation albums on a variety of record labels . 
 = = History = = 
 The band formed in spring 1988 , initially composed of four members – Ian Svenonius on vocals and trumpet , Steve Kroner on guitar , Steve Gamboa on bass guitar , and James Canty on drums – and known simply as " Ulysses . " In late 1989 , Tim Green joined the band as a second guitarist and the band was renamed to " Nation of Ulysses . " 
 In 1991 , before the band had released any official recordings , Ian Svenonius was featured as teen @-@ oriented Sassy Magazine 's first " Sassiest Boy in America . " He was interviewed at length in the magazine 's October issue , going into some depth about the band 's sound and political motivations . 
 In 1991 they released their first full @-@ length album , 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America on Dischord Records . This was followed a year later by Plays Pretty for Baby , also on Dischord . During the recording of the band 's follow @-@ up to Plays Pretty for Baby , Steve Kroner left the band . The remaining quartet continued to record , but eventually dissolved in 1992 . In a later interview , Svenonius explained the reason for the split : " Nation of Ulysses broke up because the epoch changed with the advent of digital music and the Nirvana explosion . We were faced with what 's now known as indie rock , a sort of vacuous form . We had to determine our next move and this [ the forming of the Make @-@ Up ] is it . " 
 After the band 's dissolution , Svenonius went on to form the short @-@ lived Cupid Car Club with James Canty and Steve Gamboa , the Make @-@ Up ( again with Canty and Gamboa ) , and Weird War . Green went on to become an engineer and record producer and joined the prog @-@ heavy metal band The Fucking Champs . 
 Though relatively short @-@ lived , Nation of Ulysses ' influence has been substantial : they have been cited as influences for bands such as The ( International ) Noise Conspiracy , The Hives , Thursday , Refused , <unk> , Bikini Kill , Rocket From The Crypt , Antioch Arrow , The Locust , At The Drive @-@ in , LCD Soundsystem , and <unk> Bear , among many others . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 During Nation of Ulysses ' four years of activity , they released only two full @-@ length albums : 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America in 1991 and Plays Pretty for Baby in 1992 , both released on Dischord Records . After releasing Plays Pretty for Baby , the band began recording a third full @-@ length album , but Steve Kroner separated from the band before recording was completed . The remaining quartet continued to record , but the group eventually dissolved before the record 's completion . In 2000 , six songs from those sessions , in addition to four new tracks recorded live , were compiled and released posthumously as The Embassy Tapes . 
 In addition to their three full @-@ length albums , Nation of Ulysses released two vinyl EPs . The first , a self @-@ titled EP , was the band 's first official release , but went out of print when the three tracks from it were included in 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America . The second EP , released in 1992 under the title The Birth of the Ulysses Aesthetic ( the synthesis of speed and transformation ) , also went out of print when its tracks were later released on Plays Pretty for Baby . The band were also featured in a number of compilation albums on a variety of record labels . 
 In 1992 , NOU was on tour with Bikini Kill , and when they arrived in Memphis , the found that the promoter for the show hadn 't actually promoted the show . So , while out on the town <unk> the streets and ducking into record stores , NOU ran into Primal Scream , a band which had been in town recording their own album . Primal Scream then decided to attend NOU 's show at the Antenna Club , and then proceeded to invite NOU to record with them in the studio the next day . Nation of Ulysses then recorded five songs with Primal Scream in nine hours , though of course only after a quick errand for some tin foil to smoke a bit of crack , according to Tim Green . These recordings are known as Memphis Demos , and include the demos of N @-@ Sub Ulysses , 50 @,@ 000 Watts , Mockingbird , Yeah , and Shakedown . 
 = = Musical ideology and style = = 
 Nation of Ulysses ' music was noisy and manic , but they also had a strong free @-@ jazz influence . The group embodied a rejection of the 1960s and 1970s music and styling by rejecting drug use and advocating that punk youth dress nicely and sensibly . To this end , the liner notes of 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America states the band 's aim " To dress well , as clothing and fashion , are the only things which we -- the kids -- being utterly disenfranchised , have any control over . " Much of the band admitted to not knowing how to play their instruments well , stating " All you need is a concept . There 's no reason you have to sound like Led Zeppelin . " 
 = = Political concepts = = 
 Nation of Ulysses described themselves not as a rock ' n ' roll group in the traditional sense , but " as a political party " and as " a shout of secession . " Explaining their intent , Svenonius said " it 's basically a new nation underground for the dispossessed youth colony . It 's all about smashing the old edifice , the monolith of rock and roll . " 
 Allmusic 's Steve Huey described Nation of Ulysses ' philosophy as " a relentlessly provocative ( and entertaining ) jumble of teenage rock ' n ' roll rebellion , leftist radicalism , anarchist punk polemics , and abstract intellectual rambling , [ ... ] [ which gives the sense of ] an off @-@ kilter , almost tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek approach to a ' perpetual 18 @-@ year old 's ' view of America , and life in general . " This tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek political attitude was echoed by a spoken @-@ word introduction to the song " The Sound of Jazz to Come " , from their 1992 Plays Pretty for Baby , in which the band describes themselves as " the seriously unserious , reverently irreverent , amoral moralists . " 
 Asked about their use of the medium they claimed to counteract – rock ' n ' roll – Svenonius declared " Well , it 's a camouflage , to allow for movement , revolutionary liberation from the constraints of everyday composure , basically allowing anybody to move in anyway that they want and to lift spirit to a plateau to destroy ' parent culture . ' " 
 Nation of Ulysses claimed to make weapons , not records . Discussing their second release , Svenonius asserted : " it 's like a blueprint for the destruction of the Parent Culture . It 's like a zip gun ... It 's an instruction pamphlet for kids on how to destroy their home life , you know , their domestic state . " 
 Although their first album was named 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America , Nation of Ulysses didn 't align themselves with a particular political philosophy : " We don 't usually address normal political <unk> . We aim toward the everyday fixtures of life , like aesthetics , sound , non @-@ spoken things that are inherently political in nature instead of , like bogus politicians who focus on glossy surface issues which avoid any kind of revolutionary change . " 
 = = = Ulysses Speaks = = = 
 Nation of Ulysses published a zine called " Ulysses Speaks , " which was an extension of their ideology expressed in their music and liner notes . The zines espoused what they referred to as " The Ulysses Aesthetic , " which was a mix of 1960s and 1970s radical politics , French Situationist writings , and juvenile delinquency . The zine was distributed at live shows as well as made available by writing the band . A total of 9 issues were published . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The band was known for their extremely physical performances , during some of which Svenonius recalls breaking his arm , his leg , and breaking his head open on numerous occasions . Audience members were also hurt during performances . Svenonius described Nation of Ulysses performances as " an extraordinary freak @-@ out kind of thing [ ... ] really masochistic , lots of blood [ ... ] cacophonous , and violent , and aggressive . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 13 @-@ Point Program to Destroy America ( Dischord ) ( 1991 ) 
 Plays Pretty for Baby ( Dischord ) ( 1992 ) 
 The Embassy Tapes ( Dischord ) ( 2000 ) 
 = = = Studio EPs = = = 
 Nation of Ulysses ( Dischord ) ( 1991 ) 
 The Birth of the Ulysses Aesthetic ( the synthesis of speed and transformation ) ( Dischord ) ( 1992 ) 
 = Andrew Truxal = 
 Andrew Gehr Truxal ( February 2 , 1900 – February 3 , 1971 ) was the third president of Hood College and the first president of Anne Arundel Community College . Truxal was a lifelong academic serving as instructor at several institutions and chairman of the sociology department of Dartmouth College . 
 Truxal is commemorated by a professorship and scholarship in Sociology at Hood College and a library named after him at Anne Arundel College . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 In 1920 , Truxal graduated from Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster , Pennsylvania , where he joined Phi Kappa Psi . Following that , he attended the Eastern Theological Seminary of the Evangelical and Reformed Church of the United States in Lancaster where he received his degree in divinity and became an ordained minister in 1923 . He then served as instructor of history and economics at Franklin and Marshall and instructor of history at Millersburg State Teachers College . 
 Truxal received his doctorate from Columbia University in 1928 . Upon this , he joined the faculty of Dartmouth as a professor in sociology before taking over as chairman of that department in 1935 . He briefly served , along with Bancroft H. Brown and W. Stuart Messer , as interim Dean of the Faculty of Dartmouth following the death of Dean Gordon Bill . 
 = = Presidency at Hood College = = 
 On October 21 , 1948 , Truxal was inaugurated as the third president of Hood College in Frederick , Maryland . He succeeded Irvin Stahr who resigned in July 1948 . The ceremony was held in the Hodson Outdoor Theater and featured a keynote address by Isaiah Bowman , former president of Johns Hopkins University . In his inaugural address , Dr. Truxal told the students that 
 During his time at Hood , Truxal oversaw the construction of Hodson Science Hall , Coffman Chapel , Gambrill Gymnasium , the President 's House , and Fox Alumnae Headquarters . With the completion of the President 's House , Dr. Truxal auctioned off the rights to spend an evening with the <unk> in the house . All funds raised in these auctions were given to the World Student Service Fund . He briefly stepped aside in 1953 after suffering a heart attack . An administrative committee stood in his place during his recovery . 
 On January 22 , 1961 , Truxal was named the first president of Anne Arundel Junior College . Dr. Randle Elliott was announced as Truxal 's successor at Hood on February 8 and Truxal retired from the college on July 1 of that year . 
 = = Presidency at Anne Arundel Community College = = 
 Truxal was the unanimous choice of the Anne Arundel County commissioners to become the president of the new college . The college opened in September 1961 offering night classes at Severna Park High School . In 1967 , under his tenure as president , the college moved to its current campus in Arnold , Maryland . The college also received its full accreditation from the Middle States Commission on Higher Education during his presidency . He retired from the position in August 1968 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Truxal died on February 3 , 1971 of a heart attack in his winter home in Naples , Florida . Hood College still recognizes the contributions of Dr. Truxal through a sociology scholarship . The chair of the sociology department at Hood receives the title of " Andrew G. Truxal Professor of Sociology . " In addition , the pergola located at the center of the residential quad is named in his honor . 
 Anne Arundel has honored Dr. Truxal with the Andrew G. Truxal Library on its campus . One male and one female student @-@ athlete a year receive the Dr. Andrew G. Truxal Award for his or her total involvement with athletics and accomplishments in extracurricular activities . 
 = Cabinet of Singapore = 
 The Cabinet of Singapore forms the Government ( executive branch ) of Singapore together with the President of Singapore . It is led by the Prime Minister of Singapore who is the head of government . The Prime Minister is a Member of Parliament ( MP ) appointed by the President who selects a person that in his or her view is likely to command the confidence of a majority of the Parliament of Singapore . The other members of the Cabinet are Ministers who are Members of Parliament appointed by the President on the Prime Minister 's advice . Cabinet members are prohibited from holding any office of profit and from actively engaging in any commercial enterprise . 
 The Cabinet generally directs and controls the Government and is collectively responsible to Parliament . It also has significant influence over lawmaking . Ministers may be designated by the Prime Minister to be in charge of particular ministries , or as Ministers in the Prime Minister 's Office . Singapore 's ministers are among the best paid in the world . Prior to a salary review in 2011 , the Prime Minister 's annual salary was S $ 3 @.@ 07 million , while the pay of ministerial @-@ grade officers ranged between S $ 1 @.@ 58 million and S $ 2 @.@ 37 million . On 21 May 2011 , a committee was appointed by the Prime Minister to review the salaries of the Prime Minister as well as the President , political appointment holders , and Members of Parliament . Following the recommended wage reductions by the committee which were then debated and subsequently accepted in Parliament , the Prime Minister 's salary was reduced by 36 % ( includes the removal of his pension ) to S $ 2 @.@ 2 million ( then about US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) . Nonetheless , the Prime Minister remains the highest @-@ paid political leader in the world . 
 The earliest predecessor of the Cabinet was the Executive Council of the Straits Settlements , introduced in 1877 to advise the Governor of the Straits Settlements . It wielded no executive power . In 1955 , a Council of Ministers was created , made up of three ex officio Official Members and six Elected Members of the Legislative Assembly of Singapore , appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Leader of the House . Following the general elections that year , David Saul Marshall became the first Chief Minister of Singapore . Constitutional talks between Legislative Assembly representatives and the Colonial Office were held from 1956 to 1958 , and Singapore gained full internal self @-@ government in 1959 . The Governor was replaced by the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara , who had power to appoint to the post of Prime Minister the person most likely to command the authority of the Assembly , and other Ministers of the Cabinet on the Prime Minister 's advice . In the 1959 general elections , the People 's Action Party swept to power with 43 out of the 51 seats in the Assembly , and Lee Kuan Yew became the first Prime Minister of Singapore . The executive branch of the Singapore Government remained unchanged following Singapore 's merger with Malaysia in 1963 , and subsequent independence in 1965 . 
 Following the 2011 general election , a Cabinet reshuffle took place effective 21 May 2011 . Lim <unk> Kiang and Lim Swee Say respectively retained their Trade and Industry and Prime Minister 's Office portfolios , while other ministers were given new appointments to the remaining 11 ministries . Heng Swee Keat and Chan Chun Sing , both elected to Parliament for the first time , were respectively assigned the posts of Minister for Education , and Acting Minister for Community Development , Youth and Sports . 
 = = History = = 
 Up to the outbreak of World War II , Singapore was part of the Crown colony known as the Straits Settlements together with Malacca and Penang . The earliest predecessor of the Cabinet was arguably the Executive Council of the Straits Settlements that was introduced in 1877 by letters patent issued by the Crown , though its function was very different from that of today 's Cabinet . The Council , which was composed of " such persons and constituted in such manner as may be directed " by royal instructions , existed to advise the Governor of the Straits Settlements and wielded no executive power . The Governor was required to consult the Executive Council on all affairs of importance unless they were too urgent to be laid before it , or if reference to it would prejudice the public service . In such urgent cases , the Governor had to inform the Council of the measures he had taken . 
 Following the Second World War , the Straits Settlements were disbanded and Singapore became a Crown colony in its own right . The reconstituted Executive Council consisted of six officials and four nominated " <unk> " . In February 1954 , the Rendel Constitutional Commission under the chairmanship of Sir George William Rendel , which had been appointed to comprehensively review the constitution of the Colony of Singapore , rendered its report . Among other things , it recommended that a Council of Ministers be created , composed of three ex officio Official Members and six Elected Members of the Legislative Assembly of Singapore appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Leader of the House , who would be the leader of the largest political party or coalition of parties having majority support in the legislature . The recommendation was implemented in 1955 . In the general election held that year , the Labour Front took a majority of the seats in the Assembly , and David Saul Marshall became the first Chief Minister of Singapore . Major problems with the Rendel Constitution were that the Chief Minister and Ministers ' powers were ill defined , and that the Official Members retained control of the finance , administration , and internal security and law portfolios . This led to confrontation between Marshall , who saw himself as a Prime Minister governing the country , and the Governor , Sir John Fearns Nicoll , who felt that important decisions and policies should remain with himself and the Official Members . 
 In 1956 , members of the Legislative Assembly held constitutional talks with the Colonial Office in London . The talks broke down as Marshall did not agree to the British Government 's proposal for the casting vote on a proposed Defence Council to be held by the British High Commissioner to Singapore , who would only exercise it in an emergency . Marshall resigned as Chief Minister in June 1956 , and was replaced by Lim Yew Hock . The following year , Lim led another delegation to the UK for further talks on self @-@ government . This time , agreement was reached on the composition of an Internal Security Council . Other constitutional arrangements were swiftly settled in 1958 , and on 1 August the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed the State of Singapore Act 1958 , granting the colony full internal self @-@ government . Under Singapore 's new constitution which came into force on 3 June 1959 , the Governor was replaced by the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara ( Head of State ) , who had power to appoint as Prime Minister the person most likely to command the authority of the Legislative Assembly , and other Ministers of the Cabinet on the Prime Minister 's advice . The Constitution also created the post of the British High Commissioner , who was entitled to receive the agenda of each Cabinet meeting and to see all Cabinet papers . In the 1959 general elections , the People 's Action Party ( PAP ) swept to power with 43 out of the 51 seats in the Assembly , and Lee Kuan Yew became the first Prime Minister of Singapore . Nine other Ministers were appointed to the Cabinet . 
 The British High Commissioner 's role became that of an ambassador following Singapore 's independence from Britain and merger with Malaysia in 1963 . Apart from that the executive branch of the Singapore Government remained largely unchanged , although now it governed a state within a larger federation . However , with effect from 9 August 1965 , Singapore left the Federation of Malaysia and became a fully independent republic . On separation from Malaysia , the Singapore Government retained its executive authority , and the executive authority of the Parliament of Malaysia ceased to extend to Singapore and vested in the Singapore Government . The Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong , the Supreme Head of State of Malaysia , also ceased to be the Supreme Head of Singapore and relinquished his sovereignty , jurisdiction , power and authority , executive or otherwise in respect of Singapore , which revested in the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara of Singapore . The Republic of Singapore Independence Act 1965 then vested the executive authority of Singapore in the newly created post of President , and made it exercisable by him or by the Cabinet or by any Minister authorized by the Cabinet . 
 = = Structure of government = = 
 Singapore inherited a Westminster system of government from the British . In such systems , there is an overlap between the executive and legislative branches of government . The head of state , who is the President of Singapore , is a member of both the executive Government of Singapore and the Parliament of Singapore but plays a minimal role in them . Executive power lies in the hands of the Cabinet , which is made up of the Prime Minister of Singapore ( the head of government ) and other Ministers . At the same time , the Prime Minister and Ministers are also Members of Parliament ( MPs ) . 
 Following constitutional reforms in 1991 , the office of President was transformed from an appointed to an elected post . Thus , both the President and MPs are elected to their posts by the citizens of Singapore in separate elections . 
 = = = Appointment of Cabinet = = = 
 The President appoints as Prime Minister an MP who , in his judgment , is likely to command the confidence of the majority of the MPs . In practice , the Prime Minister is usually the leader of the political party holding the majority of the seats in Parliament . 
 The President also appoints other Ministers to the Cabinet from among the MPs , acting in accordance with the Prime Minister 's advice . Any MP , including a Non @-@ Constituency Member of Parliament ( NCMP ) or a Nominated Member of Parliament ( NMP ) , may be appointed a Minister . Thus it is possible for a person who was not elected by voters to be appointed by Parliament as an NMP , then by the President as a Minister . In 1990 , then Deputy Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong said in Parliament : " I would rather that a government has the flexibility to appoint the right person to be the minister for finance , than to compel that government to select from whoever is available in the House . " However , he added that the Government had no intention to appoint a Cabinet minister from among the NMPs at that time . In May 2009 , MP <unk> Kumar proposed during a Parliamentary debate that this stand be reconsidered as the Prime Minister would be able to draw on the experience of many capable Singaporeans . He expressed the view that this would not offend democratic principles . Singapore 's Parliamentary system placed more weight on the party in power rather than individual MPs , and " Parliamentarians must still win the support from the ground and , ultimately , the PM and the ruling party and his Cabinet team will still be answerable to the electorate at elections . " Critics have commented that adopting the practice would <unk> Singaporeans , deepen the already parochial political culture , and lead to a lack of accountability and legitimacy . 
 Before entering on the duties of their office , the Prime Minister and other Ministers must take and subscribe ( sign ) the Oath of Allegiance and an oath for the due execution of their offices before the President . The Oath of Allegiance reads as follows : 
 I , [ name ] , having been appointed to the office of [ name of office ] , do solemnly swear [ or affirm ] that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Singapore and that I will preserve , protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore . 
 The oath for the due execution of the office of Prime Minister or a Minister is as follows : 
 I , [ name ] , being chosen and appointed as Prime Minister [ or Minister ] of Singapore , do solemnly swear [ or affirm ] that I will at all times faithfully discharge my duties as Prime Minister [ or Minister ] according to law , and to the best of my knowledge and ability , without fear or favour , affection or ill @-@ will . 
 Cabinet members are prohibited from holding any office of profit or actively engaging in any commercial enterprise . In addition , they are required to comply with a Code of Conduct for Ministers . For example , to counter potential allegations of corruption and unexplained wealth and to avoid potential conflicts between private interests and public responsibilities , the Code requires every Minister , upon appointment to office , to disclose in confidence to the President through the Prime Minister all sources of income other than his salary as a Minister and as an MP . This must include all assets , such as financial assets , real property , interests in any company or professional practice , and any other substantial personal assets as well as financial liabilities , including mortgages and borrowings . A Minister must also " scrupulously avoid any actual or apparent conflict of interest between his office and his private financial interests " . Thus , a Minister is not permitted to accept any favour of any kind from persons in negotiation with , or seeking to obtain any licence or enter into any contractual relations with , the Government , or to use official information that comes to him as a Minister for his own private profit or the profit of any family member or associate . 
 = = = Vacation of office = = = 
 The President must declare the office of Prime Minister vacant if the Prime Minister resigns his office , or if the President , acting in his discretion , is satisfied that the Prime Minister has ceased to command the confidence of a majority of the MPs . In the latter situation , the President is required first to inform the Prime Minister of his evaluation in this regard , and if the Prime Minister requests him to , the President may dissolve Parliament instead of making a declaration of vacancy . A general election must be held within three months after the dissolution of Parliament . This gives the former Prime Minister the opportunity to consolidate support by receiving a fresh mandate at the polls . 
 At present , it is not clear what evidence the President may rely on to be satisfied that the Prime Minister has ceased to command the confidence of a majority of MPs , as the Singapore courts have not yet had to decide the issue . In the Sarawak case of Stephen Kalong Ningkan v. Tun Abang Haji Openg , decided on provisions similar to those in the Singapore Constitution , the court found that the phrase ceased to command the confidence of a majority of the Members of Parliament was a term of art which had to be signified by a formal vote of no confidence taken by the legislature . In contrast , a Sabah court held in Datuk Amir <unk> v. Tun Mohd Said bin <unk> , Yang di @-@ Pertua Negeri Sabah that loss of confidence could be assessed on the basis of evidence other than a legislative vote . This might include , for instance , media reports or letters addressed to the President . 
 Other Cabinet ministers must vacate their office if they resign , or if their appointments are revoked by the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister . A person who has vacated his or her office as Minister may , if qualified , be subsequently appointed again as a Minister . 
 The Prime Minister and other Ministers who make up the Cabinet do not vacate their offices upon a dissolution of Parliament , but continue in their posts until the first sitting of the next Parliament following a general election . 
 = = Responsibilities and remuneration = = 
 The executive authority of Singapore is vested in the President and is exercisable by him or by the Cabinet of Singapore or any Minister authorized by the Cabinet . However , the President normally plays a nominal and largely ceremonial role in the executive branch of government . Although the President acts in his personal discretion in the exercise of certain functions as a check on the Cabinet and Parliament of Singapore , he is otherwise required to act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or of a Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet . It is the Cabinet that has the general direction and control of the Government . As Singapore follows the Westminster system of government , the legislative agenda of Parliament is determined by the Cabinet . At the start of each new Parliamentary session , the President gives an address prepared by the Cabinet that outlines what the Cabinet intends to achieve in the session . 
 Under the Constitution , the Cabinet is collectively responsible to Parliament . In theory , Parliament acts as a check on the power of the Cabinet as Ministers are required to justify their actions and policies upon being questioned by MPs . However , in Singapore this is a weak check because the ruling People 's Action Party holds a large Parliamentary majority , and party members who are MPs are required by party discipline to vote according to the party Whip 's instructions . 
 The Cabinet may not be summoned except by the authority of the Prime Minister . As far as is practicable , the Prime Minister is required to attend and preside at Cabinet meetings , but in his absence he may appoint another Minister to preside . 
 Whenever the Prime Minister is ill , absent from Singapore , or has been granted leave of absence from his duties , the functions conferred on him by the Constitution are exercisable by any other Minister authorized by the President . In general , the President must act in accordance with the Prime Minister 's advice in appointing a Minister for this purpose . However , the President may act in his own discretion if in his opinion it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister due to his illness or absence . 
 = = = Responsibilities of Ministers = = = 
 The Prime Minister may , by giving written directions , charge any Minister with responsibility for any department or subject . In practice , this is done by issuing notifications that are published in the Government Gazette . For instance , the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Responsibility of Senior Minister and Co @-@ ordinating Minister for National Security , Prime Minister 's Office ) Notification 2009 states : 
 It is hereby notified for general information that , pursuant to Article 30 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore , the Prime Minister has directed that Mr S. Jayakumar shall , with effect from 1st April 2009 , be charged with the responsibility for the following matters : 
 ( a ) national security issues involving or affecting more than one Ministry ; 
 ( b ) Chairmanship of the Security Policy Review Committee ; 
 ( c ) foreign policy issues involving or affecting more than one Ministry ; and 
 ( d ) foreign policy issues which involve legal negotiation or international adjudication , 
 and that he shall be designated as Senior Minister and Co @-@ ordinating Minister for National Security . 
 Ministers may be designated by the Prime Minister to be in charge of particular ministries , or as Ministers in the Prime Minister 's Office . Such Ministers were formerly known as Ministers without portfolio . 
 The Prime Minister may retain any department or subject in his charge . 
 = = = Remuneration = = = 
 = = = = Before 2010 = = = = 
 In 1994 , Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong received a monthly salary of nearly S $ 96 @,@ 000 ( about $ 1 @.@ 15 million a year ) , while other ministers earned about $ 48 @,@ 900 a month ( $ 586 @,@ 800 a year ) . This made them among the highest paid government ministers in the world . In October that year , the Government issued a white paper entitled Competitive Salaries for Competent & Honest Government which proposed that the salaries of ministers and civil servants be pegged at two @-@ thirds the average principal earned income of the top four earners in six professions : accounting , banking , engineering , law , local manufacturing firms and multinational corporations . These professions were chosen because their top members had general management skills which ministers also had to have . According to the white paper , the one @-@ third " discount " would be " a visible demonstration of the sacrifice involved in becoming a minister " . Although " [ s ] <unk> should never be the motivation for persons to become ministers " , the financial sacrifice had to be minimized if outstanding and committed Singaporeans were to be encouraged to take on the " risks and public responsibilities of a political career " . The benchmark would also be used to determine the pay of the President , Prime Minister , Deputy Prime Minister , Attorney @-@ General , Chairman of the Public Service Commission and judges . 
 Following Parliamentary approval of the white paper in November 1994 , the Government established an independent panel to examine the benchmark for the Prime Minister 's salary . The panel 's report , released in January 1995 , recommended that the benchmark be about $ 1 @.@ 6 million a year , but said it would be reasonable for the Prime Minister to be paid $ 2 @.@ 4 million in view of his heavy responsibilities . The Government said that in three years it planned to raise the pay of the Prime Minister to $ 1 @.@ 46 million and that of ministers to 60 % of the benchmark , and in the " longer term " to $ 1 @.@ 6 million and two @-@ thirds of the benchmark respectively . 
 In February 1996 it was reported that a survey of 19 countries by the World Economic Forum magazine World Link had found that political leaders and senior civil servants of Singapore had the highest salaries . The pay of the Singapore Prime Minister ( S $ 1 @.@ 1 million , or US $ 812 @,@ 858 ) was almost five times the average pay of the chief political executives of the nations surveyed ( US $ 168 @,@ 291 ) . Senior civil servants were paid US $ 292 @,@ 714 , almost three times their counterparts ' average pay . 
 In August 2000 , in view of the Singapore economy 's growth of almost 10 % led by a rapid increase in exports , the salary of the Prime Minister was increased by 14 % and those of other ministers by 12 % . In response to public disquiet , Goh Chok Tong said that , spread across the population , the rises amounted to about $ 11 per person , equivalent to " about five plates of char <unk> <unk> [ fried noodles with cockles ] per Singaporean " . Subsequently , in late 2001 , when Singapore experienced its worst recession in a generation , ministerial pay was reduced by more than 17 % . Nonetheless , it was reported that the prime minister still earned a gross annual salary of about $ 1 @.@ 03 million before the variable component was taken into account . 
 In April 2007 , the Prime Minister 's annual salary increased to S $ 3 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 05 million ) , about five times that of the then President of the United States George W. Bush who earned US $ 400 @,@ 000 . The annual entry @-@ level salary for ministers increased from $ 1 @.@ 2 million to $ 1 @.@ 6 million , and was projected to rise to 88 % of the private sector benchmark by the end of 2008 . Almost half of ministers ' pay packages was made up of an individual performance bonus decided by the Prime Minister , and a variable bonus component based on the country 's prevailing gross domestic product and capped at eight months of each minister 's annual salary . The pay increases were justified by the Government on the grounds that the salaries had to keep pace with those in the private sector to attract the best talent and to avoid corruption . Teo Chee Hean , the Minister for Defence and minister in charge of the civil service , was reported as saying : " We don 't want pay to be the reason for people to join [ the government ] . But we also don 't want pay to be the reason for them not to join us , or to leave after joining us . " The increases sparked much debate both in and out of Parliament , with many people seeing ministerial pay as already being too high . During a Parliamentary debate on the issue , Nominated Member of Parliament Thio Li @-@ ann said : " It would be a sad indictment of my generation if no one came forward to serve without excessive monetary inducement , as to be bereft of deep convictions is to be impoverished indeed . " On 11 April 2007 , the Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong told Parliament : " To make it quite clear why I am doing this , and also to give me the moral standing to defend this policy with Singaporeans , I will hold my own salary at the present level for five years . The government will pay me my full salary , because that is the way the system will have to work , but for five years , whatever the increase in the salary above its present level , I will donate to suitable good causes . " The following day , it was clarified that the Prime Minister had decided to do so a while ago , and that he had not been influenced by pressure arising from the announcement of the ministerial pay rise . 
 In 2008 , the annual salary for entry @-@ level ministers was $ 1 @,@ 924 @,@ 300 . In view of the worsening economic crisis in 2008 – 2009 , as of January 2009 the Prime Minister 's salary was cut to $ 3 @.@ 04 million , while the pay of ministerial @-@ grade officers was reduced by 18 % to $ 1 @.@ 57 million . In November 2009 the Public Service Division announced that pay increments would be deferred for a second time in 2010 because of the uncertain economic recovery . A minister 's 2009 salary of $ 1 @,@ 494 @,@ 700 per year was therefore 22 % lower than what he or she received in 2008 . 
 = = = = 2011 review = = = = 
 As at 31 December 2010 , the remuneration of ministers depended on which ministerial grade – from the lowest to the highest , MR4 , <unk> , MR2 or <unk> – they were at . Each minister 's pay package was made up of fixed components ( a monthly salary for 12 months , a non @-@ pensionable annual allowance of one month 's salary , a special allowance of one month 's salary , and a public service leadership allowance of two months ' salary ) and variable components ( an annual variable component , a performance bonus , and a gross domestic product ( GDP ) bonus ) . The annual variable component of up to one and a half month 's salary was paid based on Singapore 's economic performance . In years where economic performance was exceptional , a special variable payment was also made . Each minister 's performance bonus was determined by the Prime Minister and could be up to 14 months ' salary , though most good performers received the equivalent of nine months ' salary . The GDP bonus depended on the nation 's GDP growth rate . No bonus was paid if the rate was below 2 % , and a maximum bonus of eight months ' salary was paid if the rate was 10 % or greater . In addition , ministers received the same medical benefits as civil servants . In 2010 , the benchmark annual remuneration for an MR4 @-@ grade minister was $ 2 @,@ 598 @,@ 004 , while the actual salary paid was $ 1 @,@ 583 @,@ 900 . An <unk> @-@ grade minister 's salary was $ 2 @,@ 368 @,@ 500 . The annual pay of the Prime Minister was set at a fixed ratio to the MR4 salary , and was $ 3 @,@ 072 @,@ 200 in 2010 . This included a fixed service bonus in lieu of a performance bonus since there was no one to assess the Prime Minister 's individual performance . The fixed service bonus was the same as the performance bonus paid to a good performer at the MR4 grade . 
 On 21 May 2011 , following the 2011 general election , the Prime Minister announced that a committee would be appointed to review politicians ' remuneration , and that revised salaries would take effect from that date . The Committee to Review Ministerial Salaries chaired by Gerard Ee rendered its report on 30 December 2011 , and released it to the public on 4 January 2012 . As regards ministerial pay , the Committee recommended benchmarking an MR4 @-@ grade minister 's salary to the median income of the top 1 @,@ 000 wage earners who are Singapore citizens , with a 40 % discount " to signify the sacrifice that comes with the ethos of political service " . It also recommended removing the special allowance and public service leadership allowance ; capping performance bonuses at six months ' salary ( with good performers generally receiving three months ' salary ) ; and replacing the GDP bonus with a national bonus based on four equally weighted indicators : the real median income growth rate ( that is , the growth rate taking inflation into account ) , the real growth rate of the incomes of the lowest 20th percentile earners , the unemployment rate , and the real GDP growth rate . As regards the latter , no bonus will be paid if the minimum targets for the indicators are not met . A bonus of three months ' salary will be paid if the targets are met , and a maximum bonus of six months ' salary if the targets are greatly exceeded . This would result in a reduction of an M4 @-@ grade minister 's annual salary by 31 % of the 2010 figure to $ 1 @.@ 1 million . 
 Where the Prime Minister 's remuneration was concerned , the Committee recommended that it be pegged to twice of a MR4 @-@ grade minister 's salary and doing away with the fixed service bonus . Instead , the Prime Minister will receive a larger national bonus . His annual bonus where the targets for the indicators have been met will be six months ' salary , and 12 months ' salary where they have been greatly exceeded . This will lead to a reduction in the Prime Minister 's annual salary of 28 % to $ 2 @.@ 2 million ( about US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) . Lee Hsien Loong said that he accepted the Committee 's recommendations . He remains the best @-@ paid head of government in the world , his proposed annual pay package exceeding that of the Chief Executive of Hong Kong Donald Tsang , the political leader with the second @-@ highest salary in the world ( around US $ 550 @,@ 000 ) , by about three times ; and that of the President of the United States Barack Obama ( US $ 400 @,@ 000 ) by over four times . 
 The Committee 's report was discussed in Parliament from 16 to 18 January 2012 . Setting out the position of the Workers ' Party , Chen Show Mao said that the basic monthly salary of an MP should be $ 11 @,@ 000 , the pay of an <unk> @-@ grade director in the Management Executive Scheme of the Civil Service . A minister should be paid five times this sum ( $ 55 @,@ 000 ) , and the Prime Minister nine times ( $ 99 @,@ 000 ) . NCMP Gerald Giam said that ministers should obtain an average annual bonus of three months of their base salaries , and in any case no more than five months ' bonus . Two @-@ thirds of the bonus should be made up of the national bonus , and the remaining third based on the individual 's performance , which should be determined according to key performance indicators fixed for each ministry at the start of a new government 's term . Moreover , only a portion of bonuses should be paid at the end of each year . Payment of the remainder should be deferred till the end of the government 's term . If the minister 's performance is poor , some of the withheld bonus should be clawed back . The WP 's proposal was criticized by a number of PAP MPs . Minister of State for Health Amy Khor expressed the view that " [ p ] <unk> service is much more than public service . Civil servants are not subject to the votes of citizens nor do they need to carry the ground in policymaking . ... <unk> ministerial salaries to civil service salaries is not an adequate mechanism to account for the burdens and responsibilities that come with the job . " 
 Rounding up the debate , Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean said that under the WP 's proposal for calculating ministerial salaries , the quantum achieved was similar to the sum proposed by the Committee , and that in his view the WP had approved the three principles of the new system : the requirement for the pay to be competitive , recognition of the ethos of political service , and the desirability of a " clean wage " system ( that is , one in which ministers do not receive additional benefits such as housing and medical allowances ) . PAP MPs then voted to endorse the Committee 's proposals . 
 On 26 March 2012 , the Public Service Division of the Prime Minister 's Office announced that the fixed component of the salary of a political appointment holder would be 13 months of his or her monthly salary . For 2011 , the annual variable component of the salary would be 1 @.@ 25 months plus $ 250 , while the national bonus would be 2 @.@ 625 months though appointment holders would receive a pro rata amount of 1 @.@ 618 months ' pay as the new salaries took effect from 21 May 2011 when the Cabinet was appointed following the general election . The targets for the four indicators making up the national bonus were 2 – 3 % for real median income growth of citizens and real median income growth for the lowest 20th percentile of citizens , 3 – 5 % for real GDP growth , and not more than 4 @.@ 5 % for the unemployment rate of citizens . Each appointment holder 's performance bonus would be determined by the Prime Minister . 
 = = = = Pensions = = = = 
 At present , persons who have reached the age of 50 years and retired as MPs and who have served in this capacity for not less than nine years may be granted a pension for the rest of their lives . The annual amount payable is 1 ⁄ 30 of the person 's highest annual salary for every completed year of service and 1 ⁄ 360 for every uncompleted year , up to a ceiling of two @-@ thirds of the Member 's annual salary . In addition , a retired MP who is at least 50 years old and has for not less than eight years held the office of Prime Minister , Deputy Prime Minister , Senior Minister or Minister may receive an additional pension each year of 1 ⁄ 27 of his or her highest annual salary for each completed year of service and 1 ⁄ 324 for each uncompleted year , subject again to a ceiling of two @-@ thirds of the office @-@ holder 's annual salary . Members who have reached the age of 55 years and have served not less than eight years as Ministers may be granted a pension even if they have not yet ceased to hold office . No person has an absolute right to compensation for past services or to any pension or gratuity , and the President may reduce or withhold pensions and gratuities upon an MP 's conviction for corruption . 
 The Committee to Review Ministerial Salaries recommended that pensions for political appointment holders be abolished in favour of Central Provident Fund payments . Appointment holders appointed on and after 21 May 2011 will not receive any pension , while those appointed before that date will only be eligible for pensions accrued up to that date . Such pensions will be paid after they step down or retire from office . If the removal of pensions is taken into account , the Prime Minister 's annual salary will be reduced from the 2010 figure by 36 % , and that of MR4 @-@ grade ministers by 37 % . 
 = = Current Cabinet = = 
 The names in bold are the surnames of Chinese persons , and the personal names of Indian and Malay persons ( except for Vivian Balakrishnan and Tharman Shanmugaratnam , where they indicate surnames as well ) . 
 Sources : Transcript of Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong 's Statement at the Press Conference on the new Cabinet Line @-@ Up on 28 September 2015 , Prime Minister 's Office , 29 September 2015 , archived from the original on 29 September 2015 ; Rachel Chang ( 29 September 2015 ) , " PM names Cabinet aimed at leadership succession : Coordinating ministers will help tackle complex matters , mentor younger ministers " , The Straits Times , p . A1 ; Laura Elizabeth <unk> ( 29 September 2015 ) , " Five new faces to become office @-@ holders " , Today , archived from the original on 29 September 2015 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Chan , Helena H [ ui- ] M [ eng ] ( 1995 ) , " The Executive " , The Legal System of Singapore , Singapore : Butterworths Asia , pp. 22 – 29 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 409 @-@ 99789 @-@ 7 . 
 Jennings , Ivor ( 1980 ) , Cabinet Government ( 3rd ed . ) , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , John S.T. ( 2003 ) , " Paying for the ' Best and Brightest ' : Reward for High Public Office in Singapore " , in Hood , Christopher ; Peters , B. Guy ; Lee , Grace <unk> , eds . , Reward for High Public Office : Asian and Pacific Rim States [ Routledge research in comparative politics ; 3 ] , London : Routledge , pp. 145 – 162 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 26 May 2009 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 1997 ) , " The Executive " , Tan , Yeo & Lee 's Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 2nd ed . ) , Singapore : Butterworths Asia , pp. 181 – 243 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 409 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 1995 ) , " Government and the State " , ASEAN Legal Systems , Singapore : Butterworths Asia for the ASEAN Law Association , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 409 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 4 December 2009 . 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 Ong , Andrea ( 6 January 2012 ) , " What price a minister ? 42 years of controversy " , The Straits Times , pp . <unk> – A27 . 
 = Rockstar ( 2011 film ) = 
 Rockstar is a 2011 Indian musical romantic drama film directed by Imtiaz Ali , starring Ranbir Kapoor and debutant Nargis Fakhri , with music composed by A. R. Rahman . The film also stars Shammi Kapoor , Moufid Aziz , Aditi Rao Hydari , Piyush Mishra , Shernaz Patel and Kumud Mishra in supporting roles , with the former making his last silver screen appearance . The film was produced by Eros International Ltd. along with Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd . It follows Janardhan Jakhar a.k.a. JJ and Jordan , who dreams of becoming a big rockstar . Yet , eventually on attaining all that he dreamt of , he realises that he was soulless and despondent without the presence of the already married Heer Kaul in his life . Development of Rockstar commenced in May 2010 . Nargis Fakhri was casted as the female lead , after plans to give the role to Kareena Kapoor were shelved . Filming in India took place at Delhi , Kashmir , Mumbai and Dharamsala , while the foreign sequences were shot in Prague and Liberec , Czech Republic . 
 Rockstar was released on 11 November 2011 . On the day of release , Tibetans in Chennai and <unk> protested against the Central Board of Film Certification for asking the film @-@ makers to censor scenes featuring the Tibetan flag . Upon release , the film received positive to mixed reviews . Critics highlighted Kapoor and Rahman as the stars of the film , but panned the plot . The film did well at the box office and was declared a " Semi Hit " , managing to appeal the youngsters in the cities . Made on a budget of ₹ 600 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 9 million ) , Rockstar grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 08 billion ( US $ 16 million ) worldwide . Kapoor and Rahman received numerous awards for their work in the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens up by showing a large crowd outside the Verona Arena , Italy , with eager fans queuing for the rock concert of Jordan ( Ranbir Kapoor ) . Jordan , who was being attacked by thugs moments ago , manages to escape and reach the arena . He shows a complete disregard for his fans , storms onto the stage in a fit of rage and starts strumming his guitar . 
 A flashback shows the story of Jordan , when he was Janardhan <unk> a.k.a. JJ , a simple Jat from , Delhi , a student in Hindu College who dreams of becoming a big star and gets laughed at by his friends for that . Khatana , a canteen owner ( Kumud Mishra ) , tells him that the only way melody can be produced is by undergoing trauma via a heartbreak . Janardhan jokingly tells himself that since he hasn 't seen bad times , he hasn 't been able to reach his idol 's ( Jim Morrison ) level of fame . He goes to the performance of Heer Kaul ( Nargis Fakhri ) , a Kashmiri Pandit girl , one of the girls in St. Stephens College , and overhears that she is the " perfect heartbreaking machine " . Instantly deciding to propose to her , he suffers humiliation , which he deciphers as the perfect method for receiving the " heart @-@ break " and the key to " fame " . However , they both become good friends , hanging out together and doing things like drinking desi liquor and watching a B @-@ grade Hindi film called " <unk> Jawaani " . 
 Heer marries Jai ( Moufid Aziz ) in Kashmir and departs to Prague with him . During the process , she develops feelings for JJ and coins the name " Jordan " for him before leaving . JJ returns home finds himself thrown out by his elder brother for attending Heer ’ s wedding and stealing ₹ 5 @,@ 00 @,@ 000 , which he actually did not take as he points out that the money has been stolen several times even in his absence . He takes refuge for two months in the nearby Nizamuddin Dargah , singing <unk> and finally to Khatana 's place , making it his home . 
 Ustad Jameel Khan ( Shammi Kapoor ) , a Padma Bhushan classical artist , remembers JJ singing at the Dargah , and prompts Dhingra ( Piyush Mishra ) , the owner of a music company called " Platinum Records " , to sign JJ as he foresees a bright future for him . When Sheena ( Aditi Rao Hydari ) , a journalist interviewing Jordan as a rockstar , hints to Jordan that Dhingra intends to send some artists to Prague for a tour and recordings , he instantly volunteers to work there to reunite with Heer . 
 Heer , meanwhile , suffers from continuous spurts of health problems . She meets JJ , and after a while of intimacy , when he tries to profess his love for her , Heer , being married , spurns his advances . Heer warns him to stay away from her and he decides to say " bye " one last time before departing for India . While doing so , Jordan trespasses on Heer ’ s property and is arrested by cops and escorted off the premise . While doing so , Heer collapses in the presence of everyone . Upon being deported back to India , he is overwhelmed by the media attention he receives . Frustrated , JJ clashes with the media and the Indian Police , resulting in a term in jail . Dhingra becomes happy about the publicity he has received because of JJ , as it has helped the sale of his records . 
 After being released , JJ goes on a country @-@ wide tour for his concerts . He becomes famous as ' Jordan ' , and cancels the contract with Dhingra 's company . He is now truly a ' Rockstar ' , which he wanted to be . He has fame , money , music , everything he craved for . But inside , he has become a lonely man . He constantly gets into fights with the media , which reveals he has become arrogant . His friends , who earlier made fun of him in college , now use his fame to click photos with him , which disturbs him . Khatana is now his manager , but fails to control him . In spite of all this , Jordan is highly popular among his fans . 
 Jordan meets Heer 's younger sister Mandy during one of his performances . She asks him to help Heer , as she has been diagnosed with <unk> Anemia . When Jordan goes to meet her , her mother , Neena Kaul ( Shernaz Patel ) , gets angry and asks him to leave her house as she is aware of his past with Heer . To everyone 's surprise , Heer starts recovering quickly due to Jordan 's presence . He starts to spend more time with her disregarding all his work . Khatana requests Heer to persuade him to attend his concerts . During a visit to Kangra Valley , Heer accompanies him to one of his concerts where the media links them , portraying her as having an affair despite being married . Heer asks Jordan to take some time off and first finish his work before coming back to her . Her condition worsens ; she slowly slips into a coma , and is discovered to be pregnant with Jordan 's child . Mandy calls him for one last time hoping that she will recover . However , her condition only worsens . Jordan goes while she is in a coma and realises that this time she is really gone . Heer dies offscreen , and a quick montage of shots follow , where Jordan is seen bearing the pain of heartbreak and becoming a famous international rockstar . 
 The movie then goes back to where it began with Jordan , now as famous as his idol Jim Morrison , singing " <unk> Parindey " in Verona Arena , Italy . While performing , Jordan sees a vision of Heer walking on the stage towards him , smiling lovingly . As he watches her with desperate tears , the audience cheers on , oblivious to his anguish . The film finishes by recapping all of the happy times the couple spent together , ending with a line from <unk> Jalal @-@ ud @-@ Din Muhammad Rumi 's poem : " Away , beyond all concepts of wrong @-@ doing and right @-@ doing , there is a field . I 'll meet you there " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ranbir Kapoor as Janardhan " Jordan " Jakhar / JJ 
 Nargis Fakhri as Heer Kaul ( Mona Ghosh Shetty as the dubbing voice ) 
 Shammi Kapoor as Ustad Jameel Khan 
 Moufid Aziz as Jai 
 Aditi Rao Hydari as Sheena 
 Piyush Mishra as Dhingra 
 Shernaz Patel as Neena Kaul 
 Jaideep Ahlawat as Jordan 's brother 
 Shreya Narayan as Jordan 's sister @-@ in @-@ law 
 Nizami <unk> as <unk> from Nizamuddin <unk> Dargah 
 Kumud Mishra as Khatana 
 Sharad Sharma as Virat Kaul - Heer 's Father 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The male lead of Rockstar is played by Ranbir Kapoor , with whom Eros International worked previously on Anjaana Anjaani . His role of Jordan is loosely based on Imtiaz Ali 's Jat friend , who lived in a small settlement in <unk> Pura . He had seen Kareena Kapoor 's performance in his Jab We Met wanted to cast her in the film . However , the script required some romantic scenes between the leads . As Ranbir and Kareena happened to be cousins , this was touted as a problem . Moreover , the filmmakers did not want to replace Ranbir with any other actor as the character he portrayed was reportedly suitable only for him . They then made a joint decision to replace Kapoor with Nargis Fakhri , after initially approaching Sonam Kapoor and Diana Penty for the replacement . Voice actor Mona Ghosh Shetty dubbed for Fakhri . The film marked Shammi Kapoor 's last appearance in a feature film ; he died on 14 August 2011 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The shooting for Rockstar began in May 2010 . A major part of the shooting took place in Kashmir at <unk> , <unk> and Srinagar , while the last phase was shot in Delhi at places like the Kotla <unk> , Nizamuddin Dargah , Greater Kailash , Munirka , Indira Gandhi International Airport , Amity School ( deleted scenes ) , Connaught Place , Shri Ram College of Commerce , BL Kapoor Hospital , Rajendra Nagar , St. Stephen 's College and the Hindu College , which was Imtiaz Ali 's alma mater . Foreign sequences were shot at Wenceslas Square , Charles Bridge and the Old Town in parts of Prague and at Dr. Beneš Square in Liberec . The film was shot in reverse as the crew didn 't want to break the continuity of Ranbir 's hairstyle . The climax with long hair was shot first . Kapoor had to transform himself into a rockstar : he practised guitar at A. R. Rahman 's studio in Chennai for many days , read Kurt Cobain 's biography and familiarised himself with Jats . 
 Rockstar 's costumes were designed by Aki Narula and Manish Malhotra , who dressed Ranbir in " small @-@ town denim @-@ and @-@ sweater combination and later , <unk> @-@ style kurtas with arm bands " , thus completing the rockstar look . Nargis Fakhri , who plays the role of a Kashmiri Pandit girl , wore a traditional Kashmiri Pandit wedding outfit in the wedding scene , which included Pandit <unk> , <unk> ( ear ornament ) and <unk> ( head cap worn underneath the veil ) . This also happens to be the first time in Bollywood that a Kashmiri Pandit wedding was shown . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The music for the film is scored by A. R. Rahman , who replaces Imtiaz Ali 's previous associate , Pritam . The soundtrack features 14 tracks , with all lyrics penned by Irshad Kamil . The recording of the album took place in Chennai , London and Mumbai . Mohit Chauhan had lent his voice for nine songs . The audio rights were bought by T @-@ Series . Upon release on 30 September 2011 , it received positive reviews from critics . " <unk> Haq " became the most popular song of the album and was named as a " youth anthem " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Rockstar released on 11 November 2011 and saw a good advance opening at multiplexes closer to educational institutions . The film released in 2 @,@ 500 screens , and saw cinema halls running 14 to 15 shows in a day . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Major parts of the song " <unk> Haq " were shot at the <unk> monastery in McLeod <unk> , Dharamsala and people waving the free Tibet flag in the backdrop were shown in the song video . This triggered a dispute between Central Board of Film Certification and Imtiaz Ali when the Board asked Ali to blur the flag before the film hit the theatre , but the director refused to do it . Imtiaz Ali said , " I am not concerned at all . I have been out of India for long and don ’ t know whats going on , but I don ’ t see anything controversial in the intention portrayal in the movie . The purpose of the movie is not to make any social message , its more about personal freedom rather than a geographical issue . " However , he had to remove the sequence from the video to get the film 's censor done . Later an official from the Board stated : " The Censor Board chief explained to them that all the cuts were made by the director voluntarily , and he had the option of appealing to a review board which he didn ’ t do . There were certain discussions between ( Imtiaz ) Ali and the Board regarding retaining a kiss between two actors ( Ranbir and Nargis ) , but there have been no disagreement regarding deleting the flag from the frames . " The controversy sparked protests among the Tibetan diaspora in Dharamsala and Chennai . Later television broadcasts blotted out a " Free Tibet " banner featured in the song . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Rockstar received positive to mixed reviews upon release . Raja Sen of Rediff gave the film 4 stars out of 5 and wrote , " Rockstar is a simple , unspectacular tale , sometimes even predictable , but director Imtiaz Ali masterfully weaves in details that draw us in . " Aniruddha Guha of DNA too gave the film 4 out of 5 saying that the film was " like an effective crescendo that leaves you wanting more . " Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India also gave the film 4 out of 5 and stated that " The highpoint of Rockstar is it 's high tension , high @-@ on @-@ passion romance between two unlikely people " . Sukanya Verma of Rediff rated it 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 and said , " Rockstar is flawed but fabulous . " Mayank Shekhar of Hindustan Times also gave a rating of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 and noted " The canvas is wide like early Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's ; bird 's view of the stunning bridge is very Mani Ratnam ; witty , earthy dialogues are so Vishal Bhardwaj . Director <unk> Ali manages to retain a personal , auteur 's touch in a genre vastly commercial , mainstream . This is a rare feat . " Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 3 out of 5 stars , and said " On the whole , Rockstar does not live up to the confidence and expectations from the otherwise very skilled and accomplished film @-@ maker Imtiaz Ali . " Hrithik Sharma of El Viaje Reviews included it into his select list of Bollywood classics and says that " Rockstar is a unique cocktail of 50 % drama , 40 % romance and 10 % comedy . What stands out is the music by A. R. Rahman . Each song in the film is a masterpiece and fits very well into the plot . Cinematography is realistic but prepossessing indeed . The film gets a 10 on 10 in this department . There are certain scenes in the film that may seem unrelated to the plot but those would be the scenes that would stay with you longer . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN also gave 3 stars out of 5 , commenting " Imtiaz Ali 's Rockstar is a far @-@ from @-@ perfect film , but it has honesty and depth , which is mostly missing in Hindi movies today . " 
 Sumit Bhattacharya of Rediff gave a rating of 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 , saying that " Rockstar is what is called a one @-@ time watch " , and highlighted that the film " is more Devdas than Jim Morrison " . Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV too gave the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , and said " Rockstar has a Sufi soul . If only it had been set free and allowed to go the whole hog ! " Komal Nahta of Koimoi again gave the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 , and said , " Rockstar will meet with a mixed response : one section of the audience ( mainly youngsters in the cities ) will love it while another section ( mainly the single @-@ screen audience and public of smaller cities ) will find it ordinary . " Kaveree Bamzai of India Today gave the film 2 out of 5 stars and said " AR Rahman 's music is the soul of the film . What is missing is the spine , leaving just a jelly in place . " Yahoo ! gave the film 1 star out of 5 , and said " Rockstar drives home an unscientific hypothesis that people who ’ ve endured sufferings / heart break etc will reach their creative best . " A reviewer from Reuters commented that Rahman and Ranbir are the stars of the film while saying " Rockstar works on so many levels , but it fails miserably on so many more . " . 
 = = Box office = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Upon release , Rockstar had a very good opening . The film opened to a good response at multiplexes with bookings averaging around 60 – 70 % , and single screens witnessed a lower capacity at around 30 – 40 % . It collected ₹ 100 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ) nett on its opening day , thus becoming the second highest opener in a non @-@ festival season after Ready . The good opening was attributed to the multiplexes across cities , the " star power " of Ranbir Kapoor as well as the youthful theme of the film . The film showed growth on Saturday by grossing ₹ 112 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) nett , therefore taking its two @-@ day net total to ₹ 205 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 0 million ) . A similar growth was seen on Sunday , and hence the first weekend collection ended at ₹ 337 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 0 million ) nett , the majority of which was collected from Mumbai , Pune , Delhi & Bangalore . 
 Rockstar opened well on Monday collecting around ₹ 57 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 850 @,@ 000 ) nett , with 40 % drop as compared to the first day collections , thus taking the four @-@ day total to ₹ 390 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 8 million ) nett . The film collection saw another noticeable fall on Tuesday as it collected around ₹ 42 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 630 @,@ 000 ) nett , with five days collection totalling to ₹ 432 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 4 million ) nett . At the end of first week , the film had a good collection by grossing ₹ 474 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 1 million ) nett , though the film had found appreciation only with a small section of the audience . In the process , it was ranked ninth in the list of all @-@ time first week domestic collections . 
 Rockstar grossed ₹ 25 @.@ 0 million ( US $ 370 @,@ 000 ) nett on second Friday , with a 75 % drop as compared to the first day . On Saturday , the film collected ₹ 32 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 480 @,@ 000 ) nett , and ₹ 42 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 630 @,@ 000 ) nett on Sunday , taking the second weekend collection totalled at ₹ 100 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ) , representing a 70 % drop from its first weekend . As of ten days , the film had collected approximately ₹ 574 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 5 million ) nett . Rockstar made ₹ 158 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 4 million ) nett in the second week , declining by 67 % and taking the two @-@ week collection totalled at ₹ 633 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 4 million ) nett . The film on week three managed to earn ₹ 29 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 440 @,@ 000 ) , and hence taking three weeks collections to ₹ 662 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 8 million ) . By the end of its fifth week , the film netted ₹ 674 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 10 million ) . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Rockstar managed to gross $ 1 @.@ 65 million from all overseas markets and was termed as below the mark . The film collected £ 185 @,@ 000 in the UK , $ 612 @,@ 000 in North America , $ 370 @,@ 000 in UAE and $ 100 @,@ 000 in Australia . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Three Rivers Stadium = 
 Three Rivers Stadium was a multi @-@ purpose stadium located in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania from 1970 to 2000 . It was home to the Pittsburgh Pirates of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) and the Pittsburgh Steelers of the National Football League ( NFL ) . 
 Built as a replacement for Forbes Field , which opened in 1909 , the US $ 55 million ( $ 354 @.@ 9 million today ) multi @-@ purpose facility was designed to maximize efficiency . Ground was broken in April 1968 and an oft behind @-@ schedule construction plan lasted for 29 months . The stadium opened on July 16 , 1970 when the Pirates played their first game . In the 1971 World Series , Three Rivers Stadium hosted the first World Series game played at night . The following year the stadium was the site of the Immaculate Reception . The final game in the stadium was won by the Steelers on December 16 , 2000 . Three Rivers Stadium also hosted the Pittsburgh Maulers of the United States Football League and the University of Pittsburgh Panthers football team for a single season each . 
 After its closing , Three Rivers Stadium was imploded in 2001 , and the Pirates and Steelers each moved into newly built stadiums : PNC Park and Heinz Field , respectively . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and construction = = = 
 A proposal for a new sports stadium in Pittsburgh was first made in 1948 ; however , plans did not attract much attention until the late 1950s . The Pittsburgh Pirates played their home games at Forbes Field , which opened in 1909 , and was the second oldest venue in the National League ( Philadelphia 's Connie Mack Stadium was oldest , having opened only two months earlier than Forbes ) . The Pittsburgh Steelers , who had moved from Forbes Field to Pitt Stadium in 1964 , were large supporters of the project . For their part , according to longtime Pirates announcer Bob Prince , the Pirates wanted a bigger place to play in order to draw more revenue . 
 In 1958 , the Pirates sold Forbes to the University of Pittsburgh for $ 2 million ( $ 16 @.@ 4 million today ) . The university wanted the land for expanded graduate facilities . As part of the deal , the university leased Forbes back to the Pirates until a replacement could be built . An early design of the stadium included plans to situate the stadium atop a bridge across the Monongahela River . It was to call for a 70 @,@ 000 seat stadium with hotels , marina and even 100 lane bowling alley . Plans of the " Stadium over the Monongahela " were eventually not pursued . A design was presented in 1958 which featured an open center field design — through which fans could view Pittsburgh 's " Golden Triangle " . A site on the city 's Northside was approved on August 10 , 1958 , due to land availability and parking space , the latter of which had been a problem at Forbes Field . The same site had hosted Exposition Park , which the Pirates had left in 1909 . The stadium was located in a hard @-@ to @-@ access portion of downtown , making it hard in later years to get in before games and leave after games . Political debate continued over the North Side Sports Stadium and the project was often behind schedule and over @-@ budget . Arguments were made by commissioner ( and former Allegheny County Medical Examiner ) Dr. William <unk> that the Pirates and Steelers should fund a higher percentage of the $ 33 million project ( $ 240 @.@ 7 million today ) . Due to lack of support , however , the arguments faded . 
 Ground for Three Rivers Stadium was broken on April 25 , 1968 . Due to the Steelers ' suggestions , the stadium 's design was changed to enclose center field . Construction continued , though it became plagued with problems such as thieves stealing materials from the building site . In November 1969 , Arthur Gratz asked the city for an additional $ 3 million ( $ 19 @.@ 4 million today ) , which was granted . In January 1970 , the opening target date of the stadium was set for May 29 ; however , because of a failure to install the lights on schedule , opening day was pushed back to July 16 . The stadium was named in February 1969 for to its location at the confluence of the Allegheny River and Monongahela River , which forms the Ohio River . It would sometimes be called The House That Clemente Built after Pirates ' right @-@ fielder Roberto Clemente . 
 = = = Opening Day = = = 
 In their first game after the All @-@ Star Break in 1970 , the Pirates opened the stadium against Cincinnati on Thursday , July 16 . The team donned new uniform designs for the first time that day , a similar plan was for new " mini @-@ skirts " for female ushers however the ushers union declined the uniform change for female workers . A parade was held before opening ceremonies . The expansive parking lot , both Pirates and Steelers team offices , the Allegheny Club ( VIP Club ) and the press boxes and facilities were not opened until weeks later due to extended labor union work stoppages . Instead of allowing cars to park , the team instructed fans to park downtown and walk to the stadium over bridges or take shuttle buses . The opening of Three Rivers marked the first time the Pirates allowed beer to be sold in the stands during a game since the early 1960s . 
 = = = Design and alterations = = = 
 Three Rivers Stadium was similar in design to other stadiums built in the 1960s and 1970s , such as Riverfront Stadium , the Houston Astrodome , and Busch Memorial Stadium , which were designed as multi @-@ purpose facilities to maximize efficiency . Due to their similar design these stadiums were nicknamed " cookie @-@ cutter " or " concrete doughnuts " ballparks . The sight lines were more favorable to football ; almost 70 % of the seats in the baseball configuration were in fair territory . It originally seated 50 @,@ 611 for baseball , but several expansions over the years brought it to 58 @,@ 729 . In 1993 , the Pirates placed tarps on most of the upper deck to create a better baseball atmosphere , reducing capacity to 47 @,@ 687 . 
 Three Rivers was the first multi @-@ purpose stadium and the first in either the NFL or MLB to feature Tartan Turf , which was installed from opening day . It was replaced by a number of other surfaces including AstroTurf . It had a dirt skin infield on the basepaths for baseball through 1972 , until converted to " sliding pits " at the bases for 1973 . Renovations for the start of the 1983 baseball season included the initial placement of AstroTurf , the center field Stewart @-@ Warner scoreboard being removed and replaced with new seating — while a new Diamond Vision scoreboard with a White Way messageboard was installed at the top of the center field upper deck — and the outfield fence being painted blue . The field originally used " <unk> vacuum vehicles " to dry the surface , though they were replaced by an underground drainage system . 
 In 1975 , the baseball field 's outfield fences were moved ten feet ( 3 m ) closer to home plate , in an attempt to boost home run numbers . The bullpens were moved to multiple locations throughout the stadium 's history ; however , their first position was also their final one — beyond the right @-@ field fence . A Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette story in 1970 stated that the new stadium boasted 1 @,@ 632 floodlight bulbs . 
 Due to Three Rivers Stadium 's multi @-@ purpose design , bands including Led Zeppelin , Pink Floyd , The Rolling Stones , and The Who hosted concerts at the venue . On August 11 , 1985 , Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band hosted the largest concert in Pittsburgh history , when they performed for 65 @,@ 935 on @-@ lookers . And in 1992 , the Pittsburgh Penguins celebrated their second Stanley Cup victory at the Stadium . The stadium hosted various Jehovah 's Witnesses conventions , including international conventions in 1973 and 1978 , and a centennial conference in 1984 . A Billy Graham Crusade took place at Three Rivers in June , 1993 . The venue also served as the premiere of the 1994 Disney film Angels in the Outfield which , despite being based around the then @-@ Disney owned California Angels , paid homage to the original 1951 film , which featured the Pirates in " heavenly " need . 
 Three Rivers Stadium had a beverage contract with Coca @-@ Cola throughout its history . It was during the Steelers ' stay in Three Rivers that the now famous " Mean Joe " Greene Coke commercial aired , leading to a longstanding relationship between the two . When Heinz Field opened , Coca @-@ Cola also assumed the beverage contract for that stadium ( the Pirates signed a deal with Pepsi for PNC Park before signing with Coke again in 2014 ) , and also became the primary sponsor for the Steelers ' own hall of fame , the Coca @-@ Cola Great Hall . After the initial 10 @-@ year contract expired , Heinz Field contracted with Pepsi for exclusive pouring rights , breaking a 50 @-@ year tradition with the Steelers . 
 = = = Demolition = = = 
 In September 1991 , planning began to build a new baseball park for the Pittsburgh Pirates . As talks continued , a proposal to re @-@ model Three Rivers Stadium into a full @-@ time football stadium was made . However , Steelers ownership did not support the idea , stating that a new venue would be needed for the franchise to remain competitive . On July 9 , 1998 , the Allegheny Regional Asset District board approved an $ 809 million plan which would fund the Pirates ' PNC Park and the Steelers ' Heinz Field . Ground was broken for the new stadiums in 1999 . On October 1 , 2000 , the Pirates were defeated 10 – 9 by the Chicago Cubs in their final game at Three Rivers Stadium . After the game , former Pirate Willie Stargell threw out the ceremonial last pitch . Two months later on December 16 , 2000 , the Steelers concluded play at Three Rivers Stadium , with a 24 @-@ 3 victory over the Washington Redskins . 
 Three Rivers Stadium was imploded on February 11 , 2001 at 8 : 03 a.m. on a chilly 21 ° F ( − 6 ° C ) day . Over 20 @,@ 000 people viewed the implosion from Point State Park . Another 3 @,@ 000 @-@ 4 @,@ 000 viewing from atop Mount Washington and an uncounted number of people viewed the demolition from various high points across the city . Mark <unk> of Controlled Demolition , Inc. pushed the button that set off the 19 @-@ second implosion , while Elizabeth and Joseph King pushed the " ceremonial old fashioned dynamite plunger " . The demolition cost $ 5 @.@ 1 million and used 4 @,@ 800 pounds of explosive . With the newly constructed Heinz Field only 80 feet away , effects from the blast were a concern . Doug <unk> , vice president of Controlled Demolition , Inc . , was happy to report that there was no debris within 40 feet of Heinz Field . 
 At the time of the demolition , Three Rivers stadium still had $ 27 @.@ 93 million in debt ( $ 37 @.@ 3 million today ) , some of it from the original construction but the rest from renovations in the mid @-@ 1980s , bringing more criticism to the public funding of sports stadiums . The debt was finally retired by 2010 . 
 Like most stadiums demolished during this time whose replacements were located nearby ( including the Civic Arena over a decade later ) , the site of Three Rivers Stadium mostly became a parking lot . Much like the Pittsburgh Penguins would do with the site of Civic Arena , the Steelers retained development rights to the site of Three Rivers , and would later build Stage AE on portions of the site , as well as an office building that hosts the studios for Root Sports Pittsburgh , the headquarters of <unk> Tuna , and the regional headquarters of Del Monte Foods . On December 23 , 2012 , on the 40th anniversary of the Immaculate Reception , the Steelers unveiled a monument at the exact spot where Franco Harris made the reception in the parking lot . In 2015 , the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette moved into a new office building also built on a portion on the site after 53 years in the former Pittsburgh Press building and more than two centuries in Downtown . 
 In 2011 , the Pittsburgh Tribune Review reported that the Three Rivers Stadium website was still active , 11 years after the facility 's demolition . In 2015 , the newspaper revisited the issue and reported again that the website remained active , 14 years after demolition . 
 = = Seating capacity = = 
 = = = Baseball = = = 
 50 @,@ 500 ( 1970 ) 
 50 @,@ 235 ( 1971 – 1978 ) 
 50 @,@ 364 ( 1979 ) 
 50 @,@ 230 ( 1980 ) 
 54 @,@ 598 ( 1981 – 1982 ) 
 54 @,@ 490 ( 1983 ) 
 58 @,@ 365 ( 1984 ) 
 58 @,@ 429 ( 1985 ) 
 58 @,@ 437 ( 1986 – 1987 ) 
 58 @,@ 727 ( 1988 – 1989 ) 
 58 @,@ 729 ( 1990 – 1992 ) 
 47 @,@ 952 ( 1993 – 2000 ) 
 = = = Football = = = 
 50 @,@ 350 ( 1970 – 1979 ) 
 54 @,@ 000 ( 1980 – 1982 ) 
 59 @,@ 000 ( 1983 – 1990 ) 
 59 @,@ 600 ( 1991 – 2000 ) 
 = = Stadium usage = = 
 = = = Panthers = = = 
 The Pitt Panthers played at Three Rivers Stadium on multiple occasions . The Panthers played a full home schedule here during the 2000 season . The Panthers went 7 @-@ 3 in the stadium . They played here in the following games : 
 1975 : # 10 Penn State 7 vs # 17 Pitt Panthers 6 
 1976 : Penn State 7 vs # 1 Pitt Panthers 24 
 1982 : # 5 North Carolina 6 vs # 1 Pitt Panthers 7 
 1998 : West Virginia 52 vs Pitt Panthers 14 
 2000 : Kent State 7 vs Pitt Panthers 30 
 2000 : Penn State 0 vs Pitt Panthers 12 
 2000 : Rutgers 17 vs Pitt Panthers 29 
 2000 : Boston College 26 vs Pitt Panthers 42 
 2000 : North Carolina 20 vs Pitt Panthers 17 
 2000 : West Virginia 28 vs Pitt Panthers 38 
 = = = Pirates = = = 
 Three Rivers Stadium opened on July 16 , 1970 , but the Pirates lost 3 – 2 to the Cincinnati Reds in front of 48 @,@ 846 spectators . The first pitch was thrown by Dock Ellis — a strike — to Ty Cline . The first hit in the stadium was by Pittsburgh 's Richie Hebner , in the bottom of the first inning . The Pirates lifted their local blackout policy so that local fans could see the inaugural game . The Pirates ' lowest season of attendance was 1985 , at an average of 9 @,@ 085 . The average attendance would peak in 1991 , when the Pirates averaged 25 @,@ 498 per game . Game one of the 1970 NLCS , at Three Rivers Stadium , was the first postseason baseball game to be played on an artificial surface . The following season , the Pirates advanced to the World Series against the Baltimore Orioles . Three Rivers Stadium hosted game four , in which the Pirates defeated the Orioles in the first night game in the history of the World Series . Pittsburgh hosted its third All @-@ Star Game in 1974 . The National League won the game 7 – 2 and the Pirates ' Ken Brett was the winning pitcher . In 1979 , the Pirates again won a World Championship , yet again defeating the Baltimore Orioles in a seven @-@ game World Series . Games 3 , 4 and 5 of the Series were played at Three Rivers . 15 years later , the midsummer classic returned in 1994 . With 59 @,@ 568 in attendance , the largest crowd to ever attend a baseball game at the stadium , the National League won 8 @-@ 7 in the 10th inning . On July 6 , 1980 , the Pirates beat the Chicago Cubs 5 @-@ 4 in 20 innings — the most innings ever played at the stadium . The longest game at the stadium was played on August 6 , 1989 , when Jeff King hit a walk @-@ off home run 5 hours and 42 minutes into the 18 @-@ inning contest , as the Pirates once again beat the Cubs 5 @-@ 4 . On September 30 , 1972 , Pirates ' right @-@ fielder Roberto Clemente got his 3,000th hit at Three Rivers Stadium , three months before his death . 
 Bobby Bonilla hit one of the only 13 home runs ever hit into the upper deck of Three Rivers Stadium , and one of the six to the right @-@ field side . Willie Stargell is the all @-@ time leader in upper deck shots at the stadium , hitting four of the remaining five right @-@ field blasts ; Mark <unk> hit the other . The left @-@ field upper deck had been reached by Jeff Bagwell twice , and Bob Robertson , Greg Luzinski , Howard Johnson , <unk> Hill and Devon White ( his home run struck the facade ) once each . 
 = = = Steelers = = = 
 The Pittsburgh Steelers played their first game in Three Rivers Stadium on September 20 , 1970 — a 19 – 7 loss to the Houston Oilers . Throughout their 31 seasons in Three Rivers Stadium , the Steelers posted a record of 182 – 72 , including a 13 @-@ 5 playoff record , and defeated every visiting franchise at least once from the stadium 's opening to close , enjoying perfect records there against seven teams . The Steelers sold out every home game from 1972 through the closing of the stadium , a streak which continues through 2008 . The largest attendance for a football game was on January 15 , 1995 , when 61 @,@ 545 spectators witnessed the Steelers lose to the San Diego Chargers . On December 23 , 1972 , Three Rivers Stadium was site to the Immaculate Reception , which became regarded as one of the greatest plays in NFL history . Three Rivers Stadium hosted seven AFC Championship Games from 1972 to 1998 ; the Steelers won four . In the 1995 AFC Championship game , the Steelers ' Randy Fuller deflected a Hail Mary pass intended for Indianapolis Colts receiver Aaron Bailey as time expired , to send the franchise to their 5th Super Bowl . A Steelers symbol recognized worldwide , The Terrible Towel debuted on December 27 , 1975 at Three Rivers Stadium . The Steelers would move to Heinz Field after it was closed . 
 = = = Concerts = = = 
 August 24 , 1970 : Al Hirt and the Three Rivers New Orleans Music Festival 
 November 13 , 1971 : Three Dog Night 
 March 27 , 1972 : Black Sabbath 
 July 11 , 1972 : Alice Cooper ( with Humble Pie and Two Steves . Uriah Heep and John Kay were originally scheduled to be part of the show . Concert was originally scheduled to take place on June 23 , 1972 but was rescheduled due to flooding . ) 
 July 30 , 1972 : Three Dog Night ( 2nd tour ) 
 July 13 , 1973 : Pittsburgh Jazz Festival ( featuring Stevie Wonder , Ray Charles , B.B. King , and Charles Mingus ) 
