 Pollack also led the tournament ’ s international expansion with WSOP Europe . The first tournament was held in London and hosted by London Clubs International at three casinos : the Fifty , Leicester Square and the Sportsman . Pollack insisted , “ The World Series of Poker Europe will have a unique identity , style and flair , but will remain true to the 38 @-@ year tradition and heritage of the WSOP . ” The WSOPE remained in England from 2007 @-@ 2010 , was hosted in France from 2010 @-@ 2013 and is expected to be hosted in Berlin in 2015 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Pollack is known for his aggressive marketing . He ’ s noted on several occasions that he ’ s taken the strategies of the major sports brands , i.e. NASCAR , the NBA , and the NFL , and extracted the best practices to grow the WSOP . He has asserted , moreover , that “ [ s ] ports marketing fundamentally is about the selling of hope . Fans have the hope of their favorite team trading for the right player , drafting the right player , winning a game , winning the season , winning the world championship . ” And furthermore that , “ [ t ] he World Series of Poker offers a brand of hope that is infinitely more accessible ” insofar as anyone can enter the tournament and have a chance to play at the final table . 
 After becoming the Commissioner of the WSOP , he negotiated partnerships with ESPN , Sirius radio , Glu Mobile , Bluff Media , AOL , and <unk> . He also arranged sponsorships with Miller Brewing Company , Planters and Hershey ’ s . In 2006 , Card Player Media provided hand @-@ by @-@ hand reporting , streamed player interviews , gave player recaps and displayed real @-@ time chip count on its website . Once Pollack was asked if professional poker players would start wearing uniforms covered with ads , similar to NASCAR . He responded , " That is not out of the realm of possibility . As long as they stick to the guidelines , players will be allowed to seek endorsement deals and advertise as they wish . " 
 Pollack believed that the strength in the WSOP lies in its tradition and legacy . He wanted to do more to honor the WSOP 's past champions , " I want to bring our past , our history , and our DNA along for the ride . " 
 = = = Reception By Players = = = 
 Pollack was generally received well by the players , although he did have dissenters . Daniel Negreanu was impressed with his first meeting with Pollack , noting that professional poker is " a unique situation , as with the NBA players are being paid , while the poker players actually put up their own money . " However , by 2012 , Negreanu had changed his opinion of Pollack , crediting WSOP Vice President Ty Stewart and others for the event 's growth and popularity . 
 On the other hand , Pollack ’ s emphasis on the player ’ s experience along with his effectiveness in growing the WSOP cast him in a good light . This can be seen most clearly through the extent of support he received when he announced his resignation as commissioner . One commentator declared , “ the news hit the poker world … like a ton of bricks , ” and that his tenure in the role “ may be unmatched . ” Well @-@ known players like Phil Hellmuth , Peter Eastgate and Barry Goldstein expressed their esteem for Pollack . 
 = = = Resignation = = = 
 On November 13 , 2009 , Pollack announced on his Twitter feed that he was resigning as Commissioner . In a separate statement , he commented , “ Everything I set out to accomplish in 2005 , I think I have accomplished . The World Series of Poker is bigger than ever before . The brand is in a strong position and the player experience is better than it 's ever been . ” Pollock did not elaborate on any subsequent career opportunities , but said , " I 'm going to take a moment to pause and reflect , then will think things through and make some decisions , " 
 = = Epic Poker League = = 
 In January 2011 , Pollack and Annie Duke announced the launch of Federated Sports + Gaming ( FS + G ) , the parent company for the Epic Poker League . Duke served as the league ’ s commissioner . The EPL was designed to showcase the best players in the world and elevate them to the status of leading figures akin to icons in other sports . There was to be 200 players admitted and ranked by a system “ driven by mathematics and proven historic achievement . ” Pollack stated , “ I ’ ve long believed that the top professional poker players create enormous value for the industry and are skilled in a way that is worthy of star treatment , ” and moreover that , “ [ o ] ur new league will celebrate poker professionals like never before and provide a tournament experience at the Palms that is first @-@ class at every turn . ” The first season of the EPL was slated to include four “ rake @-@ free ” $ 20 @,@ 000 Main Events , in addition to a $ 1 million Championship Event . The EPL had negotiated 20 hours of television programming . Seven of which were to be aired on CBS and the remaining 13 on Discovery Communications ’ Velocity network . 
 From early on , industry insiders questioned the company 's business model . By February 2012 , after only holding three events , FS + G had filed bankruptcy , generating just over $ 38 @,@ 000 in revenue and accumulating up to $ 7 million in debt . 
 = = Advisor to the Chargers = = 
 In early 2015 , the San Diego Chargers hired Pollack as a special advisor to the team ’ s Chair and President Dean Spanos . Pollack will serve to consult the team on both future revenue growth and the development of a new stadium . Pollock aided Chargers Special Council Mark <unk> in the hiring and identifying of Manica , the architects tasked with designing a stadium in Carson , California . 
 = Marvel One @-@ Shots = 
 Marvel One @-@ Shots are a series of direct @-@ to @-@ video short films produced by Marvel Studios , set within the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , released from 2011 to 2014 . They are included as special features in the MCU films ' Blu @-@ ray and digital distribution releases , but are not included in the DVD releases . Each of the films , which range from 4 to 14 minutes , are designed to be a self @-@ contained story that provides more backstory for characters or events introduced in the films . Two of the shorts have been the inspiration for television series set in the MCU . 
 The Consultant ( 2011 ) and A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer ( 2011 ) star Clark Gregg as Agent Phil Coulson , and offer up self @-@ contained stories about a day in the life of a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent . Item 47 ( 2012 ) stars Lizzy Caplan and Jesse Bradford as a down @-@ on @-@ their @-@ luck couple who find a discarded Chitauri gun after the events of Marvel 's The Avengers . Agent Carter ( 2013 ) stars Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter after the events of Captain America : The First Avenger , while All Hail the King ( 2014 ) stars Ben Kingsley as Trevor Slattery after the events of Iron Man 3 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In August 2011 , Marvel announced that a couple of short films , designed to be self @-@ contained stories , would be released direct @-@ to @-@ video . Co @-@ producer Brad Winderbaum said " It 's a fun way to experiment with new characters and ideas , but more importantly it 's a way for us to expand the Marvel Cinematic Universe and tell stories that live outside the plot of our features . " The first two films were made in conjunction with The Ebeling Group and were directed by Leythum and written by Eric Pearson . Winderbaum added that the name of the shorts program was derived from the label used by Marvel Comics for their one @-@ shot comics . 
 Marvel Studios co @-@ president Louis D ’ Esposito later stated that Marvel was considering the idea of introducing established characters who may not yet be ready to carry their own feature films in future One @-@ Shots , stating , " There ’ s always a potential to introduce a character . We have 8 @,@ 000 of them , and they can ’ t all be at the same level . So maybe there are some that are not so popular , and we introduce them [ with a short ] – and they take off . I could see that happening . " When asked whether a Marvel superhero would ever appear in a One @-@ Shot , D 'Esposito replied that " We would love to , but it ’ s difficult because there ’ s a cost to that . If Iron Man is flying around doing something , that [ is ] very costly . And first of all , what ’ s the story ? Is it important that that superhero is in the story ? " 
 During the Agent Carter panel at the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , D 'Esposito stated that bringing the shorts to theaters , to appear before features , was being considered . In May 2014 , it was revealed that a One @-@ Shot would not be released with Captain America : The Winter Soldier 's home media , and in October 2014 , it was revealed that Guardians of the Galaxy 's home media release would not include one either . Guardians of the Galaxy director James Gunn stated that a One @-@ Shot was not included with the film due to lack of space on the disc . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = The Consultant ( 2011 ) = = = 
 Set after the events of Iron Man 2 and The Incredible Hulk , Phil Coulson informs Jasper Sitwell that the World Security Council wishes Emil Blonsky released from prison to join the Avengers Initiative . They see him as a war hero and blame the devastation in New York City on Bruce Banner . The Council orders them to send an agent to ask General Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross to release Blonsky into S.H.I.E.L.D. custody . As Nick Fury does not want to release Blonsky , the two agents decide to send a patsy to sabotage the meeting . At Sitwell 's urging , Coulson reluctantly sends " The Consultant " : Tony Stark . As partially depicted in the post @-@ credits scene of The Incredible Hulk , a disgraced Ross sits drinking in a bar , when he is approached by Stark , who annoys Ross so much that he tries to have Stark removed from the bar . In reply , Stark buys the bar and has it scheduled for demolition . The next day , Coulson informs Sitwell that their plan worked , and that Blonsky will remain in prison . 
 At the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con , Marvel announced that The Consultant would appear exclusively on the Thor Blu @-@ ray release on September 13 , 2011 . It was directed by Leythum and written by Eric Pearson , with music by Paul Oakenfold . Clark Gregg and Maximiliano Hernández return to portray Agent Phil Coulson and Agent Jasper Sitwell , respectively , from the films . They are joined via archive footage by Robert Downey , Jr. as Tony Stark / The Consultant , William Hurt as General Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross and Tim Roth as Emil Blonsky in his Abomination form . Co @-@ producer Brian Winderbaum said the producers " wanted to paint a picture of S.H.I.E.L.D. pulling the strings and being responsible for some of the events seen in the films . What better character to represent this idea than Agent Coulson , the first S.H.I.E.L.D. agent we were introduced to in the first Iron Man film ? " Gregg said he was told about the short film program in the same phone call that warned him Coulson would die in The Avengers . The actor noticed that the One @-@ Shots could then provide more information on Coulson , to " build the audience 's relationship [ with ] him " before his impactful death . The Consultant was written after A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer , due to the latter taking up 80 % of the budget Marvel reserved for the two shorts , leaving a remaining budget " for two guys talking " . To help with this , Pearson included Sitwell in the short , who had a minor role in Thor , and had him and Coulson " brainstorming a way to deal with this red tape bureaucratic politics of the Avengers Initiative " . 
 = = = A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer ( 2011 ) = = = 
 Set before the events of Thor , Phil Coulson stops at a gas station on his way to Albuquerque , New Mexico . While Coulson shops for snacks in the back of the station , two robbers enter and demand the money from the register . When the robbers ask whose car is outside , Coulson reveals himself , surrenders his keys , and offers to surrender his pistol as well . As he is about to turn over the gun , Coulson distracts the robbers and subdues both men in seconds . He then nonchalantly pays for his snacks while subtly advising the clerk not to mention his involvement to the police and leaves the station . 
 A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer was included on the Captain America : The First Avenger Blu @-@ ray release on October 25 , 2011 . It was directed by Leythum and written by Eric Pearson , with music by Paul Oakenfold . The short stars Clark Gregg reprising his role as Agent Phil Coulson . The short served to showcase Coulson as " more than just an annoying bureaucrat " of S.H.I.E.L.D. 
 = = = Item 47 ( 2012 ) = = = 
 Bennie and Claire , a down @-@ on @-@ their @-@ luck couple , find a discarded Chitauri gun ( " Item 47 " ) left over from the attack on New York City in The Avengers . The couple use it to rob a few banks , drawing the attention of S.H.I.E.L.D. , which assigns agents Sitwell and Blake to retrieve the weapon and " neutralize " the couple . Agent Sitwell tracks the couple down to a motel room that gets wrecked in the subsequent confrontation , and the stolen money gets destroyed . Instead of killing the couple , Sitwell invites them to join S.H.I.E.L.D. , with Bennie assigned to the R & D ' think @-@ tank ' to reverse engineer the Chitauri technology , and Claire becoming Blake 's assistant . 
 Item 47 was released on The Avengers Blu @-@ ray on September 25 , 2012 . The film stars Jesse Bradford and Lizzy Caplan as Bennie and Claire , respectively . The film also sees the return of Agent Sitwell , played by Maximiliano Hernández , and introduced Agent Blake , portrayed by Titus Welliver . It was directed by Marvel Studios co @-@ president Louis D ’ Esposito , written by Eric Pearson , and music by Christopher Lennertz . The short film , which was filmed over four days , has a runtime of 12 minutes , longer than the previous films , which were no longer than 4 minutes . Pearson and D 'Esposito had the idea for the short after watching The Avengers and thinking , " New York is a mess . There must be weapons everywhere " . Item 47 helped inspire the MCU television series Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. 
 = = = Agent Carter ( 2013 ) = = = 
 One year after the events of Captain America : The First Avenger , Agent Peggy Carter , now a member of the Strategic Scientific Reserve , is stuck compiling data instead of working field cases . One night while alone in the office , the case line rings , informing Carter of the location of the mysterious Zodiac . She goes to the location , and is able to retrieve the serum single @-@ handedly . The next day , her boss , Agent Flynn , reprimands her for not going through the proper procedures to complete the mission . Carter explains that the mission was time @-@ sensitive , but Flynn is unmoved , dismissing the indignant Carter as an " old flame " of Captain America 's who was given her current job out of pity for her bereavement . The case line rings again , this time with Howard Stark on the other end , who tells Flynn to inform Carter that she will co @-@ head the newly created S.H.I.E.L.D. In a mid @-@ credit scene , Dum Dum Dugan is seen poolside with Stark , marveling at two women wearing the newly created bikinis . 
 Agent Carter , released on the Iron Man 3 Blu @-@ ray release on September 24 , 2013 , as well as part of the digital download release on September 3 , 2013 , was seen as a good way of bridging that film with the then upcoming Captain America : The Winter Soldier . It had previously been considered to be released on other home media releases as well . It sees Hayley Atwell reprise her role as Peggy Carter , along with Dominic Cooper , Neal McDonough , and Chris Evans reprising their roles as Howard Stark , Timothy " Dum Dum " Dugan , and Steve Rogers / Captain America , respectively , the latter via archive footage . The short film introduces Bradley Whitford as Agent Flynn and Shane Black as the <unk> Voice . It was directed by Louis D ’ Esposito and written by Eric Pearson . The short was filmed over five days , and reused visual effects shots of 1940s New York from Captain America : The First Avenger to save money . Christopher Lennertz collaborated with D 'Esposito again on the short , composing music for it . He also composes the music for the MCU television series Marvel 's Agent Carter , which is directly related to the short . 
 = = = All Hail the King ( 2014 ) = = = 
 Trevor Slattery , having been captured at the end of Iron Man 3 , is now being held in <unk> Prison . At the prison , he is living luxuriously , having his own personal " butler " , Herman , as well as other inmates who act as his fan club and protection from other inmates . Looking on at the attention Slattery receives in the cafeteria , is Justin Hammer , who wonders what makes him so special . Slattery has been talking with a documentary filmmaker , Jackson Norriss , to chronicle the events of the Mandarin situation seen in Iron Man 3 . Norriss , trying to learn more about Slattery personally , recounts his past from his first casting as a child as well as starring in a failed CBS pilot . Norriss eventually informs Slattery that his portrayal has angered some people , including the actual Ten Rings terrorist group , which Slattery did not know existed . Norriss tells him the history of the Mandarin and the terrorist group , before revealing that he is actually a member of the group . The real reason for Norriss interviewing Slattery is to break him out of prison so he can meet the actual Mandarin . Hearing this , Slattery still has no idea of the full ramifications of his posing as the Mandarin . 
 In October 2013 , Ben Kingsley said he was working on a secret project with Marvel involving " many members of the crew that were involved in Iron Man 3 , " later revealed to be the short All Hail the King , which was released on the digital download release of Thor : The Dark World on February 4 , 2014 , and on February 25 , 2014 for the Blu @-@ ray release . The film stars : Ben Kingsley as Trevor Slattery , reprising his role from Iron Man 3 ; Scoot McNairy as Jackson Norriss , a member of the Ten Rings terrorist organization posing as a documentary filmmaker ; Lester Speight as Herman ; and Sam Rockwell as Justin Hammer , reprising his role from Iron Man 2 . The short is written and directed by Drew Pearce , the co @-@ screenwriter of Iron Man 3 , and was filmed in Los Angeles . Pearce and producer Stephen Broussard had the idea for the short during the production of Iron Man 3 , to provide " a fresh take " on the Mandarin character . Music for the short was composed by Brian Tyler , with the Caged Heat scenes composed by 1980s TV @-@ music icon Mike Post . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 List indicator ( s ) 
 A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film . 
 A ^ T indicates the character reappears in a television series . 
 A V indicates a voice @-@ only role 
 An A indicates the actor or actress appears via archived footage from previous films . 
 = = Collection = = 
 All of the Marvel One @-@ Shots were included on the bonus @-@ disc of the " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase Two Collection " box set , which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . The One @-@ Shots feature audio commentary , with Gregg providing it for The Consultant and A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer ; D 'Esposito , Hernandez , Welliver and Bradford on Item 47 , D 'Esposito and Atwell for Agent Carter ; and Pearce and Kingsley with All Hail the King . The collection was released on December 8 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cindy White of IGN called The Consultant " intriguing " and said , " The snappy dialogue seems to fit right in with what we expect from a Joss Whedon @-@ ized Avengers movie . " Scott Chitwood of ComingSoon.net said , " Considering a third of this is a rehash of an old bonus scene and the other 2 / 3 is Coulson sitting and having a chat , this is a pretty big disappointment . " 
 R.L. Shaffer of IGN called A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer " fun " . Zachary Scheer of Cinema Blend said , " The short is as hackneyed as that title . It 's about four minutes of Coulson being a badass , if the definition of ' badass ' is performing needless slow @-@ motion action stunts and then pausing to consider something normal people would consider – like which donuts to buy . " 
 Andre Dellamorte of Collider called Item 47 " silly " . William Bibbiani of Crave Online said , " The short is largely a success : [ Maximiliano ] Hernandez , [ Jesse ] Bradford and [ Lizzy ] Caplan are all in fine form although , [ Titus ] Welliver seems saddled with a little awkward dialogue , particularly in regards to Coulson , which doesn ’ t entirely sell . " Spencer Terry of Superhero Hype ! said , " [ Item 47 ] is easily the best one they 've done , and I think that can be attributed to its length seeing as it 's three times longer than the other One @-@ Shots . With a longer run time , the short film doesn 't have to rush to show us everything that it wants to - we get a clear understanding of both the S.H.I.E.L.D. perspective of the events and the robbers ' point of view . " 
 Andy Hunsaker of Crave Online said , " Agent Carter is a fun treat which could lead the way for some female @-@ led Marvel films and , if nothing else , it gives its title character the send @-@ off she deserves . " Scott Collura of IGN said , " Atwell 's Carter is the big @-@ screen female superhero we 've all been waiting for . She kicks so much ass in this short story with such aplomb , using not just brawn but also brains , and it 's all very clever and fun . " Rosie Fletcher of Total Film said , " Atwell makes a perfect femme fatale @-@ come @-@ special agent , and this ' 40s noir @-@ style short looks great and packs some euphoric action moments . " 
 IGN 's Cliff Wheatley gave All Hail the King a 9 @.@ 4 out of 10 . He said that it 's " a return to the loveable personality of the hapless Trevor and a step forward for the larger Marvel Cinematic Universe . It has its twists that should satisfy both lovers and haters of Trevor Slattery . But it ’ s the approach that Pearce takes with the material , from the kung @-@ fu movie style credit sequences to the light @-@ hearted tone that takes a sudden and jarring turn . Kingsley once again shines in the role of Slattery , aloof and ignorant , but more than happy to slide back into Mandarin mode if it will please his adoring fans . Pearce does go for some of the same jokes from Iron Man 3 in a sort of referential way , but it ’ s nothing too damaging . " Andrew Wheeler of Comics Alliance criticized the way homosexuality was presented in the short , given it was Marvel Studio 's first attempt to bring LGBT concepts into the MCU . 
 = = Potential projects = = 
 In July 2013 , D ’ Esposito said he had considered making stand @-@ alone shorts for several characters , including Loki , a young Nick Fury , Black Panther , Ms. Marvel , and Black Widow . Regarding Loki , D ’ Esposito said " Being on Asgard is very difficult for us to do in a short . It ’ s just impossible for us cost wise . The short would be 30 seconds , and it ’ s over . One shot of Loki on Asgard . " On Fury and Black Panther , he remarked " It ’ s very complicated to do : who plays those characters ? And designing the costume , getting it going … We tried . We were there in development , and we tried , but they were very difficult for all the reasons I gave . And we don ’ t want to do something that ’ s half baked because it ’ s not good for us and it ’ s not good for our fans . " In February 2014 , Pearce mentioned other shorts that he had written that never came to fruition , including ones based on Sin and Crossbones , Jessica Jones , and Damage Control . 
 In May 2015 , Marvel Studios head Kevin Feige stated that there were " no active plans for the One @-@ Shots to return " , but added that the studio was not opposed to continuing the series , and there was already " a backlog of ideas " for potential One @-@ Shots . In September 2015 , Feige provided further comments on the return of the One @-@ Shots saying , " The universe is big , and we 're moving up to three [ feature films ] a year this year . I don 't know how much beyond that we can go ... [ So ] we do talk about [ making more One @-@ Shots ] a lot ... It 's just about finding the time and the place . " 
 = 2016 Russian Grand Prix = 
 The 2016 Russian Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2016 Formula 1 Russian Grand Prix ; Russian : Гран @-@ при России 2016 года ) was a Formula One motor race that took place on 1 May 2016 . The race , contested over fifty @-@ three laps , was held at the Sochi Autodrom . It was the fourth round of the 2016 season and marked the fifth running of the Russian Grand Prix , the third time as a round of the Formula One World Championship since the series inception in 1950 . Nico Rosberg of Mercedes came into the race leading the championship ahead of his teammate Lewis Hamilton , who was the defending race winner . 
 Nico Rosberg won the race from pole position , ahead of his teammate Lewis Hamilton , with Kimi Räikkönen completing the podium for Ferrari . While Rosberg extended his winning streak to seven consecutive Grands Prix , Sebastian Vettel retired from the race on the first lap , after contact with Red Bull 's Daniil Kvyat . With the maximum number of 100 points from the first four races of the season , Rosberg left Russia with a 43 @-@ point lead to Hamilton . By securing pole position , winning the race , setting the fastest lap and leading every lap , Nico Rosberg achieved the first grand slam of his career . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Going into the fourth Grand Prix weekend of the season , Nico Rosberg and his team Mercedes were leading the Drivers ' and Constructors ' championships respectively . Rosberg was 36 points ahead of his teammate Lewis Hamilton , having taken 75 out of 75 available points from the first three races of the season . Daniel Ricciardo followed in third place , three points behind Hamilton . In the Constructors ' standings , Mercedes headed the field with 114 points , 53 points ahead of Ferrari and 57 points clear of Red Bull . This was the third time since the Russian Grand Prix debuted in Formula One in 2014 that the race was held as part of the World Championship . Two early editions of the race were held in 1913 and 1914 . 
 Red Bull Racing used the first practice session to test the " <unk> " , a form of cockpit protection developed in response to fatal accidents of the drivers such as Jules Bianchi , Justin Wilson and Henry Surtees , who were struck on the head by flying debris . The <unk> was developed as an alternative to the " halo " device trialled by Ferrari during pre @-@ season testing . The device was fitted to Daniel Ricciardo 's car and he completed a single installation lap to assess it before it was removed for the remainder of the session . Ricciardo was satisfied with the device , saying : " Where we have the structure in place is pretty much where the mirrors are so I wouldn ’ t say it hindered any more than we are now in terms of visibility . Peripheral vision was fine as well . " 
 Sole tyre supplier Pirelli brought the medium , soft and supersoft tyres to the event , continuing the trend established in the Australian , Bahrain and Chinese Grands Prix . Per the regulations of the 2016 season , every driver needs to set aside one set each of the two softest compounds for the race and one set of the <unk> for Q3 ( should they advance ) . The drivers have freedom of what other compounds they choose for the remaining ten out of thirteen sets . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2016 season , two ninety @-@ minute practice sessions were held on Friday and another one @-@ hour session was held before qualifying on Saturday . In the first session on Friday morning , Nico Rosberg was fastest for Mercedes with a time of 1 : 38 @.@ 127 , more than seven @-@ tenths of a second ahead of his teammate Lewis Hamilton . Both set their fastest times on the super @-@ soft tyre compound , while Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen at Ferrari opted for the harder soft compound , slotting in third and fourth fastest respectively . Several drivers had problems with spinning or running wide , either in turn two or between turns 15 and 16 . Among the drivers caught out were Hamilton , Vettel , Jolyon Palmer and Jenson Button . Two reserve drivers made an appearance during the first free practice session . Sergey Sirotkin drove for Renault , taking the place of Kevin Magnussen , making his second appearance in a Formula One car , after driving for Sauber during free practice at the 2014 Russian Grand Prix . Alfonso Celis Jr. replaced Nico Hülkenberg at Force India during the first practice session . Sirotkin ended the session ahead of his teammate Palmer , while Celis finished last , more than three seconds behind teammate Sergio Pérez . 
 Lewis Hamilton topped the timesheets in second practice on Friday afternoon with a time of 1 : 37 @.@ 583 , using the super @-@ soft compound . Earlier in the session , he had suffered a spin in turn four that flat @-@ spotted his tyres and sent him back to the pitlane . Rosberg managed only third fastest as the Mercedes drivers were split by Sebastian Vettel , even though the latter suffered from electrical problems that lost him track time . Rosberg in turn was unable to improve on his time set on the soft @-@ compound tyre due to his super @-@ soft run being compromised by yellow flags shown after a spin by Romain Grosjean . Behind the top three , Kimi Räikkönen was again fourth , ahead of Daniel Ricciardo and Valtteri Bottas . Slowest of the session was Sauber 's Marcus Ericsson , with the two Manor drivers Rio Haryanto and Pascal Wehrlein slotting in ahead of him . Wehrlein reported a loss of power after crossing the chequered flag at the end of the session . 
 In third practice on Saturday morning , Hamilton narrowly beat Rosberg to the fastest time , lapping just 0 @.@ 068 seconds faster than his teammate . All drivers used the super @-@ soft tyre compound to set their fastest lap times , with the two Ferraris of Vettel and Räikkönen third and fourth ahead of the Williams pair of Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas . Vettel had spent most of the session testing his car with a heavier fuel load in preparation for the race that would see him start with a five @-@ place grid penalty for a change of the gearbox . He completed the highest number of laps with 28 , ahead of Daniel Ricciardo , who was 11th fastest . At the back end , the Saubers of Ericsson and Nasr were slowest , behind both Manor cars . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with six drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . During the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) , Lewis Hamilton set the fastest time , a new fastest lap of the track ever at 1 : 36 @.@ 006 . However , he also came under investigation of the stewards as he failed to obliged the rules set for turn 2 , rejoining the track earlier than allowed after running wide . After being summoned to the stewards at the end of qualifying , he walked away with a reprimand , but was not penalised . Behind Rosberg in second place , the two Ferraris of Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen were third and fourth respectively . At the tail end of the field , three pairs of cars were eliminated : both Sauber , Manor and Renault drivers missed Q2 . 
 In the second part , Nico Rosberg was fastest , half a second faster than teammate Hamilton , and 1 @.@ 7 seconds clear of the pole position lap time from the year before . Both McLarens had shown promising pace , but nevertheless dropped out of contention in 12th and 14th , while Daniil Kvyat was the last driver to secure a place in Q3 , demoting Carlos Sainz , Jr. to 11th . Kvyat 's Red Bull teammate Daniel Ricciardo also progressed , albeit suffering a failure of his wing mirror , which hung off the side of his vehicle during his last timed lap . Eliminated at the back were both Haas drivers , along Nico Hülkenberg , who was unable to follow his teammate Pérez into Q3 and qualified 13th . 
 As Q3 started , it became apparent that Lewis Hamilton would be unable to take part , suffering from a hybrid system failure in the turbo charger , the same problem that had plagued him in China two weeks earlier . Nico Rosberg went on to secure pole position , even though his last timed lap was compromised by a tyre lockup into turn 13 . Sebastian Vettel was closest to Rosberg , but a five @-@ place grid penalty meant that he would start the race from seventh on the grid , moving Valtteri Bottas into the first row . Kimi Räikkönen was fourth fastest , ahead of Massa , Ricciardo , Pérez , Kvyat and Verstappen . After qualifying , Mercedes decided to switch Hamilton 's car back to his spare power unit , which had been rebuilt following its failure at the Chinese Grand Prix , thereby avoiding a grid penalty , which they would have incurred if a new power unit would have been installed . Williams were satisfied with their pace in qualifying , praising the advances they made in slow @-@ corner speed . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start , several drivers made contact with one another into turn two . Sebastian Vettel was hit in the rear by Daniil Kvyat there and during turn three , the latter of which caused him to crash into the barrier and retire from the competition . Further back , Nico Hülkenberg was hit by Esteban Gutiérrez and collected Rio Haryanto , forcing both Hülkenberg and Haryanto into retirement as well . As the safety car came out to allow for the cars and debris to be cleared from the track , several cars headed to the pit lane to repair damage , among them Daniel Ricciardo , Daniil Kvyat and Sergio Pérez . The order at the restart on lap four was : Rosberg , Räikkönen , Bottas , Massa and Hamilton , who had stayed clear of the incidents to move up to fifth . On the restart , Bottas moved ahead of Räikkönen , while Hamilton made a successful move on Massa into fourth . Kvyat 's early pit stop left him in 15th at that point , and he soon served a ten @-@ second stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty for his contacts with Vettel , dropping him to last . Meanwhile , Hamilton overtook Räikkönen to move into third on lap seven . Felipe Nasr came into the pits on lap 12 to replace a slow puncture on his tyres . The order at the front remained the same until Bottas became the first front runner to pit for fresh tyres on lap 17 . Hamilton followed suit one lap later , but still emerged behind Bottas , overtaking him into turn two another lap later . On lap 20 , Räikkönen pitted as well , coming back out behind Hamilton , but ahead of Bottas . All the while , Rosberg led comfortably ahead of Max Verstappen , who made his first stop on lap 23 and dropped back . 
 While racing for position on lap 23 , Sainz forced Jolyon Palmer off the track in turn two and was later handed a ten @-@ second time penalty for the incident . Four laps later , Pascal Wehrlein tried to overtake Felipe Nasr for 16th , but was unsuccessful and in turn lost a position to Kvyat . His teammate Ricciardo overtook Kevin Magnussen for eighth on lap 29 , but lost the position again and was in turn passed by Romain Grosjean . As Nico Rosberg started to lap backmarkers on lap 31 , the gap to second @-@ placed Hamilton started to come down , with his advantage dropping from more than eleven seconds to a little more than seven seconds by lap 36 . Meanwhile , Verstappen was forced to retire due to power unit failure on lap 34 , while running in sixth place . As Hamilton was told by his pit crew that he suffered from a water pressure problem , his gap to Rosberg started to increase again , staying at 13 seconds by lap 41 . Wehrlein pitted for new tyres on the same lap , but problems with his stop forced him stationary for almost a minute , resulting in him moving into last place on the road . 
 On lap 47 , Massa pitted for new tyres from fifth place , retaining his position ahead of Fernando Alonso . All the while , Räikkönen was able to close the gap to Hamilton ahead of him to eight seconds on lap 49 . On the next lap , Button passed Sainz for tenth and Ricciardo moved ahead of Palmer for 12th another lap later . Rosberg crossed the line to take his seventh consecutive victory , a feat to that point only achieved by Alberto Ascari , Michael Schumacher and Sebastian Vettel . Lewis Hamilton and Kimi Räikkönen rounded up the podium ahead of the two Williams drivers , Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Massa . Rosberg recorded the first Grand Slam of his career , meaning he won the race , recorded the fastest lap , achieved pole position and led every lap . He was the 24th driver in history to achieve the feat . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The first lap collision between Kvyat and Vettel that put the latter out of the race was a major talking point afterwards . The two had already been embroiled in an argument after the previous Grand Prix in China , when Vettel felt that Kvyat had caused a collision between the two Ferrari drivers . This time around , Vettel reacted to his retirement with what The Telegraph described as " one of the most explosive outbursts heard over team radio for years " . He later demanded an apology from Kvyat , as did Red Bull teammate Ricciardo , who felt that Kvyat , who pushed Vettel into him , had ruined his race as well . Red Bull announced that they would summon Kvyat to talks about the incident , calling their race a " disaster " , with Helmut Marko , the team 's young driver coordinator , calling him " over @-@ motivated " . Kvyat received three penalty points on his licence as a result of the incident . He himself said after the race : " I apologise to everyone who is involved and I will learn from it . I think we have to speak . It is easy now to attack me and I guess everyone will , but I am OK with that . " On 5 May , Red Bull announced that they had relegated Kvyat back to their junior squad , Toro Rosso , for the remainder of the season , switching him with 18 @-@ year old Max Verstappen . Red Bull 's team principal Christian Horner explained the driver swap with Verstappen 's talent , also stressing that the move to Red Bull would tie him to the team for the foreseeable future . 
 Following multiple collision shortly after the start , Jenson Button pressed for changes to be made to turn two of the Sochi Autodrom , saying : " The bollard at turn two is the problem at the start because people are trying to fight through turns two and three . I think that needs some looking at . " Apart from Kvyat , two more drivers received penalty points to their licences . Two points each were given to Carlos Sainz , Jr . , who was deemed to have forced Jolyon Palmer off the track and Esteban Gutiérrez , who collided with Nico Hülkenberg at the start . 
 As a result of the race , Nico Rosberg cemented his position at the top of the Drivers ' Championship , having taken the maximum number of 100 points available from the first four rounds . Lewis Hamilton followed in second with 57 points , while Kimi Räikkönen moved up to third with 43 points . Vettel 's retirement dropped him to fifth in the standings , behind Daniel Ricciardo . In the Constructors ' standings , Mercedes increased their points tally to 157 , now 81 points clear of second @-@ placed Ferrari . Red Bull 's poor performance saw their advantage over fourth placed Williams reduced to just six points . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 — Sebastian Vettel received a five place grid penalty for an unscheduled gearbox change . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = = Standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Nirvana ( band ) = 
 Nirvana was an American rock band formed by singer and guitarist Kurt Cobain and bassist Krist Novoselic in Aberdeen , Washington , in 1987 . Nirvana went through a succession of drummers , the longest @-@ lasting being Dave Grohl , who joined the band in 1990 . Despite releasing only three full @-@ length studio albums in their seven @-@ year career , Nirvana has come to be regarded as one of the most influential and important rock bands of the modern era . Though the band dissolved in 1994 , their music continues to maintain a popular following and to inspire and influence modern rock and roll culture . 
 In the late 1980s , Nirvana established itself as part of the Seattle grunge scene , releasing its first album , Bleach , for the independent record label Sub Pop in 1989 . The band eventually came to develop a sound that relied on dynamic contrasts , often between quiet verses and loud , heavy choruses . After signing to major label DGC Records , Nirvana found unexpected success with " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , the first single from the band 's second album Nevermind ( 1991 ) . Nirvana 's sudden success widely popularized alternative rock as a whole , and the band 's frontman Cobain found himself referred to in the media as the " spokesman of a generation " , with Nirvana being considered the " flagship band " of Generation X. In response , Nirvana 's third studio album , In Utero ( 1993 ) , released to critical acclaim , featured an abrasive , less mainstream sound and challenged the group 's audience . 
 Nirvana 's active career ended following the death of Kurt Cobain in 1994 , but various posthumous releases have been issued since , overseen by Novoselic , Grohl , and Cobain 's widow Courtney Love . Since its debut , the band has sold over 25 million records in the United States alone , and over 75 million records worldwide , making them one of the best @-@ selling bands of all time . Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2014 , in its first year of eligibility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years = = = 
 Cobain and Novoselic met while attending Aberdeen High , although they never connected , according to Cobain . The pair eventually became friends while frequenting the practice space of the Melvins . Cobain wanted to form a band with Novoselic , but Novoselic did not respond to his requests , which included giving him a demo tape of his project Fecal Matter . Three years after the two first met , Novoselic notified Cobain that he had finally listened to the Fecal Matter demo Cobain had given him and suggested they start a group . The pair recruited Bob McFadden on drums , but after a month the project fell apart . In early 1987 , Cobain and Novoselic recruited drummer Aaron Burckhard . The three practiced material from Cobain 's Fecal Matter tape but started writing new material soon after forming . 
 During its initial months , the band went through a series of names , starting with Skid Row and including Pen Cap Chew , Bliss , and Ted Ed Fred . The group finally settled on Nirvana , which Cobain said was chosen because " I wanted a name that was kind of beautiful or nice and pretty instead of a mean , raunchy punk name like the Angry Samoans . " With Novoselic and Cobain having moved to Tacoma and Olympia , Washington , respectively , the two temporarily lost contact with Burckhard . The pair instead practiced with Dale Crover of the Melvins , and Nirvana recorded its first demos in January 1988 . In early 1988 , Crover moved to San Francisco but recommended Dave Foster to the band as his replacement on drums . Foster 's tenure with Nirvana lasted only a few months ; during a stint in jail , he was replaced by a returning Burckhard , who himself didn 't stay with the band after telling Cobain he was too hungover to practice one day . Cobain and Novoselic put an ad in Seattle music publication The Rocket seeking a replacement drummer , which only yielded unsatisfactory responses . Meanwhile , a mutual friend introduced them to Chad Channing , and the three musicians agreed to jam together . Channing continued to jam with Cobain and Novoselic , although the drummer noted , " They never actually said ' okay , you 're in , ' " and Channing played his first show with the group that May . 
 = = = Early releases = = = 
 Nirvana released its first single , a cover of " Love Buzz " , in November 1988 on the Seattle independent record label Sub Pop . They did their first ever interview with John Robb in Sounds who also made the release single of the week . The following month , the band began recording its debut album , Bleach , with local producer Jack Endino . Bleach was highly influenced by the heavy dirge @-@ rock of the Melvins and Mudhoney , 1980s punk rock , and the 1970s heavy metal of Black Sabbath . Novoselic said in a 2001 interview with Rolling Stone that the band had played a tape in their van while on tour that had an album by The Smithereens on one side and an album by the extreme metal band Celtic Frost on the other , and noted that the combination probably played an influence as well . The money for the recording sessions for Bleach , listed as $ 606 @.@ 17 on the album sleeve , was supplied by Jason Everman , who was subsequently brought into the band as the second guitarist . Though Everman did not actually play on the album , he received a credit on Bleach because , according to Novoselic , they " wanted to make him feel more at home in the band " . Just prior to the album 's release , Nirvana insisted on signing an extended contract with Sub Pop , making the band the first to do so with the label . 
 Following the release of Bleach in June 1989 , Nirvana embarked on its first national tour , and the album became a favorite of college radio stations . Due to increasing differences between Everman and the rest of the band over the course of the tour , Nirvana canceled the last few dates and drove back to Washington . No one told Everman he was fired at the time , while Everman later said that he actually quit the group . Although Sub Pop did not promote Bleach as much as other releases , it was a steady seller , and had initial sales of 40 @,@ 000 copies . However , Cobain was upset by the label 's lack of promotion and distribution for the album . In late 1989 , the band recorded the Blew EP with producer Steve Fisk . 
 In a late 1989 interview with John Robb in Sounds , Cobain noted that the band 's music was changing . He said , " The early songs were really angry ... But as time goes on the songs are getting poppier and poppier as I get happier and happier . The songs are now about conflicts in relationships , emotional things with other human beings " . In April 1990 , the band began working with producer Butch Vig at Smart Studios in Madison , Wisconsin on recordings for the follow @-@ up to Bleach . During the sessions , Cobain and Novoselic became disenchanted with Channing 's drumming , and Channing expressed frustration at not being actively involved in songwriting . As bootlegs of Nirvana 's demos with Vig began to circulate in the music industry and draw attention from major labels , Channing left the band . That July , the band recorded the single " Sliver " with Mudhoney drummer Dan Peters . Nirvana asked Dale Crover to fill in on drums for a seven @-@ date American West Coast tour with Sonic Youth that August . 
 In September 1990 , Buzz Osborne of the Melvins introduced the band to Dave Grohl , who was looking for a new band following the sudden break @-@ up of Washington , D.C. , hardcore punks Scream . A few days after arriving in Seattle , Novoselic and Cobain auditioned Grohl , with Novoselic later stating , " We knew in two minutes that he was the right drummer " . " I remember being in the same room with them and thinking , ' What ? That 's Nirvana ? Are you kidding ? ' " , Grohl told Q. " Because on their record cover they looked like psycho lumberjacks ... I was like , ' What , that little dude and that big motherfucker ? You 're kidding me ' . I laughed . I was like , ' No way ' " . 
 = = = Mainstream success = = = 
 Disenchanted with Sub Pop and with the Smart Studios sessions generating interest , Nirvana decided to look for a deal with a major record label since no indie label could buy the group out of its contract . Following repeated recommendations by Sonic Youth 's Kim Gordon , Nirvana signed to DGC Records in 1990 . The band subsequently began recording its first major label album , Nevermind . The group was offered a number of producers to choose from , but ultimately held out for Butch Vig . Rather than recording at Vig 's Madison studio as they had in 1990 , production shifted to Sound City Studios in Van Nuys , Los Angeles , California . For two months , the band worked through a variety of songs in its catalog . Some of the songs , such as " In Bloom " and " Breed " , had been in Nirvana 's repertoire for years , while others , including " On a Plain " and " Stay Away " , lacked finished lyrics until midway through the recording process . After the recording sessions were completed , Vig and the band set out to mix the album . However , the recording sessions had run behind schedule and the resulting mixes were deemed unsatisfactory . Slayer mixer Andy Wallace was brought in to create the final mix . After the album 's release , members of Nirvana expressed dissatisfaction with the polished sound the mixer had given Nevermind . In January 1992 the band played two songs from Nevermind on Saturday Night Live , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and " Territorial Pissings " . 
 Initially , DGC Records was hoping to sell 250 @,@ 000 copies of Nevermind , which was the same level they had achieved with Sonic Youth 's Goo . However , the album 's first single " Smells Like Teen Spirit " quickly gained momentum , thanks in part to significant airplay of the song 's music video on MTV . As it toured Europe during late 1991 , the band found that its shows were dangerously oversold , that television crews were becoming a constant presence onstage , and that " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was almost omnipresent on radio and music television . By Christmas 1991 , Nevermind was selling 400 @,@ 000 copies a week in the US . In January 1992 , the album displaced Michael Jackson 's Dangerous at number one on the Billboard album charts , and also topped the charts in numerous other countries . The month Nevermind reached number one , Billboard proclaimed , " Nirvana is that rare band that has everything : critical acclaim , industry respect , pop radio appeal , and a rock @-@ solid college / alternative base " . The album would eventually sell over seven million copies in the United States , and over 30 million worldwide . 
 Citing exhaustion , Nirvana decided not to undertake another American tour in support of Nevermind , instead opting to make only a handful of performances later that year . In March 1992 , Cobain sought to reorganize the group 's songwriting royalties ( which to this point had been split equally ) so that they were more representative of the fact that he wrote the majority of the music . Grohl and Novoselic did not object to Cobain 's request , but when the frontman asked for the agreement to be retroactive to the release of Nevermind , the disagreements between the two sides came close to breaking up the band . After a week of tension , Cobain ended up receiving a retroactive share of 75 percent of the royalties , and bad feelings about the situation remained within the group afterward . Amid rumors that the band was disbanding due to Cobain 's health , Nirvana headlined the closing night of England 's 1992 Reading Festival , where Cobain personally programmed the performance lineup . Nirvana 's performance at Reading is often regarded by the press as one of the most memorable of the group 's career . A few days later , Nirvana performed at the MTV Video Music Awards where , despite the network 's refusal to let the band play the new song " Rape Me " during the broadcast , Cobain strummed and sang the first few bars of the song before breaking into " Lithium " . At the ceremony , the band received awards for the Best Alternative Video and Best New Artist categories . 
 DGC had hoped to have a new Nirvana album by the band ready for a late 1992 holiday season release ; since work on it proceeded slowly , the label released the compilation album Incesticide in December 1992 . A joint venture between DGC and Sub Pop , Incesticide collected various rare Nirvana recordings and was intended to provide the material for a better price and at better quality than was available via bootleg copies . As Nevermind had been out for 15 months and had yielded a fourth single in " In Bloom " by that point , Geffen / DGC opted not to heavily promote Incesticide , which was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America the following February . 
 = = = In Utero , final months , and Cobain 's death = = = 
 In February 1993 , Nirvana released " Puss " / " Oh , the Guilt " , a split single with The Jesus Lizard , on the independent label Touch & Go . Meanwhile , the group chose Steve Albini , who had a reputation as a principled and opinionated individual in the American indie music scene , to record its third album . While there was speculation that the band chose Albini to record the album due to his underground credentials , Cobain insisted that Albini 's sound was simply the one he had always wanted Nirvana to have : a " natural " recording without layers of studio trickery . Nirvana traveled to Pachyderm Studio in Cannon Falls , Minnesota , in that February to record the album . The sessions with Albini were productive and notably quick , and the album was recorded and mixed in two weeks for a cost of $ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 Several weeks after the completion of the recording sessions , stories ran in the Chicago Tribune and Newsweek that quoted sources claiming DGC considered the album " unreleasable " . As a result , fans began to believe that the band 's creative vision might be compromised by their label . While the stories about DGC shelving the album were untrue , the band actually was unhappy with certain aspects of Albini 's mixes . Specifically , they thought the bass levels were too low , and Cobain felt that " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " and " All Apologies " did not sound " perfect " . Longtime R.E.M. producer Scott Litt was called in to help remix those two songs , with Cobain adding additional instrumentation and backing vocals . 
 In Utero debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 album chart in September 1993 . Time 's Christopher John Farley wrote in his review of the album , " Despite the fears of some alternative @-@ music fans , Nirvana hasn 't gone mainstream , though this potent new album may once again force the mainstream to go Nirvana . " In Utero went on to sell over 3 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States . That October , Nirvana embarked on its first tour of the United States in two years with support from Half Japanese and The Breeders . For the tour , the band added Pat Smear of the punk rock band Germs as a second guitarist . In November 1993 , Nirvana recorded a performance for the television program MTV Unplugged . Augmented by Smear and cellist Lori Goldston , the band sought to veer from the typical approach to the show , opting to stay away from playing its most recognizable songs . Instead , Nirvana performed several covers , and invited Cris and Curt Kirkwood of the Meat Puppets to join the group for renditions of three of their songs . Also in November 1993 , the band made its second appearance on Saturday Night Live , where they played " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " and " Rape Me . " 
 In early 1994 , the band embarked on a European tour . Nirvana 's final concert took place in Munich , Germany , on March 1 . In Rome , on the morning of March 4 , Cobain 's wife , Courtney Love , found Cobain unconscious in their hotel room and he was rushed to the hospital . A doctor from the hospital told a press conference that Cobain had reacted to a combination of prescription Rohypnol and alcohol . The rest of the tour was canceled . In the ensuing weeks , Cobain 's heroin addiction resurfaced . An intervention was organized , and Cobain was convinced to admit himself into drug rehabilitation . After less than a week in rehabilitation , Cobain climbed over the wall of the facility and took a plane back to Seattle . A week later , on Friday , April 8 , 1994 , Cobain was found dead of a self @-@ inflicted shotgun wound to the head at his Seattle home . 
 = = = Aftermath and posthumous releases = = = 
 In August 1994 , DGC announced that a double album titled Verse Chorus Verse featuring live material from throughout the group 's career on one CD and its MTV Unplugged performance on another was due for release that November . However , Novoselic and Grohl found assembling the live material so soon after Cobain 's death to be too emotionally overwhelming . Grohl founded the Foo Fighters , and Novoselic turned his attention to political activism . With the career @-@ spanning live portion postponed , MTV Unplugged in New York debuted at number one on the Billboard charts upon release in November 1994 . A few weeks later the group 's first full @-@ length video , Live ! Tonight ! Sold Out ! ! , was released . The following year , MTV Unplugged in New York earned Nirvana a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . In 1996 , DGC finally issued a Nirvana live album , From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah , which became the third Nirvana release in a row to debut at the top of the Billboard album chart . 
 In 1997 , Novoselic , Grohl , and Courtney Love formed the limited liability company Nirvana LLC to oversee all Nirvana @-@ related projects . A 45 @-@ track box set of Nirvana rarities was scheduled for release in October 2001 . However , shortly before the release date , Love filed a suit to dissolve Nirvana LLC , and an injunction was issued preventing the release of any new Nirvana material until the case was resolved . Love contended that Cobain was the band , that Grohl and Novoselic were sidemen , and that she signed the partnership agreement originally under bad advice . Grohl and Novoselic countersued , asking the court to remove Love from the partnership and to replace her with another representative of Cobain 's estate . 
 The day before the case was set to go to trial in October 2002 , Love , Novoselic , and Grohl announced that they had reached a settlement . The settlement paved the way for the release of the compilation album Nirvana , which featured the previously unreleased track " You Know You 're Right " , the last song Nirvana recorded before Cobain 's death . Nirvana was released later that month , debuting at number three on the Billboard album chart . The box set , With the Lights Out , was finally released in November 2004 . The release contained a vast array of early Cobain demos , rough rehearsal recordings , and live tracks recorded throughout the band 's history . Sliver : The Best of the Box , which culled 19 tracks from the box set in addition to featuring three previously unreleased tracks , was released in late 2005 . 
 In April 2006 , Love announced that she had arranged to sell 25 percent of her stake in the Nirvana song catalog in a deal estimated at $ 50 million . The share of Nirvana 's publishing was purchased by Primary Wave Music , which was founded by Larry <unk> , a former CEO of Virgin Records . In an accompanying statement , Love sought to assure Nirvana 's fanbase that the music would not simply be licensed to the highest bidder , noting , " We are going to remain very tasteful and true to the spirit of Nirvana while taking the music to places it has never been before . " Further releases have since been made . This includes the DVD releases of Live ! Tonight ! Sold Out ! ! in 2006 , and the full , uncut version of MTV Unplugged in New York in 2007 . The band 's performance at the 1992 Reading Festival was released on both CD and DVD as Live at Reading in November 2009 . That month , Sub Pop released a 20th anniversary deluxe edition of Bleach , and DGC released a number of 20th anniversary deluxe @-@ edition packages of both Nevermind in September 2011 , and In Utero in September 2013 . 
 In 2012 , Grohl , Novoselic , and Smear joined Paul McCartney at 12 @-@ 12 @-@ 12 : The Concert for Sandy Relief . The performance featured the premiere of a new song written by the four musicians entitled " Cut Me Some Slack " . A studio recording was released on the soundtrack to Sound City , a film by Grohl . On July 19 , 2013 , they would once again play with McCartney during the encore of his Safeco Field " Out There " concert in Seattle , the first time Nirvana members played together in their hometown in over 15 years . 
 In 2014 , Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ; the members inducted were Cobain , Novoselic , and Grohl . At the induction ceremony , Novoselic , Grohl and Smear performed a four @-@ song set with guest vocalists Joan Jett , Kim Gordon , St. Vincent , and Lorde . Novoselic , Grohl , and Smear then performed a full show at Brooklyn 's St. Vitus Bar with Jett , Gordon , St. Vincent , J Mascis , and John McCauley as guest vocalists . At the ceremony , Grohl thanked Burckhard , Crover , Peters and Channing for their time in Nirvana . Everman was also invited and attended the ceremony . 
 At Clive Davis ' annual pre @-@ Grammy party in 2016 , the surviving members of Nirvana once again reunited to perform the David Bowie song " The Man Who Sold the World " that they 'd covered on their Unplugged album . Beck joined the band to play acoustic guitar and handle lead vocals . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Cobain described the sound of Nirvana when it first started as " a Gang of Four and Scratch Acid ripoff " . Later when Nirvana recorded Bleach , Cobain felt he had to fit the expectations of the Sub Pop grunge sound to build a fanbase , and hence suppressed his arty and pop songwriting traits while crafting the record in favor of a more rocking sound . Nirvana biographer Michael Azerrad argued , " Ironically , it was the restrictions of the Sub Pop sound that helped the band find its musical identity " . Azerrad stated that by acknowledging that its members had grown up listening to Black Sabbath and Aerosmith , the band was able to move on from its derivative early sound . 
 Nirvana used dynamic shifts that went from quiet to loud . Cobain had sought to mix heavy and pop musical sounds ; he commented , " I wanted to be totally Led Zeppelin in a way and then be totally extreme punk rock and then do real wimpy pop songs " . When Cobain heard the Pixies ' 1988 album Surfer Rosa after recording Bleach , he felt it had the sound he wanted to achieve but until then was too intimidated to try . The Pixies ' subsequent popularity encouraged Cobain to follow his instincts as a songwriter . Like the Pixies , Nirvana moved between " spare bass @-@ and @-@ drum grooves and shrill bursts of screaming guitar and vocals " . Near the end of his life , Cobain noted the band had become bored by the formula , finding it limited , but he expressed doubts that the band was skilled enough to try other dynamics . 
 Cobain 's rhythm guitar style , which relied on power chords , low @-@ note riffs , and a loose left @-@ handed technique , featured the key components to the band ’ s songs . Cobain would often initially play a song 's verse riff in a clean tone , then double it with distorted guitars when he repeated the part . In some songs the guitar would be absent from the verses entirely to allow the drums and bass guitar to support the vocals , or it would only play sparse melodies like the two @-@ note pattern used in " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Cobain rarely played standard guitar solos , opting to play slight variations of the song 's melody as single note lines . Cobain 's solos were mostly blues @-@ based and discordant , which music writer Jon Chappell described as " almost an iconoclastic parody of the traditional instrumental break " , a quality typified by the note @-@ for @-@ note replication of the lead melody in " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and the atonal solo for " Breed " . When asked about their musical education , the band states that they had no formal musical training . In fact , Cobain says : " I have no concept of knowing how to be a musician at all what @-@ so @-@ ever ... I couldn 't even pass Guitar 101 " . 
 Grohl 's drumming " took Nirvana 's sound to a new level of intensity " . Azerrad stated that Grohl 's " powerful drumming propelled the band to a whole new plane , visually as well as musically " , noting , " Although Dave is a merciless basher , his parts are also distinctly musical — it wouldn 't be difficult to figure out what song he was playing even without the rest of the music " . 
 From 1992 , Cobain and Novoselic would tune their guitars to E flat for studio and live performances ( up until then , their live tunings were to concert pitch ) . Cobain noted , " We play so hard we can 't tune our guitars fast enough . " The band made a habit of destroying its equipment after shows . Novoselic said he and Cobain created the " shtick " in order to get off of the stage sooner . Cobain stated it began as an expression of his frustration with Chad Channing making mistakes and dropping out entirely during performances . 
 = = = Songwriting and lyrics = = = 
 Everett True said in 1989 , " Nirvana songs treat the banal and pedestrian with a unique slant " . Cobain came up with the basic components of each song ( usually writing them on an acoustic guitar ) , as well as the singing style and the lyrics . He emphasized that Novoselic and Grohl " have a big part in deciding on how long a song should be and how many parts it should have . So I don 't like to be considered the sole songwriter " . When asked which part of the songs he would write first , Cobain responded , " I don ’ t know . I really don 't know . I guess I start with the verse and then go into the chorus " . 
 Cobain usually wrote lyrics for songs minutes before recording them . Cobain said , " When I write a song the lyrics are the least important subject . I can go through two or three different subjects in a song and the title can mean absolutely nothing at all " . Cobain told Spin in 1993 that he " didn 't give a flying fuck " what the lyrics on Bleach were about , figuring " Let 's just scream some negative lyrics and as long as they 're not sexist and don 't get too embarrassing it 'll be okay " , while the lyrics to Nevermind were taken from two years of poetry he had accumulated , which he cut up and chose lines he preferred from . In comparison , Cobain stated that the lyrics to In Utero were " more focused , they 're almost built on themes " . Cobain didn 't write necessarily in a linear fashion , instead relying on juxtapositions of contradictory images to convey emotions and ideas . Often in his lyrics , Cobain would present an idea then reject it ; the songwriter explained , " I 'm such a nihilistic jerk half the time and other times I 'm so vulnerable and sincere [ .. The songs are ] like a mixture of both of them . That 's how most people my age are " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that prior to Nirvana , " alternative music was consigned to specialty sections of record stores , and major labels considered it to be , at the very most , a tax write @-@ off " . Following the release of Nevermind , " nothing was ever quite the same , for better and for worse " . The success of Nevermind not only popularized grunge , but also established " the cultural and commercial viability of alternative rock in general " . While other alternative bands had hits before , Nirvana " broke down the doors forever " , according to Erlewine . Erlewine further stated that Nirvana 's breakthrough " didn 't eliminate the underground " , but rather " just gave it more exposure " . In 1992 , Jon Pareles of The New York Times reported that Nirvana 's breakthrough had made others in the alternative scene impatient for achieving similar success , noting , " Suddenly , all bets are off . No one has the inside track on which of dozens , perhaps hundreds , of ornery , obstreperous , unkempt bands might next appeal to the mall @-@ walking millions " . Record company executives offered large advances and record deals to bands , and previous strategies of building audiences for alternative rock groups had been replaced by the opportunity to achieve mainstream popularity quickly . 
 Erlewine stated that Nirvana 's breakthrough " popularized so @-@ called ' Generation X ' and ' slacker ' culture " . Immediately following Cobain 's death , numerous headlines referred to Nirvana 's frontman as " the voice of a generation " , although he had rejected such labeling during his lifetime . Reflecting on Cobain 's death over ten years later , MSNBC 's Eric Olsen wrote , " In the intervening decade , Cobain , a small , frail but handsome man in life , has become an abstract Generation X icon , viewed by many as the ' last real rock star ' [ ... ] a messiah and martyr whose every utterance has been plundered and parsed " . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 Since its breakup , Nirvana has continued to receive acclaim , and is regularly considered one of the greatest music artists of all time . In 2003 , Nirvana was selected as one of the inductees of the Mojo Hall of Fame 100 . The band also received a nomination for induction in the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2004 as the " Greatest Artist of the 1990s " . Rolling Stone placed Nirvana at number 27 on their list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " in 2004 , and at number 30 on their updated list in 2011 . In 2003 , the magazine 's senior editor David Fricke picked Kurt Cobain as the 12th best guitarist of all time . Rolling Stone later ranked Cobain as the 45th greatest singer in 2008 and 73rd greatest guitarist of all time in 2011 . VH1 ranked Nirvana as the 42nd greatest artists of rock and roll in 1998 , the 7th greatest hard rock artists in 2000 , and the 14th greatest artists of all time in 2010 . 
 Nirvana 's contributions to music have also received recognition , with Nevermind and " Smells Like Teen Spirit " consistently being ranked as one of the greatest albums and songs of all time , respectively . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame has inducted two of Nirvana 's recordings , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and " All Apologies " , into its list of " The Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . The museum also ranked Nevermind number 10 on its " The Definitive 200 Albums of All Time " list in 2007 . In 2005 , the Library of Congress added Nevermind to the National Recording Registry , which collects " culturally , historically or aesthetically important " sound recordings from the 20th century . In 2011 , four of Nirvana 's songs appeared on Rolling Stone 's updated list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , with " Smells Like Teen Spirit " ranking the highest at number 9 . Three of the band 's albums were ranked on the magazine 's 2012 list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , with Nevermind placing the highest at number 17 . The same three Nirvana albums were also placed on Rolling Stone 's 2011 list of " The 100 Best Albums of the Nineties " , with Nevermind ranking the highest at number 1 , making it the greatest album of the decade . Time included Nevermind on its list of " The All @-@ TIME 100 Albums " in 2006 , labeling it " the finest album of the 90s " . In 2011 , the magazine also added " Smells Like Teen Spirit " on its list of " The All @-@ TIME 100 Songs " , and " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " on its list of " The 30 All @-@ TIME Best Music Videos " . 
 Nirvana is one of the best @-@ selling bands of all time , having sold over 75 million records worldwide . With over 25 million RIAA @-@ certified units , the band is also the 80th best @-@ selling music artist in the United States . Two of the band 's studio albums and two of their live albums have reached the top spot on the Billboard 200 . Nirvana has been awarded one Diamond , three Multi @-@ Platinum , seven Platinum and one Gold certified albums in the United States by the RIAA , and four Multi @-@ Platinum , four Platinum , two Gold and one Silver certified albums in the UK by the BPI . Nevermind , the band 's most successful album , has sold over 30 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best @-@ selling albums ever . Their most successful song , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , is among the best @-@ selling singles of all time , having sold 8 million copies . 
 Nirvana were announced in their first year of eligibility as being part of the 2014 class of inductees into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on December 17 , 2013 . The induction ceremony was held April 10 , 2014 , in Brooklyn , New York , at the Barclays Center . However , Channing , who was informed of his omission by SMS , was not included in the induction , as the accolade was only applied to Cobain , Novoselic and Grohl . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Bleach ( 1989 ) 
 Nevermind ( 1991 ) 
 In Utero ( 1993 ) 
 = Oskar Gröning = 
 Oskar Gröning ( sometimes transliterated as Oscar Groening in English ; born 10 June 1921 ) is a German former SS junior squad leader who was stationed at Auschwitz concentration camp . His responsibilities included counting and sorting the money taken from prisoners , and he was in charge of the personal property prisoners had arrived with . On a few occasions he witnessed the procedures of mass @-@ killing in the camp . After being transferred from Auschwitz to a combat unit in October 1944 , Gröning was captured by the British on 10 June 1945 when his unit surrendered . He was eventually transferred to Britain as a prisoner of war and worked as a forced labourer . 
 Upon his return to Germany he led a normal life , reluctant to talk about his time in Auschwitz . However , more than 40 years later , he decided to make his activities at Auschwitz public after learning about Holocaust denial . He has since openly criticised those who deny the events that he witnessed , and the ideology to which he once subscribed . The recorded accounts he provided to the BBC , however , contributed to the decision and ability to prosecute him . His record as an activist against Holocaust deniers since 1985 was not taken into consideration . Groening has been notable as a German willing to make public statements about his experience as an SS soldier , which are self @-@ incriminating and have exposed his life to public scrutiny . 
 In September 2014 Gröning was charged by German prosecutors as an accessory to murder , in 300 @,@ 000 cases , for his role at the Auschwitz concentration camp . His trial began in April 2015 , after the court had ruled that , at the age of 93 , he was still fit to stand trial . The trial was held in Lüneburg , Germany . On 15 July 2015 he was found guilty of facilitating mass murder and sentenced to four years ' imprisonment . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gröning was born in 1921 , in Lower Saxony , the son of a strict conservative and skilled textile worker . His mother died when he was four . His father , a proud nationalist , joined the Stahlhelm after Germany 's defeat in the First World War , and his anger at how Germany had been treated following the Treaty of Versailles increased as his textile business went bankrupt in 1929 due to insufficient capital . 
 Gröning states that his childhood was one of " discipline , obedience and authority " . Gröning was fascinated by military uniforms , and one of his earliest memories is of looking at photos of his grandfather , who served in an elite regiment of the Duchy of Brunswick , on his horse and playing his trumpet . He joined the Scharnhorst , the Stahlhelm 's youth organisation as a small boy in the 1930s , and later the Hitler Youth when the Nazis came to power in 1933 . Influenced by his family 's values , he felt that Nazism was advantageous to Germany and believed that the Nazis " were the people who wanted the best for Germany and who did something about it . " He participated in the burning of books written by Jews and other authors that the Nazis considered degenerate in the belief that he was helping Germany free itself from an alien culture , and considered that National Socialism was having a positive effect on the economy , pointing to lower unemployment . 
 Gröning left school with high marks and began a <unk> as a bank clerk when he was 17 , but war was declared shortly after he started employment and eight of the twenty clerks present were immediately conscripted into the army . This allowed the remaining trainees to further their banking careers in a relatively short amount of time ; however , despite these opportunities , Gröning and his colleagues were inspired by Germany 's quick victories in France and Poland and wanted to contribute . 
 = = SS career = = 
 Gröning wanted to join an elite army unit and set his sights on joining the Waffen @-@ SS . Without his father 's knowledge , he did so in 1940 at a hotel where the SS was recruiting . Gröning says his father was disappointed to learn this when he came home after having joined . 
 Gröning describes himself as a " desk person " and was content with his role in SS salary administration , which granted him both the administrative and military aspects he wanted from a career . 
 = = = Auschwitz = = = 
 = = = = Arrival = = = = 
 Gröning worked as a bookkeeper for a year until 1942 , when the SS ordered that desk jobs would be reserved for injured veterans , and that fit members in administrative roles were to be subjected to more challenging duties . Gröning and about 22 of his colleagues travelled to Berlin where they reported to one of the SS economic offices . They were then given a lecture by several high @-@ ranking officers who reminded them of the oath of loyalty they took , which they could prove by doing a difficult task . The task was top secret – Gröning and his comrades had to sign a declaration that they would not disclose it to family or friends , or people not in their unit . Once this had concluded , they were split into smaller groups and taken to various Berlin stations where they boarded a train in the direction of Katowice with orders to report to the commandant of Auschwitz , a place Gröning had not heard of before . 
 Upon arrival at the main camp , they were given provisional bunks in the SS barracks , warmly greeted by fellow SS men and provided with food . Gröning was surprised at the myriad food items available in addition to basic SS rations . The new arrivals were curious about what function Auschwitz served . They were told that they should find out for themselves because Auschwitz was a special kind of concentration camp . Immediately someone opened the door and shouted " Transport ! " , causing three or four people to leave the room . 
 The next day , Gröning and the other arrivals reported to the central SS administrative building and were asked about their background before the war . One of the officers said Gröning 's bank clerk skills would be useful , and took him to barracks where the prisoners ' money was kept . Gröning was told that when prisoners were registered into the camp , their money was stored here and later returned to them when they left . 
 It became clear that Auschwitz was not a normal internment camp with above average SS rations , but that it served an additional function . Gröning was informed that money taken from interned Jews was not actually returned to them . When he inquired further , his colleagues confirmed that the Jews were being systematically exterminated and that this had included the transport of prisoners who had arrived the previous night . 
 = = = = Tasks = = = = 
 Gröning 's responsibilities included sorting and counting the multitude of currencies taken from arriving deportees , sending it to Berlin , and guarding the belongings of arrivals until they were sorted . He said he was astonished to learn of the extermination process , but later accepted his part in it , stating that his work became " routine " after several months . 
 His bureaucratic job did not shield him completely from physical acts of the extermination process : as early as his first day , Gröning saw children hidden on the train and people unable to walk that had remained among the rubbish and debris after the selection process had been completed , being shot . Gröning also heard : 
 ... a baby crying . The child was lying on the ramp , wrapped in rags . A mother had left it behind , perhaps because she knew that women with infants were sent to the gas chambers immediately . I saw another SS soldier grab the baby by the legs . The crying had bothered him . He smashed the baby 's head against the iron side of a truck until it was silent . 
 After witnessing this , Gröning claims he went to his boss and told him that he could not work at Auschwitz any more , stating that if the extermination of the Jews is necessary , " then at least it should be done within a certain framework " . Gröning claims that his superior officer denied this request citing a document he had signed before being posted , forcing him to continue his work . 
 One night towards the end of 1942 , Gröning and his comrades in their SS barracks on the outskirts of Birkenau were awakened by an alarm . They were told that a number of Jews who were being taken to the gas chambers had escaped and hidden in the woods . They were ordered to take pistols and search the woods . When his group arrived at the extermination area of the camp they saw a farmhouse , in front of which were SS men and the bodies of seven or eight prisoners who had been caught and shot . The SS men told Gröning and his comrades that they could go home but they decided to hang around in the shadows of the woods . 
 They watched as an SS man put on a gas mask and emptied a tin of Zyklon B into a hatch in the cottage wall . Gröning said the humming noise from inside " turned to screaming " for a minute , then to silence . A comrade later showed him the bodies being burnt in a pit . A Kapo there told him details of the burning , such as how gases developed in the body and made the burning corpses move . 
 Gröning claims that this disrupted the relative tranquility his job gave him and he claims he yet again complained to his superior . His boss , an SS @-@ Untersturmführer , listened but reminded him of the pledge that he and his comrades made . Gröning thus returned to work . He has declared that he manipulated his life at Auschwitz so as to avoid witnessing the camp 's most unpalatable aspects . 
 = = After Auschwitz = = 
 = = = Great Britain = = = 
 Gröning 's application to transfer to a unit on the front @-@ line was successful , and in 1944 he joined an SS unit fighting in the Ardennes . He was wounded and sent to a field hospital before rejoining his unit , which eventually surrendered to the British on 10 June 1945 , on his birthday . 
 He realised that declaring " involvement in the concentration camp of Auschwitz would have a negative response " , and so tried not to draw attention to it , putting on the form given to him by the British that he worked for the SS @-@ Wirtschafts @-@ Verwaltungshauptamt instead . He did this because " the victor 's always right " , and that things happened at Auschwitz which " did not always comply with human rights " . 
 Gröning and the rest of his SS colleagues were imprisoned in an old Nazi concentration camp . He was later sent to Britain as a forced labourer in 1946 where he had a " very comfortable life " . He ate good food and earned money , and travelled through the Midlands and Scotland giving concerts for four months , singing German hymns and traditional English folk songs to appreciative British audiences . 
 = = = Return to Germany = = = 
 Gröning was released and returned to Germany in 1947 or 1948 . Upon being reunited with his wife , he said : " Girl , do both of us a favour : don 't ask . " He was unable to regain his job at the bank due to having been a member of the SS , so he got a job at a glass factory , working his way up to a management position . He became head of personnel , and was made an honorary judge of industrial tribunal cases . 
 Upon return to Germany , Gröning lived with his father @-@ in @-@ law . At the dinner table , they once made " a silly remark about Auschwitz " , implying that he was a " potential or real murderer , " which Gröning said enraged him , banging his fist on the table , demanding : " This word and this connection are never , ever , to be mentioned again in my presence , otherwise I 'll move out ! " Gröning said that this request was respected . 
 = = = = Views on Holocaust denial = = = = 
 Gröning led a normal middle @-@ class life after the war . A keen stamp collector , he was once at his local philately club 's annual meeting , more than 40 years after the war , when he fell into a conversation about politics with the man next to him . The man told him it was " terrible " that Holocaust denial was illegal in Germany , and went on to tell Gröning how so many bodies could not have been burnt , and that the volume of gas that was supposed to have been used would have killed all living things in the vicinity . 
 Gröning said little in response to these statements , replying only : " I know a little more about that , we should discuss it some time . " The man recommended a pamphlet by Holocaust denier Thies Christophersen . Gröning obtained a copy and mailed it to Christophersen , having written his own commentary on it , which included the words : 
 " I saw everything , " he writes . " The gas chambers , the cremations , the selection process . One and a half million Jews were murdered in Auschwitz . I was there . " 
 Gröning then began receiving phone calls and letters from strangers who tried to tell him Auschwitz was not actually a place for exterminating human beings in gas chambers . 
 It became apparent that his comments condemning Holocaust denial had been printed in a neo @-@ Nazi magazine , and that most of the anonymous calls and letters were , " From people who tried to prove that what I had seen with my own eyes , what I had experienced in Auschwitz was a big , big mistake , a big hallucination on my part because it hadn 't happened . " 
 As a result of such comments , Gröning decided to speak openly about his experiences , and publicly denounce people who maintain the events he witnessed never happened . He says his message to Holocaust deniers is : 
 I have seen the crematoria , I have seen the burning pits and I want you to believe me that these atrocities happened . I was there . 
 He also wrote memoirs for his family , consisting of 87 pages . 
 = = Contemporary comments = = 
 Gröning does not consider himself guilty of any crime , due to the fact that he was in no way directly involved in the killing . He describes his part in the extermination machine as an involuntary " small cog in the gears " , which gave him involuntary guilt in turn . Citing his summons to testify against a member of the SS accused of murdering prisoners at Auschwitz , he also says he is innocent in the eyes of the law , pointing to the fact that he spoke as a witness and not as a defendant . 
 In the book and DVD set titled Auschwitz : The Nazis and ' The Final Solution ' , author Laurence Rees indicates that although Gröning had requested to leave Auschwitz after he witnessed the killing , his objection was only on the basis of its practical implementation , and not on the general militaristic principle of the mass extermination of enemies . Gröning said that he thought at the time that it was justified due to all the Nazi propaganda he had been subjected to , in that Germany 's enemies were being destroyed , which to him made the tools of their destruction ( such as gas chambers ) of no particular significance . Because of this , he says his feelings about seeing people and knowing that they had hours to live before being gassed were " very ambiguous " . He explains that children were murdered because , while the children themselves were not the enemy , the danger was the blood within them , in that they could grow up to become dangerous Jews . Rees points to Gröning 's ultra @-@ nationalist upbringing as indication of how he was able to justify the extermination of helpless children . Gröning says that the horrors in the gas chambers did eventually dawn on him when he heard the screams . 
 Rees writes that Gröning describes his time at Auschwitz as if he were talking about another Oskar Gröning at Auschwitz — and as a result , the post @-@ war Gröning speaks more candidly about his time there by segregating the Gröning that contributed to the running of a death camp from the modern Gröning that condemns Nazi ideology . 
 Gröning says that the screams of those in the gas chambers have never left him , and he has never returned to Auschwitz because of his shame . He says he feels guilt towards the Jewish people , and for being part of the organisation that committed crimes against them , despite " not having been one of the perpetrators myself " . He asks for forgiveness from God and from the Jewish people . 
 = = Criminal charges and trial = = 
 In September 2014 , it was reported that Gröning had been charged by state prosecutors with having been an accessory to murder for his role at Auschwitz receiving and processing prisoners and their personal belongings . The indictment stated that Gröning economically advanced Nazi Germany and aided the systematic killing of 300 @,@ 000 of the 425 @,@ 000 Hungarian Jews who were deported to Auschwitz by 137 railway transports during the summer of 1944 . Gröning 's prosecution has been reported to be a part of Germany ’ s final effort to bring the last Nazi war @-@ crimes suspects to justice . State prosecutors managed to charge the defendant on a legal precedent set in 2011 by the conviction of the former Sobibor extermination camp guard John <unk> by a court in Munich . 
 The trial commenced on 20 April 2015 at Lüneburg Regional Court ( <unk> ) . In an opening statement , Gröning asked for forgiveness for his mainly clerical role at Auschwitz in the summer of 1944 , by saying : " For me there 's no question that I share moral guilt , " the 93 @-@ year @-@ old told the judges , acknowledging that he knew about the gassing of Jews and other prisoners . " I ask for forgiveness . I share morally in the guilt but whether I am guilty under criminal law , you will have to decide " . 
 During the trial several of the 60 ' co @-@ claimants ' gave evidence . Eva Mozes Kor who was 10 years old when she arrived at Auschwitz , testified that she and her twin sister were used for the cruel medical experiments conducted by Josef Mengele and that she had lost her parents and older sisters in Auschwitz . Kor conversed with and embraced the defendant after giving evidence , while other holocaust survivors in the courtroom protested against this gesture . Another witness , Max Eisen who was 15 years old at the time of entry into Auschwitz , described the brutality of the extermination part of the camp , including extracting gold teeth from dead victims . On 12 May 2015 , Susan Pollack , an 84 @-@ year @-@ old Briton , gave evidence how she was taken from Hungary to Auschwitz and Bergen @-@ Belsen ; describing the living conditions encountered at Auschwitz , she said : " I was in a barrack with about 800 other girls ... we were losing weight , we weren ’ t able to use our minds anymore " . On the same day , Ivor Perl , an 83 @-@ year @-@ old Briton who was born in Hungary into a religious Jewish family , also gave evidence ; Perl testified that he was 12 years old when he arrived at Auschwitz and that he and his brother lost his parents and seven siblings in the Holocaust . " In July , Irene Weiss , an 84 @-@ year @-@ old survivor from the United States , testified that her family was torn apart on arrival at Auschwitz in May 1944 , during the mass deportation of Hungarian Jews and that she had lost both her parents , four siblings and 13 cousins at Auschwitz . 
 = = = Verdict and sentence = = = 
 On 15 July 2015 he was found guilty of being an accessory to the murder of at least 300 @,@ 000 Jews . Reacting to the sentence , Auschwitz survivor Eva Mozes Kor said that she was " disappointed " adding : " They are trying to teach a lesson that if you commit such a crime , you will be punished . But I do not think the court has acted properly in sentencing him to four years in jail . It is too late for that kind of sentence ... My preference would have been to sentence him to community service by speaking out against neo @-@ Nazis . I would like the court to prove to me , a survivor , how four years in jail will benefit anybody . " Gröning 's defence lawyer , Hans <unk> , was quoted as saying that he would review the verdict before deciding whether to appeal . Any appeal was required to be lodged within one week . 
 = Adentro = 
 Adentro is the tenth studio album by Guatemalan singer @-@ songwriter Ricardo Arjona , released on December 6 , 2005 , by Sony Music Entertainment . Recorded in the United States and Mexico , the album was produced by Arjona himself , as well as Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos , and Puerto Rican singer @-@ songwriter Tommy Torres . The album marks the first collaboration between Arjona and the latter , who would subsequently become a regular contributor in following albums by the singer . 
 Arjona experimented with prominent Latin sounds for Adentro , such as Mexican and Tejano music on " Mojado " ; as well as some Colombian and bachata elements on " Adiós Melancolía " . Adentro was named " Arjona 's most personal album " , and his performance style was classified as " confident " , with a " relevant @-@ as @-@ ever lyricism . " It was named best Latin Pop Album for 2007 at the 49th Grammy Awards in Los Angeles . 
 Adentro became Arjona 's fifth consecutive album to reach the top ten on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , peaking at number three . On the Latin Pop Albums chart , it attained a peak of number two . Adentro was certified two times Platinum in Mexico , five times Platinum in Argentina and two times Platinum ( Latin ) in the United States . As of February 2006 , the album has sold more than one million copies worldwide . 
 Five singles were released from the album . American lead single , " Acompañame A Estar Solo " , became Arjona 's fifth number @-@ one single on the US Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , and reached number seven on the Latin Songs chart . Mexican lead single " Mojado " , featuring Mexican band Intocable , became a moderate success , as well as second American single " Pingüinos En La Cama " , which single version features Spanish singer Chenoa . " A Ti " followed as the fourth single , peaking at number three on the Latin Pop Songs chart . " De Vez En Mes " was released as the fifth and final single from the album . To promote the album , Arjona embarked on a world tour , the Adentro Tour . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 This was the first time Arjona collaborated with Tommy Torres . In an interview with Billboard magazine , the singer commented that he first " tested " Torres by sending him the " hookiest and darkest tracks " on the album , " Acompañame A Estar Solo " and " <unk> " . Torres said that he " went all out on the first demo , hiring a full band that included a string orchestra " , which grabbed the attention of Arjona . Arjona further commented that Adentro was " a very representative and tremendously complete album , " adding that " having different producers made it rich in possibilities . " 
 Evan Gutierrez from AllMusic considered the record 's instrumentation , performance , and overall sonic palette to be " minimalist " and " unassuming " . Arjona experimented with prominent Latin sounds for Adentro , such as Mexican and Tejano music on " Mojado " , a duet with Mexican band Intocable about immigration . Ricky Muñoz , the vocalist of the group , said that the group met Arjona in Monterrey , and that they were in contact with Arjona through Carlos Cabral , one of Adentro 's producers , who had also worked with them formerly . Muñoz additionally reflected : " We admire Arjona . We liked the song and then we recorded it [ with him ] . It is very cool that he invited us [ as featured artists ] . " " Adiós Melancolía " is mainly composed as a bachata song with Colombian influences . " No Te Cambio Por Nada " is intermittently rock @-@ dabbled . The lyrics of " De Vez En Mes " pertain to a woman 's menstruation . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In 2006 , Arjona commenced the first leg of his world tour , named the Adentro Tour , to promote the album . The tour resumed in 2007 for a second leg , in which he visited more countries . Approximately two million people attended his concerts throughout his world tour . The tour officially closed in front of more than 100 @,@ 00 people during the International Fair on 14 September 2007 , in the mainland city of <unk> , Venezuela . In the United States , the tour had an attendance of 134 @,@ 000 people , and grossed $ 8 @.@ 2 million . Arjona founded the Fundación Adentro , a charity organization which provides music and singing education for poor children in Guatemala , in July 2008 . Arjona commented that the main objective of the organization " isn 't becoming an important foundation internationally , but to help child reach their dreams . " The organization 's development originated in 2005 , prior to the release of Adentro , from which the foundation received its name . Its headquarters are located in Mexico City . 
 " Acompañame A Estar Solo " was released as the lead single from Adentro in October 2005 . The song became his fifth chart @-@ topper on the US Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , reaching its peak in the week of 7 January 2006 . It accumulated three consecutive weeks atop the cart . It reached number seven on the Latin Songs chart , becoming his twelfth top ten single on that chart . " Pingüinos En La Cama " was released as the second single in January 2007 . Spanish singer Chenoa is featured as a guest artist on the single version of the song . On the Latin Songs chart , it peaked at number 44 . The song was more successful on the Latin Pop Songs chart , reaching number 19 . " Mojado " was released as the lead single in Mexico , while served as the third single in other music markets . It was the first time <unk> released two lead singles from an album , as it was recommended by his label . It peaked at number 34 on the Latin Songs chart , and number 30 on the Latin Pop Songs chart . " A Ti " was released as the fourth single of the album in March 2006 . The song was more successful than its two predecessors , peaking at number 14 on the Latin Songs chart , and number three on the Latin Pop Songs chart . " A Ti " was later included on Arjona 's compilation album Quién Dijo Ayer , as a duet with Italian singer Eros <unk> . Arjona released " De Vez En Mes " as the fifth and final single from the album . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Adentro became Arjona 's third studio album to debut inside the top five of the US Billboard Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts , at numbers three and two , respectively . It equaled the peak position of Santo Pecado ( 2002 ) on the Latin Albums chart , and bested that album 's peak on the Latin Pop Albums chart . Adentro also peaked at number 46 on the Top Heatseekers chart , and debuted at number 126 on the Billboard 200 , besting the previous record held by Galería Caribe ( 2000 ) , which peaked at number 136 , among Arjona 's albums . The album received a double platinum certification ( Latin ) by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . In Mexico , Adentro debuted at number one , and was subsequently certified double platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) , signifying shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . In Argentina , it was certified five times platinum by Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) for sales exceeding 200 @,@ 000 copies in that country . It became Arjona 's third album to do so , after Santo Pecado and Historias ( 1994 ) . As of February 2006 , Adentro has sold more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received critical acclaim . AllMusic writer Evan Gutierrez gave it four stars out of five , lauded its " stripped , natural production value , " Arjona 's " confident " vocal performance , its " relevant @-@ as @-@ ever " lyricism , and the record 's sonic palette as brilliantly variant . Gutierrez further opined that the album pleases both Arjona 's fans and " the execs at Norte . " Leila Cobo of Billboard dubbed it lyrically " Arjona 's most personal album " , favored its rock elements , and praised its cohesiveness . Cobo concluded : " It is hard to be touching , relevant and musically compelling all at once , but Arjona pulls it off . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Battle of Agua Dulce = 
 The Battle of Agua Dulce Creek was a skirmish during the Texas Revolution between Mexican troops and rebellious immigrants to the Mexican province of Texas , known as Texians . As part of the Goliad Campaign to retake the Texas Gulf Coast , Mexican troops ambushed a group of Texians on March 2 , 1836 . The skirmish began approximately 26 miles ( 42 km ) south of San Patricio , in territory belonging to the Mexican state of Tamaulipas . 
 When Mexico transitioned to a centralized government in 1835 , supporters of federalism took up arms . Colonists in Texas , primarily immigrants from the United States , revolted in October 1835 and by the end of the year had expelled all Mexican troops from their province . With hostilities temporarily suspended , Frank W. Johnson , the commander of the volunteer army in Texas , and James Grant gathered volunteers for a planned invasion of the Mexican port town of Matamoros . In late February 1836 , Johnson and half of the volunteers drove a herd of horses to San Patricio , while Grant took the remaining men to gather more horses and to attempt contact with federalist sympathizers near Matamoros . 
 Unknown to the Texians , on February 18 , Mexican General José de Urrea led a large contingent of troops from Matamoros into Texas to neutralize the rebels gathered along the coast . His troops easily defeated Johnson 's small force on February 26 . Several days later , informants revealed Grant 's location , and on the morning of March 2 , Urrea sent 150 troops to ambush the rebels . After a brief battle , the main body of the Texian and Tejano troops were defeated . Grant and two others escaped the battle and were pursued for 7 miles ( 11 km ) . Grant was killed , as were 11 men under his command . Six Texians were taken prisoner ; contrary to Santa Anna 's orders , Urrea did not execute them , but instead sent them to a jail in Matamoros . An additional six Texians escaped ; five of them later died in the Goliad massacre . 
 = = Background = = 
 Under President Antonio López de Santa Anna , the Mexican government began to shift away from a federalist model to a more centralized government . His increasingly dictatorial policies , including the revocation of the Constitution of 1824 in early 1835 , incited federalists throughout the nation to revolt . The Mexican Army quickly put down revolts throughout the country 's interior , including a brutal suppression of militias in Oaxaca and Zacatecas . Unrest continued in the Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas . The area that bordered the United States , known as Texas , was populated primarily by English @-@ speaking settlers , known as Texians . In October , the Texians took up arms in what became known as the Texas Revolution . The following month , Texians declared themselves part of a Mexican state independent from Coahuila and created a provisional state government based on the principles of the Constitution of 1824 . By the end of the year , all Mexican troops had been expelled from Texas . 
 Leading federalists in Mexico advocated a plan to attack centralist troops in Matamoros , a major Mexican port . Members of the General Council , the interim Texas governing body , were enamored with the idea of a Matamoros Expedition . They hoped it would inspire other federalist states to revolt and keep the bored Texian troops from deserting the army . Most importantly , it would move the war zone outside Texas . The Council officially approved the plan on December 25 , and on December 30 Frank W. Johnson , the commander of the volunteer army , and his aide James Grant took the bulk of the army and almost all of the supplies to Goliad to prepare for the expedition . Historian Stuart Reid posits that Grant was a British secret agent and that his efforts were an unofficial scheme to advance British interests in the region . Britain did not welcome the idea of an independent Texas , and the invasion of Matamoros was a way to tie Texas more tightly to Mexico . 
 Determined to quash the rebellion , Santa Anna began assembling a large force to restore order . In late December , at Santa Anna 's behest , the Mexican Congress passed the Tornel Decree , declaring that any foreigners fighting against Mexican troops " will be deemed pirates and dealt with as such , being citizens of no nation presently at war with the Republic and fighting under no recognized flag . " In the early nineteenth century , captured pirates were executed immediately . The resolution thus gave the Mexican Army permission to take no prisoners in the war against the Texians . Santa Anna personally led the bulk of his troops inland to San Antonio de Béxar , and ordered General José de Urrea to lead 550 troops along the Atascocita Road toward Goliad . Urrea 's efforts to quell the rebellion along the Texas Gulf Coast have become known as the Goliad Campaign . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Texas provisional government had named Sam Houston the commander of a new regular army in Texas , but without authority over the volunteers who reported to Johnson . The provisional governor , Henry Smith , opposed the Matamoros Expedition and ordered Houston to find a way to disband it . In a rousing speech to the volunteers , Houston dissuaded the bulk of the men from continuing their mission . Many left the army . Others joined the troops stationed under Houston 's second @-@ in @-@ command , James Fannin , at Presidio La Bahía in Goliad . By the end of January 1836 , only 70 men remained with Johnson and Grant . Most of these volunteers were Americans or Europeans who had arrived in Texas after fighting had commenced . 
 Urrea reached Matamoros on January 31 . A committed federalist himself , he soon convinced other federalists in the area that the Texians ' ultimate goal was secession and their attempt to spark a federalist revolt in Matamoros was just a method of diverting attention from themselves . Meanwhile , Mexican double agents continued to assure Johnson and Grant that they would be able to take Matamoros easily . Urrea 's force crossed into Texas on February 18 . 
 Despite hearing rumors that the Mexican Army was approaching , Grant and Johnson chose to take their men south of the Nueces River , into territory belonging to the state of Tamaulipas , to search for horses to buy , steal , or otherwise gather . About February 21 , Johnson and a small group began herding approximately 100 horses back into Texas . The rest of the men remained with Grant , ostensibly to look for more horses . In actuality , he was attempting to rendezvous with his allies near Matamoros to determine whether federalists were still willing to rise up against the Mexican Army . 
 Mexican troops arrived in San Patricio in the early hours of February 26 . After a fifteen @-@ minute battle , Johnson 's men were defeated ; six Texians , including Johnson , escaped , and the remainder were killed or captured . While Urrea waited for reinforcements before beginning his march towards Goliad , his advance party searched for Grant and the remaining Texians . Unaware of Johnson 's fate , on February 27 Grant and his party began their march northward to San Patricio , driving a herd of several hundred horses he had purchased . The men camped along San Fernando Creek on March 1 . Local ranchers welcomed them , but that night sent a messenger to Urrea with Grant 's location and plans . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Mexican troops marched overnight towards El Puerto de los <unk> de Agua Dulce , a well @-@ known crossing point on Agua Dulce Creek . Approximately 26 miles ( 42 km ) south of San Patricio , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from <unk> , and just north of modern @-@ day Kingsville , Mexican soldiers took cover in two groves of trees . Urrea had approximately 150 troops , including 80 dragoons . 
 Grant 's company comprised about 53 men , including a large contingent of Tejanos ( Mexican @-@ born residents of Texas ) under the command of Plácido Benavides . The men were in good spirits and rode at an easy pace towards San Patricio . Grant , Benavides , and Ruben Brown rode 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) ahead of the main body of Texians and saw no signs of Mexican soldiers . 
 Between 10 and 11 am , as the bulk of the Texians reached the trees , the Mexican cavalry attacked . Taken completely unaware , many of the Texians were shot before they were able to raise their guns . As they tried to flee , dragoons chased them down and lanced them off their horses . Five Texians dismounted and made a run for a small village nearby , hoping to gain cover so they could use their rifles . Urrea sent the infantry after them . Two of those Texians were captured and the rest escaped . 
 Grant , Benavides , and Brown turned back to join the other Texians . Once in the battle , Brown dismounted , either to reload his rifle or because his horse was killed . Seeing that the battle was lost , Grant pulled Brown onto another horse , and the two of them and Benavides turned to flee . Mexican cavalry attempted to stop them ; Grant shot one officer and he and Benavides then galloped past that officer 's horse . At this point , the herd stampeded , forcing the Mexican cavalry aside . The three Texians followed the horses . Mexican soldiers promptly gave chase . According to Brown 's later recollection , both his and Grant 's horses were wounded as Mexican soldiers fired after them . 
 The three Texians ran for 6 – 7 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 – 11 @.@ 3 km ) , occasionally firing their pistols to force Mexican dragoons to stay back . Mexican soldiers yelled that the men would be spared if they surrendered , but none of the Texians believed them . Benavides had the strongest mount , and Grant ordered him to go ahead to warn Fannin that the Mexican Army was close to Goliad . Grant and Brown were surrounded and forced to stop . Grant killed a Mexican soldier who drove a lance through Brown 's arm . Between ten and twelve Mexican soldiers then surrounded Grant , and he died after being pierced multiple times . Historian Stuart Reid theorizes that Mexican soldiers were eager to ensure Grant did not survive the battle . Grant could identify federalist sympathizers in Matamoros and the surrounding areas , and his knowledge potentially put Urrea and some of his federalist @-@ sympathizing troops at risk . 
 Brown threw his empty pistol at one Mexican officer , then grabbed the lance from the man Grant had shot and used it to defend himself . After soldiers lassoed him , Brown surrendered and was taken captive . Brown was then brought back to the site of the ambush . He recalled that one severely injured Texian , Joseph Carpenter , was lying in the dirt , begging for his life . Brown then saw a Mexican soldier shoot him . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although Urrea reported that 42 Texians were killed , early 20th century historians generally only list 12 Texians as killed . Tejano involvement in the revolution had been notably absent from textbooks until the 1970s , so it is likely that historians were not including the Tejanos under Benavides . Six Texians were taken prisoner . In defiance of the Tornel Decree , Urrea spared those who surrendered and sent them to a prison in Matamoros . Reports indicated that Urrea offered clemency after the intervention of <unk> <unk> , the mistress of one of Urrea 's soldiers . Six Texians escaped . Five of these joined Fannin 's garrison at Goliad and were later killed in the Goliad massacre . No reports of Mexican losses have been found , although at least one Mexican soldier is thought to have died . After the battle , Mexican soldiers rounded up the horses that the Texians had been herding and kept them . The battle marked the end of the Matamoros Expedition . Although it occurred on the same day that Texas declared independence , Grant and his men did not know that they were fighting for the new Republic of Texas . 
 According to historian Stephen Hardin , this battle proved that the Texians did not fight well on open prairies . News of the battle reached Fannin on March 4 . Urrea 's imminent arrival worried Fannin , who feared that Santa Anna would lead his troops from San Antonio de Béxar towards Goliad , essentially trapping Fannin and his men between the two branches of the Mexican Army . Fannin wrote to the Acting Governor , James Robinson , " I am a better judge of my military abilities than others , and if I am qualified to command an Army , I have not found it out . " The acting Texas government nonetheless left Fannin in charge of the fort at Goliad , instructing him to determine whether it was best to retreat or make a stand . Fannin delayed making a decision , finally choosing to leave Goliad on March 19 . Urrea 's troops trapped Fannin 's men on an open prairie . The Texians surrendered after the Battle of Coleto and most , including Colonel Fannin , were executed a week later in the Goliad massacre . 
 = Königsberg @-@ class cruiser ( 1915 ) = 
 The Königsberg class of light cruisers was a group of four ships commissioned into Germany 's Imperial Navy shortly before the end of World War I. The class comprised Königsberg , Karlsruhe , Emden , and Nürnberg , all of which were named after light cruisers lost earlier in the war . The ships were an incremental improvement over the preceding Wiesbaden @-@ class cruisers , and were armed with a main battery of eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a designed speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Königsberg and Nürnberg saw action at the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight , where Königsberg was hit by a shell from the battlecruiser Repulse . Three of the four ships were to participate in a climactic fleet operation to attack the British Grand Fleet in the final days of the war , but revolts in the fleet forced the cancellation of the plan . Karlsruhe , Emden , and Nürnberg were interned at Scapa Flow after the end of the war , and were scuttled on 21 June 1919 , though only Karlsruhe was successfully sunk . The other two ships were beached by British sailors and ceded to the Allies . Königsberg was transferred to the French Navy as a war prize and commissioned as Metz ; she served with the French Navy until the 1930s , when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 The design for the Königsberg was prepared in 1913 . The design was an incremental improvement over the previous Wiesbaden class , with a larger hull and greater displacement , but with the same armament , speed , and armor protection . By 1916 , thirteen German light cruisers had been lost in the course of World War I ; after they were commissioned , the ships of the Königsberg class took the names of four of these lost cruisers . 
 Königsberg was ordered as Ersatz Gazelle and laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1914 . She was launched on 18 December 1915 and commissioned eight months later on 12 August 1916 . Emden , ordered as Ersatz Nymphe , followed her sister at AG Weser , also in 1914 . She was launched on 1 February 1916 and commissioned into the fleet on 16 December 1916 . Karlsruhe was ordered as Ersatz Niobe and laid down in 1915 at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel . Launching ceremonies took place on 31 January 1916 , and after fitting @-@ out work was completed , she was commissioned on 15 November 1916 . The last ship of the class , Nürnberg , was laid down as Ersatz Thetis at the Howaldtswerke shipyard in Kiel in 1915 . She was launched on 14 April 1916 and commissioned on 15 February 1917 . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the class were 145 @.@ 8 meters ( 478 ft ) long at the waterline and 151 @.@ 4 m ( 497 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 96 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) forward and 6 @.@ 32 m ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) aft . The ships had a designed displacement of 5 @,@ 440 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 350 long tons ; 6 @,@ 000 short tons ) , and at full combat load , they displaced 7 @,@ 125 t ( 7 @,@ 012 long tons ; 7 @,@ 854 short tons ) . Their hulls were built with longitudinal steel frames . The hulls were divided into eighteen watertight compartments and incorporated a double bottom that extended for forty @-@ five percent of the length of the keel . The ships had a complement of 17 officers and 458 enlisted men . They carried several smaller vessels , including one picket boat , one barge , one cutter , two yawls , and two dinghies . The German Navy regarded the ships as good sea boats , having gentle motion . The ships were highly maneuverable and had a tight turning radius , and but lost speed going into a turn . In hard turns , they lost up to sixty percent speed . The ships were stern @-@ heavy . 
 The propulsion systems for Königsberg , Emden , and Nürnberg consisted of two steam turbines , while Karlsruhe was outfitted with two sets of high @-@ pressure geared turbines . The turbines for all four ships were powered by ten coal @-@ fired boilers and two oil @-@ fired double @-@ ended boilers . The turbines drove a pair of three @-@ bladed screws , which were 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) in diameter . The engines were rated at 31 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 23 @,@ 000 kW ) for a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . On trials , Königsberg reached 45 @,@ 900 shp ( 34 @,@ 200 kW ) and a top speed of 27 @.@ 8 knots ( 51 @.@ 5 km / h ; 32 @.@ 0 mph ) , while Karlsruhe made 55 @,@ 700 shp ( 41 @,@ 500 kW ) and 27 @.@ 7 knots ( 51 @.@ 3 km / h ; 31 @.@ 9 mph ) . Emden reached 50 @,@ 216 shp ( 37 @,@ 446 kW ) and 27 @.@ 7 kn ; Nürnberg 's trials figures are not recorded . The trials were conducted in shallow water due to the war ; in deep water , the ships would have exceeded 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . 
 Coal storage was 350 t ( 340 long tons ; 390 short tons ) as designed , though up to 1 @,@ 340 t ( 1 @,@ 320 long tons ; 1 @,@ 480 short tons ) could be carried . Fuel oil was initially 150 t ( 150 long tons ; 170 short tons ) , and could be similarly increased to 500 t ( 490 long tons ; 550 short tons ) . At a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) , the ships could steam for approximately 4 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 980 km ; 5 @,@ 580 mi ) . At a higher speed of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , the range fell considerably , to 1 @,@ 200 nmi ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) . Electrical power was provided by two turbo generators and one diesel generator , with a total output of 300 kilowatts at 220 volts . Steering was controlled by a single , large rudder . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were arranged in a super firing pair aft . These guns fired a 45 @.@ 3 @-@ kilogram ( 100 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 840 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 17 @,@ 600 m ( 57 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 040 rounds of ammunition , for 130 shells per gun . The ships also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . These guns fired a 10 kg ( 22 lb ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 750 to 770 m / s ( 2 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ) . She was also equipped with four 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers and two submerged in the ships ' hulls . The ships were also outfitted to carry up to 200 mines . 
 The Cöln class ships were protected by an armored belt composed of Krupp cemented steel . It was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships and 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 71 in ) forward . The stern was not protected by armor . The armored deck was 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick in the stern , 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships , and 60 mm thick forward . Sloped armor 40 mm thick connected the deck and belt armor . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides and a 20 mm thick roof . The main battery guns were protected with 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick gun shields . A 20 mm thick deck and 30 mm thick side armor protected the mine hold . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 17 November 1917 , Königsberg and Nürnberg saw action at the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight . Along with two other cruisers from the II Scouting Group and the dreadnought battleships Kaiser and Kaiserin , Königsberg and Nürnberg escorted minesweepers clearing paths in minefields laid by the British . During the engagement , the battlecruiser HMS Repulse scored a hit on Königsberg , which did minimal damage but started a serious fire . The British broke off the attack when the German battleships arrived on the scene , after which the Germans also withdrew . All four ships participated in Operation Albion , an amphibious operation against the islands in the Gulf of Riga . Emden served as the flagship for the Leader of <unk> , while the other three ships were assigned to the II Scouting Group . 
 In October 1918 , three of the ships and the rest of the II Scouting Group were to lead a final attack on the British navy . Königsberg Cöln , Dresden , and Pillau were to attack merchant shipping in the Thames estuary while Karlsruhe , Nürnberg , and Graudenz were to bombard targets in Flanders , to draw out the British Grand Fleet . Großadmiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander in chief of the fleet , intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to secure a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . When informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated , " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the Armistice that ended the fighting , Königsberg took Rear Admiral Hugo Meurer to Scapa Flow to negotiate with Admiral David Beatty , the commander of the Grand Fleet , for the place of internment of the German fleet . The accepted arrangement was for the High Seas Fleet to meet the combined Allied fleet in the North Sea and proceed to the Firth of Forth before transferring to Scapa Flow , where they would be interned . Most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , including Karlsruhe , Emden , and Nürnberg , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . Königsberg instead remained in Germany . 
 The unruly crew of Friedrich der Grosse , the fleet flagship , forced Reuter to transfer to Emden , where a Sailors ' Council cooperated with the ship 's captain to run the ship . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . 
 Karlsruhe sank at 15 : 50 ; the rights to salvaging the ship were sold in 1962 . She has not been raised for scrapping , however . Emden was boarded by British sailors who beached her before she could be completely sunk . After being refloated , she was ceded to France and used as a test ship for explosives before being broken up in 1926 . Nürnberg was also beached by British sailors . She was eventually sunk off the Isle of Wight as a gunnery target . Königsberg was meanwhile stricken from the naval register on 20 July 1920 and ceded to France . She was renamed Metz and served with the French Navy until 1933 . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1936 . 
 = Thomas Pennant = 
 Thomas Pennant ( 14 June OS 1726 – 16 December 1798 ) was a Welsh naturalist , traveller , writer and antiquarian . He was born and lived his whole life at his family estate , Downing Hall near Whitford , Flintshire in Wales . 
 As a naturalist he had a great curiosity , observing the geography , geology , plants , animals , birds , reptiles , amphibians and fish around him and recording what he saw and heard about . He wrote acclaimed books including British Zoology , the History of Quadrupeds , Arctic Zoology and Indian Zoology although he never travelled further afield than continental Europe . He knew and maintained correspondence with many of the scientific figures of his day . His books influenced the writings of Samuel Johnson . As an antiquarian , he amassed a considerable collection of art and other works , largely selected for their scientific interest . Many of these works are now housed at the National Library of Wales . 
 As a traveller he visited Scotland and many other parts of Britain and wrote about them . Many of his travels took him to places that were little known to the British public and the travelogues he produced , accompanied by painted and engraved colour plates , were much appreciated . Each tour started at his home and related in detail the route , the scenery , the habits and activities of the people he met , their customs and superstitions and the wildlife he saw or heard about . He travelled on horseback accompanied by his servant , Moses Griffiths , who sketched the things they encountered , later to work these up into illustrations for the books . He was an amiable man with a large circle of friends and was still busily following his interests into his sixties . He enjoyed good health throughout his life and died at Downing at the age of seventy two . 
 = = Family background = = 
 The <unk> were a family of Welsh gentry from the parish of Whitford , Flintshire , who had built up a modest estate at <unk> by the seventeenth century . In 1724 Thomas ' father , David Pennant , inherited the neighbouring Downing estate from a cousin , considerably augmenting the family 's fortune . Downing Hall , where Thomas was born in the ' yellow room ' , became the main Pennant residence . This house had been built in 1600 and the front and main entrance were set back between two forward facing wings . By the time the <unk> moved there it was in a state of disrepair and many alterations were set in hand . It had a number of fine rooms including a well @-@ stocked library and a smoking room " most <unk> furnished with ancient carvings , and the horns of all the European beasts of chase " . The grounds were also very overgrown and much effort was put into their improvement and the creation of paths , vistas and pleasure gardens . 
 Pennant received his early education at Wrexham Grammar School , before moving to Thomas Croft 's school in Fulham in 1740 . At the age of twelve , Pennant later recalled , he had been inspired with a passion for natural history through being presented with Francis Willughby 's Ornithology . In 1744 he entered Queen 's College , Oxford , later moving to Oriel College . Like many students from a wealthy background , he left Oxford without taking a degree , although in 1771 his work as a zoologist was recognised with an honorary degree . 
 Pennant married Elizabeth Falconer , the daughter of Lieutenant James Falconer of the Royal Navy , in 1759 and they had a son , David Pennant , born in 1763 . Pennant 's wife died the following year and fourteen years later he married Ann Mostyn , daughter of Sir Thomas Mostyn of Mostyn , Flintshire . 
 = = Interests = = 
 A visit to Cornwall in 1746 – 1747 , where he met the antiquary and naturalist William Borlase , awakened an interest in minerals and fossils which formed his main scientific study during the 1750s . In 1750 , his account of an earthquake at Downing was inserted in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , where there also appeared in 1756 a paper on several <unk> bodies he had collected at Coalbrookdale , Shropshire . More practically , Pennant used his geological knowledge to open a lead mine , which helped to finance improvements at Downing after he had inherited the estate in 1763 . 
 In 1754 , he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries but by 1760 he was happily married and resigned his fellowship because " my circumstances at that time were very narrow , my worthy father being alive , and I vainly thought my happiness would have been permanent , and that I never should have been called again from my retirement to amuse myself in town , or to be of use to the society . " When his financial circumstances later improved , he became a patron and collector . He amassed a considerable collection of works of art , many of which had been commissioned and which were selected for their scientific interest rather than their connoisseur value . He had several works by Nicholas Pocock representing topographical landforms , mostly in Wales , and others by the artist Peter <unk> , probably commissioned , representing different climate types . His portrait by Thomas Gainsborough shows him as a country gentleman . Also included in the " Pennant Collection " , housed at the National Library of Wales , are many watercolours by Moses Griffiths and John Ingleby , and some drawings by Pennant himself . 
 The artist Moses Griffiths , a native of Bryncroes in the Llŷn Peninsula , provided illustrations to most of Pennant 's books . He was employed full @-@ time by Pennant and accommodated at Downing . Many of these paintings are included in the Pennant Collection held by the National Museum of Wales . Another artist whom Pennant employed on an occasional basis was John Ingleby of Halkin . He mostly supplied town scenes and vignettes . 
 = = Scientific work and publications = = 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Pennant 's first publications were scientific papers on the earthquake he had experienced , other geological subjects and palaeontology . One of these so impressed Carl Linnaeus , that in 1757 , he put Pennant 's name forward and he was duly elected a member of the Royal Swedish Society of Sciences . Pennant felt very honoured by this and continued to correspond with Linnaeus throughout his life . 
 Observing that naturalists in other European countries were producing volumes describing the animals found in their territories , Pennant started , in 1761 , a similar work about Britain , to be called British Zoology . This was a comprehensive book with 132 folio plates in colour . It was published in 1766 and 1767 in four volumes as quarto editions , and further small editions followed . The illustrations were so expensive to produce that he made little money from the publication , and when there was a profit , he gave it to charity . For example , the bookseller Benjamin White , brother of the naturalist Gilbert White , received permission , on payment of £ 100 , to publish an octavo edition , and the money thus raised was donated to the Welsh Charity School . Further appendix volumes were added later and the text , largely written from personal observations , was translated into Latin and German . 
 The book took several years to write and during that time , Pennant was struck by personal tragedy when his wife died . Soon afterwards , in February 1765 and apparently as a reaction , he set out on a journey to the continent of Europe , starting in France where he met other naturalists and scientists including the Comte de Buffon , Voltaire , who he described as a " wicked wit " , Haller and Pallas , and they continued to correspond to their mutual advantage . He later complained that the Comte used several of his communications on animals in his Histoire Naturelle without properly attributing them to Pennant . His meeting with Pallas was significant , because it led Pennant to write his Synopsis of Quadrupeds . He and Pallas found each other 's company particularly congenial , and both were great admirers of the English naturalist John Ray . The intention was that Pallas would write the book but , having written an outline of what he planned , he got called away by the Empress Catherine the Great to her court at St Petersburg . At her request he led a " philosophical expedition " into her distant territories that lasted six years , so Pennant took over the project . 
 In 1767 Pennant was elected a fellow of the Royal Society . About this time he met the much @-@ travelled Sir Joseph Banks and visited him at his home in Lincolnshire . Banks presented him with the skin of a new species of penguin recently brought back from the Falkland Islands . Pennant wrote an account of this bird , the king penguin ( Aptenodytes patagonicus ) , and all the other known species of penguin which was published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society . 
 = = = Tours in Scotland = = = 
 While work on the Synopsis of Quadrupeds was still in progress , Pennant decided on a journey to Scotland , a relatively unexplored country and not previously visited by a naturalist . He set out in June 1769 and kept a journal and made sketches as he travelled . He visited the Farne Islands off the Northumberland coast on the way and was much impressed by the breeding seabird colonies . He entered Scotland via Berwick @-@ on @-@ Tweed and proceeded via Edinburgh and up the east coast , continuing through Perth , Aberdeen and Inverness . His return journey south took him through Fort William , Glen Awe , Inverary and Glasgow . He was unimpressed by the climate but was interested in all he saw and made enquiries about the local economy . He described in detail the scenery around Loch Ness . He enthused over the Arctic char , a fish new to him but did not mention a monster in the lake . He observed red deer , black grouse , white hares and ptarmigan . He saw the capercaillie in the forests of Glenmoriston and <unk> and mentioned the pine grosbeak , the only occasion on which it has been recorded from Scotland . He enquired into the fisheries and commerce of the different places he passed through and visited the great houses , reporting on the antiquities he found there . He finished his journey by visiting Edinburgh again and travelling through Moffat , Gretna and Carlisle on his way back to Wales , having taken about three months on his travels . On his return home , Pennant wrote an account of his tour in Scotland which met with some acclaim and which may have been responsible for an increase in the number of English people visiting the country . 
 In 1771 his Synopsis of Quadrupeds was published ; a second edition was expanded into a History of Quadrupeds . At the end of that same year , 1771 , he published A Tour in Scotland in 1769 . This proved so popular that he decided to undertake another journey and in the summer of 1772 , set out from Chester with two companions , the Rev. John Lightfoot , a naturalist , and Rev. J. Stewart , a Scotsman knowledgeable in the customs of the country . They travelled through the Lake District , Carlisle , Eskdale , which Pennant much admired , Dumfries and Glasgow . In passing , he was fascinated by the account of the inundation of the surrounding farmland by a bursting out of the Solway Moss <unk> . The party set sail in a ninety @-@ ton cutter from Greenock to explore the outer isles . They first visited Bute and Arran and then continued to Ailsa Craig . Pennant was interested in the birds , frogs and molluscs and considered their distribution . The boat then rounded the Mull of Kintyre and continued to Gigha . They would have continued to Islay but were becalmed . During this enforced idleness , the ever @-@ industrious Pennant started on his ancient history of the Hebrides . When the wind picked up they continued to Jura . 
 Here , as elsewhere , they were hospitably welcomed , lent horses to explore the island and shown the principal sights and the improvements that had been made . Pennant records the scenery , customs and superstitions of the inhabitants with many an anecdote . They later reached Islay where Pennant found geese nesting on the moors , a more southerly nesting site for geese than had previously been recorded . Their journey next took them to Colonsay , Iona and Canna and eventually to Mull and Skye . A projected journey to Staffa was prevented by adverse weather . Returning to the mainland , the party paid off their boat and attempted to travel northwards to the most northerly tip of Scotland . In this they were thwarted and had to retrace their route , having met bogs , hazardous rocks and country that even their " <unk> little steeds " had difficulty in negotiating . They returned to Skye for a while before parting company , Pennant continuing his tour while his companions returned to England , Lightfoot carrying with him most of the material he would later use when writing his Flora Scotica . Pennant visited Inverary , Dunkeld , Perth and Montrose . In the latter , he was surprised to learn that sixty or seventy thousand lobsters were caught and sent to London each year . He then travelled via Edinburgh , through <unk> and beside the River Tweed to cross the border at Birgham . Once in England he travelled rapidly home to Downing . 
 = = = Later works = = = 
 Pennant 's next publication , in 1774 , was his account of the second journey to Scotland . This was in two volumes with the second appearing in 1776 . These works include so much detail of the countryside , its economy , natural history and the customs of the inhabitants that they are still of interest today by way of comparison with the very different state of things now . While these volumes were in preparation , he started some new projects . In 1773 he returned to Cumberland , Westmorland and Yorkshire to visit the parts of them that he had missed previously . As with all his tours , he travelled on horseback , keeping his daily journal and accompanied by Moses Griffith who made copious sketches on the way . Pennant seems to have been an unpretentious man of simple tastes , who was welcomed into the homes of strangers wherever he went . He also made tours in Northamptonshire and the Isle of Man . Whenever he travelled to London he took a slightly different route , again recording what he saw and did and on the basis of these details , some years later he wrote his Journey from Chester to London . On one of these journeys , the church he visited at Buckingham in the morning collapsed into ruins that evening . 
 Over the next few years , Pennant made various excursions in North Wales . As with his other tours , he started from Downing . Almost one hundred pages in the first volume that he subsequently wrote were about the ancient city of Chester . His emphasis in these books was on history and the antiquities he saw , rather than on natural history . He was interested in Owain Glendower and his struggle with Henry IV for supremacy in Wales . The first volume of Tour in Wales was published in 1778 but covered a limited area of the country . In an attempt to remedy this , it was followed by a Journey to Snowdon ( part one in 1781 and part two in 1783 ) , and these later jointly became the second volume of his Tour . Although these also concentrated on the history of the places visited , they provided some information on the zoology and botany , in the later case with the assistance of Reverend Lightfoot . Pennant includes tales of the <unk> and harpist <unk> ferch Ifan although its not clear if he met her . Pennant mentions tales of the beaver 's presence on the River Conwy with a deep stretch being known as " Llyn yr <unk> " ( Beaver 's pool ) . He also records herons nesting at the top of the cliffs at St Orme 's Head above the noisy gulls , razorbills , guillemots and cormorants which had their own nesting zones further down . 
 Pennant 's interests ranged widely . In 1781 , he had a paper published in the Philosophical Transactions on the origins of the turkey , arguing that it was a North American bird and not an Old World species . Another paper , published at the instigation of Sir Joseph Banks , was on earthquakes , several of which he had experienced in Flintshire . In the same year he was made an honorary member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and in 1783 , he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , and separately , a member of the Swedish Royal <unk> Society in Lund . 
 In 1782 , Pennant published his Journey from Chester to London . He had then intended to write a " Zoology of North America " but as he explained in the " Advertisement " , since he felt mortified by the loss of British control over America , this was changed to Arctic Zoology . The book was published , with illustrations by Peter Brown , in 1785 – 1787 . The first volume was on quadrupeds and the second on birds . Compilation of the latter was assisted by an expedition Sir Joseph Banks had made to Newfoundland in 1786 . The work was translated into German and French , and part of it into Swedish . The volumes were much acclaimed and Pennant was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society . In 1787 , a supplementary volume was published which included extra information on the reptiles and fishes of North America . 
 Pennant is rarely thought of as a poet , but in 1782 he was moved to write an " elegant little poem " , Ode to Indifference , as he explains " on account of a Lady speaking in praise of Indifference " . In it he " wittily constructs an erotic lyric from the invocation to John Milton 's L <unk> . " It includes the lines 
 Fly , Indifference , hated maid , 
 Seek Spitsbergen 's horrid shade , 
 ... 
 Teach the sweet coquette to know 
 Heart of ice in breast of snow ; 
 In 1790 he published his Account of London , which went through a large number of editions . It was written in the style of his previous works and contained information on things of historical interest in the parts of the capital to which his wanderings led him . By this stage of his life he preferred to make tours in his imagination rather than in reality and he published a second edition of his Indian Zoology . He also conceived the idea of publishing a work on a global scale and set to work on the first two volumes of what was planned to be a fourteen volume series . Each country was to have maps and sketches , colour plates and an account of the country 's production with notes on its natural history . All this was to be gleaned from the writing of others who had seen these places themselves . The first two volumes appeared early in 1798 and covered most of India and Ceylon . Volumes three and four included the parts of India east of the Ganges , Malaysia , Japan and China but before these were published he suffered a gradual decline in health and vigour and died at Downing , in December 1798 . These two volumes were edited and published posthumously by his son , David , as were also several other short papers and an autobiographical work , The literary life of the late Thomas Pennant , Esq . By himself .. 
 = = Correspondents = = 
 Pennant met and corresponded widely over many years with other naturalists . This gave him privileged access to manuscripts and specimens , and his writings sometimes provide information about otherwise lost discoveries . For example , he visited the botanist Joseph Banks in September 1771 on his return from Captain James Cook 's four @-@ year voyage of exploration ; Banks appears to have passed his bird specimens on to Pennant . Pennant 's manuscripts describe the birds that Banks saw on the voyage ; and when he read John Latham 's A General Synopsis of Birds ( 1781 – 1785 ) , Pennant saw that Latham had omitted some of the land birds from Eastern Australia that Banks had collected , and wrote to Latham to fill in the gaps . The naturalist Peter Simon Pallas asked Banks to inform Pennant of " the unhappy fate of <unk> . Cook " , and in December 1779 he wrote to Pennant himself , telling the story . 
 Letters to Pennant from the parson @-@ naturalist Gilbert White form the first part of White 's 1789 book , The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne . It is almost certain that the men were introduced by Gilbert 's brother Benjamin White , Pennant 's publisher ; Gilbert seized on the opportunity to correspond , as a way of overcoming the intellectual isolation of Selborne in the absence of suitable learned societies at which he could read papers and share ideas . He knew that Pennant , with little skill or inclination as a field naturalist , was gathering observations to publish in his books ; he quickly determined that he would make his own use of the correspondence , and kept copies of every letter he sent to Pennant . White was more careful than Pennant , and was sometimes critical ; for example , in 1769 he objected that the goatsucker did not only make its sound while flying as Pennant asserted , so it was wrong to suppose that the noise must be made by the air beating against its " vastly extended mouth " . Pennant accepted White 's criticisms graciously . Unfortunately Pennant 's letters to White have been lost : White 's Natural History begins with 44 of White 's letters to Pennant , of which the first nine were never posted ; the remaining 35 letters are dated between 4 August 1767 and 30 November 1780 , covering topics as varied as whether swallows hibernate or migrate ( letter 10 ) , ring <unk> ( letter 20 ) , whether peacock trains are really tails ( letter 35 ) , and thunderstorms ( letter 44 ) . 
 = = Works by Pennant = = 
 A Tour in Scotland 1769 . John Monk , 1771 . 
 A Synopsis of Quadrupeds . John Monk , 1771 . 
 A Tour in Scotland , and Voyage to the Hebrides 1772 . John Monk , 1774 . 
 Genera of Birds . Balfour and <unk> , 1773 . 
 British Zoology . Benjamin White , 1776 – 1777 . 
 A Tour in Wales . H.D. Symonds , 1778 & 1781 . 
 A History of Quadrupeds . John Monk , 1781 . 
 Free Thoughts on the Militia Laws . Benjamin White , 1781 . 
 The Journey to Snowdon . Henry Hughs , 1781 . 
 The Journey from Chester to London . Benjamin White , 1782 . 
 Arctic Zoology . Henry Hughs , 1784 – 1787 . 
 Of the <unk> . George Allan ( private press ) , 1788 . 
 Of London . Robert Faulder , 1790 . 
 Indian Zoology . Robert Faulder , 1790 . 
 A Letter to a member of parliament : On Mail @-@ Coaches . R. Faulder , 1792 . 
 The Literary Life of the Late Thomas Pennant . Benjamin and J. White , 1793 . 
 The History of the Parishes of Whiteford and Holywell . Benjamin and J. White , 1796 . 
 The View of Hindoostan . Henry Hughs , 1798 – 1800 . 
 Western Hindoostan . Henry Hughs , 1798 . 
 The View of India extra <unk> , China , and Japan . L. Hansard , 1800 . 
 The View of the Malayan Isles , New Holland , and the Spicy Isles . John White , 1800 . 
 A Journey from London to the Isle of Wight . E. Harding , 1801 . 
 From Dover to the Isle of Wight . Wilson , 1801 . 
 A Tour from Downing to Alston @-@ Moor . E. Harding , 1801 . 
 A Tour from Alston @-@ Moor to <unk> , and <unk> Crags . J. Scott , 1804 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pennant 's two Scottish tours were praised by critics , as were his natural history books . The Critical Review called the Tour in Scotland 1769 " the best itinerary which has hitherto been written on that country " . Pennant 's two Scottish tours made him the best known writer on Scotland , and stimulated the great literary figure of the age , Dr Johnson , to travel in Scotland and especially to the Hebrides , resulting in notable works by both Johnson ( A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland , 1775 ) and his friend and biographer James Boswell ( The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides , 1786 ) , According to the historian David Allan , all three of these " famous " texts were " deliberate attempts ... to educate their English readers about Scotland . The intention here was usually to instil both a genuine curiosity and a profound sympathy for their fellow Britons " in marked contrast , in Allan 's view , to the prevailing English ignorance and hostility to the people of Scotland ; and he cites evidence that readers found it " a beguiling vision that literally prescribed how they would now see and respond — positively , fondly , inquisitively — to Scotland and its culture " . With rare praise , Johnson said of Pennant " ... he 's the best traveller I ever read ; he observes more things than anyone else does . " And in 1777 , Johnson said to Boswell " Our ramble in the islands hangs upon my imagination . I can hardly help imagining that we shall go again . Pennant seems to have seen a great deal which we did not see . When we travel again let us look better about us . " 
 The Gentleman 's Magazine of 1797 reviewed The History of the Parishes of Whiteford and Holywell , commenting on his claim ( " <unk> " , Latin for ' I shall rise ' ) to have returned from the dead ( having announced the end of his literary life back in 1791 ) , and continuing to joke about his excesses throughout . For example the review remarks that the portrait of " the late Pretender " to the throne " at a certain time , might have cost its possessor [ Pennant ] his seat on the bench of justices " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Pennant 's death , the French zoologist and naturalist Georges Cuvier wrote of him " When the life of a man is entirely devoted to the sciences , it cannot be expected that it will present a variety of incident ; it will be found most truly in the analysis of his works . " Pennant is cited as an authority by Thomas Bewick throughout his pioneering field guide , A History of British Birds ( 2 volumes , 1797 and 1804 ) . For example , under " The Golden Eagle " , Bewick writes that " Pennant says there are instances , though rare , of their having bred in Snowdon Hills " . Bewick cites him for facts about rare species like " The <unk> Grebe " : " This species is not numerous in the British Isles . Pennant says , they inhabit and breed in the fens near Spalding , in Lincolnshire , and that the female makes a nest not unlike that of the Crested Grebe , and lays four or five white eggs . " On occasion , Pennant 's knowledge could be highly specific : for " The Great @-@ Crested Grebe " , Bewick records that the nest " is made of various kinds of dried fibres , stalks and leaves of water plants , and ( Pennant says ) of the roots of bugbane , stalks of water @-@ lily , pond @-@ weed and water @-@ violet ; when it happens to be blown from among the reeds , it floats about upon the surface of the water " . 
 The naturalist Richard Mabey wrote that Pennant was " a doughty and open @-@ minded traveller , and his various Tours were best @-@ sellers in their time " , adding Samuel Johnson 's comment that Pennant was " the best traveller I ever read " . Mabey however comments that he " had no great aptitude or instinct for field @-@ work and nothing approaching [ Gilbert ] White 's critical intelligence " , arguing that Pennant " was essentially an intellectual entrepreneur , a popularizer and compiler of other people 's observations and ideas , and was able to produce a large number of very readable guides as a result . " Mabey adds that Pennant had a " pushy and bombastic manner , and a reliance on second @-@ hand information that at times came close to plagiarism " but admits that he was an innovative author of books , in particular by seeking original reports " from a wide network of field observers " , meeting the fashion in the 1760s for natural history journalism . 
 Pennant 's exploration of the Western Isles of Scotland was revisited by Nicholas Crane in a television documentary programme first broadcast on BBC Two on 16 August 2007 , as part of the " Great British Journeys " series . Pennant was the subject of the first in the eight part series . The Thomas Pennant Society was formed in 2007 as a result of an initiative by an informal group , the <unk> Thomas Pennant . It aims to foster his memory and arranges a programme of events connected with him including publishing leaflets and booklets , holding lectures and arranging walks in " Pennant Country " . It also holds an annual dinner . In 2013 , the society proposed to Flintshire County Council that " Holywell and the north Flintshire area " be designated ' Pennant Country ' . Some Holywell town councillors voiced reservations . 
 = = Species named after him = = 
 The following marine species were named with the epithets pennanti , pennantii and pennantiana : 
 <unk> pennantiana Leach in Gray , 1852 : synonym of <unk> parva ( Pennant , 1777 ) 
 Arca pennantiana Leach in Gray , 1852 : synonym of <unk> lactea ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) 
 Argentina pennanti Walbaum , 1792 : synonym of Maurolicus muelleri ( Gmelin , 1789 ) 
 <unk> pennantii Yarrell , 1835 : synonym of <unk> <unk> ( Walbaum , 1792 ) 
 Cardium pennanti Reeve , 1844 : synonym of <unk> <unk> ( Gmelin , 1791 ) 
 Cardium pennantii Reeve , 1844 : synonym of <unk> <unk> ( Gmelin , 1791 ) 
 Coregonus pennantii 
 <unk> pennantii Leach , 1817 : synonym of <unk> tuberosa ( Pennant , 1777 ) 
 <unk> pennantii 
 <unk> pennanti ( Philippi , 1846 ) 
 Lamna pennanti ( Walbaum , 1792 ) : synonym of Lamna nasus ( Bonnaterre , 1788 ) 
 Maurolicus pennanti ( Walbaum , 1792 ) : synonym of Maurolicus muelleri ( Gmelin , 1789 ) 
 <unk> pennantiana Leach , 1847 : synonym of <unk> patula ( Pennant , 1777 ) 
 Pasiphaë <unk> Leach in Gray , 1852 : synonym of <unk> ovata ( Pennant , 1777 ) 
 Procolobus pennantii Waterhouse , 1838 
 <unk> pennantii Cornish , 1885 : synonym of Cetorhinus maximus ( Gunnerus , 1765 ) 
 Squalus pennanti Walbaum , 1792 : synonym of Lamna nasus ( Bonnaterre , 1788 ) 
 Tetrodon pennantii Yarrell , 1836 : synonym of <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) 
 <unk> pennanti Philippi , 1846 : synonym of <unk> pennanti ( Philippi , 1846 ) 
 Venus pennanti Forbes , 1838 : synonym of Chamelea striatula ( da Costa , 1778 ) 
 Venus pennantii Forbes , 1838 : synonym of Chamelea striatula ( da Costa , 1778 ) 
 Vermilia pennantii Quatrefages , 1866 : synonym of <unk> <unk> ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) : synonym of <unk> <unk> ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) 
 = <unk> blacktip shark = 
 The smoothtooth blacktip shark ( Carcharhinus leiodon ) is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae . It is known only from the type specimen caught from the Gulf of Aden , off eastern Yemen , and a handful of additional specimens caught from the Persian Gulf , off Kuwait . Reaching 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) in length , this species has a stocky greenish @-@ colored body , a short snout , and black @-@ tipped fins . It can be distinguished from similar species by its teeth , which are narrow , erect , and smooth @-@ edged . 
 Little is known of the smoothtooth blacktip shark 's natural history ; it likely inhabits shallow waters and feeds on small bony fishes . It is presumably viviparous like other members of its family . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) last assessed this species as Vulnerable , when only the sole type specimen was known . Although more specimens have since been discovered , the conservation status of this species remains precarious due to heavy fishing and habitat degradation within its range . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first known specimen of the smoothtooth blacktip shark was a 75 cm ( 30 in ) long immature male caught by Wilhelm Hein in 1902 and deposited at the Naturhistorisches Museum in Vienna . The location was recorded as the Gulf of Aden near " <unk> " , which likely refers to the town of <unk> in eastern Yemen . In 1985 , the shark was examined and described as a new species by New Zealand ichthyologist Jack Garrick in a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Technical Report . He gave it the specific epithet leiodon , from the Greek <unk> meaning " smooth " , and odon meaning " tooth " . This species was known only by the single specimen until 2008 , when fishery surveys in Kuwait uncovered several more specimens . 
 Based on morphology , Leonard Compagno in 1988 tentatively grouped the smoothtooth blacktip shark with the spinner shark ( C. brevipinna ) , the blacktip shark ( C. limbatus ) , the graceful shark ( C. amblyrhynchoides ) , and the finetooth shark ( C. isodon ) . Using molecular phylogenetic techniques on mitochondrial DNA sequences , Alec Moore and colleagues reported in 2011 that this species is closely related to the graceful shark , the blacktip shark , and the Australian blacktip shark ( C. tilstoni ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Superficially , the smoothtooth blacktip shark resembles the blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) . It is rather robust in build , with a short and blunt snout . The large nostrils are preceded by well @-@ developed , triangular flaps of skin . The small , circular eyes are equipped with nictitating membranes . The mouth forms a wide arch and has very short furrows at the corners . There are 16 upper and 14 – 15 lower tooth rows on either side , along with two to three small teeth at the symphysis ( center ) of either jaw . The teeth are distinctive in shape , having narrow , upright cusps without serrations ; finetooth sharks and juvenile spinner sharks are the only other members of Carcharhinus with similar teeth . The five pairs of gill slits are long . 
 The fairly long and pointed pectoral fins are slightly falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) and originate between the fourth and fifth gill slits . The first dorsal fin is medium @-@ sized and triangular with a pointed apex , and originates over the rear of the pectoral fin bases . The second dorsal fin is small and positioned opposite the anal fin . There is no ridge between the dorsal fins . The pelvic fins are triangular and larger than the anal fin , which has a deep notch in the trailing margin . A crescent @-@ shaped notch is present on the caudal peduncle at the upper caudal fin origin . The caudal fin is asymmetrical , with a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a longer upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip . The dermal denticles are slightly overlapping and bear three prominent horizontal ridges leading to three or five marginal teeth . This species is greenish yellow to greenish gray above , sometimes with a scattering of tiny dark dots . The underside is white , which extends in a pale band onto the flanks . All the fins have sharply defined black tips , and there is a broad , dark midline stripe running from the second dorsal fin base to the tip of the upper caudal fin lobe . The largest recorded specimen is 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) long . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The smoothtooth blacktip shark has only been recorded from eastern Yemen and Kuwait , some 3 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) apart . These two locations differ markedly : the Gulf of Aden near Yemen is over 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) deep with a narrow continental shelf and no permanent riverine inputs , while the Persian Gulf near Kuwait is entirely shallower than 40 m ( 130 ft ) and receives abundant freshwater from the Tigris @-@ Euphrates @-@ Karun river system . The Kuwait specimens were obtained from fish markets ; given the practices of Kuwaiti speedboat fishers , this shark can be supposed to inhabit shallow , coastal waters . Still , these waters encompass a range of habitats from estuaries to coral reefs , and thus the habitat requirements of the smoothtooth blacktip shark remain largely unknown . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Considering its resemblance to the blacktip reef shark , the smoothtooth blacktip shark may play an equivalent shallow @-@ water ecological role within its range . It is known to feed on marine catfish , and its diet probably also includes other small bony fishes . This species is presumably viviparous like all other Carcharhinus species , with the developing young sustained to term by a placental connection to the mother . Judging from the available specimens , males reach sexual maturity at some point between 0 @.@ 9 and 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 0 and 3 @.@ 9 ft ) long . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Prior to the finding of additional specimens in Kuwait , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) assessed the smoothtooth blacktip shark as Vulnerable based on its presumed small range and population . Despite the discovery of a second subpopulation off Kuwait , this species likely still warrants a Vulnerable assessment ( or higher ) because the waters around the Arabian Peninsula are subject to heavy fishing pressure and habitat degradation . <unk> and other fisheries off Kuwait are known to take the smoothtooth blacktip shark as bycatch , while intensive Yemeni and Somalian shark fisheries operate in the Gulf of Aden . The status of the Yemen subpopulation is uncertain because no further specimens have been recorded since the original over a century ago . 
 = Ariwara no Narihira = 
 Ariwara no Narihira ( <unk> <unk> , 825 – 880 ) was a Japanese courtier and waka poet of the early Heian period . He was named one of both the Six Poetic Geniuses and the Thirty @-@ Six Poetic Geniuses , and one of his poems was included in the Ogura Hyakunin Isshu collection . He is also known as Zai Go @-@ Chūjō , Zai Go , Zai Chūjō or <unk> @-@ Otoko . 
 There are 87 poems attributed to Narihira in court anthologies , though some attributions are dubious . Narihira 's poems are exceptionally ambiguous ; the compilers of the 10th @-@ century Kokin Wakashū thus treated them to relatively long headnotes . 
 Narihira 's many renowned love affairs have exerted a profound influence on later Japanese culture . Legends have held that he had affairs high priestess of the Ise Grand Shrine and the poet Ono no Komachi , and that he fathered Emperor Yōzei . His love affairs inspired The Tales of Ise , and he has ever since been a model of the handsome , amorous nobleman . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birth and ancestry = = = 
 Ariwara no Narihira was born in 825 . He was a grandson of two emperors : Emperor <unk> through his father , Prince Abo ; and Emperor Kanmu through his mother , Princess Ito . He was the fifth child of Prince Abo , but was supposedly the only child of Princess Ito , who lived in the former capital at Nagaoka . Some of Narihira 's poems are about his mother . 
 Abo was banished from the old capital Heijō @-@ kyō ( modern Nara ) to <unk> Province ( within modern Fukuoka ) in 824 due to his involvement in a failed coup d 'état known as the <unk> Incident . Narihira was born during his father 's exile . After Abo 's return to Heijō , in 826 , Narihira and his brothers <unk> , Nakahira and <unk> were made commoners and given the surname Ariwara . The scholar Ōe no <unk> was also a brother of Narihira 's . 
 = = = Political career = = = 
 Although he is remembered mainly for his poetry , Narihira was of high birth and served at court . In 841 he was appointed Lieutenant of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards , before being promoted to Lieutenant of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and then Chamberlain . In 849 , he held the Junior Fifth Rank , Lower Grade . 
 Narihira rose to the positions of Provisional Assistant Master of the Left Military Guard , Assistant Chamberlain , Provisional Minor Captain of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards , Captain of the Right Division of the Bureau of Horses , Provisional Middle Captain of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards , Provisional Governor of Sagami , reaching the Junior Fourth Rank , Upper Grade . By the end of his life he had risen to Chamberlain and Provisional Governor of Mino . 
 Literary historian and critic Donald Keene observed in his description of Narihira as the protagonist of The Tales of Ise : 
 Narihira combined all the qualities most admired in a Heian courtier : he was of high birth ( a grandson of the Emperor <unk> ) , extremely handsome , a gifted poet , and an all @-@ conquering lover . He was probably also an expert horseman , adept in arms , and a competent official . These aspects of his life are not emphasized in The Tales of Ise , but they distinguish Narihira from other heroes of Heian literature , including Genji . 
 = = = Romantic affairs = = = 
 Narihira was known as a great lover ; a third of his poems included in the Kokin Wakashū ( Kokinshū ) describe his various romantic affairs , and after his death the national history Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku ( compiled 901 ) said of him : " Narihira was elegant and of handsome appearance , but he was unrestrained in his self @-@ indulgence . " 
 The Tales of Ise portrays Narihira as falling in love with Fujiwara no Takaiko , a consort of Emperor <unk> , and it is hinted that this was one of the reasons for his leaving the capital and travelling east . It has been speculated that this romantic affair with the consort of the emperor was the reason why the Sandai Jitsuroku describes his rank as going down from Junior Fifth Rank , Lower Grade to Senior Sixth Rank , Upper Grade , before again rising to Junior Fifth Rank , Upper Grade the following year . However , it has also been speculated that this may be an error in the Sandai Jitsuroku as a result of binding changing the order of events . Furthermore , Fujiwara no Takaiko reputedly had an affair with the monk Zen <unk> ( <unk> ) , which may have formed the core of the otherwise fictional legend that she also had an affair with Narihira . Whether the affair was historical or not , the Reizei family 's commentary on The Tales of Ise speculates that Emperor Yōzei was a product of this union , and not the previous emperor . 
 One of Narihira 's most famous affairs — the one that gave The Tales of Ise its name — was said to be with Yasuko , high priestess of the Ise Grand Shrine . The Tales of Ise describes the protagonist , presumed to be Narihira , visiting Ise on a hunt , and sleeping with the priestess . However , a passage in the Kokinshū describes the meeting ambiguously , in a manner that implies Narihira did not sleep with the priestess herself but rather another woman in her service . The 12th @-@ century work <unk> ( <unk> ) and the 13th @-@ century work <unk> claim that the product of this union was <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> ) , who was later adopted by <unk> no Shigenori ( <unk> ) . <unk> Helen Craig McCullough stated there was " no evidence " the affair between Narihira and Yasuko was " more than a romantic myth " . 
 A headnote to poems 784 and 785 in the Kokinshū connects Narihira to the daughter of Ki no <unk> . Medieval commentaries call her Narihira 's wife , and some modern scholars , such as Katagiri , call her Narihira 's wife , although the only early source that explicitly names her is the note in the Kokinshū . In the classical Noh play <unk> , an adaptation by Zeami <unk> of " <unk> @-@ <unk> " from The Tales of Ise , portrays Narihira and Ki no <unk> 's daughter as childhood playmates who eventually marry ; Narihira is unfaithful to his wife , and her pining spirit appears to a monk after their deaths . 
 It has been speculated , based in part on their being considered the most beautiful man and woman of their age , that Narihira and the poet Ono no Komachi may have been lovers , but there is little evidence for this . Scholars of the 20th century such as <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) have held up this speculation , which can be traced back at least as far as the 14th @-@ century historian Kitabatake <unk> . 
 <unk> likely used Kamakura period Kokinshū commentaries such as the extant <unk> @-@ bon Kokinshū @-@ chū ( <unk> ) , which speculates that one of Komachi 's poems was left for Narihira after a tryst . The <unk> @-@ bon Kokinshū @-@ chū in turn likely worked from a then @-@ common belief that fictional Tales of Ise was a genuine historical work detailing the actual events in Narihira 's life ( see above ) . Kamakura period commentaries on The Tales of Ise therefore tried to insert the names of real women where the original text simply said " a woman " , and thus inserted Ono no Komachi into several passages of the text . 
 The literary scholar Yōichi Katagiri concluded , on the lack of surviving evidence , that , while it is possible that Narihira and Ono no Komachi knew each other and were lovers , there was no usable evidence to say conclusively either way . 
 = = = Journey to the east = = = 
 The Kokinshū , Tales of Ise and Tales of Yamato all describe Narihira leaving Kyoto to travel east through the Tōkaidō region and crossing the <unk> River , composing poems at famous places ( see <unk> ) along the way . The Tales of Ise implies this journey was the result of the scandalous affair between Narihira and Fujiwara no Takaiko . There are doubts as to whether this journey actually took place , from the point of view both that the number of surviving poems is quite small for having made such a trip and composing poems along the way , and in terms of the historical likelihood that a courtier could have gone wandering to the other end of the country with only one or two friends keeping him company . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 According to the Sandai Jitsuroku , Narihira died on 9 July 880 ( the 28th day of the fifth month of <unk> 6 on the Japanese calendar ) . Poem 861 in the Kokinshū , Narihira 's last , expresses his shock and regret that his death should come so soon : 
 = = = Burial site = = = 
 The location of Narihira 's grave is uncertain . In the Middle Ages he was considered a deity ( kami ) or even an avatar of the Buddha <unk> , and so it is possible that some what have been called graves of Narihira 's are in fact sacred sites consecrated to him rather than places where he was actually believed to have been buried . Kansai University professor and scholar of The Tales of Ise <unk> Yamamoto ( <unk> , Yamamoto <unk> ) has speculated that the small stone grove on Mount Yoshida in eastern Kyoto known as " Narihira 's burial mound " ( <unk> , Narihira @-@ <unk> ) may be such a site . He further speculated that the site became associated with Narihira because it was near the grave @-@ site of Emperor Yōzei , who in the Middle Ages was widely believed to have secretly been fathered by Narihira . Another site traditionally believed to house Narihira 's grave is <unk> @-@ ji ( <unk> ) in western Kyoto , which is also known as " Narihira Temple " ( <unk> , Narihira @-@ dera ) . 
 = = = Descendants = = = 
 Among Narihira 's children were the waka poets <unk> ( <unk> ) and Shigeharu ( <unk> ) , and at least one daughter . Through <unk> , he was also the grandfather of the poet Ariwara no <unk> . One of his granddaughters , whose name is not known , was married to Fujiwara no <unk> and engaged in a clandestine affair with Taira no <unk> . 
 = = Names = = 
 Narihira is also known by the nicknames Zai Go @-@ Chūjō ( <unk> ) , Zai Go ( <unk> ) and Zai Chūjō ( <unk> ) . Zai is the Sino @-@ Japanese reading of the first character of his surname Ariwara , and Go , meaning " five " , refers to him and his four brothers <unk> , Nakahira , <unk> , and Ōe no <unk> . Chūjō ( " Middle Captain " ) is a reference to the post he held near the end of his life , Provisional Middle Captain of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards . After the recurring use of the phrase in The Tales of Ise , he is also known as <unk> @-@ Otoko ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Poetry = = 
 Narihira left a private collection , the Narihira @-@ shū ( <unk> ) , which was included in the <unk> @-@ shū ( <unk> ) . This was likely compiled by a later editor , after the compilation of the Gosen Wakashū in the mid @-@ 10th century . 
 Thirty poems attributed to Narihira were included in the early 10th @-@ century Kokinshū , and many more in later anthologies , but the attributions are dubious . Ki no Tsurayuki mentioned Narihira in his kana preface to the Kokinshū as one of the Six Poetic Geniuses — important poets of an earlier age . He was also included in Fujiwara no Kintō 's later Thirty @-@ Six Poetic Geniuses . 
 Of the eleven poems the Gosen Wakashū attributed to Narihira , several were really by others — for example , two were actually by Fujiwara no Nakahira and one by <unk> no <unk> . The Shin Kokinshū and later court anthologies attribute more poems to Narihira , but many of these were likely misunderstood to have been written by him because of their appearance in The Tales of Ise . Some of these were probably composed after Narihira 's death . Combined , poems attributed to Narihira in court anthologies total 87 . 
 The following poem by Narihira was included as No. 17 in Fujiwara no Teika 's Ogura Hyakunin Isshu : 
 = = = Characteristic style = = = 
 Although at least some of the poems attributed to Narihira in imperial anthologies are dubious , there is a large enough body of his work contained in the relatively reliable Kokinshū for scholars to discuss Narihira 's poetic style . Narihira made use of engo ( related words ) and <unk> ( pivot words ) . 
 The following poem , number 618 in the Kokinshū , is cited by Keene as an example of Narihira 's use of engo related to water : 
 The " water " engo are <unk> ( " brooding " , but a pun on naga @-@ ame " long rain " ) , <unk> ( " a river of tears " ) and <unk> ( " is soaked " ) . 
 Narihira 's poems are exceptionally ambiguous by Kokinshū standards , and so were treated by the anthology 's compilers to relatively long headnotes . He was the only poet in the collection to receive this treatment . An example of Narihira 's characteristic ambiguity that Keene cites is Kokinshū No. 747 : 
 Scholars have subjected this poem , Narihira 's most famous , to several conflicting interpretations in recent centuries . The Edo @-@ period <unk> scholar <unk> <unk> interpreted the first part of it as a pair of rhetorical questions , marked by the particle ya . He explained away the logical inconsistency with the latter part of the poem that his reading introduced by reading in an " implied " conclusion that though the poet remains the same as before , everything somehow feels different . The late @-@ Edo period waka poet Kagawa <unk> ( <unk> , 1768 – 1843 ) took a different view , interpreting the ya as exclamatory : the moon and spring are not those of before , and only the poet himself remains unchanged . 
 A similar problem of interpretation has also plagued Narihira 's last poem ( quoted above ) . The fourth line , <unk> kyō to wa , is most normally read as " ( I never thought ) that it might be yesterday or today " , but has been occasionally interpreted by scholars to mean " until yesterday I never thought it might be today " ; others take it as simply meaning " right about now " . But the emotion behind the poem is nonetheless clear : Narihira , who died in his fifties , always knew he must die someday , but is nonetheless shocked that his time has come so soon . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Tsurayuki 's preface to the Kokinshū describes Narihira 's poems as containing " too much feeling and insufficient words . They are like faded flowers whose colour has been lost but which retain a lingering fragrance " . Ki no <unk> repeats this in his Chinese preface to the Kokinshū , though according to literary scholars Rodd and <unk> , it may not be negative criticism , and may even " be seen as complimentary " . It likely refers to the subjective , emotional nature of his poetry ; they say that " ' insufficient ' may suggest that many of his poems are misleading or unintelligible without explanatory headnotes " , and perhaps indicates that " even though Narihira approached the art in an unconventional manner , his poetry succeeds " . 
 Keene pointed out that this criticism likely reflected a change in literary tastes in the decades between Narihira 's compositions and Tsurayuki 's criticisms . His history of Japanese literature , Seeds in the Heart concluded its discussion of Narihira with the following : 
 Narihira was not a profound poet . His surviving poems are mainly occasional , and even when the expression suggests deeply felt emotion , its worldly manner keeps his poetry from attaining the grandeur of the best Man 'yōshū poems in the same vein . He is nevertheless of historical importance as one who maintained the traditions of the waka during the long night of the dominance of poetry in Chinese . 
 Poet and translator Peter McMillan says the large number of Narihira 's poems included in the Kokinshū and later court anthologies is an indicator of the high regard in which his poetry was held . 
 = = Connection to The Tales of Ise = = 
 The Tales of Ise is a collection of narrative episodes , centred on Narihira , and presenting poems he had composed , along with narratives explaining what had inspired the poems . 
 Narihira was once widely considered the author of the work , but scholars have come to reject this attribution . Keene speculates that it is at least possible that Narihira originally composed the work from his and others ' poems as a kind of inventive autobiography , and some later author came across his manuscript after his death and expanded on it . The protagonist of the work was likely modelled on him . The work itself was likely put together in something resembling its present form by the middle of 10th century , and took several decades starting with Narihira 's death . 
 Three stages have been identified in the composition of the work . The first of these stages would have been based primarily on poems actually composed by Narihira , although the background details provided were not necessarily historical . The second saw poems added to the first layer that were not necessarily by Narihira , and had a higher proportion of fiction to fact . The third and final stage saw some later author adding the use of Narihira 's name , and treating him as a legendary figure of the past . 
 The late 11th @-@ century Tale of <unk> refers to Ise by the variant name <unk> Chūjō no Nikki ( " Narihira 's diary " ) . 
 = = Influence on later Japanese culture = = 
 In later centuries Narihira has been considered the epitome of the amorous bel homme , and his romantic escapades have given rise to many later legends . He and his contemporary Ono no Komachi were considered the archetypes of the beautiful man and woman of the Heian court , and appear as such in many later literary works , particularly in Noh theatre . 
 It is believed Narihira was one of the men who inspired Murasaki Shikibu when she created Hikaru Genji , the protagonist of The Tale of Genji . Genji makes allusion to The Tales of Ise and draws parallels between their respective protagonists . Though not directly stated in the text , later commentators have interpreted The Tales of Ise as implying that Narihira 's illicit union with the empress Fujiwara no Takaiko made him the true father of Emperor Yōzei ; whether Murasaki interpreted the work this way is uncertain , but The Tale of Genji describes a very similar incident in which the protagonist , a former imperial prince made a commoner , has an affair with an empress and sires a son who ultimately becomes emperor as his true parentage is kept secret . Narihira appears in tales such as 35 and 36 of Book 24 of the late <unk> @-@ period Konjaku <unk> . 
 Along with his contemporary Ono no Komachi and the protagonist of The Tale of Genji , Narihira figured prominently in Edo @-@ period ukiyo @-@ e prints and was alluded to in the ukiyo @-@ <unk> of Ihara <unk> . 
 The 16th @-@ century warrior Ōtomo Yoshiaki used Narihira and the courtly world of The Tales of Ise as an ironic reference in a poem he composed about the severed head of his defeated enemy Tachibana <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , the lord of Tachibana Castle in <unk> Province , whom he killed 10 March 1550 . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Ariwara no Narihira image gallery 
 = Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel = 
 Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel is a situation comedy radio show starring two of the Marx Brothers , Groucho and Chico , and written primarily by Nat Perrin and Arthur Sheekman . The series was originally broadcast in the United States on the National Broadcasting Company 's Blue Network beginning November 28 , 1932 , and ended May 22 , 1933 . Sponsored by the Standard Oil Companies of New Jersey , Pennsylvania and Louisiana and the Colonial Beacon Oil Company , it was the Monday night installment of the Five @-@ Star Theater , an old @-@ time radio variety series that offered a different program each weeknight . Episodes were broadcast live from NBC 's WJZ station in New York City and later from a sound stage at RKO Pictures in Los Angeles , California , before returning to WJZ for the final episodes . 
 The program depicts the misadventures of a small law firm , with Groucho as attorney Waldorf T. Flywheel and Chico as Flywheel 's assistant , Emmanuel Ravelli . The series was originally titled Beagle , Shyster , and Beagle , with Groucho 's character named Waldorf T. Beagle , until a lawyer from New York named Beagle contacted NBC and threatened to file a lawsuit unless the name was dropped . Many of the episodes ' plots were drawn from Marx Brothers films . 
 The show garnered respectable ratings for its early evening time slot although a second season was not produced . It was thought that , like most radio shows of the time , the episodes had not been recorded and the episodes were thought lost until 1988 , when 25 of the 26 scripts were rediscovered in the Library of Congress storage and republished . Adaptations of the recovered scripts were performed and broadcast in the UK on BBC Radio 4 in 1990 . In 1996 , some recordings of the original show were discovered , including a complete recording of the last episode to air . 
 = = Early development = = 
 In 1932 Texaco introduced its " Fire Chief " gasoline to the public , so named because its octane rating was 66 , higher than the United States government 's requirements for fire engines . To advertise its new premium grade fuel , Texaco approached vaudeville comic Ed Wynn to star in a radio show titled Fire Chief . Wynn played the fire chief in front of an audience of 700 and the show was aired live over the NBC Red Network , beginning April 24 , 1932 . It immediately proved popular with over two million regular listeners and a Co @-@ Operative Analysis of Broadcasting ( CAB ) Rating of 44 @.@ 8 % . 
 Upon seeing the success of Wynn 's Fire Chief , the Standard Oils in New Jersey , Louisiana and Pennsylvania , and Colonial Beacon , decided to sponsor their own radio program to promote Esso Gasoline and <unk> Motor Oil . They turned to the advertising agency McCann Erickson , which developed Five @-@ Star Theater , a variety series that offered a different show each night of the week . Groucho and Chico Marx , one half of the popular vaudeville and film stars the Marx Brothers , were approached to appear in a comedy show . Harpo and Zeppo were not required , as their trademark <unk> of mute and straight man did not work well on radio . Before this decision was officially reached , early drafts of the scripts featured guest appearances written for both absent brothers , with Harpo being represented through <unk> of his horn and other trademark sound effects . 
 Nat Perrin and Arthur Sheekman , who had contributed to the scripts of the Marx Brothers ' films Monkey Business ( 1931 ) and Horse Feathers ( 1932 ) , were enlisted to write the comedy show . It was titled Beagle , Shyster , and Beagle , and its premise involved an unethical lawyer / private detective and his bungling assistant . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Groucho Marx played Waldorf T. Beagle ( later renamed Waldorf T. Flywheel ) , and Chico played Emmanuel Ravelli , the same name as the Italian character he played in the film Animal Crackers ( 1930 ) . Mary McCoy played secretary Miss Dimple , and it is thought that Broderick Crawford also appeared as various characters . Groucho and Chico shared a weekly income of $ 6 @,@ 500 for appearing in the show . During the Great Depression , this was considered a high sum for 30 minutes ' work , especially since radio scripts required no memorization and only a few minutes were needed for costume , hair and makeup . By comparison , Greta Garbo 's weekly salary from Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer during the same period was also $ 6 @,@ 500 , though this was for a 40- or 50 @-@ hour week . Wynn was paid $ 5 @,@ 000 a week for Fire Chief . In contrast , almost two @-@ thirds of American families were living on fewer than $ 26 a week . In a classic Marxian twist , Harpo was paid a weekly salary for not appearing on the show , even though his mute character would have little to do in a radio program anyway . 
 = = Production = = 
 Five @-@ Star Theater was broadcast from NBC 's flagship station , WJZ in New York City . Because Groucho , Chico , Perrin , and Sheekman were living and working in Hollywood , they had to make a three @-@ day train journey from Pasadena each week , and then another three @-@ day trip back . The first episode was written as they took their first train ride to New York . 
 A number of Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel 's scripts reused plots from Marx Brothers films . The plot of Episode 17 was suggested by the stolen painting plot in Animal Crackers , though it was a " Beauregard " in the film , not a Rembrandt . The 23rd episode also reused scenes from Animal Crackers , including the stolen diamond plot and Groucho 's lines regarding the need for a seven @-@ cent nickel . Monkey Business influenced two skits in Episode 25 , and The <unk> gave Episode 19 its plot . Many vaudeville acts of the 1920s based their routines on the assumption that all people were straight ; some episodes of Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel included relatively low @-@ key homosexual jokes taken from the Marx Brothers ' stage act . 
 Despite reusing scripts from other sources , Perrin said that he and Sheekman " had [ their ] hands full turning out a script each week " . They found help from Tom McKnight and George Oppenheimer , whose names were passed along to Groucho . Perrin explained , " [ Groucho ] was in the men 's room during a break , and he was complaining to the guy standing next to him , ' Geez , I wish we could find another writer or two to make life easier . ' Suddenly there 's a voice from one of the stalls : ' I 've got just the guys for you ! ' Having Tom and George did make life easier , although Arthur and I went over their scripts for a light polishing . " 
 After traveling to New York to perform the first seven episodes , the four men decided to broadcast from Los Angeles instead . NBC did not have a studio on the West Coast , so for the next thirteen weeks , between January 16 and April 24 , 1933 , the show was transmitted from a borrowed empty soundstage at RKO Radio Pictures . Folding chairs were brought in for the audience of around thirty or forty people – coming from vaudeville , Groucho and Chico preferred to perform to a crowd – and were quickly cleared out at the end of each performance so that the stage would be ready for any filming the following day . The last four episodes of the show were performed back at WJZ in New York . 
 Chico was often late to rehearsals , so Perrin would have to stand in for him on the read @-@ throughs . When Chico eventually made his appearance , Perrin remembers , " he 'd be reading Ravelli 's lines and Groucho would tell him to stop [ and make me ] ' show him how the line should be read . ' My Italian accent was better than Chico 's , you see . But Chico didn 't care . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel aired Monday nights at 7 : 30 p.m. on the NBC Blue Network to thirteen network affiliates in nine Eastern and Southern states . Twenty @-@ six episodes were made , which were broadcast between November 28 , 1932 and May 22 , 1933 . Each episode is introduced by the Blue Network announcer and features about fifteen minutes of drama and ten minutes of orchestral music between acts . The episodes end with Groucho and Chico – not in character , but as themselves – performing a 60 @-@ second skit promoting Esso and <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel was not a success for Standard Oil . Although the successful Marx films Monkey Business and Horse Feathers contained plots involving adultery , Variety did not appreciate them in the radio show : 
 That 's fine stuff for children ! Chances are that if the Marxes proceed with their law office continuity along lines like this they will never be able to hold a kid listener . Firstly because parents don 't want their children to hear about bad wives and divorces , and this isn 't an agreeable theme to kids . Which means that if the Marxes don 't look out , whatever kid following they have on the screen will be totally lost to them on the air . It 's quite likely the Marxes can make themselves on the air . But they will have to use more <unk> than their first effort displayed . 
 Despite the content , Groucho 's 13 @-@ year @-@ old son Arthur found the show " extremely funny " , albeit conceding that he may have been " a very easy audience " . 
 Following the airing of the first episodes , a New York attorney named Morris Beagle filed a lawsuit for $ 300 @,@ 000 alleging his name had been slandered , and that its use was damaging his business and his health . He also claimed that people were calling his law firm and asking , " Is this Mr. Beagle ? " When he answered , " Yes " , the callers would say , " How 's your partner , Shyster ? " and hang up the phone . The sponsors and studio executives panicked , and from episode four the title of the show was changed to " Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel " , and Walter T. Beagle was renamed Waldorf T. Flywheel . It was explained in the episode that the character had divorced and reverted to his " maiden name " . 
 The CAB Rating for the show was 22 @.@ 1 % and placed 12th among the highest rated evening programs of the 1932 – 33 season . The CAB Rating was not disappointing – popular established shows such as The Shadow and The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes did not perform as well – but it was less than half of Texaco 's Fire Chief , which got a 44 @.@ 8 % CAB Rating and was the third highest @-@ rated program of the season . One reason for the lower ratings may be because of the time slot the show aired . In September 1932 , only 40 % of radio owners were listening to the radio at 7 : 00 p.m. , whereas 60 % listened at 9 : 00 p.m. The 1932 – 1933 season 's top @-@ rated shows , The Chase and Sanborn Hour , Jack Pearl 's Baron Münchhausen , and Fire Chief all aired after 9 : 00 p.m. Standard Oil decided it could not compete with Texaco in the ratings and Five @-@ Star Theater was not renewed for a second season . 
 In his 1959 autobiography , Groucho and Me , Groucho comments , " We thought we were doing pretty well as comic lawyers , but one day a few Middle East countries decided they wanted a bigger cut of the oil profits , or else . When this news broke , the price of gasoline nervously dropped two cents a gallon , and Chico and I , along with the other shows , were dropped from the network . " In his 1976 book , The Secret Word Is Groucho , he writes , " Company sales , as a result of our show , had risen precipitously . Profits doubled in that brief time , and Esso felt guilty taking the money . So Esso dropped us after twenty @-@ six weeks . Those were the days of guilt @-@ edged securities , which don 't exist today . " 
 However , the show was later praised by other comedians of the time . In 1988 , Steve Allen said , " when judged in relation to other radio comedy scripts of the early 30s , they hold up very well indeed and are , in fact , superior to the material that was produced for the Eddie Cantor , Rudy Vallee , Joe Penner school . The rapid @-@ fire jokes [ ... ] run the gamut from delightful to embarrassing . " George Burns also found it " funny " . Modern reviews of Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel have also been positive . The New York Times ' Herbert Mitgang described it as " one of the funniest [ ... ] radio shows of the early 1930s " , adding that " the radio dialogue was so witty and outrageous , [ an ] innocent form of original comedy – as well as serious drama " . Rob White of the British Film Institute said the show " glitter [ s ] with a thousand @-@ and @-@ one <unk> . " 
 = = Rediscovery of the show = = 
 The episodes of Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel were recorded , but for many years it was thought the recordings had not been preserved . At the time of the broadcasts , pre @-@ recorded shows were frowned upon by advertisers and audiences . However , in 1988 , Michael Barson , who worked in the United States Copyright Office at the Library of Congress discovered that the scripts for twenty @-@ five of the twenty @-@ six episodes had been submitted to the Office , where they had been placed in storage . Nobody was aware that they still existed and their copyrights had not been renewed . This meant that Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel had fallen into the public domain . The scripts were published that same year by Pantheon in a book titled Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel : The Marx Brothers ' Lost Radio Show , edited by Michael Barson and with an interview with Perrin . In October 1988 , Flywheel , Shyster and Flywheel scenes were broadcast for the first time since the show went off the air in 1933 when National Public Radio , a non @-@ profit media organization that provides content to public radio stations around the United States , aired an 18 @-@ minute recreation of Flywheel , Shyster and Flywheel in markets such as Chicago , Illinois , Dallas , Texas , and Los Angeles , California , using Washington , D.C.-based Arena Stage actors to perform the Chico and Groucho lead roles from the published scripts . Years later , three recordings of Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel were found , including a five @-@ minute excerpt of Episode 24 and a fifteen @-@ minute recording of Episode 25 . A complete recording of Episode 26 exists and was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 2005 . 
 = = BBC Radio adaptation = = 
 In 1990 the British Broadcasting Corporation 's Radio 4 aired a version of Flywheel , Shyster , and Flywheel . Michael Roberts and Frank Lazarus performed the lead roles of Flywheel and Ravelli , wearing make @-@ up and clothing similar to Groucho and Chico . The cast also included Lorelei King in all the female roles and guest @-@ starred Spike Milligan and Dick Vosburgh . The scripts for the BBC series were adapted for a modern British audience by Mark <unk> and were produced and directed by Dirk Maggs . Each episode incorporated material from two or three different original episodes , and occasionally included additional jokes from Marx Brothers ' films . 
 Commenting on the series , Maggs has said it was his favorite among the comedies he had directed , and described how they were performed . 
 The great thing about audience shows is doing the effects live on stage . BBC Radio Light Entertainment tended to have the effects operator hidden away behind curtains so they wouldn 't distract the audience ! A few Light Entertainment Producers like me have reasoned over the years that the spot effects are part of the entertainment so we brought the operator out front . And in the case of Flywheel we dressed him or her up as Harpo ! Michael Roberts who played Groucho came out with such good ad libs that I was always happy to cut scripted gags to keep them . One great one was when he and Frank as Flywheel and Ravelli find themselves in a pigsty – the rest of the cast pushed in to make pig voices – and Mike ad libbed , " Imagine – two nice Jewish boys surrounded by ham " – it brought the house down . 
 Six episodes were performed and recorded at the Paris Theatre and aired weekly between June 2 and July 7 , 1990 . The success of the first series led to another two being commissioned . The second series aired from May 11 to June 15 , 1991 , and the third from July 11 to August 15 , 1992 . The first series was made available by BBC Enterprises on a two @-@ cassette release in 1991 , but the second and third series were not . 
 = Loring Air Force Base = 
 Loring Air Force Base ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) was a United States Air Force installation in northeastern Maine , near Limestone and Caribou in Aroostook County . It was one of the largest bases of the U.S. Air Force 's Strategic Air Command during its existence , and was transferred to the newly created Air Combat Command in 1992 . 
 The base 's origins began in 1947 with an order for construction of an airfield by the New England Division of the United States Army Corps of Engineers . The chosen site , in northeastern Maine within both Limestone Township and Caswell Plantation , was the closest point in the continental U.S. to Europe , providing high strategic value during the Cold War . The base was originally named Limestone Army Air Field , and was renamed Limestone Air Force Base following the establishment of the Air Force in 1947 . It was named in 1954 for Major Charles J. Loring , Jr . , USAF , a Medal of Honor recipient during the Korean War . From 1951 to 1962 , it was co @-@ located next to Caribou Air Force Station . 
 Loring was home to a civilian population , many of whom were employed alongside active duty service members . The base included many amenities , such as a hospital , school , and ski hill , which facilitated the adjustment to Maine life by the civilians . 
 The 1991 Base Realignment and Closure Commission recommended that Loring be closed and its aircraft and mission be distributed to other bases in the nation . The base was closed in September 1994 after over forty years of service . It was redeveloped by the Loring Development Authority as the Loring Commerce Centre , an industrial and aviation park ; the airfield is operated as Loring International Airport . 
 = = Overview = = 
 For the majority of its operational lifetime , Loring was a heavy bomber , aerial refueling , and interception facility for military aircraft , equipment , and supplies first as part of Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) ( 1947 – 1992 ) , then as part of the succeeding Air Combat Command ( ACC ) ( 1992 – 1994 ) . 
 Loring was planned in 1947 as Limestone Army Air Field and was designed with a capacity of over 100 B @-@ 36 Peacemaker strategic bombers . This plan was only partially completed due to budget constraints , but , over time , Loring became one of the largest air bases of SAC . After the B @-@ 36 was phased out , the B @-@ 52 Stratofortress was based at Loring , first with D models , then with B @-@ 52Gs . The Boeing KC @-@ 97 Stratofreighter was also based there for a number of years , until it was replaced by the better @-@ known KC @-@ 135A Stratotanker . 
 Loring was also home to many facilities that were a part of the base , or were nearby . Caribou Air Force Station was the weapons storage area that operated separately from Loring until it was absorbed in 1961 . Caswell Air Force Station operated to the east , but had a unit associated with Loring before it became fully operational . On @-@ base facilities included the Alert Area , which operated as a separate facility within Loring , due to crews being constantly stationed on alert . The Double <unk> Hangar was the largest hangar at the facility , with the capacity to hold six parked B @-@ 52s , or five B @-@ 36s . 
 One of Loring 's major secondary missions included serving as the headquarters for the 45th Air Division from 8 October 1954 to 18 January 1958 , and on 20 November 1958 . The host wing at Loring was the 42d Bombardment Wing for all but a small portion of its early existence . Loring was primarily home to active duty units , although this changed in the 1980s , when the Massachusetts Air National Guard 's 101st Fighter Squadron sent a detachment to Loring . As the base was the closest in the U.S. to Europe , it also functioned as an important stopover point . 
 The 1991 Base Realignment and Closure Commission recommended closure of Loring AFB and it was officially closed in September 1994 . It was later reopened as the Loring Commerce Centre . 
 = = Major units = = 
 = = = 42nd Bomb Wing = = = 
 The 42nd Bomb Wing was the host unit at Loring AFB from 1953 until 1994 , supporting national security objectives with mission @-@ ready B @-@ 52G Stratofortresses , and KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker aircraft . The wing had the ability to deploy at any time to support both SAC , and later , ACC missions . It was operational at Loring from 1953 to 1994 . 
 The 42nd Operations Group ( OG ) formerly supported national security objectives , as directed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff , utilizing B @-@ 52 and KC @-@ 135 aircraft . Operational squadrons during the time of its operation at Loring included : 
 69th Bombardment Squadron ( B @-@ 52 , 1952 – 1991 ) 
 70th Bombardment Squadron ( B @-@ 52 , 1953 – 1966 ) 
 75th Bombardment Squadron ( B @-@ 52 , 1953 – 1956 ) 
 42d Air Refueling Squadron ( KC @-@ 135 , 1955 – 1994 ) 
 <unk> Air Refueling Squadron ( KC @-@ 135 , 1968 – 1990 ) 
 All B @-@ 52s carried the " LZ " <unk> . In addition to the 42nd OG , other components of the 42nd Bomb Wing were : 
 42nd Organizational Maintenance Squadron 
 42nd Field Maintenance Squadron 
 42nd Avionics Maintenance Squadron 
 42nd Munitions Maintenance Squadron 
 42nd Combat Support Group 
 42nd Transportation Squadron 
 42nd Supply Squadron 
 42nd Civil Engineering Squadron 
 42nd Consolidated headquarters Squadron 
 42nd Security Police Squadron 
 42nd Airborne Missile Maintenance Squadron ( 1964 – 1974 ) , responsible for maintenance of missiles that were fitted onto the B @-@ 52s 
 <unk> Communications Squadron , Air Force Communications Command unit absorbed into 42nd Bomb Wing in 1990 
 In 1991 , it was announced that Loring would close in 1994 . This led to the 42nd being moved to Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama , where it became the 42nd Air Base Wing . All other squadrons of the wing were inactivated and have remained inactive , except for the 69th , which was reactivated in 2009 at Minot Air Force Base . 
 = = History = = 
 Loring AFB was named in 1954 for Major Charles J. Loring , Jr . , USAF , a Medal of Honor recipient during the Korean War . During the morning of 22 November 1952 , he led a flight of F @-@ 80 Shooting Stars on patrol over <unk> . After beginning a dive bombing run and getting hit , he entered into a controlled dive and destroyed a Chinese gun emplacement on Sniper Ridge that was harassing United Nations troops . Limestone Air Force Base was renamed in his honor . 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 Designations of Loring Air Force Base : 
 Limestone Army Air Field ( 15 April 1947 – 5 June 1950 ) 
 Limestone Air Force Base ( 5 June 1950 – 1 October 1954 ) 
 = = = Major commands assigned = = = 
 Major commands to which the base was assigned : 
 Strategic Air Command , 15 April 1947 – 1 June 1992 
 Air Combat Command , 1 June 1992 – 30 September 1994 
 = = = Major units assigned = = = 
 Major units which were assigned to Loring : 
 = = = Operational history = = = 
 = = = = Origins = = = = 
 Loring AFB was carved out of the woods of Maine beginning in the late forties and officially dedicated in 1953 , named after Charles J. Loring , Jr . , who was killed in the Korean War . The closest Air Force base on the east coast to Europe , it was originally built with a capacity of 100 B @-@ 36 Peacemaker bombers and equipped with a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) runway . 
 Loring was built on 14 @,@ 300 acres ( 58 km2 ) of land , making it the biggest SAC base in the country . This in turn allowed for it to have the largest capacity for weapon storage and for fuel storage in all of SAC . ( Its overall capacity ranked second among all 21 SAC bases ) . The weapons storage capacity was the highest in all of SAC , 10 @,@ 247 @,@ 882 NEW ( Net Explosive Weight ) , and it was first in all of SAC in fuel storage capacity ( 9 @,@ 193 @,@ 374 gallons ) . Fuel was delivered to the base via a 200 @-@ mile pipeline to <unk> , Maine . Ramp space at Loring exceeded 1 @.@ 1 million square yards , which made it second among all SAC bases in total ramp space , and first in excess ramp space . Furthermore , it was one of two fully capable conventional weapons storage facilities in <unk> maintained by SAC . 
 During the Cold War , new U.S. Air Force bases were constructed along the northern border of the continental U.S. ; their most direct route to the Soviet Union was through the Arctic Circle . These sites were high @-@ importance strategic bases for hosting long @-@ range missiles and aircraft . In 1947 , the New England Division of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers chose a site in northeastern Maine , within both the Limestone Township and Caswell Plantation . The remote site consisted mostly of dense forest , shallow marshes , and wild blueberry bogs , on a slight plateau over the town , which helped keep it above the fog most of the time . Only a small part of the base was suitable for farming , so there was little impact on Aroostook County 's agricultural community . Additionally , Loring was not far from sources of materials for runway , taxiway , and parking apron construction . The most important benefit of the site was that it was a few hundred miles closer than any other base to potential targets in Europe . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 On 15 April 1947 , construction commenced on Limestone Army Air Field , the first Strategic Air Command base designed and built to host high @-@ speed aircraft , including the new B @-@ 36 Peacemaker . Original plans for Limestone called for two parallel north − south runways , a 12 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 660 m ) east − west runway , and accommodations for over 100 aircraft . The multimillion @-@ dollar project was not built to the specifications of the original Army Corps of Engineers plan , and only one north − south runway was constructed . 
 On 23 May , a 17 @-@ million @-@ dollar contract was awarded to two companies , with the aim of completing the first phase of construction . This included the north − south runway , a parallel taxiway ( <unk> J ) , a parking apron , the Arch Hangar , a base operations building , a control tower , a power plant , a 250 @-@ person barracks ( which would later become Building 6000 ) , a water supply system , and a railroad spur to the base ( now part of the Montreal , Maine and Atlantic Railway ) . 
 One of the first structures was the Arch Hangar . At the time , it was the largest monolithic arch roof structure in the United States , and one of the largest hangars in the world . The construction of the hangar was also groundbreaking , including a foundation set on bedrock , extensive footing structures , intricate formwork , and a 340 @-@ foot arch span . 
 The runway was another major construction task . The airfield in northern Maine was subject to freeze @-@ thaw cycles and had bogs and various types of groundcover ; 2 @.@ 1 million cubic yards of material was removed . The foundation of the runway was constructed to a depth of 70 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) of a flexible bituminous @-@ concrete pavement . This was all done on a runway that was 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 050 m ) in length and 300 feet ( 90 m ) wide . 
 The month of June 1950 began 44 years of constant activity at Limestone . On the 10th , the 7 officers and 78 airmen of the Limestone Detachment arrived , as the tenant unit during construction . Two days later , an aircraft from Oklahoma arrived . On the 15th , limited operations began at Limestone , as Cold War tensions began to heat up . The next day , a B @-@ 36 Peacemaker arrived and later departed . 1 July brought the re @-@ designation of the Limestone Detachment as the <unk> Base Service Squadron . After the Korean War broke out , the decision was made to increase the squadron 's size to 28 officers , 340 airmen , and 20 civilians . August brought the first permanently assigned aircraft , a C @-@ 47 Skytrain , and more aircraft using the base as a stopover between the States and Europe . 
 The war brought increased funding to Limestone in 1951 . Eight additional hangars were constructed at the southwestern end of the runway , as well as a 2 @,@ 100 @-@ foot ( 640 m ) addition to the northern end of the runway . The Department of Defense allocated funds for the North River Depot , a weapons storage facility to the northwest of the base . It later became Caribou Air Force Station and was absorbed into the facility in the 1960s . The end of the year brought the completion of a communications facility , a hospital , three barracks , a school , an officers club , a bakery , and a briefing and training building . The base was one of the first constructed after World War II and also one of the first to retain as much surrounding vegetation as possible in case there was a need to camouflage the airfield and surrounding facilities . It ditched the traditional layout of a grid system for roads . 
 Hangars were built for the additional aircraft at the base , including the 250 @-@ by @-@ 600 @-@ foot ( 80 by 180 m ) double cantilever hangar , one of the first built by the Air Force in response to a demand for more efficient maintenance space ; it could house five B @-@ 36 Peacemakers and six B @-@ 52 Stratofortresses , and nine planned concrete arch hangars were no longer needed . 
 The runway was resurfaced in 1955 in anticipation of the arrival of the B @-@ 52 Stratofortress in 1956 . Eighteen additional " nose @-@ dock " hangars ( hangars which could contain the nose and wings of the aircraft , allowing for maintenance to the cockpit area by the crew , without the need to use the larger hangars ) were built in 1956 to the northwest of the runway , near the main parking area , along with parking areas and taxiways for these hangars . 
 = = = = Early history = = = = 
 On 8 February 1953 , Curtis E. Lemay , Commander of SAC , visited the base to review the construction 's progress . During this visit , he indicated that Limestone was operationally ready . Later that month , command capabilities were formally transferred to SAC , ending an almost six @-@ year command by the Army Corps of Engineers . Furthermore , personnel of the <unk> Base Service Squadron were reassigned to the 42d Bombardment Wing , which was reactivated and assigned to the 8th Air Force . On 23 February , Limestone Air Force Base officially became operational . 
 During the first few months , the wing was not assigned any aircraft , and thus worked with other units who were in possession of the B @-@ 36 Peacemaker . In March and April , the base began preparing for operations of the B @-@ 36 , which arrived later in April . This gave the newly activated 69th Bombardment Squadron a full complement of aircraft . By the end of August , the number had increased to 27 bombers , 322 officers , 313 airmen , and 350 civilians . Additionally , more buildings were constructed on base , making it more of a home for airmen and their families . 
 January 1954 brought the declaration of the 42nd being capable of implementing its Emergency War Plan . On 1 October , the base was renamed after Charles Loring Jr . , and became " Loring Air Force Base " . One week later , the 45th Air Division was activated at Loring and designated the primary base unit . It was also designated that month as the primary staging location for fighter aircraft flying out of the Continental United States to and from Europe . Loring had 63 permanent aircraft assigned , and air traffic was significantly increased . 
 As the Cold War progressed , so did the need for new aircraft and techniques . The first KC @-@ 97 Stratofreighter arrived at Loring with the activation of the 42d Air Refueling Squadron in January 1955 . The B @-@ 36 's were not actually equipped to perform aerial refueling , so the planes supported other units until the arrival of the B @-@ 52 in 1956 . Eventually , 21 tankers were based at Loring , along with 30 air crews . 
 By 1955 , the base consisted of the 42d , 69th , 70th , and the 75th Bombardment Squadrons . A hospital became operational . The next January , a B @-@ 52 landed at the airfield as part of a cold weather testing program . Five months later , the first Stratofortress , the " State of Maine " , was permanently stationed at Loring . 
 In November 1956 , the Air Force used the base for publicity . On 10 November , the Soviet Union threatened to oust British and French troops from the Middle East , days after the end of the Suez Crisis . After a response by president Dwight D. Eisenhower to the United Nations , a reporter with the Associated Press visited Castle Air Force Base in California after SAC was alerted to support whatever action the U.S. might take . The reporter was unable to find out classified information , and instead invented maintenance records of the fleet that painted a dismal picture . On 24 and 25 November , four B @-@ 52 's of the 93rd Bombardment Wing and the 42nd flew nonstop around the perimeter of North America in Operation Quick Kick , which covered 15 @,@ 530 mi ( 13 @,@ 500 nmi ; 24 @,@ 990 km ) in 31 hours , 30 minutes . SAC noted the flight time could have been reduced by 5 to 6 hours if the four inflight refuelings had been done by fast jet @-@ powered tanker aircraft rather than propeller @-@ driven KC @-@ 97 <unk> . After the flight ended , the planes landed at Friendship International Airport . The operation distracted public attention from the reporter 's story . 
 The base was also the location of an experimental system of steam pipes in 1957 , to test the viability of using steam to melt the snow on the runways . Pipes were spaced at different intervals in the experiment . That same year , the first KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker , christened the " Aroostook Queen " , arrived at Loring . By December , all of the KC @-@ 97s had left , and by April 1958 , 20 KC @-@ <unk> had arrived , allowing the 42nd Air Refueling Squadron to reach full operational capacity in May . Later that year , an alert force was created at Loring , consisting of six B @-@ 52 's . The following year , in response to a conflict in Lebanon , the entire wing was placed on alert . 
 An Alert Force was established at Loring AFB in October 1957 . The wing began supporting the force with six B @-@ 52s in January 1958 . In response to a conflict in Lebanon , the Alert Force was expanded to include the entire bombardment wing in July 1958 , when the SAC bomber force went to full alert status . SAC 's overall goal was achieved in 1960 . 
 On 11 March 1958 , base personnel were the first members of the Air Force to land a B @-@ 52 in a belly @-@ up configuration at Westover AFB near Springfield , Massachusetts . After being lifted up and onto its wheels , the plane was flown to Kelly AFB at San Antonio , Texas , for a complete overhaul and inspection , before it was returned to the 42nd . 
 Loring was also home to an administrations support base of a Green Pine communications crew from Naval Station Argentia . The detachment did not even officially exist on the base , even though it was located on the top floor of the Bachelors Officers Quarters and consisted of six men . 
 = = = = = Assigned aircraft = = = = = 
 Various aircraft were assigned to the base , including the massive B @-@ 36 Peacemaker , which was assigned to the 42d Bombardment Wing from 1 April 1953 to 6 September 1956 ; the KC @-@ <unk> Stratotanker , which was assigned from 15 February 1955 to 16 December 1957 ; the B @-@ 52C Stratofortress , which was assigned 16 June 1956 to January 1957 ; the | KC @-@ 135A Stratotanker , which was assigned from 16 October 1957 to 7 May 1990 ; the B @-@ 52G , which was assigned from January 1957 to 16 November 1993 ; and the KC @-@ 135R , which was assigned from 1990 to March 1994 . 
 Fighter aircraft were also assigned to the base during its operation . The F @-@ 102 Delta Dagger , which was assigned to the 27th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron , was located on base from 1957 to 1960 while the F @-@ 106 Delta Dart was assigned from 16 October 1959 to 1 July 1971 , and to the <unk> Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron from July 1971 to June 1972 . 
 = = = = = Weapons Storage Area = = = = = 
 The Nuclear Weapons Storage Area at Loring once operated as a separate , top secret facility . Originally called the North River Depot , the remote area to the northeast of Loring 's property was the first U.S. operational site specifically constructed for the storage , assembly , and testing of atomic weapons . 
 In 1951 , the Department of Defense ( DOD ) allocated funds for the construction of an ordnance storage site at Loring AFB . The designs called for a self @-@ sufficient " maximum security storage area for the most advanced weapons of mankind " . The mission of the facility would be the protection and maintenance of the weapons used by SAC . The facility was in the northeast comer of the base , and construction began on 4 August 1951 . In addition to 28 storage igloos and other weapons storage structures , the facility included weapons maintenance buildings , barracks , recreational facilities , a warehouse , and offices . 
 A parallel series of four fences , one of which was electrified , surrounded the heart of the storage area . This area was nicknamed the " Q " Area , which denoted the Department of Energy 's Q clearance required to have access to Restricted Data . 
 In June 1962 , the Atomic Energy Commission released its custody and ownership of the weapons to the Air Force . The personnel and property of the later named Caribou Air Force Station were absorbed into the adjacent Loring Air Force Base . 
 = = = = = Nike defense area = = = = = 
 To provide air defense of the base , four United States Army Nike @-@ Hercules surface @-@ to @-@ air missile sites were constructed during 1956 . Sites were located near Caribou ( L @-@ 58 ) 46 ° 53 ′ 02 ″ N 068 ° 00 ′ 32 ″ W ; Caswell ( L @-@ 13 ) 47 ° 01 ′ 42 ″ N 067 ° 48 ′ 35 ″ W ; Connor <unk> . ( L @-@ 85 ) 47 ° 00 ′ 29 ″ N 068 ° 01 ′ 06 ″ W , and Limestone ( L @-@ 31 ) 46 ° 55 ′ 04 ″ N 067 ° 47 ′ 32 ″ W Maine . 
 The New England Division of the Army Corps of Engineers managed the construction of these sites . The sites were manned by men from the 3rd Missile Battalion , 61st Air Defense Artillery Regiment , and provided defense for Loring and the northeastern approaches to the United States . In 1960 , sites L @-@ 13 and L @-@ 58 underwent conversion from Ajax missiles to the MIM @-@ 14 Nike @-@ Hercules missiles . These sites remained operational until 1966 , although the site at Limestone was closed in September 1958 . 
 Members of the 3rd Missile Battalion gained distinction in November 1958 during the Annual Service Practice wargames at Fort Bliss in Texas when they simulated launching 12 Nike Ajax missiles and recorded 12 kills – a United States Army Air Defense Command first . 
 = = = = = Operation Head Start = = = = = 
 Operation Head Start was conducted at the base from September to December 1958 . It helped to demonstrate that a continuous airborne alert could be maintained successfully . 
 Before each flight , a briefing was held , alerting the crewmembers to basic world events as well as safety criteria . At least 15 hours before takeoff , the crew would thoroughly pre @-@ flight their aircraft . Inadvertently , this also increased efficiency in terms of maintenance and other pre @-@ flight routines . 
 Every six hours , a bomber would take off with live warheads and continue on a pre @-@ determined path over Greenland and eastern Canada , a trip that ended 20 hours later . Frequently , " Foxtrot : No message required " messages were sent to the bomber from Strategic Air Command headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base , keeping the crews alert . 
 While entering the landing pattern , crash trucks would travel to the runway and await landing . This was standard procedure for all Head Start landings . After landing , the crew was interrogated prior to being released , so that maintenance , intelligence , and other crews could be alerted to the performance of the plane and other items that the crew might have noticed during their flight . After release , they would typically go to the Physical Conditioning room for a steam bath and <unk> . 
 Operation Head Start eventually lead to Operation Chrome Dome . Chrome Dome was an operation where bombers would be in constant airborne alert and loiter at points just outside the Soviet Union . 
 = = = = Second @-@ half of the Cold War = = = = 
 Although it is unknown when it was opened , Loring was host to a Conventional Enhanced Release Training bomb range , which was located adjacent to the runway . Loring was one of four Strategic Air Command bases with a range of this type , and it was used frequently . The base was also located next to Condor 1 and Condor 2 airspace , which allowed for low @-@ level training . The routes and training opportunities within the restricted airspace allowed training to be accomplished . One disadvantage of the location of Loring was its distance from the Strategic Training Route Complex and bombing ranges in Nevada and Utah . The ranges out west were the only location where the B @-@ 52s were allowed to drop live munitions , although SAC training only required crews to drop live munitions twice a year on these ranges . 
 In 1974 , President Richard Nixon stopped at Loring on 3 July in Air Force One ( SAM 27000 ) as he returned from a summit in Moscow , where he and Leonid <unk> had signed the Threshold Test Ban Treaty . In a speech in front of 5 @,@ 000 people in the double cantilever hangar , he talked about the importance of the treaty . President and Mrs. Nixon were welcomed home by vice president Gerald R. Ford , who flew from Washington . His daughter Julie Nixon Eisenhower was also in attendance . Nixon resigned from office five weeks later . 
 On 11 March 1976 , SAC headquarters announced that the 42d Bombardment Wing would be inactivated , citing the poor condition of Loring 's facilities . In 1976 , it was estimated that Loring needed up to $ 300 million in facilities improvements . Between 1976 and 1979 , considerable debate took place over the strategic importance of Loring , resulting in a reversal of the Air Force decision to close Loring . When the decision to keep Loring AFB open was made in 1979 , Congress committed itself to upgrading Loring 's facilities . After 1981 , nearly $ 300 million in military construction and operations and maintenance funds were spent to upgrade the facilities . Congressman Tip O 'Neill of Massachusetts and Senator William Cohen of Maine were firm supporters of the base during the time when it was proposed to be closed . 
 During the time that Loring was proposed for closure , the region experienced economic uncertainty . Once the Air Force made its intent known in 1976 , property values plummeted , and people delayed buying homes , fearing that they would need to relocate . The reduction in the base of around 80 % meant that possibly 60 % of Aroostook County would need to relocate , according to county officials . A $ 25 @,@ 000 study , commissioned by the Department of Labor and conducted at Northeastern University , calculated that the region had lost over $ 14 million in these three years of economic uncertainty . 
 On 5 September 1983 , members of the 42d Air Refueling Squadron escorted a crippled F @-@ 4E Phantom II over the Atlantic Ocean after it experienced the loss of an engine . For its actions , crew E @-@ 113 received the Mackay Trophy for refueling it four times and towing it with its refueling boom . 
 In 1988 , the Air Force decided to close three of its nuclear weapons stations at its SAC bases . In addition to Loring , other bases around the world were scaled back . As the B @-@ 1B Lancer was now predicted to become the mainstay of nuclear defense for the country , Loring was deemed unnecessary for nuclear weapons stationing . That same year , fears began to surface that Loring would be an on the list of the 1988 Base Realignment and Closure Commission . As a result , the community began to rally around the base , which at the time included 3 @,@ 800 military personnel , 1 @,@ 000 civilian employees , generated an $ 80 million payroll the previous year , and was the subject of $ 34 million in construction services . 
 In 1981 , Loring 's bombers were placed on alert after Soviet submarines were spotted off the coast of the region . The base was briefly mentioned in the 1983 movie WarGames , although the film erroneously listed Loring as being home to the 43rd Bombardment Wing . In 1982 , the base was hit by two earthquakes , which damaged the base hospital and caused cracks to appear on the walls of the control tower . 
 The 5th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron based at Minot AFB in North Dakota maintained a detachment of three F @-@ 15 Eagles at Loring . When the 5th was inactivated in 1987 , F @-@ 4 Phantom II 's from the Minnesota Air National Guard 's 148th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Group 's 179th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron sent a detachment to Loring . After the detachment left , the Massachusetts Air National Guard 's 102nd Fighter Interceptor Wing 's 101st Fighter @-@ Interceptor Squadron deployed F @-@ 15s to the base , the same ones that were part of the 5th . A second north @-@ south runway , one that had been in the Loring 's original plans , was created on <unk> J as a " pre @-@ launch survivability " runway . This made Loring one of three SAC bases with two runways . 
 In 1989 , it was proposed to list Loring on the Environmental Protection Agency 's National Priorities List . This was due to the presence of waste oil , fuel , solvents , and pesticides in the soil . Additionally , the burning of waste also created problems , in addition to the use of landfills in old gravel pits on site . The fire training area also needed clean up , as materials were burned until 1974 on that site . Loring was officially added to the list in February 1990 . 
 During Operation Desert Storm , Loring 's tankers were responsible for refueling aircraft transiting the Atlantic . It was also used as a stopover for aircraft travelling to the Persian Gulf region due to its vital position . The base was also vital because it allowed planes to be maintained , planes which sometimes would be unable to reach their destination without maintenance . Between 2 August 1990 and 10 May 1991 , more than 1 @,@ 700 aircraft transiting between America and the Persian Gulf region landed at Loring . These included the C @-@ 141 <unk> , C @-@ 5 Galaxy , C @-@ 130 Hercules , C @-@ 21A , A @-@ 4 Skyhawk , A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II , Boeing 707 , F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon , F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , F @-@ 111 Aardvark , P @-@ 3 Orion , TR @-@ 1A <unk> , U @-@ 2 <unk> , B @-@ 52 Stratofortress , KC @-@ 10 Extender , KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker , E @-@ 3A Sentry , EA @-@ 6B Mercury , and E @-@ 8A Joint Stars aircraft . 
 = = = = = UFO sighting = = = = = 
 During the fall of 1975 , the base was the location of unidentified flying object sightings . During the night of 27 October , an unidentified object was spotted hovering near the secure weapons area ( the former Caribou AFS ) . Around 1945 hrs , a member of the 42nd Security Police Squadron spotted an apparent aircraft over the northern perimeter of Loring , at a low altitude . A later teletype message to the National Military Command Center in Washington , D.C. , stated : " The A / C [ aircraft ] definitely penetrated the <unk> [ Loring Air Force Base ] northern perimeter and on one occasion was within 300 yards ( 270 m ) of the munitions storage area perimeter . " In the control tower , a member of the <unk> Communications Squadron was on duty , when he picked up the craft on radar , nearing the base . After trying to contact the unidentified aircraft to warn it that it was approaching a restricted area , the aircraft entered the airspace over the nuclear weapons storage area and hovered over it at an altitude of 300 feet ( 91 m ) , later lowering to 150 feet ( 46 m ) . Commander of the 42d Bombardment Wing , Colonel Robert E. Chapman arrived 15 minutes later at the weapons storage area and police units were ordered in as well . At this time , he also declared a Security Option 3 . 
 At 2045 hrs , another person on duty in the control tower received a call to track the mysterious craft on radar . For the next 40 minutes , it was observed circling around the weapons storage area , when it suddenly vanished , as though it had landed or dropped below the radar . Witnesses later observed it flying away towards Grand Falls , New Brunswick , twelve miles to the east . Messages were sent to the National Military Command Center , the Air Force Chief of Staff , and Strategic Air Command headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base . The base continued to remain on a high state of alert until the following morning , as efforts to identify the unidentified aircraft through the Maine State Police , local police departments , and the Houlton Federal Aviation Administration office remained elusive . 
 The next night at 1945 hrs , a craft similar to the one the night before approached the base . In addition to being tracked on radar , it hovered around the area for 30 minutes , with characteristics of movement similar to a helicopter . Additionally , it hovered above the weapons storage area at the same altitude as the night before . At this time , possibly another object ( it is unclear if it was the same one as the over the weapons storage area , but it is possible ) was spotted over the flightline . The cigar @-@ shaped object was described as hovering in mid @-@ air , jerking around , and turning on and off its lights once . During the blackout , it traveled from the flightline , to the northern end of the runway . According to one service member , the object was chased , and eventually discovered to be hovering five feet off the ground . During this time , it was determined that the object was four car lengths long . 
 Once again , the object was tracked on radar , taking off towards New Brunswick . Teletype messages were again sent to higher commands , with no explanation being found . One teletype sent on November from Loring 's Office of Special Investigations detachment to the National Military Command Center and OSI headquarters reported another , " unidentified helicopter sighted at low level over Loring AFB " over the past two nights ( 31 October – 1 November ) . It also referred to the intruder as an " unknown entity . " Additionally , Captain Richard R. <unk> an Operations Officer in the 42nd Security Police Squadron ( SPS ) stated , " ... advised that there had been three verified sightings of an unidentified A / C [ aircraft ] flying at low level over and in the vicinity of <unk> " during this period . An initial sighting was made by a member of the 42nd , who was on duty at 23 : 14 hours Another member spotted the object near the East Gate , going from east to west . 
 = = = = = BRAC 1991 and closure = = = = = 
 In 1991 , Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney , upon the recommendation of Secretary of the Air Force Donald B. Rice , identified Loring and five other SAC bases for closure through the BRAC Commission . The commission recommended that the 42d Bomb Wing be disestablished , and the B @-@ 52Gs transferred to the 410th Bomb Wing at K.I. Sawyer AFB near Marquette , Michigan . The KC @-@ 135 aircraft were realigned to USAF Reserve and other active units . 
 The justification for the closure of Loring was that the Air Force had six more strategic bases than were needed to support the number of bomber and tanker aircraft in the Defense Department 's Structure Plan . The base was evaluated against eight selection criteria and a large number of <unk> specific to Air Force bases and missions . Even though Loring was in good condition and had strong community support , it ranked low in the criteria when compared to twenty other bases in the strategic category . One of the things that hurt Loring was its limited peacetime value as a tanker base , as well as its distance from bombing ranges . The commission did note that the facilities at Loring were above average , and the cost to close Loring would be low , the latter of which contributed to its closure . 
 The commission also projected an impact on the future of the community ; 22 @,@ 000 people were projected to leave the region with 9 @,@ 900 direct and indirect jobs affected , and a loss of over $ 92 million of regional income . This was in contrast to a regional population of over 49 @,@ 100 , available jobs of 33 @,@ 320 , and an annual income of $ 755 million . The net savings by the end of 1997 from closing the base was $ 182 million , or about $ 61 @.@ 8 million annually . 
 As the Cold War ended , so did the mission of SAC , and it was disestablished on 1 June 1992 . The last B @-@ 52 departed Loring in November 1993 , and ceremonies were held in February 1994 to celebrate the end of the flying mission . The following month saw the last KC @-@ 135 depart and after 41 years , Loring AFB officially closed on 30 September 1994 . 
 = = = Accidents and incidents = = = 
 On 22 November 1958 , a B @-@ 47B Stratojet crashed while taking off from Loring , killing all four crewmembers on board . The plane belonged to a unit at McCoy Air Force Base in Orlando , Florida . The plane was described as having reached two @-@ thirds of the way down the runway , when it veered sharply to the right , eventually crashing 400 feet north of the runway . On 25 November 1958 , a KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker of the 42d Air Refueling Squadron crashed on takeoff roughly in the same area as the B @-@ 47 three days before . Two crewmembers were thrown to safety by the impact of the crash . The Air Force stated that after a four @-@ hour mission , the crewmembers were practicing taking off and landing on the runway . On 18 November 1960 , a KC @-@ 135 crashed upon landing at Loring , killing one and injuring sixteen others . The plane landed after a six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour training mission , veered off to the left of the runway , and skidded three thousand feet while on fire . Surviving crewmembers were able to use the emergency chutes to evacuate the plane safely . On 9 May 1962 , six crewmembers of a KC @-@ 135 were killed when their plane crashed during takeoff into a surrounding marsh , about fifteen hundred feet north of the runway . On 4 January 1965 , four crewmembers were killed three miles north of Loring when their KC @-@ 135 crashed into the ground after takeoff . On 5 September 1969 , a B @-@ 52 Stratofortress crashed approximately three miles north of the runway after taking off . Seven men were killed , including six crewmembers , during a Minimum Interval Takeoff drill . On 4 October 1989 a KC @-@ 135 crash killed all 4 crewmembers . The jet , which crashed about 2 @.@ 4 miles off the TransCanada highway in New Brunswick , was attempting to land at Loring . 
 Loring also had its share of incidents that did not result in fatalities over the years . On 6 March 1955 , a B @-@ 36 Peacemaker crashed and burned in a snowbank at Loring . All crewmembers were able to escape unharmed . On 26 June 1958 , a B @-@ 52D ( 55 ‑ <unk> ) burned on the ground at Loring and was destroyed . On 25 May 1969 , a KC @-@ 135A ( 56 – <unk> ) broke in two after aborting takeoff . The cause was a frozen water injection surge tube . On 19 July 1970 , a B @-@ 52G ( 58 ‑ 0208 ) also caught on fire and was destroyed on the ground . 
 = = = Base culture and civilian life = = = 
 Families at the base were able to take advantage of many of the opportunities that the facility provided for them , as life at Loring was not all military @-@ related . Although Loring was constructed with support facilities including a hospital , chapel , and schools , other forms of civilian life were added over the years as well . 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 Younger students on the base attended Damon Elementary School . Kindergarten @-@ age children would attend school in either morning or afternoon sessions , and the older students were given the standard fare of lunch offerings . Damon 's educators were rated highly in the state . Students in grades 9 through twelve attended the nearby Limestone High School . 
 To those who were no longer in secondary education , there were opportunities as well . The Northern Maine Vocational Technical Institute offered courses that would help students with introductory college @-@ level classes . Husson College offered credits to those working to earn an associate 's or baccalaureate degree in business . The nearby University of Maine at Presque Isle offered classes in the social and behavioral sciences , as well as humanities and liberal studies . Embry @-@ Riddle Aeronautical University offered a bachelor 's degree in professional aeronautics . Credits earned through these programs counted as " on campus " or " residential credit " to those who were enrolled in them . Additionally , day , evening , and night classes were offered in nearby Caribou and Presque Isle . 
 For those who wanted to earn a graduate degree , the University of Denver offered a twelve course program for those wanting to earn a Master of Science degree in systems management . Emery @-@ Riddle also offered three graduate degrees , including the Master of Aeronautical Science . The University of Maine at Presque Isle also offered a Master of Public Administration as well . 
 The base 's Education Center also provided testing service for those interested in taking exams . It provided the <unk> , <unk> Exams , SAT , ACT , the LSAT and GRE exams . The Community College of the Air Force also enrolled active duty personnel in its programs as well . Credits taken there could be transferred to other affiliated Air Force technical institutions , and personnel could qualify for commissioning programs . 
 = = = = Healthcare = = = = 
 The Loring Air Force Base Hospital had two buildings during its operation . The first , Building 3500 , which was known as the " Green Monster , " was damaged during an earthquake on 9 January 1982 . The two earthquakes , which were centered in Miramichi , New Brunswick caused irreparable structural damage to the facility , which led to it being replaced with a sturdier hospital in 1987 . The new hospital included a dental clinic and outpatient rooms , in addition to over twenty beds . Internal medicine , optometry , general surgery , pediatrics , mental health , and radiology services were also provided at the base , in addition to the 24 @-@ hour emergency support services . Veterinary services were also offered in a separate building to base personnel and their families . 
 = = = = Family services = = = = 
 Military members adjusting to Loring had many facilities available to them . This included the Family Service Center , the Family Services Lending Closet , and the Corey Center . 
 The base was also served by an independent bank , and included help for many types of financial needs , and an ATM . The Country Federal Credit Union was located right outside the facility , and helped supplement the bank itself . 
 Shopping at Loring could be completed at the Maine Exchange Shopping Mall , which was designed to be a one @-@ stop shop for the shopping needs of the residents . Goods could also be purchased at the base commissary as well , which included a Class VI store . 
 Loring also was built with a non @-@ denominational chapel , which helped to welcome new members onto the base . Services were offered to those of the Roman Catholic , Protestant denominations , and Judaic faiths . Members of the chapel also provided food for those who ate in Loring 's dining hall , and helped to share the word of God to those who were believers . 
 The base also came with its own newspaper , named <unk> . The on @-@ base newspaper helped to provide readers with information on the USAF and Strategic Air Command , as well as information on the events happening around the facility . 
 The main dining hall on base was named Dahlgren Hall , after Maine native Edward Dahlgren , who was a recipient of the Medal of Honor for his actions in World War II . 
 = = = = Leisure activities = = = = 
 When it came to leisure , the area surrounding Loring offered many options . Many recreation areas and campgrounds were located in and around the base region , with some being as far as two hundred miles away . The Morale Welfare and Recreation center offered equipment for these outings , including <unk> and tackle , as well as boat rentals . Loring 's bowling center was twenty @-@ two lanes , and one of the most modern in the area . Finally , the base library loaned books to both residents and students alike . 
 A small downhill ski area provided recreation for personnel and their dependents , operating on the base from the early 1960s until Loring 's closure in 1994 . This ski chalet also included a lighted skating rink and could be used to host events in the area . The base also offered trips to regional ski resorts periodically , and cross country skiing was offered at the local golf course . 
 The base also contained a Noncommissioned Officers Club and an Officers Club . The Noncommissioned Officers Club , or Club 42 as it was known , allowed in all military members and civilians up the GS @-@ 7 . Many varieties of food were also offered there , and it could be used for live entertainment , in addition to the booking of parties . As the Visiting Officers Quarters and the <unk> Officers Quarters were nearby , the club was also a convenient stopover for transient officers as well . 
 = = Current status = = 
 Loring AFB was set to close as a result of the 1991 Base Realignment and Closure Commission , officially closing on 30 September 1994 . Immediately , Limestone was decimated . The population of Limestone dropped 76 % , from 10 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 , in the six years following the base 's closure . Regional economic activity was severely lowered , as 19 % of the local economy was related to Loring Air Force Base . 
 One of the more immediate ideas for redevelopment of the base was to turn it into a federal prison , something which had been done previously at the former Carswell AFB in Texas when the Federal Medical Center , Carswell was opened on its grounds . Many other former Air Force facilities have had prisons opened up on their grounds as well . From the outset , there was some reluctance in the town about turning it into creating a prison culture in Limestone , but this was lessened once the government decided that it did not want to build a federal prison on the grounds of the former air base . 
 In 1998 , the former base was considered for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places , as previous studies had found that 88 buildings were eligible for inclusion on the list , including the base 's arch hangar . 
 The Loring Development Authority created the Loring Commerce Centre on 9 @,@ 472 @-@ acre ( 38 @.@ 33 km2 ) of the site . It was marketed as an " excellent solution for your business real estate needs at a very reasonable cost . " Bigelow Aerospace maintains a call center at Loring . In addition to the Sitel site , other call centers exist on the former base , as well as food processing , forestry operations , light manufacturing , and aviation services . The military has made a return to Loring over the years through the Defense Finance and Accounting Service Limestone office , a major component of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service . The 2005 Base Realignment and Closure Commission consolidated <unk> ' 26 offices into 5 , with Loring being one of the consolidation points . This facility is located in the old base hospital . 
 Cleanup continued at the base , including the removal of hazardous materials , which prevented further waste from entering the nearby Greenlaw Brook , as it received drainage from the flightline and nose dock areas . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 During the 1970s , the population of the base declined due to the possible closure of the base and the draw down in personnel from the Vietnam War . In 1972 , the base 's population was around 12 @,@ 000 , while in 1975 the population was 10 @,@ 758 . In 1978 , 9 @,@ 233 persons resided on the base , which declined to 8 @,@ 116 the next year . 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 225 people , 82 households , and 57 families residing on the former base . The population density was 27 @.@ 4 / mi ² ( 10 @.@ 6 / km ² ) . There were 355 housing units at an average density of 43 @.@ 2 / mi ² ( 16 @.@ 7 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the base was 81 @.@ 33 % White , 10 @.@ 22 % African American , 2 @.@ 22 % Asian , 5 @.@ 33 % from other races , and 0 @.@ 89 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 13 @.@ 78 % of the population . 
 = Talbot Tagora = 
 The Talbot Tagora is an executive car developed by Chrysler Europe and produced by Peugeot Société Anonyme ( PSA ) . The Tagora was marketed under the Talbot marque after PSA took over Chrysler 's European operations in 1979 . PSA presented the first production vehicle in 1980 and launched it commercially in 1981 . The Tagora fell short of sales expectations , described as a " showroom flop " just a year after its launch , and PSA cancelled the model two years later . Fewer than 20 @,@ 000 Tagora models were built , all of them at the former Simca factory in Poissy , near Paris , France . 
 = = Development = = 
 Chrysler Europe began development of the Tagora in 1976 , under the code name C9 , with the goal of replacing the unsuccessful Chrysler 180 series . Following the same development pattern as with the Horizon and Alpine models , the responsibility for the Tagora 's technical development remained in France , while the styling was devised at Chrysler 's design centre in the United Kingdom . An early proposal for the name of the car was " Simca 2000 " . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The original C9 prototype was a modern @-@ styled saloon with a low beltline and large interior dimensions made possible by the long @-@ wheelbase . The British design team initially proposed some stylistic features inspired by the Citroën SM , including a front glass panel between the headlights to accommodate the number plate , round front <unk> and rear spats . However , Chrysler management in the United States deemed these features too extravagant , so the design of the C9 became more conventional : front and rear <unk> were squared off and the spats lost , and the license plate was placed on the front bumper as on most cars . To better balance the tall silhouette , the beltline was raised . Over the course of development , the C9 also lost its vertical taillights in favour of more " fashionable " horizontal ones . 
 = = = Engine dilemma = = = 
 The main competitors in the executive vehicle market offered engines bigger than the biggest two @-@ litre straight @-@ 4 used by Chrysler Europe , and a six @-@ cylinder engine was generally expected . Consequently , the company had to seek a new engine for the Tagora . One candidate was a straight @-@ six manufactured by Mitsubishi , but it proved unsuitable for a car of this class . The other proposal was the <unk> V6 engine ( the " PRV " ) , a joint development of PSA , Renault and Volvo . Since the Tagora would be in direct competition with PSA models that used the PRV , it seemed unlikely that Chrysler would be able to procure that engine . 
 = = = Sales projections = = = 
 Chrysler Corporation approved the development of the model on the assumption that Chrysler Europe would sell 60 @,@ 000 C9 models per year , which translated into a projected 5 percent share of the executive car market . This estimate seemed achievable because Chrysler had a 7 percent market share in Europe overall . The projected sales would have covered the car 's tooling costs , with the development costs accounted for separately , as part of an independent annual budget . 
 = = = PSA takeover = = = 
 During the development of the C9 , the management of the bankruptcy @-@ threatened Chrysler Corporation decided to divest itself of its debt @-@ ridden European operations . The buyer was the French PSA Group , formed in 1976 after Peugeot took over Citroën . The deal was finalised in 1978 , in which the buyer paid US $ 1 @.@ 00 for the entirety of Chrysler Europe and its obligations . The take @-@ over was effective as of 1 January 1979 . 
 While the C9 project was well advanced , PSA already had a crowded lineup in the large vehicle segment , including the legendary Citroën CX , the slow @-@ selling Peugeot 604 and the newly launched Peugeot 505 . Nevertheless , PSA decided to move forward with the C9 project , making a few significant changes that enabled the use of their own parts . The Simca double wishbone front suspension gave way to MacPherson struts adopted from the Peugeot 505 and 604 , and the rear axle was replaced with that of the 505 , much narrower than the one originally planned , as it was designed with respect to the 505 body width . The C9 front end was extended to accommodate the optional PRV engine : now that the model belonged to PSA , using the PRV presented no problems . 
 = = Short market life = = 
 Following the renaming of Chrysler Europe 's models to the Talbot marque , the C9 was christened the Talbot Tagora , and the first batch of cars rolled out of the former Simca plant in Poissy in 1980 . The same year , PSA presented the Tagora at the Salon de l 'Automobile in Paris . Following a hands @-@ on demonstration of the model to the press in Morocco in March 1981 , the car went on sale in France in April and in the United Kingdom in May . The British billboard advertising campaign boasted " The new Talbot Tagora . Luxury and performance redefined . " 
 The Tagora was priced to overlap with high @-@ end Peugeot 505 and low @-@ end Citroën CX models , while slotting in beneath the Peugeot 604 . Its pricing was also comparable to the Renault 20 / 30 and Ford Granada . The Tagora was in the 20 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 Deutschmark bracket in Germany . During the first fifteen months of the car 's existence , in 1980 / 81 , a mere 16 @,@ 169 Tagoras were produced which was only one quarter of Chrysler 's initial projections . Sales proved insufficient even for this production level , and volumes plummeted by more than 80 percent in 1982 . In 1983 the sales figures prompted PSA to cancel the model altogether . By the time the Tagora was discontinued , only about 20 @,@ 000 had been built ; by comparison , over 116 @,@ 000 Peugeot <unk> and 74 @,@ 000 Citroën <unk> were made in 1981 alone . 
 In December 2010 , Practical Classics reported that 99 @.@ 09 percent of all UK @-@ registered Tagoras were no longer on the roads . 
 = = Powertrains and models = = 
 As with most large cars of its time , the Tagora was a rear @-@ wheel drive vehicle , with a longitudinally mounted engine . There were three engine choices , mated to four- and five @-@ speed manual transmissions or an optional three @-@ speed automatic in the case of the four @-@ cylinder engines . 
 The available models were : 
 2 @.@ 2 litre ( 2 @,@ 155 cc ) Type 180 OHC I4 , double @-@ barrel Solex carburettor , 115 metric horsepower ( 85 kW ) , 184 newton metres ( 136 lbf · ft ) . 
 The base engine was a version of the older Simca Type 180 2 @.@ 0 litre with increased displacement , as also featured in the Matra Murena . It was unrelated to either the American Chrysler K or PSA <unk> 2 @.@ 2 litre engines . Available trim levels were designated GL and GLS . The GL was the only model to feature the four @-@ speed manual transmission , and have power steering as an option as opposed to standard . It was first to be dropped , for the 1983 model year . 
 2 @.@ 3 litre ( 2 @,@ 304 cc ) <unk> OHV turbodiesel I4 , 80 metric horsepower ( 59 kW ) , 188 newton metres ( 139 lbf · ft ) . 
 This Peugeot @-@ developed turbodiesel was primarily used in the Peugeot 505 and 604 . The diesel @-@ powered version of the Tagora was designated DT . 
 2 @.@ 7 litre ( 2 @,@ 664 cc ) PRV OHC V6 , two triple @-@ barrel Weber carburettors , 166 metric horsepower ( 122 kW ) , 234 newton metres ( 173 lbf · ft ) . 
 The V6 model , which was actually badged " 2 @.@ 6 " , came in the top SX trim level , loaded with extras , but was not available with automatic transmission . The PRV engine used in the Tagora was different from the one used in contemporary Peugeot vehicles in that it was fitted with triple @-@ barrel Weber carburettors rather than fuel injection , resulting in a higher power @-@ rating . This made it the most powerful French car of its time . Nevertheless , only 1 @,@ 083 V6 Tagora models were made . 
 = = = Tagora Présidence = = = 
 The Tagora Présidence was a concept car designed by stylist Sunny Atri at the Talbot design studio in Whitley , Coventry . The concept was created to generate interest in employing high @-@ end Tagoras as chauffeur @-@ driven limousines by users such as business executives and government officials . The donor model for the Présidence was the 2 @.@ 6 SX , which had an interior appointed with Connolly Leather upholstery and brass highlights , plus a host of electronics including a telephone , dictaphone , text @-@ message receiver , and television with VCR . Originally valued at £ 25 @,@ 000 , the Présidence now resides at a car museum in Poissy . 
 = = Critical appraisal = = 
 The Tagora was not greeted with much acclaim by the British motoring press . Autocar reviewed the Tagora in its 2 @.@ 2 litre GLS iteration , and summed it up as " excellent , if not a great advance " . L. J. K. Setright of Car magazine asked who could want one given the crowded market into which it came . Concluding a group test in Car , the Tagora was described as a " problematic newcomer " that did not exceed the standard set by the winner of the group test , the Volvo 244 <unk> . However , Motor Sport considered the Tagora a " usefully effortless , uncomplicated , simple @-@ to @-@ drive and very comfortable car " . 
 The recurring theme of published tests was the Tagora ´ s lack of clear advantages or of a competitive edge . In comparing the car to its likely competitors , Autocar 's verdict was that " the new Talbot is highly comparable with the others , and deserves to sell as any of them , although it does not come out with any startling advantages which you might expect of the latest appearance on the scene " . Those cars against which the Tagora 2 @.@ 2 GLS was compared were the Ford Granada 2 @.@ 3 GL , Opel Rekord <unk> , Renault <unk> , Rover 2300 and Volvo 244 GL . Of these cars , the Tagora was the second most expensive but did not have a superiority among the significant attributes of speed , acceleration , interior room or chassis design . Out of the comparison group the Tagora had the second highest top speed , was the third fastest to 60 mph though it had the best overall mpg ( by 0 @.@ 7 mpg ) . In terms of interior room , it had the fourth best legroom ( front / rear ) . Motor Sport also noted the car ´ s modest competence in comparison with the Rover 2300 ( launched 1976 ) , saying that the Tagora had more leisurely acceleration . <unk> Setright noted the cars ´ s overall " adequacy " going on to say that if fitted with the correct type of tyre he would still opt for a Peugeot 604 instead . Car judged the chassis design to be one area " where [ the Tagora ] does not show the comparative youth of its design " . 
 The Tagora ´ s handling was deemed " on the good side " , wrote Autocar , and performance was described as " good but not outstanding " . As such the car lay " uneasily close to being listed as under @-@ engined " though the authors conceded that generally the Tagora did not feel under @-@ engined when in use . <unk> Setright dissented saying the Tagora was as " refined in its ride as should be expected of it " and that " the car also has a good deal more road @-@ holding and cornering than might be expected " . However , in December 1981 Car magazine judged the car ( 2 @.@ 2 GLS model ) to be prone to " untidy " handling , tending to under @-@ steer first followed by excessive over @-@ steer . The magazine made a particular note of the advantage in handling and grip enjoyed by the older live @-@ axled Volvo 244 , underlining the point about the Tagora 's lack of advantage in terms of road manners . 
 Regarding the interior , the seats drew praise for their comfort and detail design . However , again , Car provided a counterpoint to the effect that the Volvo was as roomy , despite its shorter wheelbase . The steering wheel was criticized in the same review for being too close to the driver ´ s legs . The ventilation temperature control was " not satisfactory " due to an unprogressive response at the cool end of the dial . There was no fan @-@ blown cold air ( cold air was by ram @-@ effect ) nor an option for cool air to be directed to the face at the same time as warmth being directed into the <unk> . According to Car the ventilation " fell down badly " on account of its awkward controls . <unk> accommodation was " disappointment " . Lacking a self @-@ setting stay , opening the bonnet was " heavy work " and the boot , while large , had the demerit of an " unusual " locking method : " [ the boot ] is locked before being shut by pushing in a red handle set in the inside of the lid " . 
 In summary , the main competencies of the Tagora were its spacious cabin ( though it was not class @-@ leading ) , its comfortable seating , its fuel economy ( in 2 @.@ 2 GLS form ) and the size of its luggage compartment ( 572 litres ) . But the fact that a car launched in 1974 , the Volvo 244 <unk> , could offer better seats , disc brakes all round , better headlights , better ventilation and better handling for only slightly more than Talbot was charging for their car indicated that the Tagora had come to market with a vehicle that was uncompetitive in too many major respects . 
 Nearly a decade after the Tagora had ceased production , the view of the car in the automotive press was that it was merely average though there was little actively wrong with the car . The view was that the Tagora had the advantage of refinement , good manners and , in V6 form , good performance . Rust was identified as the single biggest problem for the surviving cars , usually around the rear suspension mountings . Buckley suggested that the car might attain collectible status by 2003 . 
 = = Reasons for commercial failure = = 
 = = = Market situation and image = = = 
 In terms of engineering , the Tagora had no major flaws ( except perhaps for the poor cabin ventilation ) . The 1979 energy crisis , however , dealt a blow to the European automotive market : the large car segment contracted significantly , making Chrysler 's initial sales projections unrealistic . The Tagora was ultimately launched under the Talbot brand , which was not established in the marketplace and had a questionable pedigree , which was an unfavourable trait in the executive car market ruled by established names like the Ford Granada . In the view of Martin Buckley Talbot did not advertise the car effectively so " people did not know about the car " . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 As the British magazine What Car ? opined , the Tagora " has such a complete blandness of style as to disqualify it instantly in a market where character and status count for so much . " The design of the Tagora was focused on practicality , providing exceptional cabin space at the expense of style . The steep windscreen formed a quite strange angle with the relatively short , wedge @-@ shaped bonnet . The car was wider and taller than most of its competitors , and buyers were unaccustomed to such proportions . The PSA @-@ sourced axles had very narrow tracks relative to the width of the body , which provided an awkward look , especially at the rear . Nor did the plain , plastic dashboard stir enthusiasm among reviewers and prospective customers . 
 = Trish Stratus = 
 Patricia Anne " Trish " Stratigeas ( / <unk> / ; born December 18 , 1975 ) is a Canadian retired professional wrestler , former fitness model , fitness master , actress , and television personality , better known by her former ring name Trish Stratus . She is best known for her tenure with WWE . 
 After beginning her career as a fitness model , Stratus began working for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , which was later renamed World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . Early in her career , she was mostly involved in sexually themed storylines , such as managing the team T & A and an affair with Vince McMahon 's Mr. McMahon character . As Stratus spent more time in the ring , her perceived wrestling skills strengthened and her popularity increased . Because of this , she was made a one @-@ time WWE Hardcore Champion , three @-@ time " WWE Babe of the Year " and was proclaimed " Diva of the Decade " . After nearly seven years in the business , Stratus retired from professional wrestling at WWE Unforgiven on September 17 , 2006 after winning her seventh WWE Women 's Championship , the most titles in WWE history . In 2011 , Stratus was a trainer for WWE Tough Enough and she was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame in 2013 . 
 Aside from professional wrestling , Stratus appeared on a number of magazine covers and has been involved in charity work . She has also hosted several award and television shows , and owns a yoga studio . 
 = = Early life and fitness modelling = = 
 Stratigeas grew up in Richmond Hill , Ontario , Canada where she attended Bayview Secondary School . She enrolled at York University , where she studied biology and kinesiology and played soccer and field hockey . Due to a faculty strike in 1997 , she was forced to change her plans . She was working as a receptionist at a local gym when she was approached by the publisher of <unk> International to do a test shoot for the magazine . She later appeared on the cover of the May 1998 issue and was signed to a two @-@ year contract . For the next six months , she worked on her body and appeared on numerous magazine covers . During this time , she joined Big Daddy Donnie & Jeff Marek as the third host of Live Audio Wrestling on Toronto Sports Radio , The FAN 590 . 
 Stratigeas had been a fan of wrestling since childhood and her modelling work caught the attention of the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . In November 1999 , she was signed to a multi @-@ year contract with the company , who sent her to Sully 's Gym where she was trained by Ron Hutchinson . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Managing and T & A ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 Stratigeas made her debut as a villainous character on the March 19 , 2000 episode of Sunday Night Heat , under the ring name Trish Stratus . She appeared on stage to scout Test and Prince Albert . The next night on Raw , Stratus began her first role in the company , managing Test and Albert in the tag team T & A. It was during her stint managing T & A that Stratus took her first major bump in the ring , by being driven through a table by the Dudley Boyz at Backlash , after she had been taunting Bubba Ray Dudley for several weeks . In June , she was on the receiving end of a stink face from Rikishi on Raw . 
 She also began managing then @-@ heel , Val Venis to win the WWE Intercontinental Championship , but their partnership ended at SummerSlam after Venis lost the title . Stratus made her in @-@ ring debut at the June 22 taping of SmackDown ! , winning a tag team match with T & A against the Hardy Boyz and Lita . A storyline feud between Stratus and Lita developed after the match with Stratus attacking Lita on episodes of Raw and SmackDown ! . This led to an Indian Strap match between the two women on the July 24 episode of Raw , which Stratus won with help from Stephanie McMahon . She finished the year competing unsuccessfully for the WWF Women 's Championship numerous times , and separating from Test and Albert when the team disbanded . 
 In early 2001 , Stratus became involved in an angle with WWF Chairman Vince McMahon , during a time when Vince 's wife Linda was kayfabe institutionalized following a demand Vince had made for a divorce during an episode of SmackDown ! on December 7 , 2000 . Vince and Stratus ' relationship increasingly angered the boss ' daughter , then @-@ heel , Stephanie McMahon . At No Way Out on February 25 , Stratus and Stephanie squared off , with Stephanie scoring the victory after a run @-@ in by William Regal . In the midst of a tag team match that pitted Vince and Stratus against Regal and Stephanie the next night on Raw , Stratus was the victim of a set @-@ up by Vince , Stephanie and Regal . Regal executed his finisher , the Regal Cutter , on Stratus and Stephanie then dumped sewage over Stratus ' body . Vince stood over Stratus , and he told her she was a " toy " with which he had " grown tired of playing with " . The angle continued the next week on Raw , with Vince forcing Stratus to strip down to her black bra and panties in the ring and bark like a dog . The storyline came to an end at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven , when Stratus slapped Vince during his match against his son Shane , becoming a fan favorite in the process . 
 = = = = Women 's Champion ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 Following her first face turn , Stratus began wrestling part @-@ time . She teamed up with Lita against then @-@ heels , Stacy Keibler and Torrie Wilson at InVasion . After suffering an ankle injury in the summer , however , she was sidelined for the following three months . This interrupted not only her recent venture into wrestling , but also an on @-@ screen romance with Jeff Hardy and budding storyline with Team Xtreme . As she rehabilitated , she kept herself visible by co @-@ hosting Excess on TNN . After returning in autumn , Stratus appeared at Survivor Series where she won the WWF Women 's Championship for the first time in a six @-@ pack challenge . Stratus was next involved in a feud with Jazz over the Women 's Championship , where she retained the championship at the Royal Rumble , but dropped the championship to Jazz two weeks later on the February 4 , 2002 episode of Raw . Stratus then attempted to regain the title for several months , including competing in a triple threat match at WrestleMania X8 against Lita and Jazz in her hometown of Toronto , Ontario , Canada , but failed to win the match . While chasing after the Women 's Championship , Stratus won the WWE Hardcore Championship on May 6 , pinning Crash Holly after Bubba Ray Dudley hit him over the head with a trash can . She lost the title to Steven Richards soon afterward however , due to the stipulation that the belt was to be defended 24 / 7 as long as there was a referee present . One week later , she regained the Women 's Championship in a tag team match with Bubba Ray Dudley . During this time , Stratus began wrestling solely on the Raw brand after being drafted in the WWF Brand Extension . 
 Stratus ' second reign as champion came to an end on June 23 , when she was defeated at King of the Ring by Molly Holly . The two Divas continued their storyline feud for the next three months . After a failed attempt to win the title in July , Stratus won the championship back at Unforgiven . While feuding with Holly , Stratus was also involved in an angle with new Diva Victoria , who held a storyline grudge against Stratus , claiming she was betrayed by Stratus when they both worked as fitness models . The two competed in several title matches , with Stratus retaining until Survivor Series , where Victoria won the title in a Hardcore match . On March 17 , 2003 , Victoria and Steven Richards defeated Jazz and Stratus in a tag team match when Jazz walked out on Stratus . After the match , Jeff Hardy saved Stratus from an attack by Victoria and Richards and then kissed her , resulting in Stratus becoming Hardy 's on @-@ screen girlfriend once more . The two would talk and kiss backstage , compete as an intergender tag team , and come to each other 's aid when in danger during singles competition . At no point was their previous relationship acknowledged . The storyline was suddenly dropped when WWE released Hardy in April . This marked the second time in two years that a romance between Stratus and Hardy was abruptly scrapped due to a setback in one of their personal lives . In neither instance did the angle fully play out or reach a conclusion . 
 At WrestleMania XIX , Stratus ended her feud with Victoria by defeating her and Jazz to capture her fourth Women 's Championship , only to lose the title to Jazz at the following pay @-@ per @-@ view , Backlash . The Raw after Backlash , Eric Bischoff ordered a No Disqualification match between him and Stratus . If Stratus won , she would get a championship rematch the next week ; if Bischoff won , he would get to spend a night with her . Bischoff would go on to win the match , though the stipulation was <unk> when Linda McMahon confronted him after the match . In the following months , Stratus was placed into an alliance with Gail Kim . It was short @-@ lived , however , as Kim turned on Stratus and teamed with Molly Holly , putting the women in a storyline feud . The duo defeated Stratus and several tag team partners until Stratus allied herself with a returning Lita . The team defeated Kim and Holly in several matches , including a match at Unforgiven . 
 = = = = Teaming and feuding with Lita ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 Stratus began an on @-@ screen romance with Chris Jericho during the November 10 episode of Raw when she agreed to go on a date with him . Subsequently , they participated in an intergender tag team match as partners on December 1 . After the match , Stratus overheard Jericho talking to then @-@ heel , Christian , who was involved in an on @-@ screen romance with Lita at the time , about who could sleep with their respective woman first . One week later , Stratus and Lita confronted the men about their actions , leading to a feud between the two men and women which resulted in a " Battle of the Sexes " tag team match at Armageddon , which the women lost . A rematch the next night ended in a no contest . Her relationship with Jericho continued into the next year with a new angle of Stratus developing feelings for Jericho . Christian would also briefly turn face once again , but only revealed to be a hoax as he would attack and defeat her in a match ordered by Eric Bischoff . This would start a feud between Christian and Jericho , who was defending Stratus . During their match at WrestleMania XX , however , Stratus became a villainess for the first time since her debut by betraying Jericho and siding with Christian . Stratus claimed her reasons for siding with Christian were that he was a " real man " , and Jericho was a " love sick puppy " . The duo feuded with Jericho for several months and competed in a 2 @-@ on @-@ 1 Handicap match at Backlash . The team of Stratus and Christian were joined by " problem solver " Tyson Tomko the next night on Raw . 
 Stratus won the WWE Women 's Championship for a fifth time at Bad Blood on June 13 . She defended the title until she suffered a legitimate broken hand in July that caused her to be out of action for approximately a month . Upon her return , she continued to defend the title against numerous challengers before losing the championship to Lita on December 6 , when both women wrestled in the main event of Raw for the championship . Stratus recaptured the title a month later at New Year 's Revolution , after Lita suffered a legitimate knee injury during the match . Stratus was originally booked to lose the championship back to Lita at WrestleMania 21 , but due to Lita 's injury , she wasn 't cleared to wrestle . A new angle was then developed between Stratus and 2004 Raw Diva Search winner Christy Hemme over jealousy of Hemme 's Playboy magazine exposure , with Stratus attacking Hemme and spray painting the word " slut " across her back . Stratus was challenged by Hemme , who later revealed she was being trained by Lita , for a championship match at WrestleMania 21 , where Stratus successfully retained her championship . Stratus would then demand a rematch against Hemme the next night on Raw ; before the match started , Stratus hit Hemme with the Chick Kick , and re @-@ injured Lita 's knee . The next week , after losing a tag team match , Stratus was chased around the arena by Lita 's storyline husband , Kane , narrowly escaping . The week after , Stratus almost got chokeslammed onto the stage , but Viscera saved her . Stratus would then form a short @-@ lived alliance with Viscera , who was ordered to protect her . 
 = = = = Storyline with Mickie James and retirement ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In May 2005 , Stratus was sidelined with the Women 's Championship after suffering a herniated disc , with the storyline explanation that Viscera had injured her at Backlash after she insulted him for losing to Kane . She returned to Raw on September 12 , 2005 as a face by siding with Ashley Massaro against Vince 's Devils ( Candice Michelle , Victoria and Torrie Wilson ) . The feud also involved the debuting Mickie James , who introduced herself as Stratus ' biggest fan . In November , during the Eddie Guerrero Tribute Show , Stratus took part in an inter @-@ promotional Divas battle royal that was won by SmackDown ! Diva Melina . The next week , MNM ( Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro ) kidnapped Stratus for Melina , who challenged a tied up and gagged Stratus to a match for the Women 's Championship . The two fought at Survivor Series , with Stratus defeating Melina . Stratus and Mickie James continued teaming together in late 2005 , while James became increasingly obsessed with Stratus . On the December 26 episode of Raw , the storyline between Stratus and James developed into a lesbian one , when James initiated an intimate kiss with Stratus under a sprig of mistletoe , causing a surprised Stratus to flee the locker room . 
 The odd relationship between Stratus and James continued into 2006 , with the two Divas competing against each other in a title match at New Year 's Revolution , where Stratus emerged victorious . Despite the defeat , James continued to be enamored of Stratus which made her feel uncomfortable , and on March 6 , Stratus confronted James , telling her that she needed space . The duo briefly reconciled on the March 18 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event , teaming together to defeat Candice Michelle and Victoria ; however , after the match , James turned on Stratus and attacked her . A match at WrestleMania 22 saw Stratus lose the Women 's Championship to James , ending her 448 @-@ day reign . The match is widely recognized as one of the best women 's matches in the company . During a rematch at Backlash , Stratus suffered a legitimate dislocated shoulder after taking a bump to the outside of the ring . While she was rehabilitating for six weeks , she continued to appear on @-@ screen . 
 Stratus returned to the ring on June 26 , where she had a Women 's Championship match with Mickie James . Stratus would go on to lose the match , thus finally ending their nine @-@ month long storyline . On the same night , she started a romantic angle with Carlito after he saved her from a double team attack by Melina and Johnny Nitro . They competed as a team , and won a mixed tag team match against Melina and Nitro at Saturday Night 's Main Event on July 15 . As a couple , Stratus and Carlito briefly feuded with WWE Champion Edge and Lita after the pair interrupted Stratus ' title match with Mickie James . The two couples competed in several tag team matches , including a six @-@ person tag team match where Edge , Lita and Randy Orton defeated Stratus , Carlito and John Cena after Orton RKO 'd Stratus and Lita followed up with the pin . Stratus ' last match on Raw occurred on September 11 , 2006 where she defeated former rival Mickie James . In late August , Lita stated that Stratus would retire following the Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view , which was later confirmed by Stratus . At Unforgiven on September 17 , in her hometown of Toronto , Stratus won against Lita with fellow Canadian Bret Hart 's signature submission maneuver , the Sharpshooter . Her victory earned her a seventh Women 's Championship , the most in WWE history , and she retired as the champion . 
