 July 14 , 1973 : Pittsburgh Jazz Festival ( featuring Aretha Franklin , The Staple Singers , Walt Harper , Roland Kirk , David Newman , and Herbie Mann ) 
 July 24 , 1973 : Led Zeppelin ( Footage from this show was used in the 1976 film The Song Remains the Same ) . Little Feat was the opening act . 
 August 24 , 1973 : The Allman Brothers Band 
 July 5 , 1974 : Eric Clapton ( with The Band and Todd Rundgren ) 
 July 15 , 1974 : Jackson 5 
 August 31 , 1974 : Doobie Brothers ( with Chicago and The Ozark Mountain Daredevils . Lynyrd Skynyrd was originally scheduled to perform but cancelled . ) 
 June 20 , 1975 : Pink Floyd 
 July 19 , 1975 : World Series of Rock ( featuring Bachman – Turner Overdrive , Johnny Winter , Dave Mason , Foghat , Styx , and Kansas ) 
 June 12 , 1976 : ZZ Top and Aerosmith 
 July 24 , 1976 : The Eagles , Fleetwood Mac , and Boz Scaggs 
 August 14 , 1976 : The Beach Boys , Peter Frampton , and Gary Wright 
 August 26 , 1978 : The Beach Boys , The Steve Miller Band , Jan and Dean , and Sweet Breeze 
 July 30 , 1983 : Simon and Garfunkel 
 May 27 , 1985 : " Explosion of Sound " with The Marshall Tucker Band and The Outlaws 
 August 11 , 1985 : Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band 
 May 24 , 1987 : Genesis 
 October 13 , 1987 : U2 
 May 30 , 1988 : Pink Floyd 
 June 15 , 1988 : Monsters of Rock Tour featuring Metallica , Dokken , Scorpions , Van Halen , and Kingdom Come . 
 July 16 , 1989 : The Who 
 September 6 , 1989 : The Rolling Stones 
 July 8 , 1990 : Grateful Dead 
 May 26 , 1992 : Genesis 
 July 26 , 1992 : Metallica and Guns N ' Roses on the Guns N ' Roses / Metallica Stadium Tour with Faith No More as their opening act . 
 August 25 , 1992 : U2 
 May 31 , 1994 : Pink Floyd 
 August 2 , 1994 : Elton John and Billy Joel 
 September 29 , 1994 : The Rolling Stones 
 June 30 , 1995 : Grateful Dead played their last Pittsburgh show . 
 August 15 , 1995 : The Beach Boys 
 May 22 , 1997 : U2 
 June 9 , 1999 : The George Strait Chevy Truck Music Festival featuring The Dixie Chicks , Tim McGraw , Billy Joel , Kenny Chesney , Jo Dee Messina , Mark Wills , and Asleep At The Wheel 
 July 3 , 2000 : Dave Matthews Band 
 July 16 , 2000 : ' N Sync – Last concert ever at Three Rivers Stadium 
 = Hallaton Helmet = 
 The Hallaton Helmet is a decorated iron Roman cavalry parade helmet originally covered in a sheet of silver and decorated in places with gold leaf . It was discovered in 2000 near Hallaton , Leicestershire after Ken Wallace , a member of the Hallaton Fieldwork Group , found coins in the area . Further investigation by professional archaeologists from University of Leicester Archaeological Services discovered that the site appeared to have been used as a large @-@ scale Iron Age shrine . Nine years of conservation and restoration has been undertaken by experts from the British Museum , supported by a Heritage Lottery Fund grant of £ 650 @,@ 000 . The helmet is now on permanent display at the Harborough Museum in Market Harborough alongside other artefacts from the Hallaton Treasure hoard . 
 Although it was found shattered into thousands of pieces and is now heavily corroded , the helmet still bears evidence of its original finely decorated design . It was plated with silver @-@ gilt and decorated with images of goddesses and equestrian scenes . It would have been used by a Roman auxiliary cavalryman for displays and possibly in battle . The identity of the owner is not known but the helmet was discovered on a native British ceremonial site , buried alongside thousands of Iron Age British and Roman coins . It is possible that the helmet was owned by a Briton who fought alongside the Romans during the conquest of Britain . 
 = = Description and interpretation = = 
 The helmet is an example of a three @-@ piece Roman ceremonial cavalry helmet , made of sheet iron covered with silver sheet and partly decorated with gold leaf . Such helmets were worn by Roman auxiliary cavalrymen in displays known as <unk> gymnasia and may also have been worn in battle , despite their relative thinness and lavish decoration . Horses and riders wore lavishly decorated clothes , armour and plumes while performing feats of horsemanship and re @-@ enacting historical and legendary battles , such as the wars of the Greeks and Trojans . 
 It is the only Roman helmet ever found in Britain that still has most of its silver @-@ gilt plating attached . The helmet would originally have had two cheekpieces attached via holes in front of its ear guards . It has a prominent browguard , the shape of which is similar to that of the 3rd @-@ century Guisborough Helmet , discovered in 1864 near Guisborough in Redcar and Cleveland . The rear of the helmet bowl descended to form a neckguard . 
 As is the case with other Roman cavalry helmets , the Hallaton Helmet was very ornately decorated . The closest parallel to the Hallaton Helmet in terms of overall appearance is a helmet found in Xanten @-@ <unk> in Germany which , like the Hallaton example , is made of silver @-@ gilded iron with a wreath on the crown , a central figure on the browguard and a garland of flowers on the neckguard . A number of similar features have survived on the Hallaton Helmet . Its bowl is decorated with laurel wreaths while the scalloped browguard is edged with elaborate cabling . In the centre of the browguard is the ( now heavily damaged ) bust of a woman flanked by repoussé lions . Her identity is unclear , but she may have been an empress or goddess . The iconography is reminiscent of depictions of Cybele , the Magna Mater or " Great Mother " whose image was used to promote the values of the Augustan period a few decades after the helmet was deposited . However , the depiction has a number of features that are more in common with funerary art . 
 The <unk> are in the shape of silver ears , and the neckguard is decorated with a scrolling leaf pattern . Six detached cheekpieces were found within the helmet bowl along with the disintegrated remains of a seventh , although only two would have been needed . <unk> were also found , as was the pin of one cheekpiece , which had been bent . It may have been forcibly removed or possibly sustained damage at a later date , perhaps from a plough . It is unclear why there were so many cheekpieces accompanying the helmet ; it is possible that they may all have been used on the same helmet to customise its appearance on different occasions , or alternatively they may have been intended as spares in the event of damage . The surviving cheekpieces are very elaborate . Five of the cheekpieces show equestrian scenes ; one depicts the triumph of a Roman emperor on horseback , holding his arm in the air as he is crowned with a laurel wreath by the goddess Victoria ( Victory ) . A cowering barbarian is depicted below being trampled by the hooves of the emperor 's horse . Another less well @-@ preserved cheekpiece depicts a possibly Middle Eastern figure holding a large cornucopia , and a Roman helmet and shield below . 
 The helmet was found along with some 5 @,@ 296 Iron Age and Roman coins mostly dating to AD 20 / 30 – 50 , the largest assemblage of Iron Age coins ever found in Britain . They had been buried at what appears to have been a pre @-@ Roman shrine where large @-@ scale animal slaughtering had taken place ; nearly 7 @,@ 000 bone fragments were also found at the site , 97 per cent of which were from pigs . Many appear to have been buried without the meat being eaten , suggesting that they had been used as offerings . The site is located on a hilltop which appears to have been encircled by a boundary ditch and palisade , with a possible processional way leading up to it . In Roman times it would have been located in the territory of the Corieltauvi , who inhabited an area of the East Midlands stretching from Northamptonshire to Lincolnshire . 
 It is very unusual to find a helmet of this type on a native ceremonial site . It was probably made between 25 and 50 AD , close to the date of the conquest of Britain in 43 AD ; this makes it one of the earliest Roman helmets ever found in Britain . Other British examples of later date were found in isolation away from settlements , as in the cases of the Guisborough Helmet and Crosby Garrett Helmet , or on Roman sites , as with the Newstead Helmet . Various suggestions have been put forward as to why the helmet ended up at Hallaton ; it may have been owned by a Briton who served in the Roman cavalry , it may have been a diplomatic gift from the Romans or it may have been captured in war . According to Dr Jeremy Hill of the British Museum , the first explanation is the most likely : " Here you probably have a situation where local Britons are fighting on the Roman side . " The Roman cavalry at this time was mostly recruited from native allies , not Italians , suggesting that Britons fought alongside the Romans as they carried out their conquest of Britain . 
 = = Discovery and restoration = = 
 The helmet was discovered by 71 @-@ year @-@ old Ken Wallace , a retired teacher and amateur archaeologist . He and other members of the Hallaton Fieldwork Group had found fragments of Roman pottery on a hill near Hallaton in 2000 . He visited the site with a second @-@ hand metal detector late one afternoon and found about 200 coins , which had been buried in a series of small pits dug into the clay . He also found another artifact , which he left in the ground overnight . The following day he returned to examine his discovery and found it that it was a silver ear . He reported the find to Leicestershire 's county archaeologist , who called in the University of Leicester Archaeological Services ( <unk> ) to excavate the site . The dig took place in the spring of 2003 . 
 The helmet was too fragile to be excavated in situ so it was removed within a block of earth held together with plaster of Paris . It was taken to the British Museum in London for conservation , which took nine years of work by conservator Marilyn Hockey and her colleagues Fleur Shearman and <unk> <unk> . Corrosion and the effects of time had shattered the helmet into thousands of pieces , most of which were smaller than the nail on a person 's little finger . The reconstructed and conserved helmet was unveiled in January 2012 . 
 Leicester County Council was able to raise £ 1 million to buy the entire hoard and pay for the conservation of the helmet , with the assistance of donations from the Heritage Lottery Fund ( which gave a £ 650 @,@ 000 grant ) , the Art Fund and other trusts and charities . The helmet was valued at £ 300 @,@ 000 ; under the terms of the Treasure Act , Ken Wallace and the landowner were each awarded £ 150 @,@ 000 . 
 The helmet was put on permanent public display at the end of January 2012 at the Harborough Museum in Market Harborough , nine miles from the site where the hoard was found , alongside other objects found at Hallaton . 
 = Adam Oates = 
 Adam Robert Oates ( born August 27 , 1962 ) is a retired Canadian professional ice hockey player , former co @-@ head coach for the New Jersey Devils and former head coach for the Washington Capitals . He played 19 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Detroit Red Wings , St. Louis Blues , Boston Bruins , Washington Capitals , Philadelphia Flyers , Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and Edmonton Oilers . Known as an elite playmaker , his career total of 1 @,@ 079 assists was the fifth highest total in NHL history at the time of his 2004 retirement . After retiring as a player , he served as an assistant coach for the Tampa Bay Lightning and New Jersey Devils prior to joining the Capitals as their head coach for two seasons between 2012 and 2014 . 
 As a college player , Oates was a standout forward for the RPI Engineers . He set single @-@ season school records for assists and points and was named an Eastern College Athletic Conference ( ECAC ) all @-@ star and National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) All @-@ American in both 1984 and 1985 . He was named a tournament all @-@ star in helping RPI win the 1985 national championship , and in 1990 – 91 , the NHL included him in its Second All @-@ Star Team ; he played in five All @-@ Star Games . He holds the record for most points all @-@ time of any NHL player who also played NCAA Hockey . Oates was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 12 , 2012 along with Joe Sakic , Pavel Bure , and Mats Sundin . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oates was born August 27 , 1962 , in Weston , a neighborhood in Toronto , Ontario . As a youth , he played both hockey and box lacrosse , favouring the latter sport . He played five seasons with the Etobicoke Eclipse of the Ontario Lacrosse Association ( OLA ) Junior A Lacrosse League . An offensive standout , Oates ' total of 181 points in 19 games in 1981 was the 11th highest total in OLA junior history at the time . As the league 's leading scorer , he won the Bobby Allan Award and in one game that season , set OLA Junior A single @-@ game records of 19 assists and 29 points . Oates played one season of Senior A with the Brampton <unk> of Major Series Lacrosse but left the game in 1984 to focus on his hockey career . 
 Describing his younger self as being a " punk " , Oates said he partied frequently . He dropped out of high school to focus on hockey and ended up working as a gas station attendant at 19 . Oates played two full seasons and parts of a third with the Junior A Markham Waxers of the Ontario Provincial Junior A Hockey League ( <unk> ) . He scored 89 points in 43 games during 1980 – 81 , and 159 points – including 105 assists – in 1981 – 82 . He went unselected in the NHL Entry Draft , however , as scouts considered him too slow to play in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He returned to high school to complete his diploma when he was recruited to play for Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute ( RPI ) . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 RPI 's assistant coach Paul Allen noticed Oates during a 1982 <unk> game while scouting a different player and offered him a position on the school 's team . Consequently , Oates played three seasons with the RPI Engineers , leading the team in assists each year . After scoring 42 points in 22 games in his freshman season of 1982 – 83 , he spent the summer working with a skating instructor to improve his foot speed . In 1983 – 84 , he set school records in points with 83 and assists with 57 . He was named to the East Coast Athletic Conference ( ECAC ) second all @-@ star team and became the first RPI hockey player to earn a berth on the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) All @-@ American team since 1965 . 
 In 1984 – 85 , Oates broke his own school records by recording 60 assists and 91 points . His career total of 150 assists remains a school record As of 2012 . Again named an NCAA All @-@ American , he was voted to the ECAC first all @-@ star team , and was a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award as the top hockey player in the NCAA . After helping RPI win the 1985 national championship , he was included in the all @-@ tournament team . In his three years with RPI , the Engineers recorded an 85 – 19 – 1 record and won the ECAC championships in 1984 and 1985 . Oates was voted to the ECAC 's all @-@ decade team of the 1980s . He was inducted into RPI 's Athletics Hall of Fame , and was named the inaugural member of the hockey team 's Ring of Honor in 2004 . 
 = = = Detroit and St. Louis = = = 
 NHL teams took interest in Oates following his junior season ; at least five teams attempted to sign him . Choosing to forgo his final year of college eligibility , Oates signed a four @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 1 million contract with the Detroit Red Wings that made him the highest paid rookie in the NHL in 1985 – 86 . He made his NHL debut on October 10 , 1985 , against the Minnesota North Stars , scoring his first goal that night on goaltender Don <unk> and added an assist . After this , Oates struggled offensively and was pointless in his following 16 games ; the team subsequently demoted him to the Adirondack Red Wings of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . Oates split the remainder of the season between Detroit and Adirondack , finishing his first NHL season with 38 games played , 9 goals and 11 assists . In the AHL , he scored 18 goals and 28 assists in 34 games . Having finished the NHL season in Detroit , he was returned to Adirondack for the AHL playoffs which the team won to take the Calder Cup championship . 
 Oates established himself as a full @-@ time NHLer in 1986 – 87 , scoring 47 points in 76 games . He improved to 54 points in 63 games the following year despite missing a month due to a groin injury , and finished third in team scoring with 78 points in 1988 – 89 . However , Detroit made changes following a first round loss in the playoffs ; Oates , along with Paul MacLean , was traded to the St. Louis Blues on June 15 , 1989 , in exchange for veterans Bernie <unk> and Tony <unk> . The deal , which is now considered one of the worst in Red Wings ' history , left Oates " heartbroken " to leave his first NHL club . 
 The Blues made Oates their first @-@ line centre and played him alongside Brett Hull . The pair , dubbed " Hull and Oates " as a play on the band Hall and Oates , put up prolific offensive numbers . In 1989 – 90 , Oates topped the 100 @-@ point mark for the first time in his career with 102 points . He improved to 115 in 1990 – 91 NHL season . He helped Hull score 72 and 86 goals those seasons , the latter the third highest in single @-@ season total in NHL history . Oates was named to the second all @-@ star team following the season and played in the 1991 All @-@ Star Game . 
 Oates signed a four @-@ year , $ 3 million contract extension with the Blues prior to the 1991 – 92 NHL season , but after the team signed Brendan Shanahan , Garth Butcher and Ron Sutter to significant deals , felt he was underpaid . After playing in his second career All @-@ Star Game , he threatened to walk off the team following the all @-@ star break if the Blues did not renegotiate his contract , prompting a negative reaction from St. Louis fans who booed him loudly . The conflict was resolved on February 7 , 1992 , when the team dealt him to the Boston Bruins in exchange for Craig Janney and Stéphane Quintal . 
 = = = Boston and Washington = = = 
 Oates ' best individual season came in his first full year in Boston . He led the league with 97 assists in 1992 – 93 and finished third in overall scoring with 142 points . At the 1993 All @-@ Star Game , Oates set a record by recording four assists in one period as part of a 16 – 6 victory for the Wales Conference . Oates played in his fourth consecutive All @-@ Star Game in 1994 and again finished third in league scoring with 112 points in 1993 – 94 . In a five @-@ year period between 1989 and 1994 , Oates was the second highest point producer in the NHL . His average of 114 points per season over that time was second to Wayne Gretzky 's 124 . 
 A finger injury suffered during the 1994 Stanley Cup Playoffs hampered Oates throughout 1994 – 95 and required surgery at the season 's conclusion . Despite the injury , Oates finished fourth in the NHL with 41 assists in a season disrupted by a work stoppage . The Bruins signed him to a five @-@ year , $ 10 million contract extension late in that season , but Oates once again became frustrated with his salary relative to the rest of the league by 1997 . With the Bruins struggling on the ice and out of playoff contention late in 1996 – 97 season , Oates publicly berated team management : " You go on a [ road ] trip and everyone says it 's a big trip . For what ? So we can win five games because we 're lousy and we get in the eighth spot and lose four straight and get embarrassed and then get shelled all summer ? It 's upstairs , baby . That 's their job , not ours . ... Are we rebuilding ? What are we doing ? What direction are we going in ? " 
 Less than two weeks after his tirade , on March 1 , 1997 , the Bruins dealt him to the Washington Capitals . In the trade , Oates , Bill Ranford and Rick Tocchet went to Washington in exchange for Jim Carey , Anson Carter , Jason Allison and a draft pick . Oates initially refused to report to Washington , demanding that his contract be renegotiated , but chose to join the team after a four @-@ day holdout . He continued to demand a new contract in the offseason , while his agent claimed that Oates would retire before playing for the Capitals again . After several months of contentious negotiations , the two sides agreed to a three @-@ year deal worth around $ 2 @.@ 9 million per season with an option on a fourth year . 
 Oates became the 47th player in NHL history , and the 15th fastest , to score his 1,000th career point on October 7 , 1997 against the New York Islanders . He reached the milestone by scoring a hat trick and adding two assists for the sixth five @-@ point game of his career . He finished the 1997 – 98 season as the team leader with 56 assists , and second to Peter Bondra in team scoring with 78 points . The Capitals reached the 1998 Stanley Cup Finals , which they lost to the Detroit Red Wings , the only finals appearance in franchise history . 
 The Capitals named Oates the ninth captain in franchise history prior to the 1999 – 2000 season , following the departure of his predecessor , Dale Hunter . He led the team in scoring with 71 points and played his 1,000th NHL game on December 22 , 1999 , against the Vancouver Canucks . He led the league in assists the following two seasons , at the ages of 38 and 39 , with 69 in 2000 – 01 and 64 in 2001 – 02 . On January 14 , 2002 , Oates became the eighth player in NHL history to reach 1 @,@ 000 career assists when he set up <unk> <unk> ' overtime winning goal in a 1 – 0 victory over the Boston Bruins . 
 = = = Philadelphia , Anaheim and Edmonton = = = 
 With Washington out of playoff contention late in the 2001 – 02 season and with his contract expiring following the season , the Capitals dealt Oates to the Philadelphia Flyers on March 19 , 2002 , in exchange for goaltender Maxime Ouellet and the Flyers ' first , second and third round selections in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . The Flyers hoped that bringing Oates in would solidify their playoff chances . The move did not work , as the Flyers were defeated in the first round by the lower ranked Ottawa Senators , losing the series in five games . The team scored only one goal in regulation time and were shut out three times by Ottawa 's Patrick Lalime . 
 The Flyers chose not to offer Oates a new contract following the loss , making him an unrestricted free agent . He signed a $ 3 @.@ 5 million contract for the 2002 – 03 season , with an option for 2003 – 04 , with the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim on July 1 , 2002 . He scored 45 points in 67 games with the Mighty Ducks , and added 13 points in 21 playoff games . Anaheim reached the 2003 Stanley Cup Finals , where in the third game of the series against the New Jersey Devils , Oates assisted on Ruslan Salei 's overtime winning goal . It was Oates ' ninth career playoff overtime point , tying him with Joe Sakic and Doug Gilmour for the NHL all @-@ time lead . The Ducks ultimately lost the series in seven games . 
 The Mighty Ducks declined their option on the 41 @-@ year @-@ old Oates ' contract , again making him a free agent . He remained unsigned six weeks into the 2003 – 04 season , until he agreed to a one @-@ year contract with the Edmonton Oilers on November 17 , 2003 . He appeared in 60 games in Edmonton , scoring 2 goals and 16 assists . The Oilers were eliminated from playoff contention in their final game of the season with a 5 – 2 loss to the Vancouver Canucks on April 4 , 2004 . Oates announced his retirement as a player immediately after the game . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Oates was one of the NHL 's great playmakers , a style that he credits his father as encouraging : " It was just kind of our family talks : ' If you can be unselfish , your teammates will always like you . ' And it just kind of became my role , where I was obviously trying to please my dad , growing up and becoming a playmaker out of that . " Oates ' father , a British immigrant , idolized Stanley Matthews , considered one of the greatest soccer players of all time and hoped that his son would adopt a pass @-@ first mentality similar to Matthews . 
 He led the NHL in assists three times – 1992 – 93 , 2000 – 01 and 2001 – 02 – and finished in the top ten on 12 occasions . He is also the only player in NHL history to centre three 50 @-@ goal scorers , helping Brett Hull , Cam Neely and Peter Bondra reach the mark . His teammates praised his consistency , noting that Oates continued to score points at an elite level when he did not have star players as linemates . Boston teammate Raymond Bourque suggested in 1994 that Oates was underrated : " I think a lot of people take what he does for granted . He does it in a quiet way . He 's not a flashy guy . He 's not looking for attention , he just goes out and does it . He 's the best centerman I 've been around . I never knew he was this good playing against him because I didn 't see him this much . " Oates was able to score himself , reaching the 20 goal mark five times , including a career high 45 in 1992 – 93 , a season in which he led the league with 11 game @-@ winning goals . 
 At the time of Oates ' retirement , his 1 @,@ 420 points was the 13th highest total in NHL history , and his 1 @,@ 079 assists ranked 5th . He played in a total of five NHL All @-@ Star Games and was a six @-@ time finalist for the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct on the ice . The Markham Waxers retired his jersey number 10 in 1999 . Oates was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame as part of its 2012 class . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = Assistant coach = = = 
 The Tampa Bay Lightning hired Oates as an assistant coach in the 2009 – 10 season where he worked with the team 's offense . Under his guidance , the team 's power play finished ninth in the league and he was credited with playing a significant role in Steven Stamkos 's offensive development . Oates then joined the New Jersey Devils in 2010 where he served an additional two years as an assistant coach , helping the team reach the 2012 Stanley Cup Finals , which they lost to the Los Angeles Kings in six games . New Jersey 's General Manager , Lou Lamoriello , praised Oates ' work with the team : " He did an outstanding job for us . I wish him well . He 's very communicative , very intelligent , he explains things very well . He has the resume behind him as a player and having the success he had – all the credentials are there for having the kind of respect players have for him . " 
 = = = Washington Capitals = = = 
 The same day that he was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame , June 26 , 2012 , Oates returned to Washington , where he was named the 16th head coach in franchise history , succeeding Dale Hunter who had decided not to renew his contract . Oates ' former teammates praised his appointment as head coach , calling him a " detail @-@ oriented players ' coach " with excellent communication skills . While the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout delayed Oates ' debut with the Capitals , he acted as co @-@ coach with Mark French for Washington 's AHL affiliate , the Hershey Bears . 
 When the NHL resumed for an abbreviated 2012 – 13 season , Oates and the Capitals struggled initially and won only two of their first 11 games . The team improved throughout the season , however , and went from last place in the Southeast Division to first ; they won 15 of their final 19 games to win the division title . Oates ' players praised his positive outlook and willingness to work closely with them as a primary reasons why the team was able to turn its season around . The Capitals were defeated in the first round of the 2013 Stanley Cup playoffs , however , losing to the New York Rangers in seven games . 
 The Capitals struggled throughout the 2013 – 14 season and faced increasing discontent from the fans as the team had failed to advance far into the playoffs in 16 years . The team finished with a 38 – 30 – 14 record , but finished ninth in the Eastern Conference and missed the playoffs . As a consequence , the Capitals opted to dismiss both Oates as head coach and the team 's general manager , George McPhee . 
 = = = New Jersey Devils = = = 
 On December 27 , 2014 , Oates was hired by the New Jersey Devils to become what the team referred to as a " Co @-@ Head Coach " following the team 's firing of head coach Peter DeBoer . Oates split coaching duties with former Devils captain Scott Stevens , with each coach responsible for a specific group of players ; Oates was responsible for the forwards while Stevens was responsible for the defensemen . Oates and Stevens were assisted by team general manager Lou Lamoriello , who had served as the team 's interim head coach previously . On June 1 , 2015 , John Hynes was named the new full @-@ time head coach . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Although Oates left RPI after three years to begin his professional hockey career , he continued his studies during the off @-@ seasons . He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in management from the school in 1991 . While a member of the Bruins , Oates also worked for a brief time with the investment firm Boston Capital Partners . He is a co @-@ founder of sporting apparel retailer Old Time Hockey , a company that donates a portion of all sales to the NHL emergency assistance fund . 
 His parents are David and Loretta , and he has two sisters : Michelle and Laurel . Oates was once engaged to model and actress Darlene Vogel , however the couple cancelled their planned 1998 marriage at the last moment . Oates and his wife , Donna , spend their summers in California . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = Coaching = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Chuck Versus the Last Details = 
 " Chuck Versus the Last Details " is the 23rd episode of the fourth season of Chuck , and the 77th overall episode of the series . The episode was written by Henry Alonso Myers and Kristin Newman , and directed by Peter Lauer . It originally aired on May 9 , 2011 . 
 In the episode , Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) and Sarah Walker 's ( Yvonne Strahovski ) wedding preparation includes one final detail : ensuring that the mother @-@ of @-@ the @-@ groom , Mary ( Linda Hamilton ) , makes it to the ceremony alive . Meanwhile , Morgan Grimes 's ( Joshua Gomez ) responsibilities as best man include his most dangerous mission yet , as he faces Vivian Volkoff ( Lauren Cohan ) . Elsewhere , Ellie Woodcomb ( Sarah Lancaster ) tends to the last details of the rehearsal dinner and seeks help from an unlikely source . 
 " Chuck Versus the Last Details " received generally positive reviews from critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it drew 4 @.@ 1 million viewers , the third @-@ lowest number in Chuck 's history , after " Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff " and " Chuck Versus Agent X " . It had a 2 @.@ 4 / 4 share among all households and 1 @.@ 4 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mary Elizabeth Bartowski ( Linda Hamilton ) sneaks into a mine in <unk> , Colombia to retrieve the fully assembled " Norseman " weapon , only to be captured by Vivian Volkoff ( Lauren Cohan ) and Riley ( Ray Wise ) . To ensure that Mary is at his wedding , Chuck Bartowski ( Zachary Levi ) travels to the mine and rescues Mary , leaving best man Morgan Grimes ( Joshua Gomez ) in charge of creating a video montage as his wedding present to Sarah Walker ( Yvonne Strahovski ) . Morgan allows Jeff Barnes ( Scott <unk> ) , Lester Patel ( Vik Sahay ) , and Big Mike ( Mark Christopher Lawrence ) to create the first cut so that he can partake in the mission , but John Casey ( Adam Baldwin ) forces Morgan to stay in Burbank due to Alex McHugh 's ( Mekenna Melvin ) worry for his safety . 
 Later , Morgan is assigned to infiltrate the meeting where Vivian intends to sell the Norseman , posing as a recently captured criminal he closely resembles . At the meeting , Riley uses the Norseman to kill all the buyers , eliminating all " competition " to Volkoff Industries . Because the Norseman was attuned to the DNA of the buyer Morgan was impersonating , rather than Morgan himself , Morgan pretends to be dead and is able to escape unharmed , but the team is forced to confront Riley and Vivian , who believes Chuck to be " Agent X " . Chuck then reveals the truth that Vivian 's father Alexei Volkoff was Agent X. Riley twists the information to further manipulate and shape Vivian , only to be shot and killed by Sarah . Vivian , however , manages to escape . 
 At Chuck and Sarah 's rehearsal dinner , Morgan tells Alex that he will stop going on missions and simply become an analyst . Chuck 's sister Ellie ( Sarah Lancaster ) is unable to make her own video montage , having previewed and rejected Lester 's deeply disturbed first cut . However , Jeff offers his own flawless cut of the montage , being rewarded with a kiss from Ellie . During the video , Chuck gets a phone call from Vivian , who intends to make him suffer . Vivian activates the Norseman device on a target at the dinner , who Chuck initially fears is his mother . Suddenly , Sarah 's nose starts to bleed and she collapses in Chuck 's arms as he calls out for help . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chuck Versus the Last Details " was directed by Peter Lauer , based on a script by Henry Alonso Myers and Kristin Newman . The episode originally aired in the United States on May 9 , 2011 , on NBC as the 23rd episode of Chuck 's fourth season and the 77th episode overall . 
 Zap2it confirmed in April 2011 that Linda Hamilton , Lauren Cohan , Mekenna Melvin , and Ray Wise would reprise their recurring roles of Mary Elizabeth Bartowski , Vivian Volkoff , Alex McHugh , and Riley , respectively . Michael Bailey Smith also guest starred as a Volkoff security guard , Vlad . 
 Series co @-@ creator Chris Fedak revealed at the 2011 Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo that the series would focus less on the band Jeffster ! than on Jeff and Lester 's " other obsession " as amateur film makers , saying that the " two young " au @-@ <unk> " will " ma @-@ <unk> " right in front of [ the audience ] . " 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 Multiple references are made to the Star Wars saga throughout the episode . Chuck directly compares their attempting to sneak in to Vivian 's base to the same method used by Luke Skywalker and Han Solo to rescue Princess Leia in the original film , by referring to the bound Casey as " Chewie . " During the same scene Casey mutters " I have a bad feeling about this , " a catch @-@ phrase used by characters throughout the film series . The series is twice referenced directly , by Chuck when Sarah fails to understand his " Chewie " reference , and by Casey , who says , " This is what happens when you draw your plans from Star Wars . " Chuck and Morgan also make use of " The Imperial March " as a means to prepare Morgan for his mission to pose as a villain while infiltrating a meeting with Vivian . 
 The episode contains a number of other references . Sarah comments that she has " finally " watched Mannequin . Mary is later shown doing pull @-@ ups from her bed frame in her prison cell , referencing the film Terminator 2 : Judgment Day , where Sarah Connor ( also portrayed by Hamilton ) did the same thing . While practicing his Italian accent , Morgan quotes video game character Mario 's catchphrase " It 's me , Mario ! " Morgan later comments that buckets of acid are going to be used in the same way as on Breaking Bad , recommending the series to Casey . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Chuck Versus the Last Details " received the third @-@ fewest viewers of any episode in the season . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it drew 4 @.@ 099 million viewers , higher only than " Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff " and " Chuck Versus Agent X " . The episode had a 2 @.@ 4 / 4 share among all households and 1 @.@ 4 / 4 share among those aged 18 – 49 . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall wrote , " It wasn 't a perfect episode , mainly because Vivian remains a fairly muddled , bratty villain , and because I don 't feel like the show ever really used Ray Wise to his full potential . But so much of it was so satisfying , both emotionally and comedically , that , until Vivian called Chuck during the rehearsal dinner , I actually thought to myself , ' You know , this would be a pretty damn good finale in and of itself . ' " Ryan McGee of The A.V. Club rated the episode a B on an A + to F scale . McGee wrote , " The last act was fairly phenomenal , but we had to get through a lot of troubling material in order to achieve true liftoff on the hour . With so many loose ends to wrap up , the hour felt overstuffed : the impending wedding , The Norseman , Agent X , Morgan 's first field assignment ... I mean , that 's a lot of stuff . And it doesn 't help that Vivian Volkoff is at the center of three of those things , and inserted herself into the fourth at the last moment . And in thinking about the clunkiness of aspects of this episode , I thought about the clunkiness of this latter half of the season as a whole . " Eric Goldman of IGN gave this episode a score of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , writing that it was a mistake not to include Timothy Dalton as Alexei Volkoff after the plot twists of the previous episode . Sarah Stegall of SFScope wrote , " Chuck is killing me by inches . So close , so close to the Chuck / Sarah wedding , but things keep going wrong . " 
 = Diocletian = 
 Diocletian ( / <unk> / ; Latin : Gaius Aurelius Valerius Diocletianus Augustus ) , born Diocles ( 244 – 311 ) , was a Roman emperor from 284 to 305 . Born to a family of low status in the Roman province of Dalmatia , Diocletian rose through the ranks of the military to become cavalry commander to the Emperor Carus . After the deaths of Carus and his son Numerian on campaign in Persia , Diocletian was proclaimed emperor . The title was also claimed by Carus ' other surviving son , Carinus , but Diocletian defeated him in the Battle of the Margus . Diocletian 's reign stabilized the empire and marks the end of the Crisis of the Third Century . He appointed fellow officer Maximian as Augustus , co @-@ emperor , in 286 . 
 Diocletian delegated further on 1 March 293 , appointing Galerius and Constantius as Caesars , junior co @-@ emperors . Under this ' tetrarchy ' , or " rule of four " , each emperor would rule over a quarter @-@ division of the empire . Diocletian secured the empire 's borders and purged it of all threats to his power . He defeated the Sarmatians and Carpi during several campaigns between 285 and 299 , the Alamanni in 288 , and usurpers in Egypt between 297 and 298 . Galerius , aided by Diocletian , campaigned successfully against Sassanid Persia , the empire 's traditional enemy . In 299 he sacked their capital , Ctesiphon . Diocletian led the subsequent negotiations and achieved a lasting and favorable peace . 
 Diocletian separated and enlarged the empire 's civil and military services and reorganized the empire 's provincial divisions , establishing the largest and most bureaucratic government in the history of the empire . He established new administrative centres in Nicomedia , Mediolanum , Antioch , and Trier , closer to the empire 's frontiers than the traditional capital at Rome had been . Building on third @-@ century trends towards absolutism , he styled himself an autocrat , elevating himself above the empire 's masses with imposing forms of court ceremonies and architecture . Bureaucratic and military growth , constant campaigning , and construction projects increased the state 's expenditures and necessitated a comprehensive tax reform . From at least 297 on , imperial taxation was standardized , made more equitable , and levied at generally higher rates . 
 Not all of Diocletian 's plans were successful : the Edict on Maximum Prices ( 301 ) , his attempt to curb inflation via price controls , was counterproductive and quickly ignored . Although effective while he ruled , Diocletian 's tetrarchic system collapsed after his abdication under the competing dynastic claims of Maxentius and Constantine , sons of Maximian and Constantius respectively . The Diocletianic Persecution ( 303 – 11 ) , the empire 's last , largest , and bloodiest official persecution of Christianity , did not destroy the empire 's Christian community ; indeed , after 324 Christianity became the empire 's preferred religion under its first Christian emperor , Constantine . 
 In spite of these failures and challenges , Diocletian 's reforms fundamentally changed the structure of Roman imperial government and helped stabilize the empire economically and militarily , enabling the empire to remain essentially intact for another hundred years despite being near the brink of collapse in Diocletian 's youth . Weakened by illness , Diocletian left the imperial office on 1 May 305 , and became the first Roman emperor to abdicate the position voluntarily . He lived out his retirement in his palace on the Dalmatian coast , tending to his vegetable gardens . His palace eventually became the core of the modern @-@ day city of Split in Croatia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Diocletian was born near Salona in Dalmatia ( Solin in modern Croatia ) , some time around 244 . His parents gave him the Greek name Diocles , or possibly Diocles Valerius . The modern historian Timothy Barnes takes his official birthday , 22 December , as his actual birthdate . Other historians are not so certain . Diocles ' parents were of low status , and writers critical of him claimed that his father was a scribe or a freedman of the senator <unk> , or even that Diocles was a freedman himself . The first forty years of his life are mostly obscure . The Byzantine chronicler Joannes Zonaras states that he was Dux <unk> , a commander of forces on the lower Danube . The often @-@ unreliable Historia Augusta states that he served in Gaul , but this account is not corroborated by other sources and is ignored by modern historians of the period . The first time Diocletian 's whereabouts are accurately established , in 282 , he was made by the newly Emperor Carus commander of the <unk> <unk> , the élite cavalry force directly attached to the Imperial household – a post that earned him the honor of a consulship in 283 . As such , he took part in Carus ' subsequent Persian campaign . 
 = = = Death of Numerian = = = 
 Carus 's death , amid a successful war with Persia and in mysterious circumstances – he was believed ( perhaps as a result of later Diocletianic propaganda ) to have been struck by lightning – left his sons Numerian and Carinus as the new Augusti . Carinus quickly made his way to Rome from his post in Gaul as imperial commissioner and arrived there by January 284 , becoming legitimate Emperor in the West . Numerian lingered in the East . The Roman withdrawal from Persia was orderly and unopposed . The Sassanid king Bahram II could not field an army against them as he was still struggling to establish his authority . By March 284 , Numerian had only reached Emesa ( Homs ) in Syria ; by November , only Asia Minor . In Emesa he was apparently still alive and in good health : he issued the only extant rescript in his name there , but after he left the city , his staff , including the prefect ( Numerian 's father @-@ in @-@ law , and as such the dominant influence in the Emperor 's entourage ) Aper , reported that he suffered from an inflammation of the eyes . He traveled in a closed coach from then on . When the army reached Bithynia , some of the soldiers smelled an odor emanating from the coach . They opened its curtains and inside they found Numerian dead . Both Eutropius and Aurelius Victor describe Numerian 's death as a murder . 
 Aper officially broke the news in Nicomedia ( İzmit ) in November . <unk> ' generals and tribunes called a council for the succession , and chose Diocles as Emperor , in spite of Aper 's attempts to garner support . On 20 November 284 , the army of the east gathered on a hill 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) outside Nicomedia . The army unanimously saluted Diocles as their new augustus , and he accepted the purple imperial vestments . He raised his sword to the light of the sun and swore an oath disclaiming responsibility for Numerian 's death . He asserted that Aper had killed Numerian and concealed it . In full view of the army , Diocles drew his sword and killed Aper . According to the Historia Augusta , he quoted from Virgil while doing so . Soon after Aper 's death , Diocles changed his name to the more Latinate " Diocletianus " , in full Gaius Aurelius Valerius Diocletianus . 
 = = = Conflict with Carinus = = = 
 After his accession , Diocletian and Lucius <unk> Bassus were named as consuls and assumed the fasces in place of Carinus and <unk> . Bassus was a member of a senatorial family from Campania , a former consul and proconsul of Africa , chosen by Probus for signal distinction . He was skilled in areas of government where Diocletian presumably had no experience . Diocletian 's elevation of Bassus as consul symbolized his rejection of Carinus ' government in Rome , his refusal to accept second @-@ tier status to any other emperor , and his willingness to continue the long @-@ standing collaboration between the empire 's senatorial and military aristocracies . It also tied his success to that of the Senate , whose support he would need in his advance on Rome . 
 Diocletian was not the only challenger to Carinus ' rule : the usurper M. Aurelius Julianus , Carinus ' corrector <unk> , took control of northern Italy and Pannonia after Diocletian 's accession . Julianus minted coins from the mint at Siscia ( Sisak , Croatia ) declaring himself as emperor and promising freedom . It was all good publicity for Diocletian , and it aided in his portrayal of Carinus as a cruel and oppressive tyrant . Julianus ' forces were weak , however , and were handily dispersed when Carinus ' armies moved from Britain to northern Italy . As leader of the united East , Diocletian was clearly the greater threat . Over the winter of 284 – 85 , Diocletian advanced west across the Balkans . In the spring , some time before the end of May , his armies met Carinus ' across the river Margus ( Great Morava ) in Moesia . In modern accounts , the site has been located between the Mons Aureus ( <unk> , west of Smederevo ) and Viminacium , near modern Belgrade , Serbia . 
 Despite having the stronger , more powerful army , Carinus held the weaker position . His rule was unpopular , and it was later alleged that he had mistreated the Senate and seduced his officers ' wives . It is possible that Flavius Constantius , the governor of Dalmatia and Diocletian 's associate in the household guard , had already defected to Diocletian in the early spring . When the Battle of the Margus began , Carinus ' prefect Aristobulus also defected . In the course of the battle , Carinus was killed by his own men . Following Diocletian 's victory , both the western and the eastern armies acclaimed him augustus . Diocletian exacted an oath of allegiance from the defeated army and departed for Italy . 
 = = Early rule = = 
 Diocletian may have become involved in battles against the Quadi and Marcomanni immediately after the Battle of the Margus . He eventually made his way to northern Italy and made an imperial government , but it is not known whether he visited the city of Rome at this time . There is a contemporary issue of coins suggestive of an imperial adventus ( arrival ) for the city , but some modern historians state that Diocletian avoided the city , and that he did so on principle , as the city and its Senate were no longer politically relevant to the affairs of the empire and needed to be taught as much . Diocletian dated his reign from his elevation by the army , not the date of his ratification by the Senate , following the practice established by Carus , who had declared the Senate 's ratification a useless formality . However , Diocletian was to offer proof of his deference towards the Senate by retaining Aristobulus as ordinary consul and colleague for 285 ( one of the few instances during the Late Empire in which an emperor admitted a <unk> as his colleague ) and by creating senior senators Vettius <unk> and Junius Maximus ordinary consuls for the following year – for Maximus , it was his second consulship . 
 Nevertheless , if Diocletian ever did enter Rome shortly after his accession , he did not stay long ; he is attested back in the Balkans by 2 November 285 , on campaign against the Sarmatians . 
 Diocletian replaced the prefect of Rome with his consular colleague Bassus . Most officials who had served under Carinus , however , retained their offices under Diocletian . In an act of clementia denoted by the <unk> Aurelius Victor as unusual , Diocletian did not kill or depose Carinus ' traitorous praetorian prefect and consul Ti . Claudius Aurelius Aristobulus , but confirmed him in both roles . He later gave him the <unk> of Africa and the post of urban prefect for 295 . The other figures who retained their offices might have also betrayed Carinus . 
 = = = Maximian made co @-@ emperor = = = 
 The assassinations of Aurelian and Probus demonstrated that sole rulership was dangerous to the stability of the empire . Conflict boiled in every province , from Gaul to Syria , Egypt to the lower Danube . It was too much for one person to control , and Diocletian needed a lieutenant . At some time in 285 at Mediolanum ( Milan ) , Diocletian raised his fellow @-@ officer Maximian to the office of caesar , making him co @-@ emperor . 
 The concept of dual rulership was nothing new to the Roman Empire . Augustus , the first Emperor , had nominally shared power with his colleagues , and more formal offices of Co @-@ Emperor had existed from Marcus Aurelius on . Most recently , Emperor Carus and his sons had ruled together , albeit unsuccessfully . Diocletian was in a less comfortable position than most of his predecessors , as he had a daughter , Valeria , but no sons . His co @-@ ruler had to be from outside his family , raising the question of trust . Some historians state that Diocletian adopted Maximian as his filius Augusti , his " Augustan son " , upon his appointment to the throne , following the precedent of some previous Emperors . This argument has not been universally accepted . 
 The relationship between Diocletian and Maximian was quickly couched in religious terms . Around 287 Diocletian assumed the title <unk> , and Maximian assumed the title Herculius . The titles were probably meant to convey certain characteristics of their associated leaders . Diocletian , in Jovian style , would take on the dominating roles of planning and commanding ; Maximian , in <unk> mode , would act as Jupiter 's heroic subordinate . For all their religious connotations , the emperors were not " gods " in the tradition of the Imperial cult — although they may have been hailed as such in Imperial panegyrics . Instead , they were seen as the gods ' representatives , effecting their will on earth . The shift from military acclamation to divine sanctification took the power to appoint emperors away from the army . Religious legitimization elevated Diocletian and Maximian above potential rivals in a way military power and dynastic claims could not . 
 = = = Conflict with <unk> and Persia = = = 
 After his acclamation , Maximian was dispatched to fight the rebel Bagaudae , insurgent peasants of Gaul . Diocletian returned to the East , progressing slowly . By 2 November , he had only reached <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , near Ptuj , Slovenia ) . In the Balkans during the autumn of 285 , he encountered a tribe of Sarmatians who demanded assistance . The Sarmatians requested that Diocletian either help them recover their lost lands or grant them pasturage rights within the empire . Diocletian refused and fought a battle with them , but was unable to secure a complete victory . The nomadic pressures of the European Plain remained and could not be solved by a single war ; soon the Sarmatians would have to be fought again . 
 Diocletian wintered in Nicomedia . There may have been a revolt in the eastern provinces at this time , as he brought settlers from Asia to populate emptied farmlands in Thrace . He visited Syria Palaestina the following spring , His stay in the East saw diplomatic success in the conflict with Persia : in 287 , Bahram II granted him precious gifts , declared open friendship with the Empire , and invited Diocletian to visit him . Roman sources insist that the act was entirely voluntary . 
 Around the same time , perhaps in 287 , Persia relinquished claims on Armenia and recognized Roman authority over territory to the west and south of the Tigris . The western portion of Armenia was incorporated into the empire and made a province . Tiridates III , Arsacid claimant to the Armenian throne and Roman client , had been disinherited and forced to take refuge in the empire after the Persian conquest of 252 – 53 . In 287 , he returned to lay claim to the eastern half of his ancestral domain and encountered no opposition . Bahram II 's gifts were widely recognized as symbolic of a victory in the ongoing conflict with Persia , and Diocletian was hailed as the " founder of eternal peace " . The events might have represented a formal end to Carus ' eastern campaign , which probably ended without an acknowledged peace . At the conclusion of discussions with the Persians , Diocletian re @-@ organized the Mesopotamian frontier and fortified the city of Circesium ( <unk> , Syria ) on the Euphrates . 
 = = = Maximian made Augustus = = = 
 Maximian 's campaigns were not proceeding as smoothly . The Bagaudae had been easily suppressed , but Carausius , the man he had put in charge of operations against Saxon and Frankish pirates on the Saxon Shore , had , according to literary sources , begun keeping the goods seized from the pirates for himself . Maximian issued a death @-@ warrant for his <unk> subordinate . Carausius fled the Continent , proclaimed himself Augustus , and agitated Britain and northwestern Gaul into open revolt against Maximian and Diocletian . 
 Far more probable , according to the archaeological evidence available , is that Carausius probably had held some important military post in Britain and had already a firm basis of power on both Britain and Northern Gaul ( a coin hoard found in Rouen proves that he was in control of that mainland area at the beginning of his rebellion ) and that he profited from the lack of legitimacy of the central government . Carausius strove at having his legitimacy as a junior emperor acknowledged by Diocletian : in his coinage ( of far better quality than the official one , especially his silver pieces ) he extolled the " concord " between him and the central power ( PAX <unk> , " the Peace of the three Augusti " , read one 290 bronze piece , displaying , on the other side , Carausius together with Diocletian and Maximian , with the caption <unk> ET <unk> <unk> , " Carausius & his brothers " [ 1 ] ) . However , Diocletian could not allow elbow room to a breakaway regional usurper following on Postumus 's footprints to enter , solely on his own accord , the imperial college . So Carausius had to go . 
 Spurred by the crisis , on 1 April 286 , Maximian took up the title of Augustus . His appointment is unusual in that it was impossible for Diocletian to have been present to witness the event . It has even been suggested that Maximian usurped the title and was only later recognized by Diocletian in hopes of avoiding civil war . This suggestion is unpopular , as it is clear that Diocletian meant for Maximian to act with a certain amount of independence . It may be posited , however , that Diocletian felt the need to bind Maximian closer to him , by making him his empowered associate , in order to avoid the possibility of having him striking some sort of deal with Carausius . 
 Maximian realized that he could not immediately suppress the rogue commander , so in 287 he campaigned solely against tribes beyond the Rhine instead . As Carausius was allied to the Franks , Maximian 's campaigns could be seen as an effort to deny the separatist emperor in Britain a basis of support on the mainland . The following spring , as Maximian prepared a fleet for an expedition against Carausius , Diocletian returned from the East to meet Maximian . The two emperors agreed on a joint campaign against the Alamanni . Diocletian invaded Germania through Raetia while Maximian progressed from Mainz . Each emperor burned crops and food supplies as he went , destroying the Germans ' means of sustenance . The two men added territory to the empire and allowed Maximian to continue preparations against Carausius without further disturbance . On his return to the East , Diocletian managed what was probably another rapid campaign against the resurgent Sarmatians . No details survive , but surviving inscriptions indicate that Diocletian took the title <unk> Maximus after 289 . 
 In the East , Diocletian engaged in diplomacy with desert tribes in the regions between Rome and Persia . He might have been attempting to persuade them to ally themselves with Rome , thus reviving the old , Rome @-@ friendly , Palmyrene sphere of influence , or simply attempting to reduce the frequency of their incursions . No details survive for these events . Some of the princes of these states were Persian client kings , a disturbing fact in light of increasing tensions with the Sassanids . In the West , Maximian lost the fleet built in 288 and 289 , probably in the early spring of 290 . The panegyrist who refers to the loss suggests that its cause was a storm , but this might simply have been an attempt to conceal an embarrassing military defeat . Diocletian broke off his tour of the Eastern provinces soon thereafter . He returned with haste to the West , reaching Emesa by 10 May 290 , and Sirmium on the Danube by 1 July 290 . 
 Diocletian met Maximian in Milan in the winter of 290 – 91 , either in late December 290 or January 291 . The meeting was undertaken with a sense of solemn pageantry . The emperors spent most of their time in public appearances . It has been surmised that the ceremonies were arranged to demonstrate Diocletian 's continuing support for his faltering colleague . A deputation from the Roman Senate met with the emperors , renewing its infrequent contact with the Imperial office . The choice of Milan over Rome further snubbed the capital 's pride . But then it was already a long established practice that Rome itself was only a ceremonial capital , as the actual seat of the Imperial administration was determined by the needs of defense . Long before Diocletian , Gallienus ( r . 253 – 68 ) had chosen Milan as the seat of his headquarters . If the panegyric detailing the ceremony implied that the true center of the empire was not Rome , but where the emperor sat ( " ... the capital of the empire appeared to be there , where the two emperors met " ) , it simply echoed what had already been stated by the historian Herodian in the early third century : " Rome is where the emperor is " . During the meeting , decisions on matters of politics and war were probably made in secret . The Augusti would not meet again until 303 . 
 = = Tetrarchy = = 
 = = = Foundation of the Tetrarchy = = = 
 Some time after his return , and before 293 , Diocletian transferred command of the war against Carausius from Maximian to Flavius Constantius , a former Governor of Dalmatia and a man of military experience stretching back to Aurelian 's campaigns against Zenobia ( 272 – 73 ) . He was Maximian 's praetorian prefect in Gaul , and the husband to Maximian 's daughter , Theodora . On 1 March 293 at Milan , Maximian gave Constantius the office of caesar . In the spring of 293 , in either Philippopolis ( Plovdiv , Bulgaria ) or Sirmium , Diocletian would do the same for Galerius , husband to Diocletian 's daughter Valeria , and perhaps Diocletian 's Praetorian Prefect . Constantius was assigned Gaul and Britain . Galerius was assigned Syria , Palestine , Egypt , and responsibility for the eastern borderlands . 
 This arrangement is called the tetrarchy , from a Greek term meaning " rulership by four " . The Tetrarchic Emperors were more or less sovereign in their own lands , and they travelled with their own imperial courts , administrators , secretaries , and armies . They were joined by blood and marriage ; Diocletian and Maximian now styled themselves as brothers . The senior Co @-@ Emperors formally adopted Galerius and Constantius as sons in 293 . These relationships implied a line of succession . Galerius and Constantius would become Augusti after the departure of Diocletian and Maximian . Maximian 's son Maxentius and Constantius ' son Constantine would then become Caesars . In preparation for their future roles , Constantine and Maxentius were taken to Diocletian 's court in Nicomedia . 
 = = = Demise of Carausius ' breakaway Roman Empire = = = 
 Just before his creation as Caesar , Constantius proceeded to cut Carausius from his base of support in Gaul , recovering Boulogne after a hotly fought siege , a success that would result in Carausius being murdered and replaced by his aide Allectus , who would hold out in his Britain stronghold for a further three years until a two @-@ pronged naval invasion resulted in Allectus ' defeat and death at the hands of Constantius ' <unk> prefect Julius Asclepiodotus , during a land battle somewhere near Farnham . Constantius himself , after disembarking in the south east , delivered London from a looting party of Frankish deserters in Allectus ' pay , something that allowed him to assume the role of liberator of Britain . A famous commemorative medallion depicts a personification of London supplying the victorious Constantius on <unk> with the legend <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Restorer of the eternal light ) . The suppression of this threat to the Tetrarchs ' legitimacy allowed both Constantius and Maximian to concentrate on outside threats : by 297 Constantius was back on the Rhine and Maximian engaged in a full @-@ scale African campaign against Frankish pirates and nomads , eventually making a triumphal entry into Carthage on 10 March 298 . However , Maximian 's failure to deal with Carausius and Allectus on his own had jeopardized the position of Maxentius as putative heir to his father 's post as Augustus of the West , with Constantius ' son Constantine appearing as a rival claimant 
 = = = Conflict in the Balkans and Egypt = = = 
 Diocletian spent the spring of 293 traveling with Galerius from Sirmium ( Sremska Mitrovica , Serbia ) to Byzantium ( Istanbul , Turkey ) . Diocletian then returned to Sirmium , where he would remain for the following winter and spring . He campaigned against the Sarmatians again in 294 , probably in the autumn , and won a victory against them . The Sarmatians ' defeat kept them from the Danube provinces for a long time . Meanwhile , Diocletian built forts north of the Danube , at <unk> ( Budapest , Hungary ) , Bononia ( Vidin , Bulgaria ) , <unk> <unk> , Castra <unk> , <unk> ( Dunaújváros , Hungary ) , and <unk> ( <unk> , Serbia ) . The new forts became part of a new defensive line called the Ripa <unk> . In 295 and 296 Diocletian campaigned in the region again , and won a victory over the Carpi in the summer of 296 . Later during both 299 and 302 , as Diocletian was then residing in the East , it was Galerius ' turn to campaign victoriously on the Danube . By the end of his reign , Diocletian had secured the entire length of the Danube , provided it with forts , bridgeheads , highways , and walled towns , and sent fifteen or more legions to patrol the region ; an inscription at <unk> <unk> on the Lower Danube extolled restored <unk> at the region . The defense came at a heavy cost , but was a significant achievement in an area difficult to defend . 
 Galerius , meanwhile , was engaged during 291 – 293 in disputes in Upper Egypt , where he suppressed a regional uprising . He would return to Syria in 295 to fight the revanchist Persian empire . Diocletian 's attempts to bring the Egyptian tax system in line with Imperial standards stirred discontent , and a revolt swept the region after Galerius ' departure . The usurper L. Domitius Domitianus declared himself Augustus in July or August 297 . Much of Egypt , including Alexandria , recognized his rule . Diocletian moved into Egypt to suppress him , first putting down rebels in the Thebaid in the autumn of 297 , then moving on to besiege Alexandria . Domitianus died in December 297 , by which time Diocletian had secured control of the Egyptian countryside . Alexandria , however , whose defense was organized under Domitianus ' former corrector Aurelius <unk> , was to hold out until a later date , probably March 298 . 
 Bureaucratic affairs were completed during Diocletian 's stay : a census took place , and Alexandria , in punishment for its rebellion , lost the ability to mint independently . Diocletian 's reforms in the region , combined with those of Septimius Severus , brought Egyptian administrative practices much closer to Roman standards . Diocletian travelled south along the Nile the following summer , where he visited Oxyrhynchus and Elephantine . In Nubia , he made peace with the <unk> and <unk> tribes . Under the terms of the peace treaty Rome 's borders moved north to Philae and the two tribes received an annual gold stipend . Diocletian left Africa quickly after the treaty , moving from Upper Egypt in September 298 to Syria in February 299 . He met with Galerius in Mesopotamia . 
 = = = War with Persia = = = 
 = = = = Invasion , <unk> = = = = 
 In 294 , Narseh , a son of Shapur who had been passed over for the Sassanid succession , came to power in Persia . Narseh eliminated Bahram III , a young man installed in the wake of Bahram II 's death in 293 . In early 294 , Narseh sent Diocletian the customary package of gifts between the empires , and Diocletian responded with an exchange of ambassadors . Within Persia , however , Narseh was destroying every trace of his immediate predecessors from public monuments . He sought to identify himself with the warlike kings Ardashir ( r . 226 – 41 ) and Shapur I ( r . 241 – 72 ) , who had sacked Roman Antioch and skinned the Emperor Valerian ( r . 253 – 260 ) to decorate his war temple . 
 Narseh declared war on Rome in 295 or 296 . He appears to have first invaded western Armenia , where he seized the lands delivered to Tiridates in the peace of 287 . Narseh moved south into Roman Mesopotamia in 297 , where he inflicted a severe defeat on Galerius in the region between Carrhae ( Harran , Turkey ) and Callinicum ( Ar @-@ Raqqah , Syria ) ( and thus , the historian Fergus Millar notes , probably somewhere on the <unk> River ) . Diocletian may or may not have been present at the battle , but he quickly divested himself of all responsibility . In a public ceremony at Antioch , the official version of events was clear : Galerius was responsible for the defeat ; Diocletian was not . Diocletian publicly humiliated Galerius , forcing him to walk for a mile at the head of the Imperial caravan , still clad in the purple robes of the Emperor . 
 Galerius was reinforced , probably in the spring of 298 , by a new contingent collected from the empire 's Danubian holdings . Narseh did not advance from Armenia and Mesopotamia , leaving Galerius to lead the offensive in 298 with an attack on northern Mesopotamia via Armenia . It is unclear if Diocletian was present to assist the campaign ; he might have returned to Egypt or Syria . Narseh retreated to Armenia to fight Galerius ' force , to Narseh 's disadvantage ; the rugged Armenian terrain was favorable to Roman infantry , but not to Sassanid cavalry . In two battles , Galerius won major victories over Narseh . During the second encounter , Roman forces seized Narseh 's camp , his treasury , his harem , and his wife . Galerius continued moving down the Tigris , and took the Persian capital Ctesiphon before returning to Roman territory along the Euphrates . 
 = = = = Peace negotiations = = = = 
 Narseh sent an ambassador to Galerius to plead for the return of his wives and children in the course of the war , but Galerius dismissed him . Serious peace negotiations began in the spring of 299 . The magister memoriae ( secretary ) of Diocletian and Galerius , <unk> Probus , was sent to Narseh to present terms . The conditions of the resulting Peace of Nisibis were heavy : Armenia returned to Roman domination , with the fort of <unk> as its border ; Caucasian Iberia would pay allegiance to Rome under a Roman appointee ; Nisibis , now under Roman rule , would become the sole conduit for trade between Persia and Rome ; and Rome would exercise control over the five satrapies between the Tigris and Armenia : <unk> , <unk> ( Sophene ) , Arzanene ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( near modern Hakkâri , Turkey ) . These regions included the passage of the Tigris through the Anti @-@ Taurus range ; the Bitlis pass , the quickest southerly route into Persian Armenia ; and access to the Tur Abdin plateau . 
 A stretch of land containing the later strategic strongholds of Amida ( Diyarbakır , Turkey ) and <unk> came under firm Roman military occupation . With these territories , Rome would have an advance station north of Ctesiphon , and would be able to slow any future advance of Persian forces through the region . Many cities east of the Tigris came under Roman control , including <unk> , <unk> , Martyropolis , <unk> , Moxos , <unk> , and <unk> – though under what status is unclear . At the conclusion of the peace , Tiridates regained both his throne and the entirety of his ancestral claim . Rome secured a wide zone of cultural influence , which led to a wide diffusion of Syriac Christianity from a center at Nisibis in later decades , and the eventual Christianization of Armenia . 
 = = Religious persecutions = = 
 = = = Early persecutions = = = 
 At the conclusion of the Peace of Nisibis , Diocletian and Galerius returned to Syrian Antioch . At some time in 299 , the emperors took part in a ceremony of sacrifice and divination in an attempt to predict the future . The haruspices were unable to read the entrails of the sacrificed animals and blamed Christians in the Imperial household . The emperors ordered all members of the court to perform a sacrifice to purify the palace . The emperors sent letters to the military command , demanding the entire army perform the required sacrifices or face discharge . Diocletian was conservative in matters of religion , a man faithful to the traditional Roman pantheon and understanding of demands for religious purification , but Eusebius , Lactantius and Constantine state that it was Galerius , not Diocletian , who was the prime supporter of the purge , and its greatest beneficiary . Galerius , even more devoted and passionate than Diocletian , saw political advantage in the politics of persecution . He was willing to break with a government policy of inaction on the issue . 
 Antioch was Diocletian 's primary residence from 299 to 302 , while Galerius swapped places with his Augustus on the Middle and Lower Danube . Diocletian visited Egypt once , over the winter of 301 – 2 , and issued a grain dole in Alexandria . Following some public disputes with Manicheans , Diocletian ordered that the leading followers of Mani be burnt alive along with their scriptures . In a 31 March 302 rescript from Alexandria , he declared that low @-@ status Manicheans must be executed by the blade , and high @-@ status Manicheans must be sent to work in the quarries of <unk> ( Marmara Island , Turkey ) or the mines of Phaeno in southern Palestine . All Manichean property was to be seized and deposited in the imperial treasury . Diocletian found much to be offended by in Manichean religion : its novelty , its alien origins , the way it corrupted the morals of the Roman race , and its inherent opposition to long @-@ standing religious traditions . <unk> was also supported by Persia at the time , compounding religious dissent with international politics . Excepting Persian support , the reasons he disliked <unk> were equally applicable , if not more so , to Christianity , his next target . 
 = = = Great Persecution = = = 
 Diocletian returned to Antioch in the autumn of 302 . He ordered that the deacon Romanus of Caesarea have his tongue removed for defying the order of the courts and interrupting official sacrifices . Romanus was then sent to prison , where he was executed on 17 November 303 . Diocletian believed that Romanus of Caesarea was arrogant , and he left the city for Nicomedia in the winter , accompanied by Galerius . According to Lactantius , Diocletian and Galerius entered into an argument over imperial policy towards Christians while wintering at Nicomedia in 302 . Diocletian argued that forbidding Christians from the bureaucracy and military would be sufficient to appease the gods , but Galerius pushed for extermination . The two men sought the advice of the oracle of Apollo at Didyma . The oracle responded that the impious on Earth hindered Apollo 's ability to provide advice . <unk> Eusebius records the Oracle as saying " The just on Earth ... " These impious , Diocletian was informed by members of the court , could only refer to the Christians of the empire . At the behest of his court , Diocletian acceded to demands for universal persecution . 
 On 23 February 303 , Diocletian ordered that the newly built church at Nicomedia be razed . He demanded that its scriptures be burned , and seized its precious stores for the treasury . The next day , Diocletian 's first " Edict against the Christians " was published . The edict ordered the destruction of Christian scriptures and places of worship across the empire , and prohibited Christians from assembling for worship . Before the end of February , a fire destroyed part of the Imperial palace . Galerius convinced Diocletian that the culprits were Christians , conspirators who had plotted with the eunuchs of the palace . An investigation was commissioned , but no responsible party was found . Executions followed anyway , and the palace eunuchs Dorotheus and <unk> were executed . One individual , Peter <unk> , was stripped , raised high , and scourged . Salt and vinegar were poured in his wounds , and he was slowly boiled over an open flame . The executions continued until at least 24 April 303 , when six individuals , including the bishop Anthimus , were decapitated . A second fire occurred sixteen days after the first . Galerius left the city for Rome , declaring Nicomedia unsafe . Diocletian would soon follow . 
 Although further persecutionary edicts followed , compelling the arrest of the Christian clergy and universal acts of sacrifice , the persecutionary edicts were ultimately unsuccessful ; most Christians escaped punishment , and pagans too were generally unsympathetic to the persecution . The martyrs ' sufferings strengthened the resolve of their fellow Christians . Constantius and Maximian did not apply the later persecutionary edicts , and left the Christians of the West unharmed . Galerius rescinded the edict in 311 , announcing that the persecution had failed to bring Christians back to traditional religion . The temporary apostasy of some Christians , and the surrendering of scriptures , during the persecution played a major role in the subsequent Donatist controversy . Within twenty @-@ five years of the persecution 's inauguration , the Christian Emperor Constantine would rule the empire alone . He would reverse the consequences of the edicts , and return all confiscated property to Christians . Under Constantine 's rule , Christianity would become the empire 's preferred religion . Diocletian was demonized by his Christian successors : Lactantius intimated that Diocletian 's ascendancy heralded the apocalypse , and in Serbian mythology , Diocletian is remembered as Dukljan , the adversary of God . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Illness and abdication = = = 
 Diocletian entered the city of Rome in the early winter of 303 . On 20 November , he celebrated , with Maximian , the twentieth anniversary of his reign ( <unk> ) , the tenth anniversary of the tetrarchy ( <unk> ) , and a triumph for the war with Persia . Diocletian soon grew impatient with the city , as the Romans acted towards him with what Edward Gibbon , following Lactantius , calls " licentious familiarity " . The Roman people did not give enough deference to his supreme authority ; it expected him to act the part of an aristocratic ruler , not a monarchic one . On 20 December 303 , Diocletian cut short his stay in Rome and left for the north . He did not even perform the ceremonies investing him with his ninth consulate ; he did them in Ravenna on 1 January 304 instead . There are suggestions in the <unk> Latini and Lactantius ' account that Diocletian arranged plans for his and Maximian 's future retirement of power in Rome . Maximian , according to these accounts , swore to uphold Diocletian 's plan in a ceremony in the Temple of Jupiter . 
 From Ravenna , Diocletian left for the Danube . There , possibly in Galerius ' company , he took part in a campaign against the Carpi . He contracted a minor illness while on campaign , but his condition quickly worsened and he chose to travel in a litter . In the late summer he left for Nicomedia . On 20 November , he appeared in public to dedicate the opening of the circus beside his palace . He collapsed soon after the ceremonies . Over the winter of 304 – 5 he kept within his palace at all times . Rumors alleging that Diocletian 's death was merely being kept secret until Galerius could come to assume power spread through the city . On 13 December , he seemed to have finally died . The city was sent into a mourning from which it was only retrieved by public declarations of his survival . When Diocletian reappeared in public on 1 March 305 , he was emaciated and barely recognizable . 
 Galerius arrived in the city later in March . According to Lactantius , he came armed with plans to reconstitute the tetrarchy , force Diocletian to step down , and fill the Imperial office with men compliant to his will . Through coercion and threats , he eventually convinced Diocletian to comply with his plan . Lactantius also claims that he had done the same to Maximian at Sirmium . On 1 May 305 , Diocletian called an assembly of his generals , traditional companion troops , and representatives from distant legions . They met at the same hill , 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) out of Nicomedia , where Diocletian had been proclaimed emperor . In front of a statue of Jupiter , his patron deity , Diocletian addressed the crowd . With tears in his eyes , he told them of his weakness , his need for rest , and his will to resign . He declared that he needed to pass the duty of empire on to someone stronger . He thus became the first Roman emperor to voluntarily abdicate his title . 
 Most in the crowd believed they knew what would follow ; Constantine and Maxentius , the only adult sons of a reigning emperor , men who had long been preparing to succeed their fathers , would be granted the title of caesar . Constantine had traveled through Palestine at the right hand of Diocletian , and was present at the palace in Nicomedia in 303 and 305 . It is likely that Maxentius received the same treatment . In Lactantius ' account , when Diocletian announced that he was to resign , the entire crowd turned to face Constantine . It was not to be : Severus and Maximin were declared caesars . Maximin appeared and took Diocletian 's robes . On the same day , Severus received his robes from Maximian in Milan . Constantius succeeded Maximian as augustus of the West , but Constantine and Maxentius were entirely ignored in the transition of power . This did not bode well for the future security of the tetrarchic system . 
 = = = Retirement and death = = = 
 Diocletian retired to his homeland , Dalmatia . He moved into the expansive Diocletian 's Palace , a heavily fortified compound located by the small town of <unk> on the shores of the Adriatic Sea , and near the large provincial administrative center of Salona . The palace is preserved in great part to this day and forms the historic core of Split , the second @-@ largest city of modern Croatia . 
 Maximian retired to villas in Campania or Lucania . Their homes were distant from political life , but Diocletian and Maximian were close enough to remain in regular contact with each other . Galerius assumed the consular fasces in 308 with Diocletian as his colleague . In the autumn of 308 , Galerius again conferred with Diocletian at Carnuntum ( Petronell @-@ Carnuntum , Austria ) . Diocletian and Maximian were both present on 11 November 308 , to see Galerius appoint Licinius to be augustus in place of Severus , who had died at the hands of Maxentius . He ordered Maximian , who had attempted to return to power after his retirement , to step down permanently . At Carnuntum people begged Diocletian to return to the throne , to resolve the conflicts that had arisen through Constantine 's rise to power and Maxentius ' usurpation . Diocletian 's reply : " If you could show the cabbage that I planted with my own hands to your emperor , he definitely wouldn 't dare suggest that I replace the peace and happiness of this place with the storms of a never @-@ satisfied greed . " 
 He lived on for three more years , spending his days in his palace gardens . He saw his tetrarchic system fail , torn by the selfish ambitions of his successors . He heard of Maximian 's third claim to the throne , his forced suicide , his damnatio memoriae . In his own palace , statues and portraits of his former companion emperor were torn down and destroyed . Deep in despair and illness , Diocletian may have committed suicide . He died on 3 December 311 . 
 = = Reforms = = 
 = = = Tetrarchic and ideological = = = 
 Diocletian saw his work as that of a restorer , a figure of authority whose duty it was to return the empire to peace , to recreate stability and justice where barbarian hordes had destroyed it . He arrogated , regimented and centralized political authority on a massive scale . In his policies , he enforced an Imperial system of values on diverse and often unreceptive provincial audiences . In the Imperial propaganda from the period , recent history was perverted and minimized in the service of the theme of the tetrarchs as " restorers " . Aurelian 's achievements were ignored , the revolt of Carausius was backdated to the reign of Gallienus , and it was implied that the tetrarchs engineered Aurelian 's defeat of the Palmyrenes ; the period between Gallienus and Diocletian was effectively erased . The history of the empire before the tetrarchy was portrayed as a time of civil war , savage despotism , and imperial collapse . In those inscriptions that bear their names , Diocletian and his companions are referred to as " restorers of the whole world " , men who succeeded in " defeating the nations of the barbarians , and confirming the tranquility of their world " . Diocletian was written up as the " founder of eternal peace " . The theme of restoration was conjoined to an emphasis on the uniqueness and accomplishments of the tetrarchs themselves . 
 The cities where emperors lived frequently in this period — Milan , Trier , Arles , Sirmium , Serdica , Thessaloniki , Nicomedia and Antioch — were treated as alternate imperial seats , to the exclusion of Rome and its senatorial elite . A new style of ceremony was developed , emphasizing the distinction of the emperor from all other persons . The quasi @-@ republican ideals of Augustus ' primus inter pares were abandoned for all but the tetrarchs themselves . Diocletian took to wearing a gold crown and jewels , and forbade the use of purple cloth to all but the emperors . His subjects were required to prostrate themselves in his presence ( <unk> ) ; the most fortunate were allowed the privilege of kissing the hem of his robe ( proskynesis , <unk> ) . Circuses and basilicas were designed to keep the face of the emperor perpetually in view , and always in a seat of authority . The emperor became a figure of transcendent authority , a man beyond the grip of the masses . His every appearance was stage @-@ managed . This style of presentation was not new — many of its elements were first seen in the reigns of Aurelian and Severus — but it was only under the tetrarchs that it was refined into an explicit system . 
 = = = Administrative = = = 
 In keeping with his move from an ideology of republicanism to one of autocracy , Diocletian 's council of advisers , his consilium , differed from those of earlier emperors . He destroyed the Augustan illusion of imperial government as a cooperative affair between emperor , army , and senate . In its place he established an effectively autocratic structure , a shift later epitomized in the institution 's name : it would be called a <unk> ( " consistory " ) , not a council . Diocletian regulated his court by distinguishing separate departments ( <unk> ) for different tasks . From this structure came the offices of different magistri , like the Magister officiorum ( " Master of offices " ) , and associated secretariats . These were men suited to dealing with petitions , requests , correspondence , legal affairs , and foreign embassies . Within his court Diocletian maintained a permanent body of legal advisers , men with significant influence on his re @-@ ordering of juridical affairs . There were also two finance ministers , dealing with the separate bodies of the public treasury and the private domains of the emperor , and the praetorian prefect , the most significant person of the whole . Diocletian 's reduction of the Praetorian Guards to the level of a simple city garrison for Rome lessened the military powers of the prefect – although a prefect like Asclepiodotus , the conqueror of the British Empire , was still a trained general – but the office retained much civil authority . The prefect kept a staff of hundreds and managed affairs in all segments of government : in taxation , administration , jurisprudence , and minor military commands , the praetorian prefect was often second only to the emperor himself . 
 Altogether , Diocletian effected a large increase in the number of bureaucrats at the government 's command ; Lactantius was to claim that there were now more men using tax money than there were paying it . The historian Warren Treadgold estimates that under Diocletian the number of men in the civil service doubled from 15 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 . The classicist Roger Bagnall estimated that there was one bureaucrat for every 5 – 10 @,@ 000 people in Egypt based on 400 or 800 bureaucrats for 4 million inhabitants ( no one knows the population of the province in 300 AD ; Strabo 300 years earlier put it at 7 @.@ 5 million , excluding Alexandria ) . ( By comparison , the ratio in 12th @-@ century Song dynasty China was one bureaucrat for every 15 @,@ 000 people . ) Jones estimated 30 @,@ 000 bureaucrats for an empire of 50 – 65 million inhabitants , which works out to approximately 1 @,@ 667 or 2 @,@ 167 inhabitants per imperial official as averages empire @-@ wide . The actual numbers of officials and ratios per inhabitant varied , of course , per diocese depending on the number of provinces and population within a diocese . Provincial and diocesan paid officials ( there were unpaid supernumeraries ) numbered about 13 – 15 @,@ 000 based on their staff establishments as set by law . The other 50 % were with the emperor ( s ) in his or their comitatus , with the praetorian prefects , with the grain supply officials in the capital ( later , the capitals , Rome and Constantinople ) , Alexandria , and Carthage and officials from the central offices located in the provinces . 
 To avoid the possibility of local usurpations , to facilitate a more efficient collection of taxes and supplies , and to ease the enforcement of the law , Diocletian doubled the number of provinces from fifty to almost one hundred . The provinces were grouped into twelve dioceses , each governed by an appointed official called a vicarius , or " deputy of the praetorian prefects " . Some of the provincial divisions required revision , and were modified either soon after 293 or early in the fourth century . Rome herself ( including her environs , as defined by a 100 miles ( 160 km ) <unk> perimeter around the city itself ) was not under the authority of the praetorian prefect , as she was to be administered by a city prefect of senatorial rank – the sole prestigious post with actual power reserved exclusively for senators , except for some governors in Italy with the titles of corrector and the proconsuls of Asia and Africa . The dissemination of imperial law to the provinces was facilitated under Diocletian 's reign , because Diocletian 's reform of the Empire 's provincial structure meant that there were now a greater number of governors ( <unk> ) ruling over smaller regions and smaller populations . Diocletian 's reforms shifted the governors ' main function to that of the presiding official in the lower courts : whereas in the early Empire military and judicial functions were the function of governor , and procurators had supervised taxation ; under the new system <unk> and governors were responsible for justice and taxation , and a new class of duces ( " dukes " ) , acting independently of the civil service , had military command . These dukes sometimes administered two or three of the new provinces created by Diocletian , and had forces ranging from two thousand to more than twenty thousand men . In addition to their roles as judges and tax collectors , governors were expected to maintain the postal service ( cursus publicus ) and ensure that town councils fulfilled their duties . 
 This curtailment of governors ' powers as the Emperors ' representatives may have lessened the political dangers of an all @-@ too @-@ powerful class of Imperial delegates , but it also severely limited governors ' ability to oppose local landed elites , specially those of senatorial status , which , although with reduced opportunities for office holding , retained wealth , social prestige , and personal connections . – specially in relatively peaceful regions without a great military presence . On one occasion , Diocletian had to exhort a proconsul of Africa not to fear the consequences of treading on the toes of the local magnates of senatorial rank . If a governor of senatorial rank himself felt these pressures , one can imagine the difficulties faced by a mere praeses . That accounts for the strained relationship between the central power and local elites : sometime during 303 , an attempted military sedition in Seleucia <unk> and Antioch made Diocletian to extract a bloody retribution on both cities by putting to death a number of their council members for failing their duties of keeping order in their jurisdiction . 
 = = = Legal = = = 
 As with most emperors , much of Diocletian 's daily routine rotated around legal affairs — responding to appeals and petitions , and delivering decisions on disputed matters . <unk> , authoritative interpretations issued by the emperor in response to demands from disputants in both public and private cases , were a common duty of second- and third @-@ century emperors . Diocletian was awash in paperwork , and was nearly incapable of delegating his duties . It would have been seen as a dereliction of duty to ignore them . In the " nomadic " imperial courts of the later Empire , one can track the progress of the imperial retinue through the locations from whence particular rescripts were issued – the presence of the Emperor was what allowed the system to function . Whenever the imperial court would settle in one of the capitals , there was a glut in petitions , as in late 294 in Nicomedia , where Diocletian kept winter quarters . 
 Admittedly , Diocletian 's praetorian prefects — Afranius Hannibalianus , Julius Asclepiodotus , and Aurelius Hermogenianus — aided in regulating the flow and presentation of such paperwork , but the deep legalism of Roman culture kept the workload heavy . Emperors in the forty years preceding Diocletian 's reign had not managed these duties so effectively , and their output in attested rescripts is low . Diocletian , by contrast , was prodigious in his affairs : there are around 1 @,@ 200 rescripts in his name still surviving , and these probably represent only a small portion of the total issue . The sharp increase in the number of edicts and rescripts produced under Diocletian 's rule has been read as evidence of an ongoing effort to realign the whole Empire on terms dictated by the imperial center . 
 Under the governance of the jurists Gregorius , Aurelius Arcadius Charisius , and Hermogenianus , the imperial government began issuing official books of precedent , collecting and listing all the rescripts that had been issued from the reign of Hadrian ( r . 117 – 38 ) to the reign of Diocletian . The Codex <unk> includes rescripts up to 292 , which the Codex Hermogenianus updated with a comprehensive collection of rescripts issued by Diocletian in 293 and 294 . Although the very act of codification was a radical innovation , given the precedent @-@ based design of the Roman legal system , the jurists were generally conservative , and constantly looked to past Roman practice and theory for guidance . They were probably given more free rein over their codes than the later compilers of the Codex Theodosianus ( 438 ) and Codex Justinianus ( 529 ) would have . Gregorius and Hermogenianus ' codices lack the rigid structuring of later codes , and were not published in the name of the emperor , but in the names of their compilers . Their official character , however , was clear in that both collections were subsequently acknowledged by courts as authoritative records of imperial legislation up to the date of their publication and regularly updated . 
 After Diocletian 's reform of the provinces , governors were called iudex , or judge . The governor became responsible for his decisions first to his immediate superiors , as well as to the more distant office of the emperor . It was most likely at this time that judicial records became verbatim accounts of what was said in trial , making it easier to determine bias or improper conduct on the part of the governor . With these records and the Empire 's universal right of appeal , Imperial authorities probably had a great deal of power to enforce behavior standards for their judges . In spite of Diocletian 's attempts at reform , the provincial restructuring was far from clear , especially when citizens appealed the decisions of their governors . <unk> , for example , were often both judges of first instance and appeal , and the governors of some provinces took appellant cases from their neighbors . It soon became impossible to avoid taking some cases to the emperor for arbitration and judgment . Diocletian 's reign marks the end of the classical period of Roman law . Where Diocletian 's system of rescripts shows an adherence to classical tradition , Constantine 's law is full of Greek and eastern influences . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 It is archaeologically difficult to distinguish Diocletian 's fortifications from those of his successors and predecessors . The Devil 's Dyke , for example , the Danubian earthworks traditionally attributed to Diocletian , cannot even be securely dated to a particular century . The most that can be said about built structures under Diocletian 's reign is that he rebuilt and strengthened forts at the Upper Rhine frontier ( where he followed the works built under Probus along the Lake Constance @-@ Basel and the Rhine – Iller – Danube line ) , on the <unk> where a new line of forts on the far side of the river , the Ripa <unk> , was added to older , rehabilitated fortresses – in Egypt , and on the frontier with Persia . Beyond that , much discussion is speculative , and reliant on the broad generalizations of written sources . Diocletian and the tetrarchs had no consistent plan for frontier advancement , and records of raids and forts built across the frontier are likely to indicate only temporary claims . The Strata <unk> , built after the Persian Wars , which ran from the Euphrates North of Palmyra and South towards northeast Arabia in the general vicinity of Bostra , is the classic Diocletianic frontier system , consisting of an outer road followed by tightly spaced forts – defensible hard @-@ points manned by small garrisons – followed by further fortifications in the rear . In an attempt to resolve the difficulty and slowness of transmitting orders to the frontier , the new capitals of the tetrarchic era were all much closer to the empire 's frontiers than Rome had been : Trier sat on the Rhine , Sirmium and Serdica were close to the Danube , Thessaloniki was on the route leading eastward , and Nicomedia and Antioch were important points in dealings with Persia . 
 Lactantius criticized Diocletian for an excessive increase in troop sizes , declaring that " each of the four [ tetrarchs ] strove to have a far larger number of troops than previous emperors had when they were governing the state alone " . The fifth @-@ century pagan Zosimus , by contrast , praised Diocletian for keeping troops on the borders , rather than keeping them in the cities , as Constantine was held to have done . Both these views had some truth to them , despite the biases of their authors : Diocletian and the tetrarchs did greatly expand the army , and the growth was mostly in frontier regions , where the increased effectives of the new Diocletianic legions seem to have been mostly spread across a network of strongholds . Nevertheless , it is difficult to establish the precise details of these shifts given the weakness of the sources . The army expanded to about 580 @,@ 000 men from a 285 strength of 390 @,@ 000 , of which 310 @,@ 000 men were stationed in the East , most of whom manned the Persian frontier . The navy 's forces increased from approximately 45 @,@ 000 men to approximately 65 @,@ 000 men . 
 Diocletian 's expansion of the army and civil service meant that the empire 's tax burden grew . Since military upkeep took the largest portion of the imperial budget , any reforms here would be especially costly . The proportion of the adult male population , excluding slaves , serving in the army increased from roughly 1 in 25 to 1 in 15 , an increase judged excessive by some modern commentators . Official troop allowances were kept to low levels , and the mass of troops often resorted to extortion or the taking of civilian jobs . <unk> became the norm for most troops . Many were even given payment in kind in place of their salaries . Were he unable to pay for his enlarged army , there would likely be civil conflict , potentially open revolt . Diocletian was led to devise a new system of taxation . 
 = = = Economic = = = 
 = = = = Taxation = = = = 
 In the early empire ( 30 BC – AD 235 ) the Roman government paid for what it needed in gold and silver . The coinage was stable . Requisition , forced purchase , was used to supply armies on the march . During the third century crisis ( 235 – 285 ) , the government resorted to requisition rather than payment in debased coinage , since it could never be sure of the value of money . Requisition was nothing more or less than seizure . Diocletian made requisition into tax . He introduced an extensive new tax system based on heads ( capita ) and land ( <unk> ) – with one <unk> equal to approximately .65 acres – and tied to a new , regular census of the empire 's population and wealth . Census officials traveled throughout the empire , assessed the value of labor and land for each landowner , and joined the landowners ' totals together to make city @-@ wide totals of capita and iuga . The <unk> was not a consistent measure of land , but varied according to the type of land and crop , and the amount of labor necessary for sustenance . The caput was not consistent either : women , for instance , were often valued at half a caput , and sometimes at other values . Cities provided animals , money , and manpower in proportion to its capita , and grain in proportion to its iuga . 
 Most taxes were due on each year on 1 September , and levied from individual landowners by <unk> ( decurions ) . These decurions , analogous to city councilors , were responsible for paying from their own pocket what they failed to collect . Diocletian 's reforms also increased the number of financial officials in the provinces : more rationales and magistri <unk> are attested under Diocletian 's reign than before . These officials represented the interests of the <unk> , which collected taxes in gold , and the Imperial properties . Fluctuations in the value of the currency made collection of taxes in kind the norm , although these could be converted into coin . Rates shifted to take inflation into account . In 296 , Diocletian issued an edict reforming census procedures . This edict introduced a general five @-@ year census for the whole empire , replacing prior censuses that had operated at different speeds throughout the empire . The new censuses would keep up with changes in the values of capita and iuga . 
 Italy , which had long been exempt from taxes , was included in the tax system from 290 / 291 as a <unk> . The city of Rome itself , however , remained exempt ; the " regions " ( i.e. , provinces ) South of Rome ( generally called " suburbicarian " , as opposed to the Northern , " <unk> " region ) seem to have been relatively less taxed , in what probably was a sop offered to the great senatorial families and their landed properties . 
 Diocletian 's edicts emphasized the common liability of all taxpayers . Public records of all taxes were made public . The position of <unk> , member of the city council , had been an honor sought by wealthy aristocrats and the middle classes who displayed their wealth by paying for city amenities and public works . <unk> were made liable for any shortfall in the amount of tax collected . Many tried to find ways to escape the obligation . 
 = = = = Currency and inflation = = = = 
 Aurelian 's attempt to reform the currency had failed ; the denarius was dead . Diocletian restored the three @-@ metal coinage and issued better quality pieces . The new system consisted of five coins : the aureus / solidus , a gold coin weighing , like its predecessors , one @-@ sixtieth of a pound ; the argenteus , a coin weighing one ninety @-@ sixth of a pound and containing ninety @-@ five percent pure silver ; the follis , sometimes referred to as the <unk> A , which is a copper coin with added silver struck at the rate of thirty @-@ two to the pound ; the radiatus , a small copper coin struck at the rate of 108 to the pound , with no added silver ; and a coin known today as the <unk> B , a smaller copper coin struck at the rate of 192 to the pound . Since the nominal values of these new issues were lower than their intrinsic worth as metals , the state was minting these coins at a loss . This practice could be sustained only by requisitioning precious metals from private citizens in exchange for state @-@ minted coin ( of a far lower value than the price of the precious metals requisitioned ) . 
 By 301 , however , the system was in trouble , strained by a new bout of inflation . Diocletian therefore issued his Edict on Coinage , an act re @-@ <unk> all debts so that the <unk> , the most common coin in circulation , would be worth half as much . In the edict , preserved in an inscription from the city of Aphrodisias in Caria ( near <unk> , Turkey ) , it was declared that all debts contracted before 1 September 301 must be repaid at the old standards , while all debts contracted after that date would be repaid at the new standards . It appears that the edict was made in an attempt to preserve the current price of gold and to keep the Empire 's coinage on silver , Rome 's traditional metal currency . This edict risked giving further momentum to inflationary trends , as had happened after Aurelian 's currency reforms . The government 's response was to issue a price freeze . 
 The Edict on Maximum Prices ( Edictum De <unk> Rerum <unk> ) was issued two to three months after the coinage edict , somewhere between 20 November and 10 December 301 . The best @-@ preserved Latin inscription surviving from the Greek East , the edict survives in many versions , on materials as varied as wood , papyrus , and stone . In the edict , Diocletian declared that the current pricing crisis resulted from the unchecked greed of merchants , and had resulted in turmoil for the mass of common citizens . The language of the edict calls on the people 's memory of their benevolent leaders , and exhorts them to enforce the provisions of the edict , and thereby restore perfection to the world . The edict goes on to list in detail over one thousand goods and accompanying retail prices not to be exceeded . Penalties are laid out for various pricing transgressions . 
 In the most basic terms , the edict was ignorant of the law of supply and demand : it ignored the fact that prices might vary from region to region according to product availability , and it ignored the impact of transportation costs in the retail price of goods . In the judgment of the historian David Potter , the edict was " an act of economic lunacy " . The fact that the edict began with a long rhetorical preamble betrays at the same time a moralizing stance as well as a weak grasp of economics – perhaps simply the wishful thinking that criminalizing a practice was enough to stop it . 
 There is no consensus about how effectively the edict was enforced . Supposedly , inflation , speculation , and monetary instability continued , and a black market arose to trade in goods forced out of official markets . The edict 's penalties were applied unevenly across the empire ( some scholars believe they were applied only in Diocletian 's domains ) , widely resisted , and eventually dropped , perhaps within a year of the edict 's issue . Lactantius has written of the perverse accompaniments to the edict ; of goods withdrawn from the market , of brawls over minute variations in price , of the deaths that came when its provisions were enforced . His account may be true , but it seems to modern historians exaggerated and hyperbolic , and the impact of the law is recorded in no other ancient source . 
 = = = = Social and professional mobility = = = = 
 Partly in response to economic pressures and in order to protect the vital functions of the state , Diocletian restricted social and professional mobility . Peasants became tied to the land in a way that presaged later systems of land tenure and workers such as bakers , armourers , public entertainers and workers in the mint had their occupations made hereditary . Soldiers ' children were also forcibly enrolled , something that followed spontaneous tendencies among the rank @-@ and @-@ file , but also expressed increasing difficulties in recruitment . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The historian A.H.M. Jones observed that " It is perhaps Diocletian 's greatest achievement that he reigned twenty @-@ one years and then abdicated voluntarily , and spent the remaining years of his life in peaceful retirement . " Diocletian was one of the few emperors of the third and fourth centuries to die naturally , and the first in the history of the empire to retire voluntarily . Once he retired , however , his tetrarchic system collapsed . Without the guiding hand of Diocletian , the empire fell into civil wars . Stability emerged after the defeat of Licinius by Constantine in 324 . Under the Christian Constantine , Diocletian was maligned . Constantine 's rule , however , validated Diocletian 's achievements and the autocratic principle he represented : the borders remained secure , in spite of Constantine 's large expenditure of forces during his civil wars ; the bureaucratic transformation of Roman government was completed ; and Constantine took Diocletian 's court ceremonies and made them even more extravagant . 
 Constantine ignored those parts of Diocletian 's rule that did not suit him . Diocletian 's policy of preserving a stable silver coinage was abandoned , and the gold solidus became the empire 's primary currency instead . Diocletian 's persecution of Christians was repudiated and changed to a policy of toleration and then favoritism . Christianity eventually became the official religion in 380 . Constantine would claim to have the same close relationship with the Christian God as Diocletian claimed to have with Jupiter . Most importantly , Diocletian 's tax system and administrative reforms lasted , with some modifications , until the advent of the Muslims in the 630s . The combination of state autocracy and state religion was instilled in much of Europe , particularly in the lands which adopted Orthodox Christianity . 
 In addition to his administrative and legal impact on history , the Emperor Diocletian is considered to be the founder of the city of Split in modern @-@ day Croatia . The city itself grew around the heavily fortified Diocletian 's Palace the emperor had built in anticipation of his retirement . 
 The Era of Martyrs ( Latin : anno <unk> or AM ) , also known as the Diocletian era ( Latin : anno <unk> ) , is a method of numbering years used by the Church of Alexandria beginning in the 4th century anno Domini and by the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria from the 5th century to the present . In this system of counting , the beginning of Diocletian 's reign in 284 was used as the epoch , making Diocletian 's first year in power into the Year 1 of that calendar . Western Christians were aware of this count but did not use it ; Dionysius Exiguus replaced the anno <unk> era with his anno Domini era because he did not wish to continue the memory of a tyrant who persecuted Christians . The anno Domini era became dominant in the Latin West but was not used in the Greek East until modern times . 
 = New York State Route 280 = 
 New York State Route 280 ( NY 280 ) is an 11 @.@ 59 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 65 km ) long north – south state highway in rural Cattaraugus County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at the Pennsylvania state line in South Valley , where it becomes Pennsylvania Route 346 ( PA 346 ) . The northern terminus is at exit 18 on the Southern Tier Expressway ( Interstate 86 or I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) in Coldspring , west of Salamanca . NY 280 follows both the eastern edge of the Allegheny Reservoir and the western boundary of Allegany State Park for its entire length . 
 When NY 280 was originally assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it was little more than a short spur route off of NY 17 that followed the Allegheny River south to the hamlet of Quaker Bridge . In 1965 , the Kinzua Dam was completed , leading to the creation of the Allegheny Reservoir and the inundation of much of NY 280 . As a result , the route was shifted onto a new alignment that was constructed along the eastern edge of the reservoir . 
 = = Route description = = 
 At the Pennsylvania state line in South Valley , PA 346 exits the Allegheny National Forest and becomes NY 280 upon entering New York . The route heads north along the eastern edge of the Allegheny Reservoir as East Bank Perimeter Road , clipping the southwestern corner of Allegany State Park prior to entering the Allegany Indian Reservation . NY 280 passes in and out of the park once more before turning to the east toward Quaker Lake as it enters the town of Coldspring . At Quaker Lake , NY 280 penetrates the park boundary once more and intersects Allegany State Park Route 3 ( ASP Route 3 ) at the Quaker Run entrance . Here , NY 280 turns north , traversing a small waterway separating Quaker Lake from the reservoir before reentering the Allegany Indian Reservation limits . 
 Between ASP Route 3 and exit 18 of the Southern Tier Expressway ( I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) , NY 280 continues to straddle both the eastern extent of the Allegheny Reservoir and the western perimeter of Allegany State Park before terminating at a diamond interchange with the Southern Tier Expressway . The West Bank Perimeter Road ( unsigned NY <unk> ) , which parallels NY 280 from the Pennsylvania line northward on the western bank of the reservoir , meets the expressway at exit 17 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) to the west . 
 = = History = = 
 Families living in the hamlet of Cold Spring were brought in through the Cornplanter Grant in the early 1800s , and by 1809 , the village located along future – NY 280 exceeded 500 people in log houses . The alignment of future NY 280 appears in the 1869 Cattaraugus County Atlas on its alignment from Cold Spring to Quaker Bridge . At the time a dirt road , a total of 14 families lived along the road . Construction of the Seneca Trading Post , a general store , began in 1833 , which was a hub of activity at the southern end of the road in Quaker Bridge , supplying stuff for tourists of the area until 1964 . The building was intentionally burned in 1965 . NY 280 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to a short roadway connecting NY 17 , then an at @-@ grade highway , to the now @-@ submerged hamlets of Cold Spring and Quaker Bridge along the western bank of the Allegheny River . The designation ended in Quaker Bridge , a community situated on the eastern riverbank near the modern junction of NY 280 and Allegany State Park Route 3 in the town of Elko . NY 280 remained relatively unchanged up through the early 1960s . 
 In October 1960 , ground was broken on the Kinzua Dam , which would dam the Allegheny River downriver from NY 280 at a point east of Warren , Pennsylvania . The structure was completed on December 13 , 1965 , leading to the creation of the Allegheny Reservoir . Much of NY 280 was inundated by the new reservoir , as were Cold Spring , Quaker Bridge , and a significant portion of Pennsylvania Route 346 ( PA 346 ) that ran along the river in Warren County . As a result , new alignments were built for both NY 280 and PA 346 along the eastern edge of the new reservoir . Construction of NY 280 's new alignment began in 1965 and was completed by 1968 . NY 280 now began at the realigned PA 346 at the state line and ended at exit 18 of the Southern Tier Expressway , which was built between Steamburg and Salamanca during the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 Portions of the original Route 280 are still navigable during dry spells . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Cattaraugus County . 
 = Nick Adenhart = 
 Nicholas James " Nick " Adenhart ( August 24 , 1986 – April 9 , 2009 ) was an American right @-@ handed baseball starting pitcher who played two seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . In four career games , Adenhart pitched 18 innings and posted a win @-@ loss record of 1 – 0 , with nine strikeouts and a 6 @.@ 00 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 A graduate of Williamsport High School , Adenhart was highly touted as a high school prospect until an injury in his final game required Tommy John surgery . He was drafted by the Angels in the 14th round of the 2004 Major League Baseball draft , and began playing in their minor league system after the surgery was a success . He spent three full seasons in the minor leagues before making his major league debut on May 1 , 2008 . After appearing in three games , Adenhart spent the rest of 2008 in the minor leagues developing his skills , and in 2009 he earned a spot in the Angels ' starting rotation . 
 Just after pitching his first start of 2009 , Adenhart was killed in a collision with a drunk driver . Both the Angels and the Salt Lake Bees , for whom Adenhart played in 2008 , suspended their next games . There were many tributes to him over the course of the season , including his former teammates celebrating with him by spraying champagne and beer on one of his jerseys after they clinched the 2009 American League West division championship . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Nicholas James Adenhart was born in Silver Spring , Maryland , the only son of Janet and Jim Adenhart , a former United States Secret Service officer . His parents divorced and Janet later remarried Duane <unk> , with whom she had a son named Henry , who is a pitcher at the University of Oregon . Adenhart played Halfway Little League Baseball for Gehr Construction and attended Springfield Middle School in Williamsport , Maryland . He pitched for the Hagerstown PONY League for six years , and was a member of the 1999 team that won the Maryland District 1 title . 
 After graduating from middle school , Adenhart attended Saint Maria Goretti High School in Hagerstown , Maryland . He played shortstop and outfield , in addition to pitching . While attending Saint Maria Goretti , Adenhart was a guard on the basketball team that won the Baltimore Catholic League championship . At the age of 14 , Adenhart joined the <unk> , a showcase team composed of Maryland amateur players and sponsored by the Baltimore Orioles , where he would stay for four years . In 2003 , at the age of 16 , Adenhart pitched for the <unk> 's Maryland Orioles , who went on to win the All American Amateur Baseball Association Tournament for that year . 
 Adenhart transferred to Williamsport High School after his sophomore year , where he gave up basketball to focus solely on baseball , as a pitcher . Scouts began closely following him when he was named the top junior prospect by Baseball America . Adenhart had a 6 – 0 record with a 1 @.@ 04 earned run average during the regular season in his junior year , and as a result was named the Gatorade Player of the Year in Maryland . In a 1 – 0 loss during the playoff quarterfinal matchup , he threw a no @-@ hitter and had 14 strikeouts . Entering his final high school season , Baseball America dubbed Adenhart the top high school prospect in the country . In his senior year , Adenhart threw a perfect game in his very first outing , striking out 15 of the 21 batters faced . Entering the final regular season game of his high school career , he had a 5 – 1 record , a 0 @.@ 73 ERA and an average of 2 @.@ 2 strikeouts per inning . During November of his senior year , Adenhart signed a letter of intent to play with the North Carolina Tar Heels baseball team at the University of North Carolina , although his chances of being drafted high continued to climb and the North Carolina coaching staff saw their chances of acquiring Adenhart to be slim . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 In his final high school game , in front of two dozen scouts , Adenhart felt a pop in his elbow after throwing a curveball to the third batter . The injury , which abruptly ended his season , was a partial ligament tear in his elbow that required Tommy John surgery . Though he had originally been projected as a first @-@ round draft pick , the injury caused his stock to plummet two weeks before the 2004 Major League Baseball draft . He fell to the 413th overall pick in the 14th round , selected by the Anaheim Angels . Angels scout Dan Radcliff and director of scouting Eddie Bane convinced Adenhart to forego a scholarship offer from the University of North Carolina and signed him to a $ 710 @,@ 000 bonus ( $ 820 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) on July 26 , 2004 . After having Dr. James Andrews perform the Tommy John surgery , Adenhart spent the next year rehabilitating his elbow at the Angels ' rehab facility in Tempe , Arizona . During that time , Adenhart also attended classes at Arizona State University . 
 Adenhart made his professional debut on June 25 , 2005 with the Pioneer League 's Orem Owlz , the Angels ' Rookie League affiliate . In his lone appearance for the Owlz , he pitched six innings , allowed one unearned run , struck out seven , and earned the win . He spent the rest of the 2005 season with the Angels of the Arizona League that summer . In 13 games for the Angels , he had a 2 – 3 record , a 3 @.@ 68 ERA , and 52 strikeouts . The following spring , at the age of 19 , Adenhart was one of twelve pitchers who earned a non @-@ roster invitation to the Angels ' big league camp . As the 2006 season began , he was also considered the Angels ' sixth best prospect and the 90th @-@ best overall by Baseball America . Adenhart was assigned to the Cedar Rapids Kernels , the Angels ' Low @-@ A affiliate , after spring training . He pitched well for the Kernels . In 16 games , Adenhart had 10 wins , a 1 @.@ 95 ERA , and 99 strikeouts in 106 innings pitched . His performance earned him a starting assignment in the 2006 All @-@ Star Futures Game on June 21 and a promotion to the Rancho Cucamonga Quakes , the organization 's High @-@ A affiliate , soon after . He continued his efforts with the Quakes , winning five games and losing two in nine starts . Adenhart was a member of the United States Olympic Qualifying team in 2006 , along with fellow Angels prospect Brandon Wood . 
 In 2007 , Adenhart became a top @-@ ranked prospect in the Angels organization . Baseball America ranked him as the 34th @-@ best prospect in baseball and second in the Angels organization . He was called up to the Double @-@ A Arkansas Travelers for which he played the 2007 season . In 26 appearances , he had a record of 10 – 8 with a 3 @.@ 65 ERA . The following year , Adenhart was called up to the Triple @-@ A Salt Lake Bees , where he spent the majority of the 2008 season . He was declared the 24th @-@ best prospect in the majors that season . In the month of April , Adenhart had a 4 – 0 record with a 0 @.@ 87 ERA and 21 strikeouts in 31 innings . As a result , he was brought up to the Angels ' major league roster , and was scheduled to make his debut on May 1 , pitching on three days ' rest . Shortstop <unk> <unk> was placed on the disabled list when Adenhart was brought up . 
 Adenhart made his Major League debut as the starting pitcher against the Oakland Athletics at home in Angel Stadium of Anaheim . At the time , he was the youngest active @-@ roster pitcher in the major leagues . In his debut , he gave up five earned runs and walked five in two innings , earning a no @-@ decision in a 15 – 8 loss . Adenhart was disappointed in his first appearance , saying , " I let down the team first . You always want to go out and prove yourself to your teammates and your manager and your coaches . I was a disappointment to myself also . " His second start was against the Kansas City Royals , where he earned another no @-@ decision , allowing three earned runs and striking out three over 4 ⅓ innings in a 5 – 3 win by the Angels . The reaction to his second start was more positive , with manager Mike Scioscia saying that " it was definitely a start in the right direction . " Adenhart earned his only career decision , a victory , on May 12 , 2008 , against the Chicago White Sox in Anaheim , giving up four earned runs in 5 ⅔ innings en route to a 10 – 7 Angels victory . After the win against the White Sox , Adenhart was sent back down to the Salt Lake Bees . He spent the rest of the 2008 season at Salt Lake , amassing a 9 – 13 record with a 5 @.@ 76 ERA in 26 games . 
 Adenhart was declared the best prospect in the Angels organization going into 2009 , and was ranked 68th overall on Baseball America 's 2009 Top 100 Prospects list , citing his 158 innings pitched per year over the past three seasons . Adenhart earned his spot in the Angels ' 2009 starting rotation during spring training . He appeared in six starts and had a 3 – 0 record with a 3 @.@ 12 ERA over 26 innings pitched . He allowed only nine earned runs and five walks , while striking out 18 . Adenhart opened the 2009 season as the third starter in the Angels ' rotation . In his season debut on April 8 , 2009 , he earned a no @-@ decision , giving up seven hits and no runs while striking out five batters and walking three in six innings against the Oakland Athletics at Angel Stadium of Anaheim . 
 = = Death = = 
 Shortly after midnight on April 9 , 2009 , Adenhart was involved in a car crash in Fullerton , California , just hours after being the starting pitcher in the previous night 's game . Police reported that an individual driving a red Toyota Sienna minivan ran a red light and broadsided a gray Mitsubishi Eclipse in which Adenhart was a passenger , sending it crashing into a telephone pole . Courtney Stewart and Henry Pearson , the driver and another passenger in the Mitsubishi respectively , were pronounced dead at the scene . Adenhart and Jon Wilhite , a third passenger in the Mitsubishi , were taken to University of California , Irvine Medical Center , where Adenhart died as a result of his injuries . Wilhite suffered internal decapitation and survived after undergoing five hours of surgery to reattach his skull to his spine six days after the crash . 
 The minivan driver fled the scene on foot , but was later arrested and identified as Andrew Thomas Gallo . On May 27 , 2009 , Gallo was indicted by the Orange County grand jury on three counts of murder , one count each of felony hit @-@ and @-@ run , driving under the influence and causing injury , and driving with a .08 percent blood alcohol or higher and causing injury and death . Gallo had a blood alcohol content of <unk> percent two hours after the crash , and was also driving with a suspended license . On June 8 , 2009 , Gallo entered a not guilty plea at his arraignment . After a two @-@ week jury trial held in September 2010 , Gallo was convicted on three counts of second @-@ degree murder , two counts of driving under the influence causing great bodily injury , and one felony count of hit @-@ and @-@ run . A bench trial found Gallo guilty of driving on a suspended license . On December 22 , 2010 , Gallo was sentenced to 51 @-@ years @-@ to @-@ life in jail . 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 Adenhart 's family released this statement , following his death : 
 Nick 's family expresses sincere gratitude for all the help the Angels have provided . He lived his dream and was blessed to be part of an organization comprised of such warm , caring , and compassionate people . The Angels were his extended family . Thanks to all of Nick 's loyal supporters and fans throughout his career . He will always be in everyone 's hearts forever . 
 Angels General Manager Tony <unk> released a statement as well : 
 The Angels family has suffered a tremendous loss today . We are deeply saddened and shocked by this tragic loss . Our thoughts and prayers go out to Nick 's family , friends , loved ones and fans . 
 The Angels postponed the game against the Athletics for the day immediately after Adenhart 's death . In remembrance of Adenhart , for the rest of the 2009 season , a black number 34 patch was placed above the heart on the Angels ' uniforms , his locker in the Angel Stadium of Anaheim clubhouse remained as it was , and a locker was assigned to him on road games . The team hung one of Adenhart 's jerseys in their dugout during games . A black @-@ and @-@ white photo of Adenhart along with his name and number was added to the center field fence at Angel Stadium . A makeshift shrine , dedicated to Adenhart , was established outside the home plate gates to Angel Stadium . The makeshift shrine was maintained by Angels personnel until its removal in December 2009 . The Angels do not have any plans to create a permanent memorial . 
 The Salt Lake Bees , the Angels ' AAA affiliate , also postponed their game on April 9 against the Reno Aces . The team also wore a number 32 patch through the season representing Adenhart 's jersey number during his time with the Bees . A number 32 was also painted on the grass in front of the Bees dugout . 
 On September 28 , 2009 , when the Angels celebrated winning the American League West division , they honored Adenhart by spraying champagne and beer on one of his jerseys , and then gathered in front of the outfield wall memorial for a team picture . The appropriateness of celebrating with alcohol in respect to Adenhart 's death being alcohol @-@ related was questioned , but family members were supportive of the celebrations . Adenhart 's father Jim stated , " That 's baseball . If Nick were there , he 'd have been throwing a few back as well . " Adenhart 's teammates voted to give his family a full playoff share for the 2009 playoffs worth $ 138 @,@ 038 @.@ 57 . Angels manager Mike Scioscia dedicated his 2009 American League Manager of the Year Award to Adenhart . 
 The Angels established the Nick Adenhart Pitcher of the Year award given to an Angels pitcher for outstanding performance throughout the regular season . The team commissioned Harry Weber to create a bronze statue of Adenhart , which will be on display in the Angel Stadium trophy case . Smaller versions of the statue will be presented to all honorees of the Nick Adenhart award . 
 The Adenhart family created the Nick Adenhart Memorial Fund , which is designed to provide financial support to youth baseball organizations . The goal is to lend a helping hand to struggling leagues around the country to buy equipment and cover expenses to keep youth baseball functioning . The first presentation from the fund was for $ 5000 to the Halfway Little League in Halfway , Maryland . Two annual events , the Nick Adenhart 5K Run and Walk and the Nick Adenhart Baseball Camp , have been established to benefit the foundation . 
 Adenhart 's number 21 jersey was retired by the Cedar Rapids Kernels , the Angels ' Class A affiliate , on June 20 , 2010 . The Kernels , the Kernels Foundation , and the Adenhart family also established the Nick Adenhart Memorial Scholarship , a yearly $ 1 @,@ 000 scholarship . The Orem Owlz , for whom Adenhart briefly played in 2005 , have worn special jerseys , which bear the likeness of a screen @-@ printed picture of Adenhart , along with his number 34 . The Little League Baseball field where Adenhart played in Halfway , Maryland , was rededicated as the Nicholas James Adenhart Memorial Field . The Hagerstown Suns , the Minor League Baseball affiliate in Hagerstown , Maryland , held a fundraiser for the Nick Adenhart Memorial Fund and added Adenhart to their Wall of Fame at Municipal Stadium . The city of Manhattan Beach , Wilhite 's home town , erected the Pearson @-@ Wilhite @-@ Stewart @-@ Adenhart Commemorative Wall at Marine Avenue Park honoring all four victims of the crash . 
 In an ongoing memorial , Angels pitcher Jered Weaver writes the initials " NA " in the dirt on the back of the pitcher 's mound before each start in honor of Adenhart . Weaver also named his son Aden in memory of Adenhart . Mike Napoli , who caught Adenhart 's final game , goes out to center field before every game , and writes Adenhart 's name in the warning track dirt . Darren O 'Day , who came up through the Angels minor system with Adenhart , writes Adenhart 's number and initials on the brim of every new cap he wears . Baltimore Orioles pitcher Miguel González paid tribute to Adenhart , his former minor league teammate , by wearing one of his gloves in his first major league start , which was against the Angels on July 6 , 2012 . 
 Adenhart is buried at Greenlawn Cemetery , in Williamsport , Maryland , just across the street from Springfield Middle School , where he attended and played baseball as a child . A public memorial service was held at Williamsport High School the day after his burial . 
 Subsequent to Adenhart 's death , his former high school teammate and close friend , David <unk> , was hired as the Williamsport High School baseball coach . In a crash described as " eerily similar to Adenhart 's " , the school 's star pitcher and girlfriend were both killed in collision in 2012 . 
 = The Other Woman ( Lost ) = 
 " The Other Woman " is the 78th episode of the serial drama television series Lost and the sixth episode of the show 's fourth season . It aired on March 6 , 2008 on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States and on CTV in Canada . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Drew Goddard and executive story editor Christina M. Kim , and was directed by Eric Laneuville . 
 The narrative begins on December 24 , 2004 , 94 days after the crash of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 . Recent island arrivals Daniel Faraday ( played by Jeremy Davies ) and Charlotte Lewis ( Rebecca Mader ) leave the survivors ' camp without notice for the Dharma Initiative electrical station called the Tempest . In flashbacks that depict events on the island , Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) discovers that her boss Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , the leader of the island 's original inhabitants referred to as the Others , is in love with her . 
 The writers advanced several story lines with " The Other Woman " . The episode furthers Juliet 's back story and relationships , sheds more light on the season 's new characters , and features the first appearance of Harper Stanhope ( Andrea Roth ) . The introduction of the Tempest further develops the series ' mythology , specifically the " purge " . In the third season , the purge was mentioned in episode " Enter 77 " and seen in " The Man Behind the Curtain " . 
 " The Other Woman " was watched by 15 million Americans and received mixed reviews . Critics from the Los Angeles Times , Entertainment Weekly , and BuddyTV deemed it the worst episode of the season , partially due to a flashback storyline that was seemingly recycled from the third season episode , " One of Us " . Another criticism was that audiences actually learned more about Ben than Juliet , despite the focus on Juliet . Emerson also received more praise for his acting than Mitchell , who plays Juliet ; however , Mitchell won a Saturn Award for her performance . Positive reviews commended the action in the episode 's climax . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with flashbacks to Juliet 's life on the island following her recruitment in September 2001 by the Others . Juliet has an affair with an Other named Goodwin ( Brett Cullen ) , who is married to therapist Harper Stanhope . Harper discovers the affair , and warns Juliet that their leader Ben will punish Goodwin because he has a crush on Juliet . Following the crash of Flight 815 , Ben sends him to infiltrate a group of surviving passengers ; Goodwin is killed by Ana Lucia Cortez after she realizes he is not a survivor . In October 2004 , Ben invites Juliet to what he initially describes as a dinner party , but is actually a private date . Ben leads Juliet to Goodwin 's impaled corpse , where she accuses him of having wanted Goodwin to die . Ben then subsequently reveals his love for her . 
 On the night of December 24 , 2004 ( three months after the crash of Flight 815 ) , two members of a science team from the Kahana freighter anchored offshore — Daniel and Charlotte — who landed on the island three days earlier with a hidden agenda , sneak off to find the Tempest . Juliet and the crash survivors ' leader Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) notice their absence from the beach camp and pursue them . After hearing the whispers , Harper approaches Juliet . She tells her that Daniel and Charlotte intend to kill everyone on the island by deploying a lethal gas at the Tempest and that Ben 's orders are for Juliet to kill them . On a trek back to the beach in the morning , Kate encounters Daniel and Charlotte and is knocked unconscious by the latter . Jack and Juliet come across Kate and they split up : Juliet continues for the Tempest alone , as Jack minds Kate . Inside the station , Juliet finds Daniel in a hazmat suit at a computer . After a standoff , Daniel and Charlotte convince Juliet that they are not going to kill anyone ; they are neutralizing the gas in case Ben decides to use it again , as he had twelve years earlier in an Others @-@ led purge of Dharma . Jack arrives at the Tempest and Juliet explains that those on the freighter came to the island to wage war against Ben and she expects him to win . She fears for Jack because Ben thinks that she belongs to him , but Jack shows no worry and kisses her . 
 In the Barracks , Ben bargains with 815 survivor John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) for his freedom . He reveals that Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) — the father of Desmond Hume 's ( Henry Ian Cusick ) girlfriend , Penny ( Sonya Walger ) — owns the freighter and hopes to exploit the island . Ben also tells Locke who his spy on the freighter is . Ben continues to reside in the Barracks following his release . 
 = = Production = = 
 When asked about what she learned about her character through " The Other Woman " , Elizabeth Mitchell surmised that Juliet 's " mistakes are morally questionable , if not morally wrong . But you do see that behind this is a human being who is struggling to live and have a life that makes sense to her . " Mitchell did not think that Juliet was too surprised that Ben has romantic feelings for her , but " it was horrifying under the circumstances " because she had just found out that Goodwin had died . Michael Emerson thought that his character Ben was childish when he shouted " you 're mine ! " to Juliet ; Mitchell compared him to " a twelve @-@ year @-@ old boy throwing a temper tantrum over ... his first love " . Mitchell said that " it was emotionally draining shooting this episode " because she was intimidated by Emerson and Matthew Fox 's acting skills . 
 Co @-@ executive producer and staff writer Adam Horowitz stated that " It 's always interesting to pull back another layer on one of our characters , and to see another chapter in Juliet 's story on the island and bring us to where she is now was great " , while fellow co @-@ executive producer and staff writer Edward Kitsis thought that " the interesting thing about the episode is the way Ben looks at Juliet ... everything is informed by that look . " Horowitz also enjoyed the juxtaposition of Juliet 's character development with the revelations on the " freighter folk " . Kitsis picked the episode 's final scene where Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) discover that Ben has negotiated his release and will be dining with them that evening as his favorite of the episode . Actress Rebecca Mader , who plays Charlotte , said that she was " so excited " for the episode to air because she thought that it was " even better " than the previous episode , which is widely regarded as one of the best episodes of the series . Charlotte knocks Kate unconscious with the barrel of her gun and asks " what ? " to a speechless Daniel in " The Other Woman " . Mader found this hilarious and described it as " the pinnacle of [ her ] career " . 
 Andrea Roth makes her first appearance as Harper in " The Other Woman " . During casting in early October , Harper was described as " a tough , no @-@ nonsense and beautiful [ therapist who has a tendency to be ] overly controlling and obsessive . " The character was also noted as a recurring role ; however , Harper did not make another appearance in the season . The writers have since stated that she will eventually reappear . A jungle scene with Mitchell , Fox and Roth was filmed until 4 : 00 a.m. on October 27 , 2007 with industrial sprinklers and Mitchell referred to this as her " most intense experience on the show " . Harper 's appearance and disappearance in this scene are sudden so fans speculated that this was actually an apparition or manifestation of the island 's black smoke monster . This was refuted by Lost 's writers . 
 Named after William Shakespeare 's 1610 play of the same name , the Tempest first appears in " The Other Woman " and is apparently alluded to on an unseen layer of the Dharma " Swan " station 's blast door map of the second season . The writers wanted to explain some of the island 's history in the fourth season and decided that " The Other Woman " would reveal where the gas that Ben used came from and that Dharma had stations set up for protection against hostile forces . They also enjoyed having Goodwin on the show and wanted to bring him back . " The Other Woman " had commenced filming by October 11 , 2007 and was completed on October 30 . 
 " The Other Woman " contains Jack and Juliet 's second kiss . Juliet was conceived by the writers as the next possible love interest for Jack after the death of the second season character Ana Lucia Cortez ( Michelle Rodriguez ) . Fans hated Ana Lucia so the writers did not pursue the romantic story arc . Mitchell guesses that her character was created because " they needed a bridge between Ben and everyone else , and they needed someone to come in and be a little salt in the oyster of Jack and Kate . " She believes that Juliet did genuinely fall in love with Jack , but not knowing whether " her attraction to Jack or her willingness to do anything to get off the island " is more important to her . Juliet forms something of a " love rectangle " with Jack , Kate and Sawyer . Mitchell " feel [ s ] like [ Jack and Juliet have ] a very grown @-@ up relationship . They seem to really respect and like each other " , whereas Sawyer and Kate are like " rambunctious teenagers " . The couple has gained an Internet fandom and been given the portmanteau nickname " Jacket " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Other Woman " was watched live or recorded and watched within five hours of broadcast by 13 @.@ 008 million viewers in the United States , ranking seventh for the week in television programs with the most viewers and achieving a 5 @.@ 4 / 13 in the coveted adults aged eighteen to forty @-@ nine demographic . Including those who watched within seven days of broadcast , the episode was watched by a total of 14 @.@ 933 million American viewers ; this number went toward the season 's average . 1 @.@ 439 million Canadians watched it , making Lost the eighth highest @-@ rated show of the week . In the United Kingdom , 1 @.@ 1 million people viewed the episode . The episode brought in 691 @,@ 000 viewers in Australia , placing it as the twenty @-@ second most watched show of the night . 
 A common claim by critics of Entertainment Weekly , IGN , SyFy Portal , AOL 's TV Squad and BuddyTV was that more was learned about supporting player Ben , instead of Juliet who was centered on in flashbacks . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly praised Emerson 's acting and stated that " in the end , this was really a story about Ben and the lengths he will go to protect himself and the Island from his enemies . " SyFy Portal 's Dan Compora said that " The more I hate Ben , the more I realize that Michael Emerson is just a very fine actor doing his job . " Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV called Emerson an acting " god " and said that " The Other Woman " was " ostensibly a Juliet episode , [ but ] Ben 's presence made a far bigger impression on me " . Despite Emerson 's shadow , Elizabeth Mitchell received the award for " Best Supporting Actress on Television " at the 34th Saturn Awards in a tie with Summer Glau , who plays Cameron Phillips in FOX 's Terminator : The Sarah Connor Chronicles . 
 " The Other Woman " has been cited as the weakest episode of Lost 's fourth season . Despite his claim , Patrick Day of the Los Angeles Times pointed out that " even this so @-@ so episode of Lost stood far above anything else being shown on network TV this season " . He noted that the " most heartbreaking scene " was Claire Littleton 's ( Emilie de Ravin ) appearance because it reminded him of how little the character had done to advance the season 's plot . BuddyTV 's John Kubicek dubbed " The Other Woman " " the worst episode of Lost season four so far " because it " followed the soap opera that is the romantic entanglements of the major players , which is not the reason most people love Lost . " Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly graded the episode as a " C – " and called it " the only true dud of the season " . He thought that its " story was kinda all over the place " and that " the whole thing felt forced " . Jensen was not fond of Andrea Roth 's guest performance because he felt that " she came off as too arch and unreal . " In contrast , TV Guide 's Bruce Fretts praised Roth 's " suitably creepy " appearance . Other critics also reviewed the episode as poor . Maureen Ryan of Chicago Tribune said that " The Other Woman " " seemed somewhat pallid and predictable … several elements … felt like they 'd been recycled from previous seasons and story arcs . " The Star @-@ Ledger 's Alan Sepinwall considered the episode to be the second weakest of the fourth season after " Eggtown " . He criticized the Tempest storyline due to a lack of explanation for the station 's original purpose and thought that Juliet 's flashbacks were redundant . 
 " The Other Woman " was also the subject of mixed reviews . Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote that " I really liked this episode , but I liked it less than the [ preceding episodes ] … it seems that someone took their foot off the gas just a fraction and the reduction in speed was notable . Time 's James Poniewozik had mixed feelings for the flashbacks , but enjoyed Ben 's character development . Nikki Stafford of Wizard " enjoyed " the " interesting " episode , although " not nearly as much " as the previous episode . She rejoiced at the return of her " favorite Other " Tom ( M.C. Gainey ) and wrote that " Locke used to be one of [ her ] favorite characters , but now he 's a tool " . Digital Spy 's Ben Rawson @-@ Jones stated that " the episode came together nicely in the end , with an expected twist and a <unk> , although for a great part it bordered on tedium . Juliet is a character who simply isn 't interesting enough to fully sustain one 's attention over a flashback . She 's been so peripheral and irrelevant over this season , and it felt like a token gesture to foreground her at last . There was a nice pay off though , with a long awaited smooch between her and Jack . " Daniel of TMZ graded the episode as a " C + " ; however , he wrote that " the Ben / Locke scenes were great and Juliet in a bikini did not disappoint . " TV Squad 's Erin Martell was " not impressed with Jack and Juliet 's chemistry " and found their kiss " unconvincing " . Martell commended Emerson 's acting , Ben 's one @-@ liners and his " too funny for words " casual greeting to Hurley and Sawyer at the end of the episode after he is released from captivity . The Huffington Post 's Jay Glatfelter thought that " this was another great episode [ that ] could have lived up to last week 's episode , but there was still a lot of solid character development . " 
 Verne Gay of Newsday referred to the episode as " yet another brilliant outing by TV 's best drama [ that ] keeps getting better " ; she was not the only critic to give a positive review . E ! ' s Kristin Dos Santos thought that the fight scene between Juliet and Charlotte in the Tempest was " awesome " and suggested that Alan Dale receive a " lifetime achievement award for his parade of marvelously malicious patriarchs " , such as Widmore . Chris Carabott of IGN gave the episode a score of eight out of ten and described it as " a good episode of Lost that has all the action , suspense and excitement that this show consistently delivers " . Carabott wrote that " seeing how twisted [ Ben and Juliet 's ] ' relationship ' really is was fascinating " . SyFy Portal 's Dan Compora wrote that " this week 's episode contributed to what is shaping up to be a pretty solid fourth season . … Fine acting carried the episode despite a few potholes in the plot . " Compora also enjoyed the title and the " nice cat fight " in the Tempest between Juliet and Charlotte . 
 = Addington Long Barrow = 
 Addington Long Barrow is a chambered long barrow located near to the village of Addington in the southeastern English county of Kent . Constructed during Britain 's Early Neolithic period , today it survives only in a ruined state . Built out of earth and around fifty local sarsen megaliths , the long barrow consisted of a sub @-@ rectangular earthen tumulus enclosed by kerb @-@ stones . Collapsed stones on the northeastern end of the chamber probably represented a stone chamber in which human remains might have been deposited ; none , however , have been discovered . 
 Archaeologists have established that the monument was built by pastoralist communities shortly after the introduction of agriculture to Britain from continental Europe . Although representing part of an architectural tradition of long barrow building that was widespread across Neolithic Europe , Addington Long Barrow belongs to a localised regional variant of barrows produced in the vicinity of the River Medway , now known as the Medway Megaliths . Of these , it lies near to both Chestnuts Long Barrow and Coldrum Long Barrow on the western side of the river . Three further surviving long barrows , Kit 's Coty House , the Little Kit 's Coty House , and the Coffin Stone , are located on the Medway 's eastern side . 
 After the Early Neolithic , the long barrow fell into a state of ruined dilapidation , with a small road being built through the centre of the monument by the 19th century at the latest . Local folklore grew up around the site , associating it with the countless stones motif . The ruin attracted the interest of antiquarians in the early 18th century , and was studied by local archaeologists in the 20th . Both it and the nearby Chestnuts Long Barrow are open for public viewing by appointment with the landowner . 
 = = Location = = 
 The monument lies approximately 250 metres ( 820 ft ) north of Addington Parish Church . It is accessible from the A20 via two minor roads . The area in which the barrow is located is sometimes termed Addington Park . The site is privately owned , although visible from a road that cuts through the middle of the barrow . 
 = = Context = = 
 The Early Neolithic was a revolutionary period of British history . Beginning in the fifth millennium BCE , it saw a widespread change in lifestyle as the communities living in the British Isles adopted agriculture as their primary form of subsistence , abandoning the hunter @-@ gatherer lifestyle that had characterised the preceding Mesolithic period . Archaeologists have been unable to prove whether this adoption of farming was because of a new influx of migrants coming in from continental Europe or because the indigenous Mesolithic Britons came to adopt the agricultural practices of continental societies . Either way , it certainly emerged through contact with continental Europe , probably as a result of centuries of interaction between Mesolithic people living in southeast Britain and Linear Pottery culture ( <unk> ) communities in northeastern France . The region of modern Kent would have been a key area for the arrival of continental European settlers and visitors , because of its position on the estuary of the River Thames and its proximity to the continent . 
 Between 4500 and 3800 BCE , all of the British Isles came to abandon its former Mesolithic hunter @-@ gatherer lifestyle , to be replaced by the new agricultural subsistence of the Neolithic Age . Although a common material culture was shared throughout most of the British Isles in this period , there was great regional variation regarding the nature and distribution of settlement , architectural styles , and the use of natural resources . Throughout most of Britain , there is little evidence of cereal or permanent dwellings from this period , leading archaeologists to believe that the Early Neolithic economy on the island was largely pastoral , relying on herding cattle , with people living a nomadic or semi @-@ nomadic way of life . Although witnessing some land clearance , Britain was largely forested in this period , and it is unclear what level of deforestation the area of Kent had experienced in the Early Neolithic ; widespread forest clearance only took place on the <unk> of south @-@ east Britain in the Late Bronze Age . Environmental data from the area around the White Horse Stone supports the idea that the area was still largely forested in the Early Neolithic , covered by a woodland of oak , ash , hazel / alder and <unk> . 
 = = = Tomb building tradition = = = 
 Across Western Europe , the Early Neolithic marked the first period in which humans built monumental structures in the landscape . These were tombs that held the physical remains of the dead , and though sometimes constructed out of timber , many were built using large stones , now known as " megaliths " . Individuals were rarely buried alone in the Early Neolithic , instead being interned in collective burials with other members of their community . The construction of these collective burial monumental tombs , both wooden and megalithic , began in continental Europe before being adopted in Britain in the first half of the fourth millennium BCE . 
 The Early Neolithic people of Britain placed far greater emphasis on the ritualised burial of the dead than their Mesolithic forebears had done . Many archaeologists have suggested that this is because Early Neolithic people adhered to an ancestor cult that venerated the spirits of the dead , believing that they could intercede with the forces of nature for the benefit of their living descendants . Archaeologist Robin Holgate stressed that rather than simply being tombs , the Medway Megaliths were " communal <unk> fulfilling a social function for the communities who built and used them . " Thus , it has furthermore been suggested that Early Neolithic people entered into the tombs – which doubled as temples or shrines – to perform rituals that would honour the dead and ask for their assistance . For this reason , historian Ronald Hutton termed these monuments " tomb @-@ shrines " to reflect their dual purpose . 
 In Britain , these tombs were typically located on prominent hills and slopes overlooking the surrounding landscape , perhaps at the junction between different territories . Archaeologist Caroline Malone noted that the tombs would have served as one of a variety of markers in the landscape that conveyed information on " territory , political allegiance , ownership , and ancestors . " Many archaeologists have subscribed to the idea that these tomb @-@ shrines served as territorial markers between different tribal groups , although others have argued that such markers would be of little use to a nomadic herding society . Instead it has been suggested that they represent markers along herding pathways . Many archaeologists have suggested that the construction of such monuments reflects an attempt to stamp control and ownership over the land , thus representing a change in mindset brought about by <unk> . Others have suggested that these monuments were built on sites already deemed sacred by Mesolithic hunter @-@ gatherers . 
 Archaeologists have differentiated these Early Neolithic tombs into a variety of different architectural styles , each typically associated with a different region within the British Isles . Passage graves , characterised by their narrow passage made of large stones and one or multiple burial chambers covered in earth or stone , were predominantly located in northern Britain and southern and central Ireland . Alternately , across northern Ireland and central Britain long chambered mounds predominated , while in the east and south @-@ east of Britain , earthen long barrows represented the dominant architectural trend . These earthen long barrows were typically constructed of timber because building stone was scarce in southern Britain ; archaeologist Aubrey Burl argued that these timber tombs might have been " even more eye @-@ catching " than their stone counterparts , perhaps consisting of " towering carved poles , flamboyantly painted " , but that evidence of such sculptures has not survived . The Medway Megaliths represent just one of these regional groups within the wider West European tradition of tomb building in this period . 
 = = = Medway Megaliths = = = 
 Although now all in a ruinous state and not retaining their original appearance , at the time of construction the Medway Megaliths would have been some of the largest and most visually imposing Early Neolithic funerary monuments in Britain . Grouped along the River Medway as it cuts through the North Downs , they constitute the most southeasterly group of megalithic monuments in the British Isles , and the only megalithic group in eastern England . Archaeologists Brian Philp and Mike <unk> deemed the Medway Megaliths to be " some of the most interesting and well known " archaeological sites in Kent , while archaeologist Paul Ashbee described them as " the most grandiose and impressive structures of their kind in southern England " . 
 They can be divided into two separate clusters : one to the west of the River Medway and the other on Blue Bell Hill to the east , with the distance between the two clusters measuring at between 8 and 10 km . The western group includes Coldrum Long Barrow , Addington Long Barrow , and the Chestnuts Long Barrow . The eastern group consists of Kit 's Coty House , Little Kit 's Coty House , the Coffin Stone , and several other stones which might have once been parts of chambered tombs . It is not known if they were all built at the same time , or whether they were constructed in succession , while similarly it is not known if they each served the same function or whether there was a hierarchy in their usage . 
 The Medway long barrows all conformed to the same general design plan , and are all aligned on an east to west axis . Each had a stone chamber at the eastern end of the mound , and they each probably had a stone facade flanking the entrance . The chambers were constructed from sarsen , a dense , hard , and durable stone that occurs naturally throughout Kent , having formed out of silicified sand from the Eocene . Early Neolithic builders would have selected blocks from the local area , and then transported them to the site of the monument to be erected . 
 Such common architectural features among these tomb @-@ shrines indicate a strong regional cohesion with no direct parallels elsewhere in the British Isles . For instance , they would have been taller than most other tomb @-@ shrines in Britain , with internal heights of up to 10 ft . Nevertheless , as with other regional groupings of Early Neolithic tomb @-@ shrines – like the Cotswold @-@ Severn group – there are also various idiosyncrasies in the different monuments , such as Coldrum 's rectilinear shape , the Chestnut long barrow 's facade , and the long , thin mounds at Addington and Kit 's Coty . This variation might have been caused by the tomb @-@ shrines being altered and adapted over the course of their use ; in this scenario , the <unk> would represent composite structures . 
 It seems apparent that the people who built these monuments were influenced by pre @-@ existing tomb @-@ shrines that they were already aware of . Whether those people had grown up locally , or moved into the Medway area from elsewhere is not known . Based on a stylistic analysis of their architectural designs , the archaeologist Stuart Piggott thought that they had originated in the area around the Low Countries , while fellow archaeologist Glyn Daniel instead believed that the same evidence showed an influence from Scandinavia . John H. Evans instead suggested an origin in Germany , and Ronald F. Jessop thought that their origins could be seen in the Cotswold @-@ Severn megalithic group . Ashbee noted that their close clustering in the same area was reminiscent of the megalithic tomb @-@ shrine traditions of continental Northern Europe , and emphasised that the Medway Megaliths were a regional manifestation of a tradition widespread across Early Neolithic Europe . He nevertheless stressed that a precise place of origin was " impossible to indicate " with the available evidence . 
 = = Design and demolition = = 
 Addington Long Barrow is situated on a northeast to southwest alignment . In 1950 , Evans stated that twenty @-@ two sarsens were evident in the monument , eight of which were located around its northeastern end . In 1981 , investigators from Kent Archaeological Rescue Unit expanded that number , identifying twenty @-@ five sarsens in the monument . Given the dimensions of the monument , they suggested that it likely once included about fifty stones . 
 Upon construction , the barrow would have been about 200 feet , or 60 metres , long . The sides would have been straight but the monument tapered in width from 14 metres on its east end to 11 metres on its western end . It thus formed a " truncated wedge @-@ shape " . The chamber within the long barrow was located in the northeastern end , although had been pulled down at some point in the monument 's history , while much of the mound was left standing . Jessop suggested that this chamber had been a false portal , an idea supported by Daniel . 
 The earthen tumulus currently stands at about one metre , or three feet , in height , although would have been much taller when the monument was initially constructed . Evans described the tumulus as having been " of immense size " , believing that the long barrow would have been " a most imposing structure " when first built . There is no evidence for quarry ditches or scoops around the sides of the monument . 
 Following the demolition of the tomb 's chamber , some of the sarsens around the monument had been buried , while others had been left visible . Various buildings in Addington are partly made out of sarsen stone , some of which may have been removed from the long barrow . Ashbee also suspected that sarsens from this monument had been broken up for use in the repairs and extensions to the local church in the nineteenth century . The barrow was further damaged by the construction of the small road running through the middle of it . 
 = = Folklore and folk tradition = = 
 When Thomas Wright investigated the site in about 1850 , he was aided by a local man who believed that a crock of gold would be unearthed there . 
 In a 1946 paper published in the Folklore journal , John H. Evans recorded that there was a folk belief in the area that applied to all of the Medway Megaliths and which had been widespread " Up to the last generation " ; this was that it was impossible for any human being to successfully count the number of stones in the monuments . This " countless stones " motif is not unique to this particular site , and can be found at various other megalithic monuments in Britain . The earliest textual evidence for it is found in an early 16th @-@ century document , where it applies to the stone circle of Stonehenge in Wiltshire , although in an early 17th @-@ century document it was being applied to The <unk> , a set of three stone circles in Cornwall . Later records reveal that it had gained widespread distribution in England , as well as a single occurrence each in Wales and Ireland . The folklorist S. P. Menefee suggested that it could be attributed to an animistic understanding that these megaliths had lives of their own . 
 = = Antiquarian and archaeological investigation = = 
 Addington Long Barrow was mentioned by the antiquarian John Harris in his History of Kent , published posthumously in 1719 . He noted that the area on which the barrow stood was known locally as " the Warren " , and that an " old clerk " informed him that an oak tree had formerly grown in the centre of the stones . It was next recorded by the antiquarian Josiah Colebrooke in a short article that he wrote for Archaeologia , the journal of the Society of Antiquaries of London , in 1773 . Aided by the minister of the parish , the Reverend <unk> , <unk> enquired among elderly locals as to whether they had heard of the oak tree mentioned by Harris , but none had . Colebrooke asserted that it was to the Addington area that the Britons retreated after their defeat at the Battle of Aylesford , and that it was here that they buried their military leader , <unk> . However , the later archaeologist John H. Evans has claimed that Colebrooke 's descriptions and drawings are " almost completely worthless " because the antiquarian incorrectly thought the monument to be a stone circle rather than a rectangular chambered tomb . Colebrook 's analysis was echoed in the 18th @-@ century writings of Samuel Pegge , Edward Hasted , and John Thorpe . 
 In 1827 , the road was widened and deepened , and to achieve this workmen removed two of the sarsens from the revetment kerb and placed them in the corner of the wood to the south of the monument . In the early 1840s , the Reverend Beale Post conducted investigations into the Medway Megaliths , writing them up in a manuscript that was left unpublished ; this included Addington Long Barrow and Chestnuts Long Barrow , which he collectively labelled the " Addington Circles " . Thomas Wright recorded that in 1845 a local parson , the Reverend Lambert Blackwell Larking , dug into a chamber at Addington , discovering " fragments of rude pottery " ; from the context in which he wrote , it seems that Addington Long Barrow is referred to , although it remains possible that Chestnuts was the barrow in question . In the early 1860s , Charles Roach Smith visited the site alongside Charles Warne and Charles Moore Jessop , the latter of whom described it as a " Celtic " monument in a subsequent article he wrote for Gentleman 's Magazine . 
 In 1871 , Edwin Dunkin published a basic plan of the monument , noting that there were similar chambered tombs around Britain . In 1880 , the archaeologist Flinders Petrie listed the existence of the stones at Addington in his list of Kentish earthworks ; he stated that " with extraordinary perversity [ they ] have been hitherto described as forming a circle , though they appear to be very plainly in two lines " . He then included a small , basic plan of the monument . The barrow then received a mention in George Payne 's Collectanea Cantiana , published in 1893 . Payne noted a folk tradition that there were stone avenues connecting Coldrum to the Addington Long Barrow , although asserted that he was unable to discover any evidence for the existence of this feature . The earliest published photographs of the monument appeared in 1908 , produced by George Clinch . In his 1924 publication dealing with Kent , the archaeologist O. G. S. Crawford , then working as the archaeological officer for the Ordnance Survey , listed the Addington Long <unk> alongside the other Medway Megaliths . 
 In 1981 , members of the Kent Archaeological Rescue Unit conducted a measured survey of the monument . In 2005 , Ashbee noted that he had found evidence of recent metal <unk> activity at the site . On 15 May 2007 , the Kentish archaeologist Brian Philp was conducting his regular inspection of the monument when the property owner , Mrs <unk> , pointed out to him an area where the road was beginning to subside . He alerted Kent County Council , who organised for contractors to investigate the reason for the subsidence , which proved to be decades of rabbit burrowing beneath the tarmac . Archaeologists from Kent Archaeological Unit visited the site during the work , discovering a buried sarsen ; comparison with older records revealed that this stone had once been upright but had been buried where it stood in the 19th century by workmen who were replacing the trackway with a paved road . 
 = Battle of Dobro Pole = 
 The Battle of Dobro Pole , also known as the Breakthrough at Dobro Pole in Bulgarian ( Bulgarian : <unk> при <unk> <unk> , <unk> Pri Dobro Pole ) , ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , Bitka <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , ( Greek : Μάχη του <unk> <unk> , <unk> tou <unk> <unk> ) , was a World War I battle , fought between 15 and 18 September 1918 . The battle was fought in the initial stage of the Vardar Offensive , in the Balkans Theatre . On September 15 , a combined force of Serbian , French and Greek troops attacked the Bulgarian @-@ held trenches in Dobro Pole ( " Good Field " ) , at the time part of the Kingdom of Serbia ( present day Republic of Macedonia ) . The offensive and the preceding artillery preparation had devastating effects on Bulgarian morale , eventually leading to mass desertions . 
 Despite being outnumbered and poorly equipped , certain Bulgarian units offered fierce resistance , delaying the Entente advance in Zborsko . The collapse of the front @-@ line enabled the Allies to assault Bulgarian positions from multiple directions and eventually quell the last pockets of resistance . The Central Powers ' defeat at the Dobro Pole played a role in the Bulgarian withdrawal from the war and opened the way for the subsequent capture of Vardar Macedonia . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The 28 June 1914 , assassination of Austro @-@ Hungarian heir presumptive Archduke Franz Ferdinand precipitated Austria @-@ Hungary 's declaration of war against Serbia . The conflict quickly attracted the involvement of all major European countries , pitting the Central Powers against the Entente coalition , and starting World War I. 
 Serbia was ultimately defeated during the autumn 1915 phase of the Serbian Campaign prompting France and Britain to transfer troops from the Gallipoli Campaign to Greek Macedonia . The Macedonian Front was thus established in an effort to support the remnants of the Serbian army to conquer Vardar Macedonia . 
 On 17 August 1916 , Bulgaria invaded Greece , easily conquering all Greek territory east of the Struma , since the Greek Army was ordered not to resist by the pro @-@ German King Constantine . The surrender of territory recently won with difficulty in the Second Balkan War of 1913 was the last straw for many supporters of Liberal Party politician Eleftherios Venizelos . With Allied assistance , they launched a coup which secured Thessaloniki and most of Greek Macedonia , causing the National Schism . In June 1917 , the Venizelists gained full control of the country , immediately declaring war on the Central Powers and joining the Allied Army of the Orient operating on the Balkan Front . The Greek entry into the war along with the 24 division reinforcements that the Army had received in the spring of the same year had created a strategic advantage for the Entente . 
 In late July 1918 , Bulgarian commander @-@ in @-@ chief Nikola Zhekov sent German field marshal general Paul von Hindenburg a message regarding a rumored Entente offensive , and detailed Bulgaria 's inability to adequately defend the Vardar portion of the front . Zhekov requested that Germany immediately reinforce the Balkan Front , hinting that Austria @-@ Hungary would also be required to strengthen its positions in Albania . On 17 August , Hindenburg pledged to provide Bulgaria with support once the situation on other front permits it . Hindenburg 's reluctance to support Bulgaria was also manifested by the early September redeployment of the last German Jäger battalion stationed in Macedonia back into Germany . 
 The Bulgarians , using information from escaped prisoners of war , determined that Entente forces would engage in hostile actions west of lake Ohrid , in Monastir , Dobro Pole or Human . On 27 August , the 2nd and 3rd Bulgarian Divisions stationed at Dobro Pole were ordered to make emergency preparations , as new evidence indicated a frontal assault on Dobro Pole along with a secondary attack on Human . By 7 September , Dobro Pole was reinforced by one machine gun company , six battalions and ten heavy howitzers , General Friedrich von Scholtz then stated that the defensive measures made the defense of the front feasible . Von Scholtz had , however , failed to take into account the departure of Bulgarian chief of staff Nikola Zhekov and his subsequent replacement by Georgi Todorov . Widespread insubordination and desertions also plagued the Bulgarian troops who refused to participate in fortification works ; poor rationing and fatigue contributed to the low morale . 
 A day prior to the Entente offensive , General Louis Franchet d 'Espèrey laid out the final plan for the operation . The first phase consisted of a combined Franco @-@ Serbian attack on the positions of the 2nd and 3rd Bulgarian Divisions , which was expected to create a breach of the frontline in the area of Dobro Pole , while also posing a danger to the Bulgarian supply lines on river Vardar . Τhe 1 @,@ 875 metres ( 6 @,@ 152 ft ) Dobro Pole ( " Good Field " ) peak dominated the region , providing excellent observation points for the defenders . Dobro Pole was surrounded by a well @-@ developed system of trenches which , in combination with the rough terrain , made the area impassable for wheeled transport . Dobro Pole was , however , lower and less steep than the mountains on other parts of the front that averaged 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . 
 A second Anglo @-@ Franco @-@ Hellenic force would then attack the 1st Bulgarian Army between <unk> and Lake Doiran , preventing it from forming new defensive positions in the area . The initial advance would allow the Armée d 'Orient to progress in support of other units first to Prilep , <unk> and <unk> . In the meantime , an Anglo @-@ Hellenic force would strike Mount Belasica , occupying the Rupel Pass . 
 D 'Espèrey expected to march the Allied Army of the Orient through the towns of Demir Hisar , Rupel , <unk> , <unk> , Gradec , Štip and <unk> finally seizing Skopje . Units stationed at <unk> and Tetovo would prevent a Bulgarian flanking maneuver , while the main body of the force would widen the breach both in Štip and Prilep . In case of a collapse of the front between Dobro Pole and <unk> , the 1st Bulgarian and 11th German armies would either be annihilated or , in less favorable circumstances , perform an organised retreat to a new defensive line on river Crna . The prevention of such a retreat was to be achieved by a rapid , penetrating attack on <unk> , <unk> Planina and <unk> . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 8 a.m. on 14 September 1918 , Entente forces commenced a 566 @-@ gun artillery barrage on enemy positions . Their aircraft also bombed enemy positions and strafed a 250 @-@ truck column moving towards Kozjak . On the same day , Scholtz sent Hindenburg a telegraph stating that " all indications point out that an enemy offensive will target the 11th Army on both sides of Vardar as well as Dobro Pole ... " The Bulgarian high command did not attempt to perform a spoiling attack as they lacked the necessary vehicles and pack animals . The barrage did not cause a significant number of casualties but severely affected the Bulgarian esprit de corps . On the night between 14 and 15 September , Franco @-@ Serbian patrols reported that the artillery barrage had dealt sufficient damage to the barbed wire entanglements separating the trenches . 
 At 5 : 30 a.m. on 15 September , the French 122nd and 17th ( Colonial ) Divisions struck Sokol , Dobro Pole , Kravitski Kamene and Kravitsa while the Serbian Shumadia Division assaulted Kamene and Veternik . The Greek Archipelago , 3rd and 4th Divisions under Panagiotis <unk> acted as a link between the Serbian and French troops without entering combat . The offensive immediately caused a wave of mass desertion among the Bulgarian units ; the remaining infantrymen and artillery squadrons were not able to hold their ground . During the course of the battle , the 122nd Division broke into two columns and suffered heavy casualties . The left column managed to reach a position located 50 metres ( 160 ft ) from Sokol at 6 : 30 a.m. and take the peak at the end of the day . At 16 : 00 p.m. , the right column captured Dobro Pole after rushing a 200 metres ( 660 ft ) segment of steep terrain . The 17th Division seized Kravitsa at 7 : 00 a.m. , suppressing the last signs of resistance . 
 Two Franco @-@ Greek Regiments attempted to storm Zborsko but were pushed back in the ensuing counterattack , as powerful pockets of resistance between the Sousnitsa and <unk> streams facilitated its defense . Greek units then focused on Sousnitsa the fall of which created an opening in the Bulgarian rear and put the surrounding units to flight . Using dispersed bluffs as cover , soldiers of the Shumadia Division took over Veternik , Kamene and the western part of a nearby mountain range with considerable difficulty . Elements of the same unit successfully flanked Kravitski Kamene while the 17th Division was engaging in a frontal assault . At 16 : 00 p.m. , the Serbian 1st Army 's thrust on Sokol failed to produce intended results . An attack later that night did secure the peak . The two French divisions were then ordered to remain in position while the Serbian Timok and Yugoslav Divisions moved forward . By the end of the day , Bulgaria lost approximately 40 – 50 percent of the 12 @,@ 000 soldiers involved in the battle , including 3 @,@ 000 prisoners of war , 2 @,@ 689 dead and 50 out of the initial 158 artillery pieces . Entente casualties amounted to 1 @,@ 700 Frenchmen and 200 Serbians killed in action . 
 On the morning of 16 September , the Serbians overran the Kozjak mountain range and the Golo Bilo peak . They were joined by the 35th Greek Regiment which crossed the Poroi river and later marching on Topolets . At 11 : 00 a.m. , Franco @-@ Hellenic units stormed Zborsko for a second time and were met by heavy artillery and machine gun fire . The attack was rebuffed with the loss of 158 Greeks and roughly the same number of French lives and attempts to take the area were suspended . Živojin Mišić 's 1st Army and the Armée d 'Orient performed a night attack on the Gradešnica fortified zone , suppressing the defenders . The 1st Division Group moved into a position on the Poroi river north of <unk> in conjunction with the Timok Division . By the night of 16 September , the gap in what formerly constituted the front @-@ line had extended to 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) in width and 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) in depth . The Allied command ordered its air department to continue attacking all bridges on the river Vardar . 
 At 4 @.@ 00 a.m. on 17 September , Hellenic components of the 1st Division Group raided mount Preslap , a key position housing Bulgarian artillery . The Greeks rapidly descended from Golo Bilo and then began climbing the cliffs of Preslap with their bare hands . The Preslap garrison proceeded to abandon their positions and retreat eastwards . Having lost their artillery cover forces at Zborsko followed their comrades in retreat . The Timok Division conquered Topolets and advanced towards Studena Voda and Preslap while the Morava and Yugoslav Divisions overran <unk> Kamene . At the same time , the Drina and Danube Divisions seized Gradešnica along with the <unk> and <unk> peaks , then halted at <unk> . 
 On 18 September , the 11th French Colonial Division and the 6th Greek Regiment occupied the villages of <unk> , <unk> and Cebren , approaching towards the Cebren Monastery bridge on Crna . An Entente air raid destroyed another bridge north of <unk> Bey . Bulgarian forces failed at putting a stop to the Allied offensive , abandoning their wounded and large quantities of military equipment . By the end of the day , Allied troops had advanced 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) into enemy territory while also seizing locales of strategic importance that would later enable them to continue pushing deeper into Vardar Macedonia . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately following the battle , Entente forces were defeated in the Battle of Doiran at Lake Doiran on 18 September . However the breach of the defensive line at Dobro Pole , enabled the Allies to penetrate into Vardar Macedonia and send reinforcements to Doiran . The Bulgarians rushed to the defense of their homeland , abandoning Vardar Macedonia , in order to prevent a future occupation by the Entente . Having suffered heavy losses at Doiran , the Allied forces allowed the Bulgarians to peacefully withdraw over the border . A combination of multiple factors , including combat fatigue and poor supplies , led to the Radomir Rebellion . On 25 September , a band of Bulgarian deserters who had previously fled from Dobro Pole arrived at Kyustendil , looting the city and putting the Bulgarian High Command to flight . The mass of retreating Bulgarian mutineers then converged on the railway center of Radomir in Bulgaria , just 30 miles ( 48 km ) from the capital city of Sofia . On 27 September , the leaders of the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union took control of these troops and proclaimed the establishment of the Bulgarian Republic . About 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 rebellious troops threatened Sofia the following day . 
 Under those chaotic circumstances a Bulgarian delegation arrived in Thessaloniki to ask for an armistice . On 29 September , the Bulgarians were granted the Armistice of Salonica by General d 'Esperey . The Bulgarian downfall turned the strategic and operational balance of the war against the Central Powers . The Macedonian Front was brought to an end at noon on 30 September , when the ceasefire came into effect , and the Radomir Rebellion was put down , by Bulgarian forces , as of the 2 October . Tsar Ferdinand I of Bulgaria abdicated and went into exile the following day . 
 The British Army headed east towards the European side of the Ottoman Empire , while the French and Serbian forces continued north . The British Army neared Constantinople and , without a force capable to stopping the advance , the Ottoman government asked for an armistice ( the Armistice of Mudros ) on 26 October . In Serbia , " Desperate Frankie " ( as the British nicknamed d 'Esperey ) continued to advance and the Serbo @-@ French Army re @-@ captured the country , overrunning several weak German divisions that tried to block its push near Niš . On 3 November , Austria @-@ Hungary was forced to sign an armistice on the Italian Front ending the war there . On 10 November , d 'Esperey 's army crossed the Danube river and was poised to enter the Hungarian heartland . At the request of the French general , Count Mihály Károlyi , leading the Hungarian government , came to Belgrade and signed another armistice . 
 = Hurricane Grace ( 1991 ) = 
 Hurricane Grace was a short @-@ lived Category 2 hurricane that contributed to the formation of the powerful 1991 Perfect Storm . Forming on October 26 , Grace initially had subtropical origins , meaning it was partially tropical and partially extratropical in nature . It became a tropical cyclone on October 27 , and ultimately peaked with winds of 85 knots ( 100 mph ; 160 km / h ) . The storm had minor effects on the island of Bermuda as it passed to the south . A developing extratropical storm to the north turned Grace eastward ; the hurricane was eventually absorbed into the large circulation of the larger low pressure system . Fed by the contrast between cold air to the northwest and warm air from the remnants of Hurricane Grace , this storm became a large and powerful nor 'easter that caused extremely high waves and resulted in severe coastal damage along the U.S. East Coast . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Grace go back to a mid @-@ level area of low pressure that formed on October 23 to the south of Bermuda . Reports from a nearby ship indicated that the low had become a surface feature by October 25 . The storm system initially contained subtropical characteristics , and the center of circulation lacked deep convection for several days . The system was designated a subtropical storm on October 26 . An area of clouds near Bermuda became increasingly convective , and gradually became entrained into the expanding and developing circulation of the subtropical storm . Thunderstorm activity persisted near the center , and on October 27 , the storm attained tropical storm status and was named Grace . 
 Grace continued to organize and intensify ; based on satellite intensity estimates and reconnaissance reports , the storm was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane , the lowest level on the Saffir Simpson Hurricane Scale . Grace reached its peak intensity with winds of 85 knots ( 100 mph ; 160 km / h ) and a minimum central barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) , ranking as a Category 2 . Operationally , however , the peak intensity was thought to have been 65 knots ( 75 mph ; 120 km / h ) , which would have made it a mere Category 1 at its peak strength . The hurricane tracked generally northwestward until October 28 , when an extratropical cyclone formed along an approaching cold front off the New England coast . This storm rapidly intensified and influenced Grace 's steering currents , turning the hurricane sharply east . At around the same time , an eye feature associated with Hurricane Grace became apparent on satellite imagery , despite a lack of strong convective activity around the storm 's center . Grace accelerated as it continued eastward , and reached its peak intensity of Category 2 status on October 29 . However , the storm 's rapid forward movement led to an asymmetrical circulation . The center passed approximately 50 mi ( 80 km ) south of Bermuda without significantly affecting the island . 
 Hurricane Grace turned northeast later that day , as the rapidly approaching cold front undermined the storm 's lower @-@ level center . The system became overtaken by the front and subsequently lost its status as a tropical system . It moved north along the front and merged with the large cyclone to the north . The remnants of Grace became completely indistinguishable by the next day as it was completely absorbed by the passing extratropical storm on October 30 . The nor 'easter significantly strengthened as a result of the temperature contrast between the cold air to the northwest and the warmth and humidity associated with the remnants of Hurricane Grace . The low @-@ pressure system continued deepening as it drifted southeastward and then southwestward towards the United States . The cyclone attained its peak intensity 390 miles ( 630 km ) south of Halifax , Nova Scotia , with winds of up to 60 knots ( 70 mph ; 110 km / h ) . The storm became known as the 1991 Perfect Storm , or more commonly , the " Perfect Storm " . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In advance of Hurricane Grace , a tropical storm warning was issued for Bermuda on October 27 . The following day , about 10 hours before the storm 's closest approach to the island , the tropical storm warning was upgraded to a hurricane warning . On October 29 , the hurricane warning was lowered to a tropical storm warning , which was amended to a gale warning shortly thereafter . The island experienced bands of squally weather in association with the storm . Precipitation peaked at 3 @.@ 21 in ( 82 mm ) . However , no significant damage was reported . A yacht traveling from Bermuda to New York encountered strong winds and 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) seas well off the Virginia coast ; its nine occupants were rescued by Coast Guard helicopters . 
 Because of its large size , Grace generated large swells along the East Coast of the United States ; combined with abnormally high tides , these waves reached at least 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . Despite minor beach erosion , no substantial property damage occurred , although Carolina Beach , North Carolina , lost about 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of sand . 
 Despite the light impacts from Hurricane Grace , the resultant nor 'easter caused extensive coastal damage , high seas , and powerful winds . Hurricane @-@ force wind gusts were reported in New England . The storm churned the ocean for several days ; a wave 101 ft ( 31 m ) in height was reported by an offshore buoy . Extensive coastal flooding occurred along the coast of the Mid @-@ Atlantic and Northeastern U.S. , with effects as far north as Newfoundland and as far south as Jamaica . The nor 'easter eventually transitioned into another hurricane that made landfall in Nova Scotia . A ship known as the Andrea Gail was lost , along with her six crew members , during the storm . The story of the Andrea Gail inspired Sebastian Junger 's 1997 book , The Perfect Storm , and a 2000 motion picture film . 
 = Marian Cruger Coffin = 
 Marian Cruger Coffin ( September 16 , 1876 – February 2 , 1957 ) was one of the first American women to work as a professional landscape architect , and became famous for designing numerous gardens for members of the East Coast elite to whom she had connections through her mother 's side of the family . As a child , she received almost no formal education but was home @-@ tutored while living with her mother 's relatives in upstate New York . Coffin was determined to embark on a career despite the social problems that it would cause for a woman of her class and enrolled at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , where she studied between 1901 – 4 as one of only four women in architecture and landscape design . 
 After graduating Coffin was unable to find work with established architectural firms , due to widespread prejudice against a woman working in a male @-@ dominated field . She set up her own practice in New York City in 1905 , starting out by designing suburban gardens on Long Island . Her increasing fame led to larger commissions from wealthy and powerful East Coast families . By the 1920s she was one of the most sought @-@ after landscape architects in the eastern United States . Coffin 's clientele included some of the wealthiest and most famous families in the country , including the <unk> , the Vanderbilts , the <unk> , and the du Ponts . 
 Although the number of her commissions was greatly reduced after the onset of the Great Depression in 1930 , she continued working almost until her death in 1957 at the age of 80 . During her career she worked on over 130 commissions , including dozens of major estate gardens . Among her most notable creations were the gardens of Gibraltar in Wilmington , Delaware , the campus plan of the University of Delaware , the gardens of the Caumsett estate ( now Caumsett State Historic Park ) , and those of Winterthur , Delaware . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Coffin was born into a wealthy upper @-@ class family in Scarborough , New York but grew up almost penniless , due to her father 's death from complications of malaria when Marian was seven . During her childhood years , Coffin and her mother lived with relatives in Geneva , New York . She found the beautiful scenery of the area , set in the Finger Lakes of upper New York state , an inspiration ; she later wrote , " even as a small girl , I loved the country , not so much gardens and growing things , for I had no experience with these . . . but simply the great outdoor world . " 
 Although the Coffins had little money , their life with Alice 's upper @-@ class relatives gave Marian an almost aristocratic upbringing that introduced her to high society on the East Coast and enabled her to make social connections that were to be extremely valuable in later life . However , she received almost no formal education , a deficiency that caused significant problems for her in her college years . She was instead tutored at home , where she also enjoyed the benefits of exposure to fine art and music and became an accomplished horse rider . 
 As a relatively impoverished member of the upper class , Coffin had no independent income and faced a choice between finding a rich husband or taking up a professional career . She chose the latter , despite the fact that ( as noted by Martha Brookes Hutcheson , another early female landscape architect ) " it was considered almost social suicide and distinctly matrimonial suicide , for a woman to enter any profession . " She aspired to find a creative role but recognized the difficulties she faced , as she later wrote : 
 I secretly cherished the idea of being a great artist . . . but that dream seemed in no way possible of realization . . . [ Although ] my desire to create beauty was strong , I did not seem to possess talent for music , writing , painting or sculpture , at the time , the only outlet a woman had to express any artistic ability . . . My artistic yearnings lay fallow until I realized it was necessary to earn my living . 
 = = Studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology = = 
 An architect friend suggested that she might like to try " landscape gardening " ( the term used at the time for landscape architecture ) a field in which Beatrix Jones Farrand had become a female pioneer during the 1890s . Coffin may also have been influenced by her uncle Benjamin Church , who had worked under Frederick Law Olmsted on the creation of Central Park in New York City . Women at the time were looking beyond the traditional female careers of school teacher , nurse and office clerk , but relatively few educational institutions admitted them to study in male @-@ dominated fields such as architecture or horticulture . One of the exceptions was the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , which had begun admitting women in 1870 , only nine years after its establishment . Coffin applied there but was initially refused entry , as she was not qualified to meet the admission requirements due to her lack of a formal education . However , several of the key faculty members were sympathetic and encouraged her to persevere . She undertook intensive tuition in mathematics and enrolled at MIT in 1901 as a special student , one of four women enrolled on the architecture course and one of two studying landscape architecture . The four women on the course were the only female members of a 500 @-@ strong student body . 
 Coffin took the full range of architectural courses including studying engineering , physics , maths , mechanical drafting and freehand drawing in addition to architectural and landscape design . She also studied botany and horticulture under Charles Sprague Sargent at the Arnold Arboretum . One of her formative influences at MIT was Guy Lowell , the director of the landscape design program there , who was an advocate of the classical values of balance , order , proportion and harmony taught by the French Ecole des Beaux @-@ Arts . Lowell was best known for his book American Gardens , published in 1902 , which influenced many landscape architects to adopt his principles to design symmetrical , axial gardens that combined architectural features with classical garden ornaments with vegetation , following the tradition of Italian villas . 
 Another major influence was Charles Platt , who also followed the Italian tradition of treating the house and gardens as complementary entities , designed as a whole as a series of indoor and outdoor " rooms " . His 1894 book Italian Gardens was a major influence on Coffin 's own designs and elements of his work can be recognised in gardens that she executed , such as the Gibraltar Gardens in Wilmington , Delaware . During her course , she spent a summer abroad studying landscape design in France and Italy , as well as going on field trips to study estates in the Boston area , including some designed by Platt . She particularly excelled at botany and became friends with a fellow student , Henry Francis du Pont , with whom she later collaborated to design the gardens of Winterthur , Delaware . 
 Coffin 's college years were nonetheless a " long grind " , as she described it , with a seemingly unrelenting " long routine of hard work " relieved only by her summer abroad . She and the other three women in the program maintained a friendly competition with the male students which , she said , " put us on our mettle to prove that we , too , were serious students and competitors . This association with many types of boys and men I found very helpful as we had a fine spirit of <unk> in the drafting room and many a helping hand was given me at a critical moment , though one had to steel oneself to hear many a severe criticism , which was perhaps even more valuable . " 
 = = Early career = = 
 She graduated in 1904 and travelled to Europe with her mother , visiting well @-@ known gardens and staying with family and friends . Along the way she met Edith Wharton , Henry James and Gertrude Jekyll among others . Jekyll , an influential British horticulturist and garden designer , had a major influence on Coffin 's subsequent work . On returning to America , Coffin found that the strongly male @-@ dominated architectural firms were unwilling to employ a woman . She later wrote : 
 One expected the world to welcome newly fledged landscape artists , but alas , few people seemed to know what it was all about . . . while the idea of taking a woman into an office was unheard of . ' My dear young lady , what will you do about supervising the work on the ground ? [ meaning the laborers ] . ' [ It ] became such a constant and discouraging query that the only thing seemed to be for me to hang out my own shingle and see what I would do about it . 
 She moved to New York City with her mother and took rooms in the National Arts Club in Gramercy Park , Manhattan . Around 1905 , Coffin set up her own office at the National Arts Club and began taking commissions , using her family connections to find work . She was ideally situated ; it was the height of the Country Place Era , when wealthy East Coast Americans were eager to develop elaborate European @-@ style gardens for their estates . Coffin was well @-@ connected in such circles , widely traveled , came from a good family , was professionally trained and was known for her good taste . She also joined the American Society of Landscape Architects , which had two other female members at the time . 
 Coffin 's first jobs were to design small flower gardens such as the suburban garden she designed for Edward Sprague in 1906 in Flushing , Queens . Noted for its original design , it was situated on a modest lot measuring 150 feet by 300 feet ( 45 m by 91 m ) , typical of the new suburban developments being built on Long Island at the time . A few years later , she wrote about the Sprague garden in Country Life in America and Elsa Rehmann also discussed it in her 1918 book The Small Place : Its Landscape Architecture . Coffin argued that a " moderately well @-@ to @-@ do " homeowner could create and maintain a substantial and elaborate garden for a modest expenditure , comparable to that of a mid @-@ range car . She promoted the idea that even the most featureless lot could be beautified through good design : " We certainly cannot create a magnificent view , but we can plan and plant beautiful screens and backgrounds that will be interesting at all seasons of the year . We may not easily be able to construct a picturesque diversity at ground level , but we can plant so as to have much height and variety in our flower and shrub groups . " 
 As her fame grew , Coffin gained the opportunity to put her design principles into practice on a larger scale . Her practice had grown large enough for her to need an assistant by 1911 , and by 1918 she had moved her office to larger premises at 830 Lexington Avenue . She also took on James Scheiner , an architect , as an associate . He became a key part of Coffin 's practice , working on large @-@ scale tasks such as overseeing work on the ground . This in turn opened up new opportunities for her to take on new , larger commissions . Coffin insisted on being paid the same fees as a male architect and to be treated equally in contracts ; this was a novelty in itself , at a time when women were usually paid less than men . She also liked to employ women to work with her on commissions , giving them the chance to undertake apprenticeships that male prejudice had denied her when she had first started on her career . 
 = = Inter @-@ war career = = 
 Among Coffin 's significant commissions during this period were the design of a garden for William Marshall Bullitt 's Oxmoor estate in Glenview , Kentucky in 1909 , probably due to a recommendation from Henry du Pont . The Bullitt commission led to two similar commissions nearby in 1911 . In 1910 – 11 she also designed gardens for Alfred Boardman in Southampton , New York and for her friend Elizabeth E. Farnum in Norfolk , Connecticut . A relative of the du Ponts , Hugh Rodney Sharp , gave her what was to become one of her best @-@ known commissions in 1916 , the creation of the gardens of the Gibraltar estate in Wilmington , Delaware . She designed it in an Italianate Beaux @-@ Arts style as a series of " rooms " to parallel the layout of the mansion . It has a strongly geometric layout profusely planted in a style reminiscent of an informal English garden . Numerous architectural and decorative elements such as fountains , statues , urns and hand @-@ forged iron gates provide additional ornamentation . 
 Coffin 's attempts to find business in the Midwest were thwarted by the well @-@ established presence there of several notable landscape architects in Chicago but she was not short of commissions despite this failure . Her success was recognized by her being elected a Fellow of the American Society of Landscape Architects in 1918 , and by the 1920s she was one of the most sought @-@ after East Coast landscape architects . Her work was widely featured in popular magazines and professional journals , at Coffin 's own instigation as part of an overt marketing strategy . She sought to reach the wealthy and powerful women who made up an important part of the readership of publications such as the Garden Club of America 's Bulletin . Coffin commissioned some of America 's leading landscape photographers to take photographs of her creations and promoted her work through slide lectures . Her marketing was highly successful and led to a steady stream of commissions . 
 Most of her commissions were carried out during the 12 years or so between the end of the First World War and the start of the Great Depression . She took on several major projects , including designing the landscape of the University of Delaware campus in 1919 at the recommendation of Sharp , who chaired the college 's Buildings and Grounds Committee . From 1918 to 1952 , Coffin was appointed the University of Delaware ’ s landscape architect , a position which required Coffin to unite the university ’ s two separate campuses ( the former Delaware College to the north and the Delaware Women ’ s College to the south ) into one cohesive design . This was a challenge since the linear mall design of each was out of alignment with the other . Coffin solved this problem by linking them via a circle instead of curving the straight paths ( the university ’ s library faces this circle today ) which rendered the misalignment unnoticeable to the pedestrian . 
 Other major projects included gardens for the <unk> estate in Shinnecock Hills on Long Island , the Marjorie Merriweather Post estate known as <unk> in nearby Brookville ( which is now part of the Long Island University Post Campus ) and the huge Caumsett estate ( now Caumsett State Historic Park ) on behalf of Marshall Field III . Two projects carried out in the late 1920s , for Edgar W. <unk> in Bridgeport , Connecticut and Joseph Morgan Wing in Millbrook , New York led to her being awarded the Gold Medal of Honor by the Architectural League of New York in 1930 . 
 In 1926 , Coffin fell ill with a serious hip infection that forced her to curtail much of her physical activity and required a lengthy stay in hospital . She moved to a newly acquired house in New Haven , Connecticut , although she continued to maintain her office in New York and commuted there daily . Coffin often entertained guests in New Haven ( and recruited several Connecticut notables as new clients ) , holding teas , cocktail parties , musical events and buffet suppers . The garden , which she had laid out herself , became the site of garden parties in the summer months . She preferred the company of young architects , artists , musicians and writers , though she could be curt towards those she took a dislike to ; on one occasion , she snubbed Hilaire Belloc when he asked her which of his books she had read . 
 = = Later career and death = = 
 Coffin 's designs were distinguished by her use of " dramatic contrasts in color , inclusion of wildflowers and woodland plantings , and site unity through effective transition spaces . " She was especially noted for her ability to effectively incorporate functional areas such as tennis courts and putting greens with ornamental areas such as allées . Her willingness to innovate made her a particularly sought @-@ after designer as clients came to value a more adventurous approach to landscape architecture . She put into practice the idea put forward in 1918 by Elsa Rehmann that a garden should be a " manifestation of distinctive individuality , an expression of personality . " By the 1920s , Rehmann 's views had become fashionable and gardens became seen as a vehicle for expressing the private self . 
 Many of Coffin 's theories and principles can be seen in practice in her most famous creation , Harry and Ruth du Pont 's gardens at their Winterthur estate . Her work on the gardens began in 1929 and became the biggest commission of her career . It was very fortuitously timed for her , as the Wall Street Crash of 1929 wiped out the fortunes of many of her clients and brought to an end the era of commissioning elaborate gardens for large country estates . Coffin had somewhat better luck with her investments and the enormous fortune of the du Ponts insulated the family from the worst of the Great Depression , permitting work on Winterthur to continue throughout the downturn . With the money from her investments and the fees from the du Ponts for the Winterthur commission , Coffin was able to maintain two homes , a maid and a chauffeur despite the general economic decline . 
 The Depression meant that large commissions became few and far between . For the rest of her career , Coffin had to make do with smaller and less well @-@ compensated commissions for suburban gardens . She took up writing and produced two books , Trees and Shrubs for Landscape Effects ( 1940 ) and The Seeing Eye . The latter was completed but never published and the manuscript was lost after she died . After the Second World War she carried out several more commissions and continued working on Winterthur until the 1950s . She designed layouts for the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx and travelled extensively in Europe and South America in the late 1940s and early 1950s . She was awarded an honorary doctorate of letters from Hobart and William Smith Colleges in Geneva , New York in 1946 . On February 2 , 1957 she died at her home in New Haven . Perhaps fulfilling Martha Brookes Hutcheson 's prediction that having a career would be " matrimonial suicide " for a woman of her class , Coffin never married and had no children . Her papers , architectural plans and photographs of her gardens are preserved at the Winterthur Museum and Country Estate . 
 = Live Peace in Toronto 1969 = 
 Live Peace in Toronto 1969 is a live album by the Plastic Ono Band , released on Apple in the United Kingdom and the United States , in December 1969 . Recorded at the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival festival , it was the first live album released by any member of the Beatles separately or together . John Lennon and his wife Yoko Ono received a phone call from the festival 's promoters John Brower and Kenny Walker , and then quickly assembled a band in a very short space of time to play at the festival , which was due to start the following day . The group had brief rehearsals before appearing on the stage to perform several songs ; one of which , " Cold Turkey " , was first performed live at said festival . Eventually returning home , Lennon mixed the album in a day . 
 The album peaked at number 10 on the Billboard 200 and has been certified a gold album by the RIAA , and failed to chart in the UK . The original LP came with a thirteen @-@ month 1970 calendar . A video of several performances , not just the Plastic Ono Band 's set , was released on video . Since its first release , the album has been reissued a number of times . 
 = = Background = = 
 Toronto rock promoters John Brower and Kenny Walker organised a festival held at Varsity Stadium on 13 September 1969 , around the notion of a revival of rock and roll stars from the 1950s , booking Chuck Berry , Little Richard , Jerry Lee Lewis , Fats Domino , Bo Diddley , and Gene Vincent . They also booked more modern acts such as Alice Cooper , Chicago , and The Doors , and contacted Lennon to see if he would be willing to be the master of ceremonies . Lennon responded that if he came over at all , it would be to play " only if you let me bring my new band so we can play . " Lennon hastily assembled a band under the Plastic Ono Band moniker , consisting of Eric Clapton , Klaus Voormann , and drummer Alan White , as well as their assistants , Anthony Fawcett , Terry Doran , and Jill and Dan Richter , to accompany himself and Ono . White got a phone call from Lennon , and assumed it was a friend prank calling him , only realising it was actually Lennon after a second call . White would later call the band line @-@ up " very unique " : " This voice on the phone said , ' Do you want to do a gig with me – it 's John Lennon ' . The Plastic Ono Band was John and Yoko , Klaus Voormann , Eric Clapton and myself . It was a unique band . " Lennon also asked George Harrison , but Harrison turned down the offer . 
 On the morning of the scheduled flight , a day before the concert , on 12 September , Lennon , Ono , and Clapton were not at the airport . At this point , Clapton had not been aware of the concert , nor of Lennon contacting him . Brower had managed to get through to Clapton and told him to contact Lennon and Ono , who were still in bed . Clapton said he got " a phone call on the day we were to leave and he said that someone had asked him to do that concert and it was that night ! So I had to make the airport in an hour . " The group had two rehearsals : one was during the transatlantic flight from London to Toronto , and the other shortly before appearing on stage at the actual festival . Lennon said the group " didn 't know what to play " , as they had not previously performed together . Also on the flight , Lennon gained the confidence , that when he got back to England , to leave the Beatles . Lennon told this to Clapton , and shortly afterwards , to the Beatles ' then @-@ manager , Allen Klein . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The group played eight songs to a crowd of 25 @,@ 000 people . Before the start of the Plastic Ono Band 's performance , they were introduced by Kim Fowley , and Lennon said to the crowd that the group were going to play only songs that they actually knew . They performed the Beatles 's " Yer Blues " , because Clapton had performed it with Lennon for the Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus , and his two solo songs , " Give Peace a Chance " and " Cold Turkey " , the latter of which had its premiere at the festival . " Cold Turkey " , presented as " the newest song that John wrote " by Ono , had Lennon reading the lyrics off a clip @-@ board . Ono selected a song which had been the B @-@ side of " Cold Turkey , " " Don 't Worry Kyoko ( Mummy 's Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow ) " , which also had its premiere at the festival . Shortly before the band went into " Don 't Worry Kyoko " , Lennon announced that Ono was " gonna do her thing all over you " . The band closed with an electric version of the Wedding Album track " John John ( Let 's Hope for Peace ) " , an extended experimental number consisting of her screaming the title repeatedly to the feedback of the electric guitars . The number , and the Plastic Ono Band 's participation in the concert , ended with the guitars and the bass being put in front of the amplifiers to continue the feedback , after the band was gone , until Mal Evans turned off the amplifiers . With their stage remarks , Lennon and Ono linked the appearance here to their ongoing campaign for peace . 
 Lennon personally went to Abbey Road Studios on 25 September 1969 to mix the album from their eight @-@ track recordings . While at the session , Lennon finished the stereo master for the album , although he did go back on 20 October to re @-@ do the " Don 't Worry Kyoko " stereo master , removing the majority of Ono 's vocals from his songs and Clapton 's backing vocals . The album is technically a soundtrack recording , being part of the audio portion of the documentary film being made of the festival by D.A. Pennebaker , later released as Sweet Toronto . Lennon and Ono made a deal with Pennebaker to license their portion of the show for record , in exchange for rights to include their appearance . According to the Beatles Monthly , due to the adverse reaction to Ono 's performance , Pennebaker removed the segments with Lennon and Ono after limited screenings of the film , later re @-@ edited as Keep on Rockin ' . Showtime ultimately presented the performance in 1989 , and the full movie appeared later on home video and DVD . 
 = = Release and aftermath = = 
 The album , which was released on the same day in both the UK and US , failed to chart in the UK , but peaked at number 10 in the US . It was released to quash any bootleg versions that Lennon was sure would leak onto the market . US editions of the album wrongly stated that the album was recorded in England . The album came with a 13 @-@ month calendar , which had photos , poems and songs in it , from Lennon 's In His Own Write and A Spaniard in the Works , and Ono 's Grapefruit books . In the US , Capitol were reluctant at first to issue the album , after the commercial failures of their three experimental albums . Lennon recalled in an interview in December 1980 that he had to persuade Capitol to distribute the album : " They said ' This is garbage , we 're not going to put it out with her screaming on one side and you doing this sort of live stuff . ' And they refused to put it out . But we finally persuaded them that ... people might buy this . " In an interview with Rolling Stone , Lennon said that Capitol " were on the [ Paul ] McCartney bandwagon , which they were on , and they thought that I was just an idiot pissing about with a Japanese broad and the music we were making , like Toronto , they didn 't want to put out , because they didn 't like that . " 
 Criticism was directed at side two of the LP , the side consisting entirely of two Yoko Ono songs . Richard Ginell of AllMusic remarks : 
 Side two , alas , was devoted entirely to Ono 's wailing , <unk> , brainless , banshee vocalizing on " Don 't Worry Kyoko " and " John John ( Let 's Hope for Peace ) " – the former backed with plodding rock rhythms and the latter with feedback . No wonder you see many used copies of the LP with worn A @-@ sides and clean , unplayed B @-@ sides – and Yoko 's " art " is just as irritating today as it was in 1969 . But in those days , if you wanted John you had to take the whole package . 
 Lennon later said he " couldn 't remember any of the words but it didn 't matter — I just made them all up and we made a great wonderful noise . " Carl Perkins said to Lennon after the show that he was " so beautiful you made me cry . " A bootleg album of the concert appeared , under the title JL @-@ YO @-@ EC , thanks to an audience recording , which was released a few months after the official album . After Lennon 's death , the album , along with seven other Lennon albums , was reissued by EMI as part of a box set , which was released in the UK on 15 June 1981 . The album was reissued in the US in 1982 , on Capitol , and again in the same country on the same label , in 1986 . The album was originally scheduled to appear on CD for the first time in June 1989 , but the plan was scrapped . Ono , with the help of Rob Stevens from Quad Recording , supervised a remixing of Live Peace in Toronto 1969 for its compact disc issue , released on 1 May 1995 . Two of the remixed tracks feature a variation in Ono 's vocals : while " Dizzy Miss Lizzy " has additional backing vocals from Ono , " Money " has fewer backing vocals from Ono . The CD booklet included a 1995 calendar , mimicking the original release . The album is also available from the audiophile label Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab . , utilizing the same remix . The booklet for the 2006 Mobile Fidelity release also included a current calendar . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Side one 
 " Blue Suede Shoes " ( Carl Perkins ) – 3 : 50 
 " Money ( That 's What I Want ) " ( Janie Bradford , Berry Gordy ) – 3 : 25 
 " Dizzy , Miss Lizzy " ( Larry Williams ) – 3 : 24 
 " Yer Blues " ( John Lennon , Paul McCartney ) – 4 : 12 
 " Cold Turkey " ( Lennon ) – 3 : 34 
 " Give Peace a Chance " ( Lennon , McCartney ) – 3 : 41 
 Side two 
 " Don 't Worry Kyoko ( Mummy 's Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow ) " ( Yoko Ono ) – 4 : 48 
 " John John ( Let 's Hope for Peace ) " ( Ono ) – 12 : 38 
 = = Personnel = = 
 John Lennon — lead vocals , rhythm guitar 
 Yoko Ono — vocals 
 Eric Clapton — lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Klaus Voormann — bass 
 Alan White — drums 
 Kim Fowley — spoken introduction 
 George Marino - mastering 
 = History of Davenport , Iowa = 
 Davenport , Iowa , was part of the Louisiana Purchase . In 1814 , during the War of 1812 the British military , along with the Saux and Fox Indian tribes fought against the Americans near Davenport . In August , Major Zachary Taylor , later President , fought a battle east of what is now Credit Island Park , in Davenport . An outpost was set up at Fort Armstrong and George Davenport and Antonie LeClaire were stationed there . 
 Davenport was established in 1836 by Antoine LeClaire and named after his good friend Colonel George Davenport . The first settlers of Davenport were mostly Germans . After a county seat dilemma with neighboring town Rockingham in 1840 , Davenport was established as the county seat of Scott County . Davenport was declared to be Iowa 's first military headquarters just before the Civil War by Governor Samuel J. Kirkwood . In November 1865 , the Iowa Soldiers ' Orphans ' Home was opened in Davenport to take in children left orphaned by the Civil War . In 1895 , the city hall was built , and in 1897 , the first chiropractic school in the world , Palmer Chiropractic College was opened . 
 Davenport experienced an economic and building boom in the 1920s and early 1930s . The Kahl Building and the Capitol Theatre , the baseball stadium , the Parker Building , and the Blackhawk Hotel are a few of the buildings built during this time period that are still standing . The Great Depression brought economic tough times to the city . The inclusion of new factories in the 1940s and 1950s helped turn the economy around after World War II . Davenport was on hard times once again with the farm crisis of the 1980s , when the Caterpillar Plant closed , costing 35 @,@ 000 jobs . The city was rejuvenated once again in the 1990s and present by renovations and building additions . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 = = = Early 19th century = = = 
 In 1832 , Chief Keokuk and General Winfield Scott signed a treaty to end the Black Hawk War . Antoine LeClaire , who was part French and part Pottawattamie , served as translator . A generous portion of land was given by Chief Keokuk to Marguerite LeClaire , Antoine 's wife , as she was the granddaughter of a Sac chief . Keokuk stipulated that Antoine build their home on the exact spot where the treaty was signed or forfeit the land . Antoine did so , finishing the Treaty House in the spring of 1833 . Davenport was established in 1836 by Antoine LeClaire and named after his good friend Colonel George Davenport . 
 Colonel Davenport arrived in 1816 with the establishment of Fort Armstrong . He acted as a " sutler " , or supplier , for the army 's Fort Armstrong . Fort Armstrong was located on the northwestern tip of Arsenal Island with the purpose of monitoring fur trade traffic in the area and keeping the peace between local Native American tribes . He contributed to the organization and mapping out of the community , now known as the Quad Cities . He also aided in establishing plans for the first railroad bridge to cross the Mississippi River . 
 = = = County seat dilemma = = = 
 In 1837 , shortly after Scott County was formed Davenport , and rival neighbor Rockingham both campaigned to become the county seat . As stated by the Iowa Territory , the city with the most votes at the February 1838 election , would become the county seat . On the eve of the election , Davenporters secured the temporary service of Dubuque laborers so that they could vote in the election . Davenport won the election . Rockingham supporters however , did not like this . They protested the elections to the territorial Governor . The Governor of the territory refused to certify the results of the election . A second election was scheduled for the following August . To avoid another import of voters , the Governor set a sixty @-@ day residency requirement . Both cities proved to be corrupt as the second election drew near . Davenport , was again the victor , by only two votes . A third election was set by the Territorial Legislature for the summer of 1840 . As the August election drew nearer , <unk> grew tired of the county seat cause . Antoine LeClaire 's $ 3 @,@ 000 contribution , and the efforts of other Davenporters were difficult to challenge . Davenport easily won the third election . To ensure the question of county seat would not arise again , Davenport built the first county courthouse . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Late 19th century = = = 
 Colonel Davenport arrived in 1816 with the establishment of Fort Armstrong . He acted as a " sutler " , or supplier , for the United States Army garrisoned at Fort Armstrong . Fort Armstrong was located on the northwestern tip of Arsenal Island with the purpose of monitoring fur trade traffic in the area and keeping the peace between local Native American tribes . He contributed to the organization and mapping out of the community , now known as the Quad Cities . He also aided in establishing plans for the first railroad bridge to cross the Mississippi . On July 4 , 1845 , Colonel Davenport was assaulted in his home by the Banditti of the Prairie men who thought he had a fortune in his safe . Beaten and left for dead , he survived long enough to give a full description of the criminals before he died that night . Five men were charged with the murder of George Davenport , and all but one , who escaped before the trial , were hung for the murder . Three more men were charged with accessories to the murder . One man was sentenced to life in prison , but escaped and was killed three months later , one man served one year in prison , and the charges were dropped against the third man , who left the area . 
 On June 9 , 1849 , Maj. William Williams visited Davenport and provided a brief description in his journal : 
 Davenport is situated on the Iowa site of the river on a very extensive flat of land , gently rising from the River Mississippi for a mile back , when the bluff rises to considerable height affording most beautiful sites for improvements . This is a charming place ; buildings good but in some part scattered ; streets very wide and beautified with trees on each side ; some very pretty residences ; a great deal of taste displayed . We have a fine view of the river both up and down . The population is from 1 @,@ 100 to 1 @,@ 200 . The town has the appearance of a more ancient town than any I have seen on the Mississippi ... Davenport is the county seat of Scott county . Supports two lawyers , four doctors , has seven churches ... No cholera <unk> a healthy place . ... Two large steam flouring mills that manufactures 620 barrels of flower per week , one steam saw mill . ... Eight or ten stores here , good ones , some groceries , 3 drug stores , one regular <unk> 2 <unk> ... A very fine college [ Iowa College ] at Davenport under the direction of the Congregationalists ; a very fine building , beautifully situated on the bluffs in rear of the town . 
 In the 1850s , Germans made up Davenport 's largest settlement group . By 1858 , more than one @-@ fifth of Davenport 's nearly 11 @,@ 000 residence were Germans . The growing city had a need for a railroad bridge to cross into Illinois . Before a bridge was built , privately owned ferryboats transported passengers , wagons , and cargo across the Mississippi River . In 1856 , the first railroad bridge built across the Mississippi River connecting Davenport and Rock Island , IL . It was built by the Rock Island Railroad . <unk> saw nationwide railroads as a threat to their business . On May 6 , 1856 , just weeks after it was completed , a <unk> crashed the Effie Afton steamboat into the bridge . The owner of the Effie Afton , John Hurd , filed a lawsuit against The Rock Island Railroad Company . The Rock Island Railroad Company selected Abraham Lincoln as their trial lawyer . 
 The case , " Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company " was argued by Lincoln in the U.S. Circuit Court in Chicago before Judge John MacLean , on September 8 , 1857 . The jury deliberated for a few hours and ended up as a hung jury so the case was dismissed . In 1858 , the Committee on Commerce of the United States House of Representatives conducted an investigation to decide if the Rock Island Bridge was a serious obstruction to the navigation of the river . The committee concluded that the bridge was a hazard because of the length of the pier , the angle of the bridge , and the swift current under the bridge . The committee believed , however , that the courts should settle the matter and therefore did not recommend any action by the United States Congress . In May 1858 , Ward filed suit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Iowa asking the court to declare the bridge a nuisance and order its removal and restore the river to its original capacity for all purposes of navigation . The judge declared the bridge a nuisance and ordered the Mississippi and Missouri Railroad to remove the three piers and their superstructure that lay on the Iowa side . The judge reasoned that if this bridge was not stopped , many other bridges would follow . The piers were not torn out , because the railroad company appealed the case to the United States Supreme Court . The Supreme Court , reversed the decision of the district court and allowed the bridge to remain . 
 Just before the start of the Civil War , Governor Samuel J. Kirkwood declared Davenport to be Iowa 's first military headquarters . Five camps were set up in Davenport during the war . Camp McClellan was the largest camp , on the eastern edge of the city . Thousands of Iowa troops trained here . Camp McClellan contained twenty wooden barracks , a stockade building , headquarters buildings , and hospitals . A Davenport neighborhood , McClellan Heights is named after the camp . 
 Hundreds of Iowa children were left homeless by the Civil War . On November 16 , 1865 , the Iowa Soldiers ' Orphans ' Home ( renamed the Annie <unk> Home in 1949 ) was opened . The first 150 children arrived from Keokuk , Iowa . Starting in 1876 , children from broken homes as well as orphans from all of Iowa 's ninety @-@ nine counties were taken in at the home . The home was a self @-@ contained community , containing residences , a school , tailor shop , and a chapel . The home had three separate fires during its course . On November 9 , 1887 , at three o ’ clock in the morning , the third fire started . The building burnt to the ground . The next day ’ s Morning Democrat Gazette pointed out that if home was not set up with several different buildings as houses , all 350 children at the time would have been homeless , and some may have not survived the fire . After 110 years of service , the home closed in 1975 . It is estimated that well over 12 @,@ 000 children were helped by the Home during its operation . 
 In 1872 , Phebe Sudlow was appointed principal of Davenport High School . She was the first female principal in the United States . On June 19 , 1874 , Phebe Sudlow was then unanimously voted to the position of Superintendent of Davenport Schools . She was also the first woman in United States history to be a public school superintendent . 
 In 1895 , in the midst of a deep national economic depression , Davenport built an ornate new City Hall . The cost was about $ 90 @,@ 000 — an astronomical sum at that time — and the City constructed the new building without issuing any municipal bonds . Local legend has long suggested that the city retired the debt so quickly by taxing the city 's brothels , but the fines levied against the brothels accounted for only between $ <unk> $ 9 @,@ 000 per year , just a portion of the financial windfall the city reaped in the mid @-@ 1890s . The bulk of the funds came from a new state law ( the " <unk> tax " ) which applied to the city 's 150 illegal saloons and amounted to around $ 50 @,@ 000 per year . This tax allowed for construction not only of City Hall , but also paved streets and a new sewer system , and from 1902 – 08 , the city eliminated its property taxes altogether . 
 In 1897 , Palmer College of Chiropractic was founded by Daniel David Palmer . It is the first chiropractic school in the world . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 On July 25 , 1901 , a large fire erupted on Davenport 's east side . The fire burnt itself out late in the day , instead of being brought under control . Eight blocks of buildings were destroyed causing one million dollars of damage . No lives were lost during the fire . 
 The 1920s brought an economic and building boom . The city 's skyline began to form , with the construction of commercial buildings like the Kahl Building and the Capitol Theatre , the Parker Building , and American Commercial and Savings Bank . Large national department stores also arrived downtown , Montgomery Wards , Sears and J.C. Penney . The Blackhawk Hotel was built in downtown in 1915 . The original hotel was seven stories . Four floors were added in the 1920s , giving a total of 400 rooms . The Blackhawk has been host to several high @-@ profile people including Carl Sandburg , Herbert Hoover , Richard Nixon , and Jack Dempsey . The hotel named rooms 412 @-@ 414 the " Nixon Suite " . Big bands such as Guy Lombardo and Stan Kenton played at the Blackhawk on many occasions 
 On Christmas day in 1920 , 10 @,@ 000 people turned out to see the opening of Davenport 's new , elegant theater , the Capitol Theatre . The Capitol Theatre featured a classical interior , an orchestra pit and a full @-@ scale theater organ . The third balcony extended five full stories . The theater 's 2 @,@ 000 seats were regularly filed . On February 18 , 1922 , WOC Radio made its local broadcasting debut . WOC was the second radio station licensed in the country . In 1933 , WOC hired future President Ronald Reagan as a staff announcer . 
 In 1930 , efforts began to turn a city dump into a landmark . The project was to construct a municipal stadium ( now called Modern Woodmen Park ) . The project was financed by bonds , and cost more than $ 150 @,@ 000 . Special features included reserved seats , box seats , and night lighting . The stadium was home to the Saint Ambrose University football games , and boxing matches . Today the stadium is home to the Quad Cities River Bandits baseball team . By 1932 , thousands of Davenporters were on public relief due to the Great Depression . A shantytown grew in the west end of the city along the Mississippi River . Sickness , hunger , and unsanitary living conditions plagued the area . Through county and municipal government , the federal Civil Works Administration gave employment to thousands of men . They worked to extend the seawall along the riverfront . More than 200 jobs were created by the construction of Lock and Dam 15 project , in 1932 . Hundreds of state employees worked on completing the Kimberly Road <unk> Bypass in 1936 . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Late 20th century = = = 
 In 1946 Alcoa decided to build a new rolling mill east of Davenport in Riverdale , Iowa . With the construction , concerns about postwar unemployment ended . Retailing in Davenport was changed by the inclusion of the automobile into mainstream America . In the late 1940s , parking meters were installed in downtown to encourage rotation of space between different users . Soon there were more cars then the street parking spaces could handle . In 1953 , the first multi @-@ story ramp was completed in the state , on the corner of Fifth Street and Brady Street . The large variety of shops kept downtown a retail leader even after the opening of the Village Shopping Center in 1956 . Another first for Iowa . 
 The deadliest fire in Davenport history came on January 7 , 1950 , when 41 people were killed in a fire at the St. Elizabeth 's Hospital , a mental ward operated by Mercy Hospital . Most of the people who lost their lives were female patients trapped behind windows locked shut by rusty , iron bars . The cause was attributed to a patient who was lighting curtains on fire with a cigarette lighter . 
 Davenport experienced a post @-@ war economic and population boom after World War II . Oscar Mayer , Ralston Purina , and other companies all built plants in west Davenport . 1956 brought the Interstate highway network to Davenport . Local transportation planning took on a new design after World War II . Paved state and federal highways built to and through Davenport in the 1930s were expanded to handle new truck shipping patterns . In 1960 a second span was constructed to help with the increased traffic on the Iowa @-@ Illinois Memorial Bridge , while the first segment of Interstate 80 , between Iowa Highway 38 and U.S. Highway 61 , opened later that year . A segment connecting U.S. 61 to U.S. 67 was completed in 1964 , while other Interstate highways – 74 on the east and 280 on the west – also opened to traffic during the 1960s and early 1970s . 
 By 1959 , more than 1 @,@ 000 homes a year were being constructed . By the late 1970s , the economic growth was over for both downtown and local businesses and industries . The farm crisis of the 1980s hit Davenport and the rest of the Quad Cities hard , with high unemployment and financial hardships . 35 @,@ 000 workers lost their jobs throughout the entire Quad Cities area . The Caterpillar Plant on the cities north side closed , causing many jobs to be lost . 
 In the late 1970s , Davenport city leaders , began plans to construct a civic center in downtown . The center would become a focus for the revitalization of downtown 's sagging property values . In December 1983 , following sixteen months of construction , the civic center was opened . After a public naming contest , it was named the RiverCenter a short time later . The adjacent <unk> Theatre was renamed the " Adler Theater " and was placed under the management of the RiverCenter . In the late 1970s a large shopping mall was built drawing most customers away from downtown and leaving the area in its own economic depression . 
 The 1990s brought the beginnings of an economic turnaround for the city . Many renovations and building additions have occurred to revitalize downtown . Including fixing up Modern Woodmen Park , building the Skybridge , and the Figge Art Museum , along with many other projects . 
 Davenport ( along with neighboring Rock Island , Illinois ) won the " 2007 City Livability Award " in the small @-@ city category from the U.S. Conference of Mayors . Tom Cochran , Executive Director of the Conference , stated that the award " gives the Conference a chance to highlight mayoral leadership in making urban areas safer , cleaner and more livable . " The award acknowledges achievements from the " <unk> " plan of Davenport and Rock Island . 
 = = List of mayors of Davenport = = 
 = Last Gasp ( Inside No. 9 ) = 
 " Last Gasp " is the fourth episode of the first series of British dark comedy anthology television programme Inside No. 9 . It first aired on 26 February 2014 on BBC Two . The story revolves around the ninth birthday of the severely ill Tamsin ( Lucy Hutchinson ) . Tamsin 's parents Jan ( Sophie Thompson ) and Graham ( Steve Pemberton ) have arranged with charity WishmakerUK for singer Frankie J Parsons ( David Bedella ) to visit as a treat for their daughter . Frankie dies after blowing up a balloon , leading to arguments between Graham , WishmakerUK representative Sally ( Tamsin Greig ) and Frankie 's assistant Si ( Adam Deacon ) over the now @-@ valuable balloon containing Frankie 's last breath . The story , written by Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , was inspired by someone Pemberton had seen on television who collected air from different places . The episode is more comedic than others in the series , and critiques celebrity culture and human greed . 
 " Last Gasp " received a fairly negative critical response ; in retrospect , Shearsmith claimed that " people hated " the episode . Several critics , including Gerard Gilbert of The Independent , Jack Seale of Radio Times and comedy critic Bruce Dessau — though complimentary of Inside No. 9 generally — considered " Last Gasp " to be weaker than the previous three episodes , but not unwatchable . Other reviewers gave a more positive response , but a particularly scathing review by columnist Virginia Blackburn was published in the Daily Express . On its first showing , " Last Gasp " drew 872 @,@ 000 viewers , lower than any previous episode . Pemberton subsequently sold a balloon containing his own breath on eBay , with proceeds going to a Sport Relief charity . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Last Gasp " was inspired by someone Pemberton had seen on children 's programme Multi @-@ Coloured Swap Shop who collected apparently empty jars which actually contained air taken from different places . The idea , which he considered " bizarre " but " very special " , had " haunted " him . This gave him the idea of collecting the breath of celebrities . The death of Michael Jackson and the death of Amy Winehouse , along with the associated collecting of memorabilia , also served as inspiration . For Pemberton , the family and house in " Last Gasp " were very " normal " . The episode was filmed on location in what director David Kerr called an " utterly freezing " house . The finished episode , for Kerr , had a degree of " suburban darkness " in that , though the events unfold in a relatively unremarkable setting , the darker side of human nature is revealed . At the same time , the characters ' arguments lead to humour . Shearsmith described " Last Gasp " as like a My Family episode " gone wrong " . 
 As the format of Inside No. 9 requires new characters each week , the writers were able to attract actors who may have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . In addition to Pemberton — who played Graham , the father — " Last Gasp " starred Sophie Thompson as Jan , the mother ; Lucy Hutchinson as 9 @-@ year @-@ old Tamsin ; David Bedella as popstar Frankie J Parsons ; Tamsin Greig as Sally , of WishmakerUK ; and Adam Deacon as Si , Parsons 's assistant . It was the first episode of the programme not to star Shearsmith . For Kerr , the typical difficulty associated with the use of child actors was not present in " Last Gasp " ; for him , Hutchinson " was superb . She was brilliant ; she had maturity beyond her years . " Pemberton and Shearsmith had been keen to use Inside No. 9 as a vehicle to work with new people , and had been keen to collaborate with Greig for some time . Kerr said that " one of the real joys of Inside No. 9 " was the opportunity to see actors in very different roles to those in which they had previously starred . He used Greig as his example , saying that the character of Sally was somewhat different from the roles in which Greig had previously performed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the ninth birthday of the severely ill Tamsin , parents Graham and Jan struggle with a camcorder and blow up balloons . A charity called WishmakerUK has arranged for pop star Frankie J Parsons to visit Tamsin . Frankie arrives , much to the excitement of Jan , accompanied by his personal assistant Si and WishmakerUK representative Sally . Frankie visits Tamsin in her bedroom , and blows up a purple balloon for her . He begins to struggle for breath and then collapses from an intracranial aneurysm . Later , Graham makes tea for Jan and Sally . Jan is upset about Frankie 's death . Si says that no one can touch anything or call an ambulance until Frankie 's manager arrives . Tamsin , sitting in her wheelchair , holds the balloon ; and Graham and Si realise that it may be valuable . Si takes the balloon from Tamsin , and Graham ties it . Sally takes a call from her boss , but does not mention Frankie 's death . She makes excuses to have a colleague cover for her on her next assignment so that she can stay at the house . Graham and Si argue over the balloon , and Graham gives it to Sally , as he considers her " a neutral " . He looks online to work out how much the balloon and accompanying footage may be worth . 
 Later , Jan starts playing one of Frankie 's CDs , but Graham turns it off to talk about money with Si and Sally . Jan takes Tamsin outside . Tamsin worries that Frankie 's death is her fault because she asked him to blow up the balloon . She asks if Frankie 's soul will go to Heaven , and Jan says that it will . Inside , Si , Sally and Graham argue about how to split the money they will make from the balloon . The argument gets heated after Sally argues that the fact Tamsin will soon die should preclude her from getting a share . As Graham threatens to pop the balloon , Jan reappears and chastises him . Tamsin , who is now considered neutral , takes the balloon . Graham says they should all settle down and have lunch . In the kitchen , Sally and Jan talk about Sally 's work , and , in Tamsin 's bedroom , Graham and Si talk about Parsons , with Si revealing that Parsons was actually unpleasant to work for . There is a loud bang from outside , and everyone goes back into the lounge , erroneously thinking that the balloon has burst . Graham and Si take the balloon to an upstairs bedroom and tuck it into a bed , while Jan turns the music back on . 
 Everyone sits in silence , waiting for Parsons 's manager to arrive . Jan suggests that Graham blow up another balloon for Tamsin . Sally , Si and Graham realise that , with the camera footage they have , they can blow up all the purple balloons and sell them to multiple bidders . Jan screams when she sees movement in Tamsin 's bedroom , and it is realised that Frankie is still alive . Jan takes Tamsin out of the room and the remaining three agree , after panicked discussion , that they should kill Frankie . Si loses a coin toss and smothers Frankie with a cushion . Later , out on the street , Frankie 's body is put into an ambulance . Si says to Sally and Graham that he will be in touch and leaves . Sally and Graham discuss selling the camcorder footage , and Jan runs inside to see that Tamsin is not in her chair or room . Upstairs , Tamsin crawls onto the bed containing the balloon , carrying a heart @-@ shaped helium balloon . On the street , Sally , Graham and Jan see Tamsin opening the upstairs window . She releases the helium balloon with the balloon containing Frankie 's breath attached . The two float skyward as Graham films . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Comedy critic Bruce Dessau described the episode as containing " a nice if not very subtle critique " of the value of celebrity , and noted that there was " a flicker " of " The Pardoner 's Tale " , a story from writer Geoffrey Chaucer 's collection The Canterbury Tales . Rebecca McQuillan , writing in The Herald , felt the episode captures the " sheer unctuousness " of fandom . She added that , as the plot advances , the venal and vulgar attitudes which are initially hidden behind the characters ' fake grins are revealed . For her , the story takes place around Tamsin , who looks " worldly and disappointed with the human race " . David Chater , of The Times , identified celebrity worship and greed as the episode 's themes . 
 In South African newspaper The Star , the episode was identified as the most cynical of the first series . For the reviewer , it " parades before us the depravity to which the human animal will stoop , and explores how agendas can be furthered under the noble cover of altruism " . David Upton , writing for PopMatters , called it " easily the most acerbic and most overtly comic " episode of the series . He listed three reasons that the episode does not seem like something produced by Pemberton and Shearsmith : its avoidance of the horrific ; the fact that it does not star Shearsmith ; and its direct focus on celebrity culture , which Upton considers a modern phenomenon . Instead , he suggested that it feels closer to a story from Charlie Brooker 's anthology programme Black Mirror . The focus of " Last Gasp " on comedy to the exclusion of horror , for Upton , leaves it " stranded " when compared to the other episodes . 
 Some critics questioned the plausibility of the premise . Daily Express columnist Virginia Blackburn felt that there was potential for a comedic critique of the celebrity memorabilia market . Such a story , she suggested , would be based around selling the balloon — not the breath — something she felt may have happened . Paddy Shennan , writing for the Liverpool Echo , questioned the extent to which the ending would actually impact the characters , asking whether they could have nonetheless sold the fake balloons . For freelance journalist Dan Owen the premise " riff [ s ] on the fact [ that ] online auction sites like eBay often sell ludicrous items for huge amounts of money " . Owen argued that the episode 's plot offers an amusing way that such a sale could come about . Though not fraudulent , the sale would nonetheless be " highly disrespectful and money @-@ grabbing " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gerard Gilbert of The Independent , Jack Seale of Radio Times , Dessau and Owen all stressed that " Last Gasp " was weaker than the three previous episodes of Inside No. 9 . Seale claimed that there were " several sublime moments – but no knockout blow " , while Dessau wrote that " it doesn 't really go anywhere and it resolves itself a little too simplistically " , and Owen felt that the episode " didn 't manage to go anywhere very unexpected ... and just sort of ended " . All three suggested , however , that the episode still had its strengths ; for Seale , it was as " brilliantly acted and constructed as you 'd expect " , Dessau considered it watchable , and Owen felt it was enjoyable to watch with a number of funny moments . Shennan , writing for the Liverpool Echo , wrote that " perhaps there had to be a dud – or , at least , disappointing – episode sooner or later " , noting that you " can 't win ' em all " . 
 The acting in the episode was praised by Michael Hogan and Rachel Ward , who wrote in The Daily Telegraph that " with their gift for comedy , vulnerability and pathos , Tamsin Grieg [ sic ] and Sophie Thompson ... deliver excellent performances " . Similarly , Owen wrote that " the performances were good — especially from Thompson as the mousy housewife , and I liked the sour expressions from child star Hutchinson " . Nonetheless , he thought it regrettable than a real @-@ world musician had not been cast , especially as he considered it unlikely that Tamsin would admire Parsons . Awarding the episode three and a half out of five , he thought " the set @-@ up ... sublime , the central dilemma amusing , and the execution typically brilliant " . In the review published in The Star , " Last Gasp " was described as " hilarious " . The title , it was suggested , is appropriate , " as I caught myself gasping more than once as its foul contents unfolded " . Upton called the episode " a clever little piece " . 
 On the day it was shown , " Last Gasp " was selected as comedy " pick of the day " in the Daily Express , but , the following day , an extremely critical review of the episode by Virginia Blackburn was published in the newspaper . She felt that the episode was disappointing and wasted the talent of the actors , and that the concept was " the sort of idea you can imagine two students coming up with after the sixth pint ... and then feeling slightly embarrassed about it when they wake up the next morning " . She summed up the episode by saying that it was neither funny nor clever , and " is so utterly , irredeemably , naffly silly that it ends up being incredibly irritating and nothing else " . 
 An interview with Shearsmith and Pemberton was published on British comedy website <unk> after Inside No. 9 won the Chortle Award for best TV show . The pair were asked if they would ever consider writing an episode with a happy ending . Shearsmith responded by saying " Yes , because that would be the biggest surprise of all ... But last year we had the Last Gasp , and that had quite a happy ending - and people hated that one ! " Similarly , Pemberton suggested that " people are disappointed if we don 't deliver something horrible " . 
 = = = Viewing figures = = = 
 Based on overnight viewing figures , " Last Gasp " drew a lower viewership than any previous episode of Inside No. 9 , with 872 @,@ 000 viewers . In most UK listings , it was preceded by Line of Duty , which drew 2 @.@ 2 million viewers ( 9 @.@ 7 % of the audience ) . However , the following episode of Inside No. 9 , " The Understudy " , drew a lower number of viewers still , with 720 @,@ 000 viewers . The final episode of the first series , " The Harrowing " , saw an increase in viewing figures , leaving " Last Gasp " with the second @-@ lowest viewership of the series , below the series average of 904 @,@ 000 people , and the slot average of 970 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Charity auction = = 
 Pemberton listed a balloon containing his breath which had appeared on " Last Gasp " on eBay . Listed with the balloon was a copy of the episode 's poster signed by Pemberton and Shearsmith . The auction was held to raise money for Give It Up , a Sport Relief charity founded by comedian Russell Brand to help those recovering from alcoholism and drug addiction . The winning bid on the auction was for £ 265 @.@ 00 . 
 = Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded is the reissue of Barbadian singer Rihanna 's third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . It was first released digitally in selected countries on June 2 , 2008 , by Def Jam Recordings and SRP Records . Launched to mark the first @-@ year anniversary of the original album , Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded features three newly recorded songs and a DVD showing exclusive behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of Rihanna 's worldwide tour , the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) . For the new material , she worked with past collaborators Ne @-@ Yo , StarGate , and C. " Tricky " Stewart , as well as Brian Kennedy , Mark Endert , Mike Elizondo , Mark " Spike " Stent and Maroon 5 . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised the sound and production of the newly added material . However , other critics felt that the album was not worthy of re @-@ release with only three new songs . Among other awards and achievements , the reissue 's songs earned two Grammy nominations at the 2009 ceremony ; " Disturbia " was nominated for Best Dance Recording , while " If I Never See Your Face Again " received a nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals . 
 Following its release , the reissue helped Good Girl Gone Bad re @-@ enter several national charts . Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded sold 63 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and helped the original album peak at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart . The reissue charted in New Zealand and peaked at number four ; it was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting shipments of over 15 @,@ 000 copies . Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded was promoted with four singles , including the US number @-@ one hits " Take a Bow " and " Disturbia " , and " If I Never See Your Face Again " , which featured Maroon 5 . To further promote the album , Rihanna performed songs from the reissue on several television programs and award ceremonies including FNMTV and the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Rihanna began working on her third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) in late 2006 and by late February 2007 , the album was almost complete . Most of its songs were recorded in Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California , parallel to the recording sessions for her second studio album , A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . For the album 's production , she worked with some of the producers who were involved on her previous albums , including Evan Rogers and Carl Sturken , Ne @-@ Yo , J.R. Rotem , Sean Garrett , and Norwegian duo StarGate . Rihanna also collaborated with Timbaland and will.i.am for the first time . Following its release , Good Girl Gone Bad became a worldwide commercial success and reached number one on the UK Albums Chart and number two on the US Billboard 200 . It also received generally positive reviews from critics . The album 's lead single " Umbrella " became a commercial success and reached number one on over fifteen national singles charts , including the Billboard Hot 100 , which it topped for seven consecutive weeks , and the UK Singles Chart , which it topped for ten consecutive weeks . 
 In early 2008 , Rihanna unveiled a new song titled " Take a Bow " , which premiered on February 14 , 2008 on the KIIS @-@ FM radio show On Air with Ryan Seacrest . MTV News reported that the track would serve as the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , a reissue of the original album to mark its first anniversary . Rihanna further announced that apart from " Take a Bow " , the expanded album would contain two more songs , one of which was a duet with American pop rock band Maroon 5 , to supplement the original track listing . Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded was first released digitally on June 2 , 2008 in certain countries , including Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . The album was released physically on June 13 in Germany . On June 17 , it was released in Canada , the United Kingdom , and the United States . A DVD containing behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of Rihanna 's Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) was included in a special version launched in the US for a limited time . Rihanna subsequently hosted a promotion party for Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded in New York City , which featured several celebrity guests , including LeToya Luckett , Teyana Taylor , and Wynter Gordon . 
 = = New material = = 
 Four new songs were recorded for Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded : " Disturbia " , " Hatin ' on the Club " , " If I Never See Your Face Again " ( with Maroon 5 ) and " Take a Bow " . All were initially confirmed for inclusion on the album , though " Hatin ' on the Club " was removed for unspecified reasons . The song was leaked online in January 2009 on Big Mike & DJ Neptune 's R & B Kings Part Two mixtape . 
 " Disturbia " is an uptempo electropop song . According to BBC Music 's Fraser McAlpine , it is reminiscent of Rihanna 's 2007 single " Don 't Stop the Music " . McAlpine also noted that the song has a " frosty @-@ rave " chorus accompanied with Rihanna 's " icy " vocals . It was written by Brian Kennedy Seals , Chris Brown , Robert Allen and Andre Merritt for the re @-@ release of Brown 's second studio album , Exclusive ( 2007 ) . However , after finishing the song , Brown took preference to another track , " Forever " , which would later be released as the first single from the re @-@ release . He felt that " Disturbia " would be better suited for a female singer and gave it to Rihanna . Kennedy produced " Disturbia " , while Makeba Riddick produced Rihanna 's vocals . The song was recorded by Andrew <unk> at Rocky Mountain Recorders in Denver , Colorado . It was mixed by Phil Tan at Soapbox Studios in Atlanta , Georgia . Additional engineering was provided by Josh Houghkirk , with assistance from Carlos Oyanedel . Speaking to USA Today , Brown described his feelings about giving " Disturbia " to Rihanna : " It 's fun being creative and even if you have a concept in your head to write about , you can write it and give it and give it to someone else because it might not personally fit you , but it might be an idea you have " . 
 " If I Never See Your Face Again " is an R & B song that incorporates a " jagged " use of synthesizers and " buzzing " guitars in its production . It was written by Adam Levine and James Valentine , two of the five band members from Maroon 5 . It was produced by Mark Endert , Mike Elizondo , Mark " Spike " Stent , C. " Tricky " Stewart and Maroon 5 . " If I Never See Your Face Again " was recorded by Stent at Conway Studios in Hollywood , Glenwood Place Studios in Burbank and Phantom Studios in Westlake Village . The song was mixed by Endert at Scream Studios in Miami , with assistance from Doug Johnson . " If I Never See Your Face Again " was originally included on the standard version of It Won 't Be Soon Before Long without the inclusion of Rihanna , however , Levine stated in an interview with James Montgomery for MTV News while on set of the music video that he wanted to try something different for the album 's re @-@ release . He also said that he asked Rihanna to do some " bits and pieces " in the recording studio and that it came together very quickly . Levine stated that if there is " magic " between two artists , then " you don 't even have to think about it . " In an interview with MTV 's Total Request Live , Rihanna said that she was very excited about the collaboration with the band because she always " loved them " and their work . 
 " Take a Bow " is an R & B song that tells of how the female protagonist expresses disinterest in rekindling her relationship with a dishonorable and unfaithful ex @-@ boyfriend . The song was written by Ne @-@ Yo , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen . Hermansen and Eriksen produced and provided instruments for " Take a Bow " under their production name , StarGate , while Smith co @-@ produced the song . Rihanna 's vocals were recorded by Eriksen at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City , Westlake Studios in Los Angeles and Parr Street Studios in Liverpool . The song was mixed by Tan at Soapbox Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , with assistance from Houghkirk . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Take a Bow " was released as the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded and fifth single overall from the two releases . The song was made available to purchase in media outlets , via Def Jam Recordings ' website since March 14 , 2008 , and was later made available to download via iTunes Store on May 6 , 2008 . It peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and became Rihanna 's third song to reach the plateau . It has been certified four @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and sold over three million digital copies . The single also reached number one in Canada , Denmark , Ireland , Slovakia and the United Kingdom . The accompanying music video was directed by Anthony Mandler . 
 The Spanglish version of " Hate That I Love You " featuring David Bisbal , was released as the second single from the album on April 28 , 2008 , in certain countries such as Argentina , Brazil and Spain . The song peaked at number 37 on the Spanish Singles Chart and stayed on the chart for a total of two weeks . " If I Never See Your Face Again " , the collaboration with Maroon 5 , was released as the second single from Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded . It was sent to contemporary hit radio in the US on May 15 , 2008 . It reached the top twenty on over five national charts worldwide . The music video for the song was directed by Anthony Mandler and shot on an indoor soundstage in Castaic , California . According to Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian , the concept for the video was " high @-@ end erotica " . 
 When the album was reissued , Rihanna approached L.A. Reid , the head of Def Jam Recordings and suggested that she wanted to release " Disturbia " as the next single . Speaking to MTV News , Reid said , " It was the first time Rihanna actually came to me and said , ' Here 's the song I want to put out . ' She played me the song . That was her taking control [ ... ] She understands what hits are , and she knows what she wants to say . She 's at that place where she can do that . " It was solicited to US contemporary hit radio on June 17 , 2008 , and was released as a CD single in the United Kingdom on July 22 , 2008 . " Disturbia " earned Rihanna an award for Best International Song at the 2009 NRJ Music Awards . It peaked at number one in Belgium ( Flanders ) and New Zealand and became a top @-@ ten hit in over twenty countries worldwide . The single topped the US Billboard Hot 100 chart for two consecutive weeks , and became Rihanna 's third number one single from Good Girl Gone Bad and fourth overall on the Hot 100 chart . The music video for " Disturbia " was directed by Anthony Mandler and portrays Rihanna in various locations such as in a prison cell and gas chamber . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To further promote Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , Rihanna performed on several television programs and award ceremonies . She performed " Take a Bow " for the first time at the 2008 MuchMusic Video Awards held in Toronto , Canada in the MuchMusic 's headquarters on June 15 , 2008 . On June 20 , Rihanna appeared on Today 's Concert Series held at the Rockefeller Plaza , New York City . She performed " Take a Bow " together with her 2007 singles " Umbrella " and " Don 't Stop the Music " . On June 27 , she appeared on FNMTV together with Maroon 5 . She sang " Take a Bow " before performing together on their collaboration " If I Never See Your Face Again " . In July 2008 , Rihanna performed the Spanglish version of " Hate That I Love You " with David Bisbal , at the sixth series of the Spanish talent show , Operación Triunfo . 
 Rihanna performed " Disturbia " for the first time at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards . She performed it while revealing a leather " goth inspired " outfit . Together with the dance troops , she performed a Thriller @-@ inspired dance in which glow sticks and leather props were used . On September 19 , 2008 , Rihanna visited France and performed " Disturbia " at Star Academy France . Rihanna sang " Disturbia " at the 2009 Super Bowl which was held at the Pepsi Center in Denver , Colorado . The performance of the song featured a sample from the White Stripes song " Seven Nation Army " ( 2003 ) and was accompanied by flames that shot up across the front of the stage . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 A reviewer from The National praised the material on the original album , particularly the " ubiquity " of " Umbrella " , and also complimented " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Hate That I Love You " , and " Shut Up and Drive " . He further stated that the release of Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded was made to mark the first year anniversary of the album and that " the new tracks are everything you want pop to be , and are a testament to the power of the original record and to the new Rihanna . " Spence D. of IGN reviewed the new material and wrote that " Disturbia " is built on an infective " bum @-@ bum @-@ be @-@ dum @-@ bum @-@ bum ... " hook " that sucks you into the detached electronic bounce of the track " . He said that " Take a Bow " is perfectly fitted for a " post @-@ break @-@ up days of gloom " and further praised Rihanna 's vocals on the song . According to D. , " If I Never See Your Face Again " is inspired by the works of American musician Prince and wrote that the " Rihanna 's presence [ on the song ] definitely gives it a nice boost " . 
 J. Edward Keyes of eMusic gave the album four out of five stars and wrote that the " uber @-@ futurist " production of the release accompanied with Rihanna 's " Robo Dominatrix vocal approach — is a big reason the record works so well . Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded is all blue @-@ light electronics and primal throb , 25th @-@ century pop music in the here and now . " Digital Spy 's Nick Levine also gave Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded four out of five stars , but was skeptical about the choice to re @-@ release the album , writing that " it isn 't worth forking out for Good Girl Gone Bad twice just to hear the new songs " . Despite that , he praised the newly added songs especially " If I Never See Your Face Again " ; he called the song " superior " . Levine further wrote , " if Reloaded encourages a few hesitant pop fans to invest in this album , the closest thing to a Thriller that 2007 / 8 is likely to produce , this rather cynical reissue should be let off the hook ... just . " Among other achieved awards and nominations , " Disturbia " and " If I Never See Your Face Again " received nominations for Best Dance Recording and Pop Collaboration with Vocals respectively at the 2009 Grammy Awards . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 After the release of Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , it was predicted that the reissue would sell between 45 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the US . For the week ending June 22 , 2008 , it sold 63 @,@ 000 copies and helped the original version of the album to jump from number 124 to number seven on the US Billboard 200 in its 55th week . It also peaked at number five on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . With this , Good Girl Gone Bad got back in the top 10 for the first time since its debut in June 2007 . Additionally , five songs from the reissue were listed on the Hot Digital Songs , topped by " Disturbia " , which debuted at number six . The next week , Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded fell to number nine and sold 40 @,@ 000 more copies . In its third week , it charted at number ten on sales of 41 @,@ 000 copies . By November 2012 , both Good Girl Gone Bad and the reissue had sold 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 copies in the US alone . Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded helped the original album re @-@ enter and peak at number six on the Canadian Albums Chart . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded debuted at number seven on the New Zealand Albums Chart in the week of June 30 , 2008 . It reached its peak position on the chart at number four the following week . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipping over 15 @,@ 000 copies . Following the reissue , the original album re @-@ entered the UK Singles Chart at number 12 in the week of June 16 . The next week , the album fell to number 16 . By June 2012 , both the original album and its reissue had sold 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 combined copies in the UK . Following its release , the original album re @-@ entered the Danish Albums Chart at number 15 . In its second week , it reached number nine , and in its third week , the album reached a peak of number four . After the release of Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , Good Girl Gone Bad re @-@ entered the Swiss Albums Chart at number 32 , and the Austrian Albums Chart at number 36 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 When Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded was released , the original album received a sales increase of 930 % — more than any other non @-@ debuting album in the history of the Billboard 200 chart . By July 2010 , it had become the third album in the US whose songs have sold the most copies combined . Its songs have sold over 17 @,@ 081 @,@ 000 digital copies , only behind from The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) by Lady Gaga and The <unk> ( 2009 ) by The Black Eyed Peas . " Disturbia " and " Take a Bow " were two of its most downloaded songs . Before reaching number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , " Take a Bow " jumped from number 53 to the top of the chart , following digital sales of 267 @,@ 000 copies . At the time , it was the second highest leap to number one in the Hot 100 's history , followed only by Maroon 5 's " Makes Me Wonder " ( 2007 ) . The song also helped Rihanna achieve two of the top @-@ three digital sales opening weeks ; the first one being Mariah Carey 's " Touch My Body " ( 2008 ) which opened with 286 @,@ 000 copies sold and the second the singer 's own " Umbrella " which sold 277 @,@ 000 copies for the week dated June 9 , 2007 . " Disturbia " became Rihanna 's fourth number @-@ one single on the Hot 100 , which tied her at the time with Beyoncé Knowles and Mariah Carey for the most number @-@ one hits in the decade of 2000 – 2010 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a denotes a vocal producer 
 ^ b denotes a co @-@ producer 
 ^ c denotes a remixer and additional producer 
 " Push Up on Me " samples " Running with the Night " , as written by Lionel Richie and Cynthia Weil , and performed by Richie . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " samples " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , as written and performed by Michael Jackson , which itself samples " Soul Makossa " , as performed by Manu Dibango . 
 " Shut Up and Drive " samples " Blue Monday " , as written and performed by New Order ( Stephen Morris , Peter Hook , Bernard Sumner and Gillian Gilbert ) . 
 " Say It " samples " Flex " , as written by Ewart Brown , Clifton Dillon , Sly Dunbar and Brian Thompson , and performed by Mad Cobra . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love = 
 " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " is a song by American R & B recording artist Usher . It features guest vocals from American rapper Pitbull , who co @-@ wrote the song its producers Shellback and Max Martin , with additional writing from Savan Kotecha . It was released to digital download on July 13 , 2010 , and sent to radio on July 20 , 2010 , as the first single from Usher 's EP , Versus , which is an extension of his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond . A Europop , electronic dance track , the song puts emphasis on its chorus , and follows the chord progression of Gm @-@ F @-@ E ♭ . It received mixed to positive reviews from critics , who favoured its production and Usher 's vocals , but criticised the song 's lack of originality . 
 " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " peaked in the top @-@ ten in over fifteen countries , becoming one of Usher 's most successful singles . It reached the top @-@ three on the Japan Hot 100 , Canadian Hot 100 , Hungary Singles Chart , French Singles Chart and ARIA Singles Chart . It peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 , marking Usher 's sixteenth top @-@ ten hit on the chart . It received a 4 times platinum certification from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and a 2 times platinum certification from Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) . An accompanying music video , directed by Hiro Murai , shows Usher krumping and <unk> walking in a club environment . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " was leaked on the internet on July 9 , 2010 , with its follow @-@ up single " Hot Tottie " leaked later that month . The song was released from Versus as the EP 's mainstream single , whereas the latter track was released as the urban single . " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " features guest vocals by rapper Pitbull , who co @-@ wrote it with Savan Kotecha , Max Martin and Shellback , with production handled by the latter two . It was recorded at Maratone Studios , Stockholm , Sweden and at Conway Studios , Los Angeles , California , handled by Sam Holland and Emily Wright . Mixing was done by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios . " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " runs for a duration of three minutes and forty seconds . This is the first of two songs that Kotecha , Martin , and Shellback have co @-@ written for Usher , who would later join the three in co @-@ writing his 2012 single " Scream " . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " is written in the key of G Minor and has a tempo of 120 beats per minute . It follows the chord progression of Gm @-@ F @-@ E ♭ , and Usher 's vocal range spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of B ♭ 4 . The song is described as a club track , that contains Europop and electronic dance influences . Bill Lamb of About.com noted that the song puts emphasis on its chorus , to which Usher sings " with appropriate passion " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mixed reviews from critics , with criticism directed mainly towards its lack of originality . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman noted the song as a stand @-@ out from Versus , along with " Hot Tottie " and " There Goes My Baby " . Bill Lamb of About.com gave the song three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , praising Usher 's vocal delivery and the song 's " memorable chorus " . Lamb criticised Pitbull 's appearance , writing that his verse is " tossed on as a commercial gimmick " , while also writing that the song doesn 't compare well to Usher 's " OMG " ( 2010 ) . Billboard 's Michael Menachem described Pitbull 's verse as " energising " and wrote that Usher 's " high register fits seamlessly with dance beats " . Despite citing the lyrics as repetitive , he thought that the song " should keep clubgoers moving for months to come " . 
 Sarah Rodman of Boston Globe depicted the song as a " dance thumper " and invites listeners to " lose themselves in the music " . Los Angeles Times ' Jeff Weiss viewed the song as " generic " with Usher " singing generic paeans to a paramour ’ s eyes over a Eurovision @-@ like Max Martin production . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine disapproved of the track as a whole , writing " DJ Got Us Fallin ' In Love is , while indistinguishable from any other overdriving club banger , one of the only songs in which Usher Raymond acknowledges an aphrodisiac more powerful than his own ab musk " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted at number nineteen on the Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending July 21 , 2010 . It became Usher 's second top @-@ 20 debut of 2010 , after " OMG " opened at number fourteen in April . On the week ending September 2 , 2010 " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " was positioned at number five . It was the first time that Usher — as a lead artist — had four singles on the top @-@ 40 of the Hot 100 simultaneously , with " OMG " at number twenty , " There Goes My Baby " at thirty @-@ three and " Hot Tottie " at twenty @-@ five . " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " remained on the Hot 100 for thirty weeks before dropping out , and peaked at number four , becoming Usher 's sixteenth top @-@ ten hit . The song peaked at number two on the Pop Songs Chart , and twelve on the Adult Pop Songs Chart . On the Hot 100 year @-@ end charts for 2010 and 2011 , it reached number twenty @-@ two and sixty @-@ five , respectively . 
 " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " peaked at number two on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , and was certified 2 times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , for shipments of over 160 @,@ 000 copies . It peaked at number three on the Australian Singles Charts , and received a 4 times platinum certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . The song reached number four on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " was certified platinum in the regions of México and Switzerland , by the AMPROFON and IFPI , respectively . The song achieved success in Europe , peaking at number three on the European Hot 100 . Internationally " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " reached the top @-@ ten in over fifteen countries , becoming one of Usher 's most successful singles . It peaked in the top five in Japan , Hungary , France , Switzerland , Germany and Austria . 
 By February 2011 , the song had reached 3 million in digital sales , according to Nielsen SoundScan , making it the second single of 2010 for both Usher and Pitbull to achieve the figure ( Usher 's " OMG " sold 3 @,@ 957 @,@ 000 copies , while " I Like It " performed by lead artist Enrique Iglesias sold 3 @,@ 197 @,@ 000 ) . It reached its 4 million sales mark in the US in April 2013 . As of June 2014 , the song has sold 4 @,@ 198 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 = = Music video and parody = = 
 The music video for the song premièred on August 26 , 2010 on Vevo , and was directed by Hiro Murai . The video begins in a club environment , with misplaced furniture and a shattered glass bottle . The scene goes in reverse motion , people instantly appear , frozen in a raving action . As the scene is still reversing a DJ is spinning his booth , and the shattered glass bottle forms into its original state , the clubbers and the scene then start to move in forward but slow motion and the song begins with Usher approaching from a set of stairs . Usher sings and dances , whilst moving past clubbers who are still moving in slow motion whilst he is in moving normally . Once the chorus comes in , the clubbers begin dancing and raving in normal motion , periodically slowing down ; Usher is krumping pass them , moving on to the next scene . Usher slides into a room with a large lit up window as a back drop . He performs choreography backed @-@ up by female dancers for the second verse , and then returns to the original room with the second chorus coming in . A similar scene is involved to the first chorus , but this time Usher is dancing with the clubbers , who are still alternating in motion speed . Pitbull then begins his verse , and is sat in a V.I.P. area with three females , with the camera alternating between him , the clubbers and Usher . The video ends with its final scene , in a dance off , with Usher dancing adjacent to some of the clubbers . Once the climax of the chorus comes in , Usher jumps in the air and starts freely dancing along with the clubbers , with everyone in the same motion speed ; Usher is primarily <unk> @-@ walking . Usher and the clubbers then perform a final organised choreography , mainly krumping , and the video ends . 
 A Minecraft @-@ themed parody of " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " , titled " Revenge " , was created by YouTubers <unk> and <unk> and was uploaded on August 19 , 2011 . It has received over 151 million views as of 31 December 2015 . The official music video has received over 159 million . At one time , " Revenge " had more views than the official video . However , due to legal issues , the " Revenge " video was taken down in mid @-@ 2015 and re @-@ uploaded a few months later , with an original audio soundtrack placed over the same video . This was met with mixed opinion among the community : some were upset with the change and blamed Usher for being " jealous " and having the video taken down , while others accepted the new version for what it was . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Usher first performed " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " on Good Morning America , alongside " OMG " . A few days later , Usher performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . On September 17 , 2010 , he performed the song alongside " There Goes My Baby " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . Usher performed " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " in the season five finale of America 's Got Talent , and in the seventh season of The X Factor . He performed the song during his OMG Tour , alongside several other tracks . The song was performed with " OMG " during the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards . VMA executive producer Dave <unk> told MTV News , " We said to him , ' We want to do the best televised dance routine that you 've done in years . Let 's show why you 're the king . ' " MTV Buzzworthy writer , Tamar Antai was present at the rehearsal for the show , and commented that the VMA crew was about to " pull off visual feats not just previously unseen and unparalleled at the VMAs , but unseen and unparalleled on TV . " 
 The performance was received with critical acclaim . On Usher specifically Antai said the performance was like " liquid magic , " saying , " He took it to the level that comes after the next level . The penthouse level . " He was aided by about a dozen background dancers , the males in skeleton @-@ like <unk> , and the females donning a one @-@ piece , gloves and boots . The " OMG " performance was accompanied by red laser lights , making an illusion as if the stage disappeared . The lights spelled out " <unk> " as well as " Usher " , as dancers lowered from the ceiling . Jayson <unk> of MTV News commented , " The singer moved and grooved , proving that he 's the R & B star that everyone pays attention to for the big moments . " Rochell D. Thomas , also of the site said " Call it what you will : talent , swag , skills ... When he steps on the dance floor , some mysterious thing comes out of him and puts the G in groove . " Thomas went on to say that Usher 's dance moves would make " the late great Michael Jackson jealous " in the stage production " that included more special @-@ effects bells and whistles than a summer blockbuster . " Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy also compared the performance to Jackson , calling it overall , " One part " Tron , " one part laser show , one part Michael Jackson <unk> tribute , and all spectacle . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Recording locations 
 Vocal recording – Maratone Studios , Stockholm , Sweden ; Conway Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; Al Burna 's Crib , Miami , Florida 
 Mixing – MixStar Studios , Los Angeles , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Versus . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Yugoslav torpedo boat T1 = 
 The Yugoslav torpedo boat T1 was a 250t @-@ class , T @-@ group sea @-@ going torpedo boat built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as 76 T in 1914 . She was armed with two Škoda 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) L / 30 guns and four 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , and could carry 10 – 12 naval mines . She saw active service during World War I , performing convoy , escort and minesweeping tasks , and anti @-@ submarine operations . She was part of the escort force during the action that resulted in the sinking of the Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought SMS Szent István by Italian torpedo boats . Following Austria @-@ Hungary 's defeat in 1918 , 76 T was allocated to the Navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , which became the Royal Yugoslav Navy , and was renamed T1 . 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was captured by the Italians and served with the Royal Italian Navy under her Yugoslav designation . Following the Italian capitulation in September 1943 , she was captured by Germany and handed over to the Navy of the Independent State of Croatia who renamed her Golešnica . She was transferred to the Yugoslav Navy after World War II , and after a refit which included replacement of her armament , continued to serve as Golešnica until 1959 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1910 , the Austria @-@ Hungary Naval Technical Committee initiated the design and development of a 275 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 279 t ) coastal torpedo boat , specifying that it should be capable of sustaining 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) for 10 hours . This specification was based an expectation that the Strait of Otranto , where the Adriatic Sea meets the Ionian Sea , would be blockaded by hostile forces during a future conflict . In such circumstances , there would be a need for a torpedo boat that could sail from the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : <unk> und <unk> Kriegsmarine ) base at Cattaro to the Strait during darkness , locate and attack blockading ships and return to port before morning . Steam turbine power was selected for propulsion , as diesels with the necessary power were not available , and the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy did not have the practical experience to run turbo @-@ electric boats . Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino ( STT ) of Trieste was selected for the contract to build eight vessels , ahead of one other tenderer . The T @-@ group designation signified the builder , STT . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The 250t @-@ class T @-@ group boats had a waterline length of 58 @.@ 2 m ( 190 ft 11 in ) , a beam of 5 @.@ 7 m ( 18 ft 8 in ) , and a normal draught of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) . While their designed displacement was 262 tonnes ( 258 long tons ) , they displaced about 320 tonnes ( 310 long tons ) fully loaded . The crew consisted of 39 officers and enlisted men . The boats were powered by a Parsons steam turbine driving two propellers , using steam generated by two Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers , one of which burned fuel oil and the other coal . The turbine was rated at 5 @,@ 000 shp ( 3 @,@ 700 kW ) with a maximum output of 6 @,@ 000 shp ( 4 @,@ 500 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . They carried 18 tonnes ( 17 @.@ 7 long tons ) of coal and 24 tonnes ( 23 @.@ 6 long tons ) of fuel oil , which gave them a range of 980 nmi ( 1 @,@ 810 km ; 1 @,@ 130 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . The T @-@ group had one funnel rather than the two funnels of the later groups of the class . Despite the specifications of the contract being very close to the requirements for the coastal torpedo boat , the STT boats were classified as sea @-@ going . 
 The boats were originally to be armed with three Škoda 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) L / 30 guns , and three 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , but this was changed to two guns and four torpedo tubes before the first boat was completed , in order to standardise the armament with the following F @-@ group . They could also carry 10 – 12 naval mines . 76 T was the third of its class to be completed , and was laid down on 24 June 1913 , launched on 15 December 1913 , and completed on 20 July 1914 . Eight T @-@ group boats were completed between February and December 1914 , designated 74 T – 81 T. In 1914 , one 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun was added . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The 250t @-@ class , T @-@ group were the first small Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy boats to use turbines , and this contributed to ongoing problems with the boats . At the outbreak of World War I , 76 T was part of the 1st Torpedo Group of the 3rd Torpedo Craft Division of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 1st Torpedo Craft Flotilla . During World War I , 76 T was used for convoy , escort and minesweeping tasks , and anti @-@ submarine operations . She also conducted patrols and supported seaplane raids against the Italian coast . Due to inadequate funding , 76 T and the rest of the 250t @-@ class were essentially coastal vessels , despite the original intention that they would be used for " high seas " operations . In 1917 , one of the 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) guns on each boat was placed on an anti @-@ aircraft mount . 
 By 1918 , the Allies had strengthened their ongoing blockade on the Strait of Otranto , as foreseen by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . As a result , it was becoming more difficult for the German and Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ boats to get through the strait and into the Mediterranean Sea . In response to these new measures at blockading the straits , the new commander of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , Konteradmiral Miklós Horthy , decided to launch an attack on the Allied defenders with battleships , scout cruisers , and destroyers . 
 During the night of 8 June , Horthy left the naval base of Pola in the upper Adriatic with Viribus Unitis and Prinz Eugen . After some difficulties getting the harbour defence barrage opened , about 23 : 00 on 9 June 1918 , Szent István and Tegetthoff , escorted by one destroyer and six torpedo boats , including 76 T , also departed Pola . They were en route to the harbour at Slano , north of Ragusa to rendezvous with Viribus Unitis and Prinz Eugen , for a coordinated attack on the Otranto Barrage . About 03 : 15 on 10 June , two Italian Navy ( Italian : Regia Marina ) MAS boats , MAS 15 and MAS 21 , spotted the smoke from the Austrian ships while returning from an uneventful patrol off the Dalmatian coast . Both boats successfully penetrated the escort screen and split to engage the dreadnoughts individually . MAS 21 attacked Tegetthoff , but her torpedoes missed . 
 Under the command of Luigi Rizzo , MAS 15 fired two torpedoes at 03 : 25 , and both hit Szent István . Both boats evaded pursuit although Rizzo had to discourage 76 T by dropping depth charges in her wake . The torpedo hits on Szent István were abreast her boiler rooms , which flooded , knocking out power to the pumps . Szent István capsized less than three hours after being torpedoed . 
 = = = Interwar period = = = 
 76 T survived the war intact , and under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye concluded in September 1919 , she was allocated to the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS , later Yugoslavia ) in 1920 . Along with three other 250t @-@ class T @-@ group boats , 77 T , 78 T and 79 T , and four 250t @-@ class F @-@ group boats , she served with the Royal Yugoslav Navy ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> Jugoslovenska Ratna Mornarica , KJRM ; <unk> Југословенска Pатна <unk> ) . In KJRM service , 76 T was renamed T1 . In May and June 1929 , six of the eight 250t @-@ class torpedo boats accompanied the light cruiser Dalmacija , the submarines Hrabri and Nebojša , the submarine tender Hvar on a cruise to Malta , the Greek island of Corfu in the Ionian Sea , and Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia . It is not clear if T1 was one of the torpedo boats involved . The ships and crews made a very good impression while visiting Malta . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises , manoeuvres or gunnery training due to reduced budgets . 
 = = = World War II and post @-@ war service = = = 
 In April 1941 , Yugoslavia entered World War II when it was invaded by the German @-@ led Axis powers . At the time of the invasion , T1 was assigned to the Southern Sector of the KJRM 's Coastal Defence Command based at the Bay of Kotor , along with her sister ship T3 and a number of minesweepers and other craft . T1 was captured by the Italian Navy shortly after the commencement of hostilities and was operated by them under her Yugoslav designation . When the Italians capitulated in September 1943 , the Germans seized the ship and in December 1943 transferred her to the Navy of the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Mornarica Nezavisne Države Hrvatske ) . She was renamed Golešnica and continued in Croatian service until the end of the war . She was transferred to the Yugoslav Navy ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Jugoslavenska Ratna Mornarica , Југословенска Pатна <unk> ) after the war . Her post @-@ war fit @-@ out included replacing her original guns with two 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns on single mounts and four 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns , and removing her torpedo tubes . She continued in Yugoslav service as Golešnica until October 1959 , when she was stricken . 
 = Ivan Aivazovsky = 
 Ivan Konstantinovich Aivazovsky ( Russian : Ива ́ н Константи ́ нович <unk> ́ вский , Armenian : Հովհաննես <unk> Hovhannes <unk> ; 29 July 1817 – 2 May 1900 ) was a Russian Romantic painter . He is considered one of the greatest marine artists in history . Baptized as Hovhannes Aivazian , Aivazovsky was born into an Armenian family in the Black Sea port of Feodosia and was mostly based in his native Crimea . 
 Following his education at the Imperial Academy of Arts , Aivazovsky traveled to Europe and lived briefly in Italy in the early 1840s . He then returned to Russia and was appointed the main painter of the Russian Navy . Aivazovsky had close ties with the military and political elite of the Russian Empire and often attended military maneuvers . He was sponsored by the state and was well @-@ regarded during his lifetime . The saying " worthy of Aivazovsky 's brush " , popularized by Anton Chekhov , was used in Russia for " describing something ineffably lovely . " 
 One of the most prominent Russian artists of his time , Aivazovsky was also popular outside Russia . He held numerous solo exhibitions in Europe and the United States . During his almost 60 @-@ year career , he created around 6 @,@ 000 paintings , making him one of the most prolific artists of his time . The vast majority of his works are seascapes , but he often depicted battle scenes , Armenian themes , and portraiture . Most of Aivazovsky 's works are kept in Russian , Ukrainian and Armenian museums as well as private collections . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Ivan Aivazovsky was born on 17 July ( 29 in New Style ) 1817 in the city of Feodosia ( Theodosia ) , Crimea , Russian Empire . In the baptismal records of the local St. Sargis Armenian Church , Aivazovsky was listed as Hovhannes , the son of Gevorg Aivazian ( Armenian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . During his study at the Imperial Academy of Arts , he was known in Russian as Ivan <unk> ( <unk> <unk> in the pre @-@ 1918 spelling ) . He became known as Aivazovsky since c . 1840 , while in Italy . He signed a 1844 letter with the <unk> version of his name : Giovani Aivazovsky . 
 His father , Konstantin , ( c . 1765 – 1840 ) , was an Armenian merchant from the Polish region of Galicia . His family had migrated to Europe from Turkish Armenia in the 18th century . After numerous familial conflicts , Konstantin left Galicia for Moldavia , later moving to Bukovina , before settling in Feodosia in the early 1800s . He was initially known as Gevorg Aivazian ( <unk> or <unk> ) , but he changed his last name to <unk> by adding the Polish " <unk> " . Aivazovsky 's mother , <unk> , was a Feodosia Armenian . The couple had five children — three daughters and two sons . Aivazovsky 's elder brother , Gabriel , was a prominent historian and an Armenian Apostolic archbishop . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The young Aivazovsky received parochial education at Feodosia 's St. Sargis Armenian Church . He was taught drawing by Jacob Koch , a local architect . Aivazovsky moved to Simferopol with <unk> Governor Alexander <unk> 's family in 1830 and attended the city 's Russian gymnasium . In 1833 , Aivazovsky arrived in the Russian capital , Saint Petersburg , to study at the Imperial Academy of Arts in Maxim Vorobiev 's landscape class . In 1835 , he was awarded with a silver medal and appointed assistant to the French painter Philippe <unk> ( fr ) . In September 1836 , Aivazovsky met Russia 's national poet Alexander Pushkin during the latter 's visit to the Academy . In 1837 , Aivazovsky joined the battle @-@ painting class of Alexander <unk> and participated in Baltic Fleet exercises in the Gulf of Finland . In October 1837 , he graduated from the Imperial Academy of Arts with a gold medal , two years earlier than intended . Aivazovsky returned to Feodosia in 1838 and spent two years in his native Crimea . In 1839 , he took part in military exercises in the shores of Crimea , where he met Russian admirals Mikhail Lazarev , Pavel Nakhimov and Vladimir Kornilov . 
 = = = First visit to Europe = = = 
 In 1840 , Aivazovsky was sent by the Imperial Academy of Arts to study in Europe . He first traveled to Venice via Berlin and Vienna and visited San Lazzaro degli Armeni , where an important Armenian Catholic congregation was located and his brother Gabriel lived at the time . Aivazovsky studied Armenian manuscripts and became familiar with Armenian art . He met Russian novelist Nikolai Gogol in Venice . He then headed to Florence , Amalfi and Sorrento . In Florence , he met painter Alexander Ivanov . He remained in Naples and Rome between 1840 and 1842 . Aivazovsky was heavily influenced by Italian art and their museums became the " second academy " for him . According to <unk> the news of successful exhibitions in Italy reached Russia . Pope Gregory XVI awarded him with a golden medal . He then visited Switzerland , Germany , the Netherlands and Britain , where he met English painter J. M. W. Turner who , " was so struck by Aivazovsky 's picture The Bay of Naples on a Moonlit Night that he dedicated a rhymed eulogy in Italian to Aivazovsky . " In an international exhibition at the Louvre , he was the only representative from Russia . In France , he received a gold medal from the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture . He then returned to Naples via Marseille and again visited Britain , Portugal , Spain and Malta in 1843 . Aivazovsky was admired throughout Europe . He returned to Russia via Paris and Amsterdam in 1844 . 
 = = = Return to Russia and first marriage = = = 
 Upon his return to Russia , Aivazovsky was made an academician of the Imperial Academy of Arts and was appointed the " official artist of the Russian Navy to paint seascapes , coastal scenes and naval battles . " In 1845 , Aivazovsky traveled to the Aegean Sea with Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich and visited the Ottoman capital , Constantinople , and the Greek islands of Patmos and Rhodes . 
 In 1845 , Aivazovsky settled in his hometown of Feodosia , where he built a house and studio . He isolated himself from the outside world , keeping a small circle of friends and relatives . Yet the solitude played a negative role in his art career . By the mid @-@ nineteenth century , Russian art was moving from Romanticism towards a distinct Russian style of Realism , while Aivazovsky continued to paint Romantic seascapes and attracted heavy criticism . 
 In 1845 and 1846 , Aivazovsky attended the maneuvers of the Black Sea Fleet and the Baltic Fleet at <unk> , near the imperial palace . In 1847 , he was given the title of professor of seascape painting by the Imperial Academy of Arts and elevated to the rank of nobility . In the same year , he was elected to the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 In 1848 , Aivazovsky married Julia Graves , an English governess . They had four daughters : Elena ( 1849 ) , Maria ( 1851 ) , Alexandra ( 1852 ) and Joanne ( 1858 ) . They separated in 1860 and divorced in 1877 with permission from the Armenian Church , since Graves was a Lutheran . 
 = = = Rise to prominence = = = 
 In 1851 , traveling with the Russian emperor Nicholas I , Aivazovsky sailed to Sevastopol to participate in military maneuvers . His archaeological excavations near Feodosia lead to his election as a full member of the Russian Geographical Society in 1853 . In that year , the Crimean War erupted between Russia and the Ottoman Empire , and he was evacuated to Kharkiv . While safe , he returned to the besieged fortress of Sevastopol to paint battle scenes . His work was exhibited in Sevastopol while it was under Ottoman siege . 
 Between 1856 and 1857 , Aivazovsky worked in Paris and became the first Russian ( and the first non @-@ French ) artist to receive the Legion of Honour . In 1857 , Aivazovsky visited Constantinople and was awarded the Order of the Medjidie . In the same year he was elected an honorary member of the Moscow Art Society . He was awarded the Greek Order of the Redeemer in 1859 and the Russian Order of St. Vladimir in 1865 . 
 Aivazovsky opened an art studio in Feodosia in 1865 and was awarded a salary by the Imperial Academy of Arts the same year . 
 = = = Travels and accolades : 1860s – 1880s = = = 
 In the 1860s , the artist produced several paintings inspired by Greek nationalism and the Italian unification . In 1868 , he once again visited Constantinople and produced a series of works about the Greek resistance to the Turks , during the Great Cretan Revolution . In 1868 , Aivazovsky traveled in the Caucasus and visited the Russian part of Armenia for the first time . He painted several mountainous landscapes and in 1869 held an exhibition in Tiflis . Later in the year , he made a trip to Egypt and took part in the opening ceremony of the Suez Canal . He became the " first artist to paint the Suez Canal , thus marking an epoch @-@ making event in the history of Europe , Africa and Asia . " 
 In 1870 , Aivazovsky was made an Actual Civil Councilor , the fourth highest civil rank in Russia . In 1871 , he initiated the construction of the archaeological museum in Feodosia . In 1872 , he traveled to Nice and Florence to exhibit his paintings . In 1874 , the Accademia di Belle Arti di Firenze ( Florence Academy of Fine Art ) asked him for a self @-@ portrait to be hung in the Uffizi Gallery . The same year , Aivazovsky was invited to Constantinople by Sultan Abdülaziz who subsequently bestowed upon him the Turkish Order of Osmanieh . In 1876 , he was made a member of the Academy of Arts in Florence and became the second Russian artist ( after Orest <unk> ) to paint a self @-@ portrait for the Palazzo Pitti . 
 Aivazovsky was elected an honorary member of Stuttgart 's Royal Academy of Fine Arts ( de ) in 1878 . He made a trip to the Netherlands and France , staying briefly in Frankfurt until 1879 . He then visited Munich and traveled to Genoa and Venice " to collect material on the discovery of America by Christopher Columbus . " 
 In 1880 , Aivazovsky opened an art gallery in his Feodosia house ; it became the third museum in the Russian Empire , after the Hermitage Museum and the Tretyakov Gallery . Aivazovsky held an 1881 exhibition at London 's Pall Mall , attended by English painter John Everett Millais and Edward VII , Prince of Wales . 
 = = = Second marriage and later life = = = 
 Aivazovsky 's second wife , Anna <unk> , was a young Armenian widow 40 years his junior . Aivazovsky said that by marrying her in 1882 , he " became closer to [ his ] nation " , referring to the Armenian people . In 1882 , Aivazovsky visited Moscow and St Petersburg and then toured the countryside of Russia by traveling along the Volga River in 1884 . 
 In 1885 , he was promoted to the rank of Privy Councilor . The next year , the 50th anniversary of his creative labors , was celebrated with an exhibition in St Petersburg , and an honorary membership in the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts . 
 After meeting Aivazovsky in person , Anton Chekhov wrote a letter to his wife on 22 July 1888 describing him as follows : 
 Aivazovsky himself is a <unk> and hearty old man of about seventy @-@ five , looking like an insignificant Armenian and an bishop ; he is full of a sense of his own importance , has soft hands and shakes your hand like a general . He 's not very bright , but he is a complex personality , worthy of a further study . In him alone there are combined a general , a bishop , an artist , an Armenian , an naive old peasant , and an Othello . 
 After traveling to Paris with his wife , in 1892 he made a trip to the United States , visiting Niagara Falls in New York and Washington D.C. In 1896 , at 79 , Aivazovsky was promoted to the rank of full privy councillor . 
 Aivazovsky was deeply affected by the Hamidian massacres that took place in the Armenian @-@ inhabited areas of the Ottoman Empire between 1894 and 1896 . He painted a number of works on the subject such as The Expulsion of the Turkish Ship , and The Armenian Massacres at Trebizond . He threw the medals given to him by the Ottoman Sultan into the sea and told the Turkish consul in Feodosia : " Tell your bloodthirsty master that I 've thrown away all the medals given to me , here are their ribbons , send it to him and if he wants , he can throw them into the seas painted by me . " He created several painting on the events , such as The Massacre of Armenians in Trebizond ( 1895 ) , Lonely Ship , Night . Tragedy in the Sea of Marmara ( 1897 ) . 
 He spent his final years in Feodosia . In the 1890s , thanks to his efforts a commercial port was established in Feodosia and linked to the railway network of the Russian Empire . The railway station , opened in 1892 , is now called <unk> and is one of the two stations within the city of Feodosia . Aivazovsky also supplied Feodosia with water . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Aivazovsky died on 19 April ( 2 May in New Style ) 1900 in Feodosia . In accordance with his wishes , he was buried at the courtyard of St. Sargis Armenian Church . A white marble sarcophagus was made by Italian sculptor L. <unk> in 1901 . A quote from Movses Khorenatsi 's History of Armenia in Classical Armenian is engraved on his tombstone : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , which translates : " He was born a mortal , left an immortal legacy " or " Born as a mortal , left the immortal memory of himself " . After his death , his wife Anna led a generally secluded life and died on July 25 , 1944 . She was buried next to Aivazovsky . 
 = = Art = = 
 During his 60 career , Aivazovsky produced around 6 @,@ 000 paintings of , what one online art magazine describes , " very different value ... there are masterpieces and there are very timid works " . The vast majority of Aivazovsky 's works depict the sea . He rarely drew dry @-@ landscapes and created only a handful of portraits . According to Rosa Newmarch Aivazovsky " never painted his pictures from nature , always from memory , and far away from the seaboard . " <unk> wrote that " His artistic memory was legendary . He was able to reproduce what he had seen only for a very short time , without even drawing preliminary sketches . " Bolton praised " his ability to convey the effect of moving water and of reflected sun and moonlight . " 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 He held 55 solo exhibitions ( an unprecedented number ) over the course of his career . Among the most notable were held in Rome , Naples and Venice ( 1841 – 42 ) , Paris ( 1843 , 1890 ) , Amsterdam ( 1844 ) , Moscow ( 1848 , 1851 , 1886 ) , Sevastopol ( 1854 ) , Tiflis ( 1868 ) , Florence ( 1874 ) , St. Petersburg ( 1875 , 1877 , 1886 , 1891 ) , Frankfurt ( 1879 ) , Stuttgart ( 1879 ) , London ( 1881 ) , Berlin ( 1885 , 1890 ) , Warsaw ( 1885 ) , Constantinople ( 1888 ) , New York ( 1893 ) , Chicago ( 1893 ) , San Francisco ( 1893 ) . 
 He also " contributed to the exhibitions of the Imperial Academy of Arts ( 1836 – 1900 ) , Paris Salon ( 1843 , 1879 ) , Society of Exhibitions of Works of Art ( 1876 – 83 ) , Moscow Society of Lovers of the Arts ( 1880 ) , Pan @-@ Russian Exhibitions in Moscow ( 1882 ) and Nizhny Novgorod ( 1896 ) , World Exhibitions in Paris ( 1855 , 1867 , 1878 ) , London ( 1863 ) , Munich ( 1879 ) and Chicago ( 1893 ) and the international exhibitions in Philadelphia ( 1876 ) , Munich ( 1879 ) and Berlin ( 1896 ) . " 
 = = = Style = = = 
 A primarily Romantic painter , Aivazovsky used some Realistic elements . Leek argued that Aivazovsky remained faithful to Romanticism ] throughout his life , " even though he oriented his work toward the Realist genre . " His early works are influenced by his Academy of Arts teachers Maxim Vorobiev and Sylvester <unk> . Classic painters like Salvator Rosa , Jacob <unk> van Ruisdael and Claude Lorrain contributed to Aivazovsky 's individual process and style . Karl <unk> , best known for his The Last Day of Pompeii , " played an important part in stimulating Aivazovsky 's own creative development , " according to Bolton . Aivazovsky 's best paintings in the 1840s – 1850s used a variety of colors and were both epic and romantic in theme . Newmarch suggested that by the mid @-@ 19th century the romantic features in Aivazovsky  ' s work became " increasingly pronounced . " She , like most scholars , considered his Ninth Wave his best piece of art and argued that it " seems to mark the transition between fantastic color of his earlier works , and the more truthful vision of the later years . " By the 1870s , his paintings were dominated by delicate colors ; and in the last two decades of his life , Aivazovsky created a series of silver @-@ toned seascapes . 
 The distinct transition in Russian art from Romanticism to Realism in the mid @-@ nineteenth century left Aivazovsky , who would always retain a Romantic style , open to criticism . Proposed reasons for his unwillingness or inability to change began with his location ; Feodosia was a remote town in the huge Russian empire , far from Moscow and Saint Petersburg . His mindset and worldview were similarly considered old @-@ fashioned , and did not correspond to the developments in Russian art and culture . Vladimir Stasov only accepted his early works , while Alexandre Benois wrote in his The History of Russian Painting in the 19th Century that despite he was Vorobiev 's student , Aivazovsky stood apart from the general development of the Russian landscape school . 
 Aivazovsky 's later work contained dramatic scenes and was usually done on a larger scale . He depicted " the romantic struggle between man and the elements in the form of the sea ( The Rainbow , 1873 ) , and so @-@ called " blue marines " ( The Bay of Naples in Early Morning , 1897 , Disaster , 1898 ) and urban landscapes ( Moonlit Night on the Bosphorus , 1894 ) . " 
 = = = Works = = = 
 Landscapes 
 <unk> 
 Religious paintings 
 = = = = Armenian themes = = = = 
 Aivazovsky 's early works incorporated Armenian themes . The artist 's longstanding wish to visit his ancestral homeland was fulfilled in 1868 . During his visit to Russian ( Eastern ) Armenia ( roughly corresponding to the modern Republic of Armenia , as opposed to Western Armenia under Ottoman rule ) , Aivazovsky created paintings of Mount Ararat , the Ararat plain , and Lake Sevan . Although Mt . Ararat has been depicted in paintings of many non @-@ native artists ( mostly European travelers ) , Aivazovsky became the first Armenian artist to illustrate the two @-@ peaked biblical mountain . 
 He resumed the creation of Armenian @-@ related paintings in the 1880s : Valley of Mount Ararat ( 1882 ) , Ararat ( 1887 ) , Descent of Noah from Ararat ( 1889 ) . The unique Valley of Mount Ararat contains <unk> 's signature in Armenian : " Aivazian " ( <unk> ) . In a panorama of Venice expressed by Byron 's Visit to the <unk> on St Lazarus Island in Venice ( 1898 ) ; the foreground of the picture contains members of the Armenian Congregation giving an enthusiastic welcome to the poet . 
 His other themed works from this period include rare portraits of notable Armenians , such as his brother Archbishop Gabriel Aivazovsky ( 1882 ) , Count Mikhail Loris @-@ <unk> ( 1888 ) , Catholicos Mkrtich Khrimian ( 1895 ) , Nakhichevan @-@ on @-@ Don Mayor <unk> <unk> and others . 
 The Baptism of Armenians and Oath Before the Battle of <unk> ( both 1892 ) depict the two single most memorable events of ancient Armenia : the Christianization of Armenia via baptism of King Tiridates III ( early 4th century ) , and the Battle of <unk> of 451 . 
 Orientalist themes 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Ivan Aivazovsky is one of the few Russian artists to achieve wide recognition during their lifetime . The Brockhaus and Efron Encyclopedic Dictionary explicitly described him as the " best Russian marine painter " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) in 1890 . 
 Today , he is considered as one of the most prominent marine artists of the 19th century , and , overall , one of the greatest marine artists in Russia and the world . He was also one of the few Russian artists to become famous outside Russia . In 1898 , Munsey 's Magazine wrote that Aivazovsky is " better known to the world at large than any other artist of his nationality , with the exception of the sensational <unk> " . Although according to art historian Janet Whitmore he is relatively unknown in the west . 
 Ivan <unk> , one of the most prominent Russian artists of the nineteenth century , praised him thus : " Aivazovsky is — no matter who says what — a star of first magnitude , and not only in our [ country ] , but also in history of art in general . " Another Russian painter , Alexandre Benois , suggested that " Aivazovsky stands apart from the general history of the Russian school of landscape painting . " The State Russian Museum website continues , " It is hard to find another figure in the history of Russian art enjoying the same popularity among amateur viewers and erudite professionals alike . " 
 In nineteenth @-@ century Russia , his name became a synonym for art and beauty . The phrase " worthy of Aivazovsky 's brush " was the standard way of describing something ineffably lovely . It was first used by Anton Chekhov in his 1897 play Uncle Vanya . In response to Marina <unk> 's ( the old nurse ) query about the fight between Ivan <unk> ( " Uncle Vanya " ) and Aleksandr <unk> , Ilya <unk> says that it was " A sight worthy of Aivazovsky 's brush " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = In Armenia = = = 
 Aivazovsky has always been considered an Armenian painter in his ancestral homeland and virtually always referred to there by his original Armenian name , Hovhannes . Aivazovsky is highly regarded in Armenia and his significance in Armenian art is greatly valued . He was the " most remarkable " Armenian painter of the 19th century , and the first ever Armenian marine painter . He was born outside Armenia proper , and like his contemporaries , including Gevorg <unk> , Panos <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , Aivazovsky lived outside his homeland , drawing primary influences from European and Russian schools of art . His creativity and viewpoint have been attributed to his uniquely Armenian roots . According to <unk> , he sought to create a union which would have brought together all Armenian artists around the world . The prominent Armenian poet Hovhannes Tumanyan wrote a short poem titled " In front of <unk> 's painting " ( « <unk> <unk> <unk> » ) in 1893 . It is inspired by painting of the sea by Aivazovsky , mostly likely from the 1870s – 1890s . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Aivazovsky was the most influential seascape painter in nineteenth @-@ century Russian art . According to the Russian Museum , " he was the first and for a long time the only representative of seascape painting " and " all other artists who painted seascapes were either his own students or influenced by him . " 
 <unk> Kuindzhi ( 1841 / 2 – 1910 ) is cited by <unk> encyclopedia as having been influenced by Aivazovsky . In 1855 , at age 13 – 14 , Kuindzhi visited Feodosia to study with Aivazovsky , however , he was engaged merely to mix paints and instead studied with Adolf <unk> , Aivazovsky 's student . A 1903 encyclopedic article stated : " Although Kuindzhi cannot be called a student of Aivazovsky , the latter had without doubt some influence on him in the first period of his activity ; from whom he borrowed much in the manner of painting . " English art historian John E. <unk> wrote that " the elemental sense of light and form associated with Aivazovsky 's sunsets , storms , and surging oceans permanently influenced the young Kuindzhi . " 
 Aivazovsky also influenced Russian painters Lev Lagorio , Mikhail <unk> , and Aleksey <unk> ( the latter two were his grandsons ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Aivazovsky 's house in Feodosia , where he had founded an art museum in 1880 , is open to this day as the Aivazovsky National Art Gallery . It remains a central attraction in the city and holds the world 's largest collections ( 417 ) of Aivazovsky paintings . 
 = = = Posthumous honors = = = 
 Monuments in Crimea , Armenia and Russia stand in Aivazovsky 's memory . A statue of the artist can be found in front of the Feodosia Art Gallery , his former home . A statue of Aivazovsky and his brother Gabriel is located in Simferopol , Crimea 's administrative center . Aivazovsky 's first statue in his ancestral homeland was unveiled in Yerevan in 2003 . Aivazovsky 's first and only statue in Russia was erected in 2007 in Kronstadt , near Saint Petersburg . 
 An avenue in Feodosia ( uk ) , streets in Moscow ( ru ) , Yerevan , and Minsk ; an alley in Kiev ( uk ) and in many smaller cities : all are named after Aivazovsky . A three @-@ star hotel in Odessa , where dozens of his works are displayed , is named for him as well . 
 The Soviet Union ( 1950 ) , Romania ( 1971 ) , Madagascar ( 1988 ) , Armenia ( first in 1992 ) , Russia ( 1995 ) , Ukraine ( 1999 ) , Abkhazia ( 1999 ) , Moldova ( 2010 ) , Kyrgyzstan ( 2010 ) , Burundi ( 2012 ) , and Mozambique ( 2013 ) have issued postage stamps depicting Aivazovsky or his works . 
 The minor planet <unk> <unk> , named after Aivazovsky , was discovered by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Chernykh in 1977 . 
 Several paintings of Aivazovsky from the National Gallery of Armenia hang in the Presidential Palace in Yerevan . 
 In 2007 when Abdullah Gül became president of Turkey , he redecorated the presidential palace — <unk> <unk> in Ankara — and brought paintings by Aivazovsky up from the basement to hang in his office . According to Hürriyet Daily News 30 paintings of Aivazovsky are on display in museums in Turkey . 
 = = = Auctions = = = 
 Aivazovsky 's paintings began appearing in auctions ( mostly in London ) in the early 2000s . His works have risen steadily in auction value . Many of his works are bought by Russian oligarchs . In 2004 , his Saint Isaac 's Cathedral On A Frosty Day , a rare cityscape , unexpectedly sold for around £ 1 million ( $ 1 @.@ 9 million ) . In 2007 , his painting American Shipping off the Rock of Gibraltar auctioned at £ 2 @.@ 71 million , " more than four times its top estimate " . It was , " the highest price paid at auction for Aivazovsky " at the time . In April 2012 , a canvas belonging to the artist View of Constantinople and the Bosphorus ( 1856 ) was sold at Sotheby 's for a record $ 5 @.@ 2 million ( £ 3 @.@ 2 million ) , " well over its top estimate of £ 1.8m " . 
 In June 2015 Sotheby 's withdrew from auction an 1870 Aivazovsky painting Evening in Cairo , which was estimated at £ 1 @.@ 5 – 2 million ( $ 2 – $ 3 million ) , after the Russian Interior Ministry claimed that it was stolen in 1997 from a private collection in Moscow . 
 = = = Ranks = = = 
 Russian Table of Ranks 
 1870 — Actual Civil Councilor ( <unk> <unk> советник ) 
 1885 — Privy Councilor ( <unk> советник ) 
 1896 — Actual Privy Councilor ( <unk> <unk> советник ) 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Charlie Fonville = 
 Charles Edward " Charlie " Fonville ( April 27 , 1927 – July 13 , 1994 ) was an American track and field athlete who set a world record in the shot put . In 1945 , he had been named the Michigan High School Track & Field Athlete of the Year . He won the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) shot put championship in 1947 and 1948 . Competing for the University of Michigan at the Kansas Relays in April 1948 , Fonville broke a 14 @-@ year @-@ old world record , throwing the shot a foot further than the record . 
 Fonville was considered the favorite for the 1948 Olympic gold medal but a back injury prevented him from qualifying for the Games . After undergoing back surgery in November 1948 , Fonville sat out the 1949 season , but came back in 1950 to win his third Big Ten Conference shot put championship . Fonville later became a lawyer and practiced law in Detroit , Michigan for 40 years . He was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1979 , as part of the second class of inductees . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Birmingham , Alabama , he moved with his family to Decatur , Illinois at age 11 . Prior to his senior year in high school , his family moved to Detroit . In 1945 , following Fonville 's lone track season at Detroit 's Miller High School , he was named Michigan High School Track & Field Athlete of the Year for his first @-@ place performance at the Detroit City League Meet . Fonville 's winning effort in the shot put was five feet better than that of the state champion . Later that summer , Charlie Fonville and Jessie Nimmons competed in the Detroit YMCA Track Championship as a two @-@ man team for the St. Antoine YMCA ; Fonville won the 100m , 200m , high jump , and shot put . Fonville and Nimmons won the 440 yard relay , with each of them running 220 yard legs . They were later disqualified for not having four runners . They finished in second place at the meet ; their disqualification in the 440 preventing them from winning . 
 In 1945 , Fonville enrolled at the University of Michigan without a scholarship and paid his way through college with summer jobs and working in a sorority dining room . 
