 = = Big Ten shot put record in 1947 = = 
 Fonville won the 1947 Big Ten indoor shot put championship . Early in the subsequent 1947 outdoor track season , Fonville was throwing over 53 feet ( 16 m ) and was poised to break William Watson 's Big Ten Conference record . At a meet in early May 1947 , he broke Watson 's Ferry Field record with a throw of 53 feet 10 @.@ 5 inches ( 16 @.@ 421 m ) . At the Big Ten outdoor track and field meet in late May 1947 in Evanston , Illinois , Fonville broke the Big Ten shot put record in the qualifying rounds . Henry J. McCormick , of the Wisconsin State Journal , reported that " Friday 's finals were highlighted by the shot put , where Charlie Fonville set a new conference record of 53 feet 11 @.@ 75 inches ( 16 @.@ <unk> m ) , smashing the former mark of 52 feet 11 @.@ 5 inches ( 16 @.@ 142 m ) which Bill Watson of Michigan set in 1938 . " Fonville then topped his own mark in the finals of the same meet with a throw of 54 feet 1 inch ( 16 @.@ 48 m ) . The following month , Fonville continued to improve with a throw of 54 feet 10 @.@ 875 inches ( 16 @.@ <unk> m ) to win the NCAA meet . 
 = = World record in 1948 = = 
 Fonville won the Big Ten indoor shot put championship again in 1948 . In April 1948 , Fonville broke the world record in the shot put at the Kansas Relays with a throw of 58 feet 0 @.@ 375 inches ( 17 @.@ <unk> m ) . The previous mark of 57 feet 1 inch ( 17 @.@ 40 m ) , set by Jack Torrance , had stood since 1934 . The United Press reported : 
 Two of the nation 's greatest Negro athletes smashed a pair of world records Saturday [ hurdler Harrison Dillard was the other ] at the 23rd annual Kansas Relays to send U.S. Olympic hopes soaring . Charles Fonville , mighty Michigan shot putter , shattered the world mark in his event with a heave of 58 feet 0 @.@ 25 inches ( 17 @.@ <unk> m ) ... Fonville 's great toss came in the morning preliminaries . ... Fonville broke into the limelight indoors last fall and has been starring ever since . His toss Saturday was almost 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) greater than that of his nearest competitor . 
 Ironically , Fonville had felt he was not ready for the Kansas Relays . A back injury had discouraged him , and there was even discussion that he might not make the trip . 
 Fonville noted at the time that , in his opinion , speed was more essential than beef and weight in the shot put . Speaking about his technique , Fonville said , " You concentrate — and then you just try to explode across the circle . " His coach , Ken Doherty , described Fonville as " one of the hardest working , most studious athletes " he had ever coached . Doherty also added that Fonville 's technique distinguished him from most shot putters : " Fonville drives completely across the ring in one continuous motion . Previously , most <unk> made their initial hop and hesitated before their final drive . ... Any track coach looking at him , would recognize all the points of good form . The only difference is that he has unusual speed and quickness — and he is the greatest competitor I 've ever coached . " One columnist described Fonville 's steady improvement from his freshman year in 1946 through his junior year in 1948 and concluded : " Small as shot @-@ putters go , Fonville is the greatest in the long history of sensational 16 @-@ pound ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) <unk> . " 
 Fonville 's son , Carl Eric Fonville , later wrote that his father was troubled by the unequal treatment given to African @-@ American athletes during the Kansas meet at which he set the world record . Upon arriving at the Kansas Relays , Fonville and Harrison Dillard of Baldwin @-@ Wallace College were housed at the home of a black family . His son wrote : " Without unpacking they decided to take a walk to the University of Kansas campus where they found the other visiting white athletes being given campus tours and their treatment far different than their own . They both considered leaving but decided to stay and compete . Charles called Ann Arbor , Michigan to tell them that he wanted leave , he got Don Canham who told him that he was ' Sent to Kansas City to represent the University of Michigan , ' the conversation was short and clear . " Fonville and Dillard both set new world records at the event . 
 In June 1948 , Fonville successfully defended his NCAA championship at the NCAA meet in Minneapolis , with a throw of 54 feet 7 inches ( 16 @.@ 64 m ) . 
 = = Back injury and Olympic disappointment = = 
 Even before the Kansas Relays , one writer stated : " Michigan 's Charley Fonville has only to retain his present form to be a certain Olympic games winner in the shot put . " After a record @-@ setting performance at the Purdue Relays , the United Press noted that " American Olympic stock was several points higher today . " And after he set the world record at the Kansas Relays , the United Press reported : " You can write down the names of the midwest 's terrific trio — Harrison Dillard , Fortune <unk> , and Charley Fonville — today as sure leaders of the U.S. Olympic track and field squad this summer . Out of the helter @-@ skelter of three relay carnivals , ... these three emerged as Uncle Sam 's surest hopes for glory in London . " 
 However , Fonville had been competing with an ailing back all year . The injury worsened as the track season wore on , and in early July 1948 , Fonville was forced to pull out of the National AAU track and field championships due to a " strained back . " Michigan 's coach , J. Kenneth Doherty , informed the meet of the injury but " did not say how severe the injury was nor if it would keep Fonville from Olympic competition . " 
 Fonville competed in the Olympic trials in Evanston , Illinois in mid @-@ July 1948 , but he was not able to meet his own standards as a result of the injury . He finished fourth and , despite having broken the world record just three months earlier , did not qualify for the U.S. Olympic team . There were some who suggested that Fonville should be named to the Olympic team despite his fourth @-@ place finish at the trials ; others argued it would be unfair to the third @-@ place finisher to take away his spot on the team . And " there was also a suspicion that Fonville 's ailing back hadn 't healed and that his performance at Evanston represented the best he can do at this time . " 
 Wilbur Thompson won the gold medal in the 1948 Summer Olympics with a throw of 56 feet 2 inches ( 17 @.@ 12 m ) — almost 2 @.@ 0 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) shorter than Fonville 's world @-@ record distance . 
 Despite not making the Olympic team , he remained Michigan 's most valuable track and field star , and at the end of the 1948 season he was chosen by teammates as captain for the 1949 season . However , in the fall of 1948 , the severity of Fonville 's injury was discovered , and it appeared he would never compete again . In October 1948 , after observing Fonville for a month , specialists at the University of Michigan Hospital concluded that Fonville was suffering from a fused vertebrae . He apparently had the ailment since birth , but had aggravated the condition throwing a 16 @-@ pound ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) iron ball in event after event . The Associated Press ( AP ) reported that the injury " has ended the Michigan star 's brilliant collegiate shot @-@ putting career . " 
 " Learning that Charley Fonville , Michigan shot putting ace , will no longer thrill the crowds with his mammoth heaves was a sickening shock . Fonville , who handled the 16 @-@ pound ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) shot like the average citizen does a baseball , might have been the greatest in the history of the event . Tall , powerful and perfectly co @-@ ordinated , he was becoming the idol of weight fans throughout the nation . He destroyed the lingering notion that a good shot put man had to resemble a two @-@ legged hippo . He gave hope to the athletes who were big — but didn 't seem big enough . At the Big Nine track meet at Madison , Wisconsin in the spring of this year one could discover exactly how much the soft spoken Negro had contributed . ... Every time he came on the line murmurs of anticipation ... through the stands . The moment the ball left his hands all eyes followed it in lumbering flight . ... When [ the judge ] reported the Western Conference record had been broken an outburst , like wind from a giant bellows , popped from the stands . Though this was striking in itself the best treat remained to the last . After Fonville came back from the discus , even he was swamped with young and eager autograph hunters . With only a request for ' no shoving ' the symmetrically perfect athlete sat down and fulfilled his obligation of fame . " 
 In early November , doctors operated on Fonville , placing a bone graft onto his cracked vertebrae . After the surgery , doctors described the procedure as " 100 percent successful . " Fonville refused to give up , saying at the time of the operation that , though he would not compete in 1949 , he had been troubled by his back for two years and hoped the operation would cure him and allow him to compete again in 1950 . 
 = = Comeback in 1950 = = 
 After sitting out the 1949 season to allow time for his back to heal from the surgery , Fonville returned to competition in 1950 . The 1950 U @-@ M yearbook , Michiganensian , simultaneously lamented about and praised Fonville 's comeback , noting his return to form with a 55 feet 1 inch ( 16 @.@ 79 m ) throw in the Michigan <unk> meet in January and describing how it would have earned second place in the 1948 Olympics . However , Fonville was not able to throw at the distances he reached in 1948 . After a victory in a meet against Wisconsin , The Wisconsin State Journal said : " Charlie Fonville , the former world recordholder in the shot put , heaved a creditable 53 feet 7 @.@ 5 inches ( 16 @.@ 345 m ) to win the event . The Negro star , sidelined for 18 months , returned to competition three weeks ago to heave more than 55 feet . " He also won the Big Ten Conference indoor title for the third time . However , the AP noted that Fonville " returned to competition this season after laying out last year and either has lost his terrific snap or is favoring the back . " Jim Fuchs of Yale broke Fonville 's world record , and the AP reported : " An injured back , perhaps , is all that stands in the way of boosting the world 's record for the shot put to 60 feet . Michigan 's Charlie Fonville , the athlete with the bad back , was the world 's best shot putter two years ago and still holds the official mark of 58 feet 0 @.@ 375 inches ( 17 @.@ <unk> m ) . " Though Fonville won the 1950 Drake relays , his winning throw of 52 feet 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 15 @.@ 888 m ) was described as " comparatively puny " compared to the 58 feet 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 17 @.@ 818 m ) throws of Jim Fuchs that year . In 1952 , Michigan track coach ( and future athletic director ) Don Canham dedicated his book Field Techniques Illustrated to Fonville as follows : " Dedicated to Charlie Fonville a world record holder who accepted disappointment as graciously as he did fame and success . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 After graduating from Michigan in 1950 , Fonville worked in labor relations at Kaiser @-@ Frazer , an automobile manufacturer , while attending Wayne State University Law School at night . Fonville was a lawyer in private practice in Detroit from 1954 to 1994 . In 1979 , Fonville was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor . He was part of only the second class inducted into the U @-@ M Hall of Honor , being inducted in the same year as Michigan legends Fielding H. Yost , Fritz Crisler and Willie Heston . The only U @-@ M track athlete inducted into the Hall of Honor before Fonville was Bob Ufer . In 1994 , Fonville died at the University of Michigan Hospital — the same hospital where he had surgery in 1948 to repair his vertebrae . He was 67 years old when he died . 
 = Touch Me Like That = 
 " Touch Me Like That " is a dance @-@ pop song performed by Dannii Minogue and Jason Nevins . The song was written by Jason Nevins , Lisa Molina , Sylvester James and James Wirrick . It samples the melody of the disco song " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " , originally performed by Sylvester . The song is the sixth and final single from Minogue 's fifth album Club Disco ( 2007 ) . 
 It was released as a single on 3 December 2007 in the United Kingdom to mixed reviews from music critics . The song was released in Minogue 's native Australia on 19 January 2008 , but was not eligible to chart in Australia because its CD single contained too many remixes by other artists . It entered the top fifty in the UK and became Minogue 's thirteenth Upfront Club Chart number one . The song 's music video , directed by Andy Soup , was filmed in London , England , and features Minogue in a multi @-@ coloured studio surrounded by a starry background and four dancers . 
 = = Background and reception = = 
 " Touch Me Like That " was written by record producer Jason Nevins and singer / songwriter Lisa Molina . It samples the melody of the disco song " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " originally performed and co @-@ written by Sylvester James and James Wirrick . Minogue was offered to provide vocals for the song by Nevins ' agent Matt Waterhouse , who was a close friend of Minogue 's . Minogue recorded her vocals in London , England , after Nevins had sent her an instrumental version of the song to her e @-@ mail inbox . Nevins produced and programmed the song from his home in New York City . 
 Minogue has cited " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " as one of her favourite disco songs and compared recording " Touch Me Like That " to the " best chocolate cake you ever ate " . Nevins had previously remixed Minogue 's song " Put the Needle on It " in 2002 , but the two had not previously met . He enjoyed working with Minogue and described working with her as " great " . " Touch Me Like That " premiered on The Chris Moyles Show in United Kingdom on 3 October 2007 . 
 In a review for Digital Spy , Nick Levine described the song as a " sticky , sweaty club banger " that will guarantee that " Team Minogue ’ s winning streak continues " . Channel 4 wrote that the song was a " quaintly dated electro disco workout " and rated it five out of ten stars . Alex Needham of The Guardian was not impressed with the track , describing it as " dodgy hi @-@ NRG so low rent it makes Rhydian look like Lou Reed - and not in a good way , either " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Touch Me Like That " was officially released in the United Kingdom and Ireland as a digital download on 3 December 2007 . The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart on 11 December 2007 at number forty @-@ eight . The track became Minogue 's thirteenth Upfront Club Chart number one in the UK . In Ireland , the track reached number two on the Dance <unk> Scotland the song debuted and peaked at 18 and stayed in the chart for 6 weeks 
 In Australia , " Touch Me Like That " was released on 19 January 2008 . The CD single , which featured thirteen tracks , was not eligible to chart because it contained too many remixes by other artists . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Touch Me Like That " was directed by Andy Soup and filmed in London , England . It features Minogue in a multi @-@ coloured studio surrounded by a starry background and four dancers . The video begins with Jason Nevins spinning the song on his turntable , with a starry background behind him . Minogue , wearing a short white dress and a curly hairdo , is then shown in a room of mirrors and on a suspended dance floor . The final sequence of the video features Minogue in a red dress , surrounded by a spinning cage in a digital room . As the video concludes , all of the scenes are intercut and gradually fade . 
 Minogue was responsible for finding the song 's video director and for its concept . Nevins had only two days to film the video because he was busy working on music for the Grammy Awards . The video shoot marked the first time Minogue and Nevins had met in person , as previous communication had been through record label representatives and e @-@ mail . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Touch Me Like That " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to " Touch Me Like That " : 
 Dannii Minogue – lead vocals , backing vocals 
 Jason Nevins – songwriter , production , drum programming , synths 
 Terry Ronald – backing vocals , mixing , vocal production 
 Ian Masterson – engineering , mixing , vocal production 
 Valerie Etienne and Michaela Breen – backing vocals 
 Andrew Hobbs – photography 
 = Great Britain at the 2006 Winter Paralympics = 
 Great Britain competed at the 2006 Winter Paralympics in Turin , Italy . The team was able to be made up of athletes from the whole United Kingdom ; athletes from Northern Ireland , who elected to hold Irish citizenship under the pre @-@ 1999 article 2 of the Irish constitution , were eligible to represent either Great Britain or Ireland at the Paralympics . However no Northern Irish athletes took part in the Winter Paralympics for either team until 2010 in Vancouver . All competitors had disabilities that were organised into one of five Paralympic categories for the Games . 
 Great Britain entered a total of twenty athletes at the Games ; three individuals in alpine skiing and teams of twelve athletes in ice sledge hockey and five athletes in wheelchair curling . The team won a single silver medal , in the debut sport of wheelchair curling , and finished seventeenth in the medal table . In addition to the medal there were top ten finishes from Sean Rose and Liz Miller , in alpine skiing , and the ice sledge hockey team . 
 = = Medallists = = 
 Great Britain placed seventeenth in the medal table with a single silver medal and zero gold or bronze medals . The following British athletes won medals at the Games . In the ' by discipline ' sections below , medallists ' names are in bold . 
 = = Disability classification = = 
 Every participant at the Paralympics has their disability grouped into one of five disability categories ; amputation , the condition may be congenital or sustained through injury or illness ; cerebral palsy ; wheelchair athletes , there is often overlap between this and other categories ; visual impairment , including blindness ; Les autres , any physical disability that does not fall strictly under one of the other categories , for example dwarfism or multiple sclerosis . Each Paralympic sport then has its own classifications , dependent upon the specific physical demands of competition . Events are given a code , made of numbers and letters , describing the type of event and classification of the athletes competing . Events with " B " in the code are for athletes with visual impairment , codes LW1 to LW9 are for athletes who stand to compete and LW10 to LW12 are for athletes who compete sitting down . For the 2006 Paralympics alpine skiing events grouped athletes in to sitting , standing and visually impaired . Wheelchair curling , making its first appearance at the Games in 2006 , was open to athletes with a physical disability in the lower part of the body that required the everyday use of a wheelchair . Stones may be played by hand while leaning over the side of the wheelchair , or pushed by a delivery stick . 
 = = Alpine skiing = = 
 Britain entered three skiers , two men and one woman , into the Games . Russell Docker , one of only two athletes to have competed for Britain at the 2002 Winter Paralympics , appeared in his second Games , this time in sitting events having switched to the use of a monoski . Sean Rose , also a sit @-@ skier , and Liz Miller , a standing skier who uses a prosthetic leg , were the other British participants . The three athletes were members of the British Adaptive Ski Team , which is run by national ski charity Disability Snowsport UK . Each of the three skiers raced in four events in their respective categories ; downhill , giant slalom , slalom and Super @-@ G. Rose had the highest finish of the three ; he placed sixth in the men 's sitting downhill , 0 @.@ 7 seconds outside of the medal positions . Russell Docker crashed in the same event and did not finish . Docker also failed to finish in the slalom , as did Rose in the giant slalom . Miller completed the course in each of her events with a best finish of tenth in the downhill . 
 Calculated time 
 To ensure a fair event when athletes with differing disabilities compete , times achieved are sometimes modified by a factor percentage , to produce a result known as " Calculated Time " . It is this time that decides the result of the races . Actual times recorded are also listed . 
 Women 
 = = Ice sledge hockey = = 
 Britain 's ice sledge hockey team took the final qualification spot for the Games by winning the qualifying tournament in Italy in November 2005 . The team of twelve athletes included Stephen Thomas who had previously participated in Summer Paralympic sailing . Goalkeeper Gary Vaughan was named in the initial squad but was unable to complete due a high blood pressure condition and was replaced by Matt Lloyd . Britain competed in pool B alongside teams from Canada , Italy and Norway . Having suffered heavy defeats in their first two matches the team beat hosts Italy in their final pool match to finish third in the group . In the classification rounds they lost to Sweden before beating Italy again to finish in seventh position . 
 = = Wheelchair curling = = 
 The British wheelchair curling team was made up of Frank Duffy the skip , Ken Dickson , Tom Killin , Angie Malone and Michael McCreadie . This was the same team that had won the World Championships in January 2005 in Glasgow , all but Killin had also won the 2004 World Championships , and many considered them strong contenders for a medal . Although this was the first time wheelchair curling had been included as a Paralympic sport the team did have previous Games experience . Michael McCreadie , who made his first Paralympics appearance in 1972 , was competing in his sixth Paralympics and had previously won two bronze medals for Lawn Bowls in the 1976 Summer Paralympics . Tom Killin was a previous silver medallist in wheelchair fencing at the 1980 Summer Games . The team received the same preparation as Great Britain 's Olympic <unk> ; funding came from the National Lottery as well as the Scottish Institute of Sport . The team 's coach , Tom <unk> , was also personal coach of the men 's Olympic skip David Murdoch . 
 Paralympic wheelchair curling is played according to the rules of the World Curling Federation , the only modification is that there is no sweeping . The sport was open to both male and female athletes who competed in mixed teams , with a requirement that each team had at least one member of each sex . The format was a round @-@ robin tournament ; each nation played all others in a group stage with the top four qualifying for medal playoffs . Britain won their group games against the teams from Denmark , Sweden , Italy and the United States , and lost the matches against Switzerland , Norway and Canada . Their record of four wins and three loses meant they finished the group stage in second place and advanced directly to the medal rounds . In the first end of the semifinal , against Sweden , Britain stole three and went on to win the match 7 – 3 . In the final the team faced Canada . Trailing 6 – 3 in the final end skip Frank Duffy had an opportunity , with the last stone of the tournament for an open hit of a Canadian stone . If successful he would have scored four for Britain and won them the gold medal but he threw too hard and the shot tracked an inch wide . This meant that Canada scored one to win 7 – 4 , leaving the British team as silver medallists . 
 = Pilotwings = 
 Pilotwings ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . The game was originally released in Japan on December 21 , 1990 , shortly after the launch of the Super Famicom . It was released as a launch title for the Super NES in August 1991 in North America , with a European release following in 1992 . 
 Pilotwings is an amateur flight simulator game in which the player attempts to earn pilot licenses through lessons in light plane flight , hang gliding , skydiving , and the use of a rocket belt . Bonus stages and levels involving an attack helicopter are also available . Each event offers unique controls and gameplay mechanics . To increase the realism of the game 's flight simulation , the developers extensively utilized the Super NES 's Mode 7 capability , which mimics 3D graphics by rotating and scaling flat objects . 
 The game was well received upon its release , largely thanks to its graphical presentation . The game has since been re @-@ released on the Virtual Console service for both the Wii and the Wii U consoles in PAL regions , North America , and Japan , as well as for the New Nintendo 3DS in North America . A sequel , Pilotwings 64 , was released for the Nintendo 64 in 1996 . After many years of announcements and cancellations , Nintendo unveiled a second sequel , Pilotwings Resort , for the Nintendo 3DS handheld at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2010 which released in 2011 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pilotwings takes place in a series of training areas called the " Flight Club " . The player 's objective is to pass each training area and earn licenses based on the difficulty of the courses . Each area features events , which may be played in any order . In these events , the player controls one of four aerial vehicles and must complete a task ( usually flying through floating markers ) within a time limit . Upon completing or failing an objective , the player earns points and receives comments from the instructors . Points are awarded based on criteria such as the time taken to complete the event , the accuracy of the landing , and the completion of certain tasks , such as flying through colored rings or orbs . To pass a training area , the combined scores from each event must exceed a certain threshold . Each training area can be replayed if necessary , and passwords allow players to save their progress . 
 The first event , the light plane , requires the player to follow a guide path of orbs , or to fly through rings of orbs , and then land on the runway . In the second event , skydiving , the player jumps from a helicopter at a high altitude and maneuvers by leaning forward and back , and by rotating on a horizontal axis . The player must fall through rings of orbs in the sky before deploying the parachute , and must then attempt to land in a target area made up of concentric circles , with marks indicating the points awarded . The third event sees the player taking control of a rocket belt , which can be controlled with left and right yaw rotation , leaning forward and back to control speed . High and low levels of thrust allow high speed and finer control , respectively . The player must take off and fly through a series of rings , bars , or other objects before landing in a target area . The objective of the fourth event , hang gliding , is to catch thermal currents ( represented by ascending white dots ) , reach a specified altitude , and then land as close as possible to the center of a gray square target . 
 Some events have bonus stages that add to a player 's score , even if it has already reached the maximum number . In the skydiving , rocket belt , and hang glider modes , landing on moving platforms rewards players with a perfect score , and a bonus stage for extra points may be earned by falling into the water of a target area . These stages include maneuvering a diving penguin into a pool , bouncing a winged man across a series of trampolines , and flying another winged man as far as possible . 
 After completing the certification courses of all four instructors , the player is informed that an agent has infiltrated an enemy base ( " <unk> Syndicate " ) on the fictional <unk> Island and has freed the player 's kidnapped instructors , who are waiting to be rescued . The player 's mission is to fly an attack helicopter from an offshore aircraft carrier and retrieve the captives by landing on a helipad on the island . This rescue mission stands out from the normal courses in that the player does more than maneuver a craft . As the player flies over the island , they must successfully dodge anti @-@ aircraft fire from ground @-@ based turrets , and , although the helicopter is able to fire missiles to destroy the artillery , a single hit to the craft causes the game to end . The helicopter has forward , backward , left , and right pitch controls , rotor throttle controls for altitude , and left and right missile firing controls . Completing the mission earns the player the " Pilot 's Wings " certificate and opens harder training areas ( consisting of several weather conditions and higher score requirements ) and another helicopter mission . Clearing the second helicopter mission awards the player with the golden " Pilot 's Wings , " and the credits roll . 
 = = Development = = 
 Pilotwings was developed by Nintendo Entertainment Analysis and Development ( EAD ) , a team consisting of members of the company 's Research & Development divisions , under the leadership of producer Shigeru Miyamoto . Nintendo EAD completed Pilotwings and two other games ( Super Mario World and F @-@ Zero ) within 15 months of the debut of the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Pilotwings was released in Japan on December 21 , 1990 , one month after the system 's launch , and was later released in North America in August 1991 as a launch title . The game 's musical score was composed by Soyo Oka , while her superior Koji Kondo was responsible for the sound programming and the helicopter theme . Six tracks from the game , including a rearranged version of the skydiving theme , appeared on the Nintendo Super Famicom Game Music album , released in Japan on March 4 , 1992 . Six piano @-@ arranged versions of songs from the game were included on the Nintendo Super Famicom Game Music : Fun Together with Beyer CD , which was released in Japan on November 30 , 1993 . 
 A flight simulator game resembling Pilotwings called Dragonfly was shown during the official unveiling of the Super NES to the Japanese press on November 21 , 1988 . The game was used to demonstrate the system 's Mode 7 graphics system , which allows rotation , scaling , and other effects to be used on flat images to create a 3D effect . Because the game does not use the coprocessor chip Super FX , the true Super NES 3D technology , the buildings , runway , trees , and so on are all " painted " flat on the ground plane , and they appear to stick out of the ground when the player 's viewpoint is far above . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Pilotwings was positively received during both its initial release and in retrospective reviews . The game drew praise for its presentation , with publications describing the game 's use of Mode 7 graphics as " stunning " and " jaw @-@ dropping " . Its level of challenge was also positively noted ; Mean Machines found that practicing the flight tests and reaching the end of the game was very rewarding . Official Nintendo Magazine remarked , " This early SNES title is still enjoyable enough to be considered a true classic . " 
 In February 2006 , Pilotwings was listed as the 153rd best game on a Nintendo console by Nintendo Power . They also listed it as the 20th best game on the Super NES . IGN listed it in their " Top 100 Games of All Time " at number 74 in 2003 , and at number 91 in 2007 . They later placed it as the 80th best Super NES game . It was named the 16th best game on the Super NES by GameDaily in 2008 , while Game Informer listed it at number 131 in its " Top 200 Games of All Time " in 2009 . Official Nintendo Magazine ranked the game number 61 on its February 2009 " 100 Best Nintendo Games " list . In April 1996 , Super Play listed it as the tenth greatest game for the Super NES . 
 Computer and Video Games stated that Pilotwings sold over two million copies worldwide by August 1996 . A sequel , Pilotwings 64 , was released for the Nintendo 64 in 1996 as a launch title for its respective system . A second sequel for the Nintendo 64 , which showed off the console 's capabilities , was cancelled . In 2003 , it was announced that Factor 5 was working on a GameCube incarnation of the Pilotwings series . Development was moved to Nintendo 's Wii console shortly thereafter . However , an anonymous blogger claimed in late 2009 that Factor 5 had indeed finished working on it , but that Nintendo was not confident in publishing it . Nintendo finally announced a new title in the series , the Nintendo 3DS title Pilotwings Resort , at E3 2010 . The new title was released as a launch title for the 3DS in North America on March 27 , 2011 . 
 The game has been featured in the Game On historical exhibition organized by the Barbican Centre , including a display at the Science Museum in London in 2007 . Nintendo re @-@ released Pilotwings on the Wii Virtual Console service in PAL regions and North America in 2009 and in Japan in 2010 , and then on the Wii U Virtual Console in 2013 . 
 A stage based on Pilotwings makes an appearance in Super Smash Bros. for Wii U. The stage combines elements from the original Super NES game and Pilotwings Resort . 
 = War against Nabis = 
 The War against Nabis , or the Laconian War , of 195 BC was fought between the Greek city @-@ state of Sparta and a coalition composed of Rome , the Achaean League , Pergamum , Rhodes , and Macedon . 
 During the Second Macedonian War ( 200 – 196 BC ) , Macedon had given Sparta control over Argos , an important city on the Aegean coast of Peloponnese . Sparta 's continued occupation of Argos at the end of war was used as a pretext for Rome and its allies to declare war . The anti @-@ Spartan coalition laid siege to Argos , captured the Spartan naval base at Gythium , and soon invested and besieged Sparta itself . Eventually , negotiations led to peace on Rome 's terms , under which Argos and the coastal towns of Laconia were separated from Sparta and the Spartans were compelled to pay a war indemnity to Rome over the next eight years . Argos joined the Achaean League , and the Laconian towns were placed under Achaean protection . 
 As a result of the war , Sparta lost its position as a major power in Greece . Subsequent Spartan attempts to recover the losses failed and Nabis , the last sovereign ruler , was eventually murdered . Soon after , Sparta was forcibly made a member of its former rival , the Achaean League , ending several centuries of fierce political independence . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the death of the Spartan regent <unk> in 207 BC in battle against the Achaean League , Nabis overthrew the reigning king Pelops with the backing of a mercenary army and placed himself on the throne , claiming descent from the Eurypontid king Demaratus . By then , the traditional constitution of Lycurgus had already lost its meaning and Sparta was dominated by a group of its former mercenaries . Polybius described Nabis ' force as " a crowd of murderers , burglars , <unk> and highwaymen " . In 205 BC , Nabis signed a peace treaty with Rome , but in 201 BC he attacked the territory of Messene , at that time an ally of both parties , which Sparta had ruled until the mid 4th century BC . The Spartans captured Messene but were soon forced to abandon it when the army of Megalopolis arrived under the command of Philopoemen . Later , they were decisively defeated at the Tegea and Nabis was forced to check his expansionist ambitions for the time . 
 During the Second Macedonian War , Nabis had another possibility for expansion . Philip of Macedon offered him the polis of Argos in exchange for Sparta defecting from the Roman coalition and joining the Macedonian alliance . Nabis accepted and received control over Argos . However , when the war turned against Macedon , he rejoined the Roman coalition and sent 600 Cretan mercenaries to support the Roman army . Philip was later decisively defeated by the Romans at the battle of Cynoscephalae , but Sparta remained in control of Argos . After the war , the Roman army did not withdraw from Greece , but instead sent garrisons to various strategic locations across Greece to secure its interests . 
 = = Nabis ' reforms = = 
 In return for his assistance in the war , Rome accepted Nabis ' possession of the polis of Argos . While Nabis was already King of Sparta , he made his wife Apia ruler of her hometown Argos . Afterwards , Apia and Nabis staged a financial coup by confiscating large amounts of property from the wealthy families of these cities , and torturing those who resisted them ; much of the confiscated land was redistributed to liberated helots loyal to Nabis . After increasing his territory and wealth by the aforementioned method , Nabis started to turn the port of Gythium into a major naval arsenal and fortified the city of Sparta . His Cretan allies were already allowed to have naval bases on Spartan territory , and from these they ventured on acts of piracy . His naval buildup offered a chance even for the very poor to participate , as rowers , in the profitable employment . However , the extension of the naval capacities at Gythium greatly displeased the abutting states of the Aegean Sea and the Roman Republic . 
 Nabis ' rule was largely based on his social reforms and the rebuilding of Sparta 's armed forces . The military of Lacedaemonia , Sparta , had traditionally been based on levies of full citizens and perioeci ( one of the free non @-@ citizen groups of Lacedaemonia ) supported by lightly armed helots . From several thousands in the times of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars , the numbers of full citizen Spartans had declined to a few hundred in the times of Cleomenes III . There were possibly several reasons for the decline of numbers , one of which was that every Spartan who wasn 't able to pay his share in the <unk> ( common meal for men in Doric societies ) lost his full citizenship , although this didn 't exclude his offspring from partaking in the agoge ( traditional Spartan education and training regime ) . 
 As a result , the fielding of a respectable hoplite army without mercenaries or freed helots was difficult . Cleomenes increased the number of full citizens again and made the Spartan army operate with an increased reliance on more lightly armored phalangites of the Macedonian style . However , many of these restored citizens were killed in the Battle of Sellasia and Nabis ' politics drove the remainder of them into exile . In consequence , the heavy troops were no longer available in sufficient numbers . This led to a serious decline in Sparta 's military power , and the aim of Nabis reforms was to reestablish a class of loyal subjects capable of serving as well @-@ equipped phalangites ( operating in a close and deep formation , with a longer spear than the hoplites ' ) . Nabis ' liberation of the enslaved helots was one of the most outstanding deeds in Spartan history . With this action , Nabis eliminated a central ideological pillar of the old Spartan social system and the chief reason for objection to Spartan expansion by the surrounding poleis ( city @-@ states ) . Guarding against helot revolt had been , until this time , the central concern of Spartan foreign policy , and the need to protect against internal revolt had limited adventurism abroad ; Nabis ' action abolished this concern with a single stroke . His freed helots received land from him and were wedded to wealthy wives of the exiled Spartan demos ( all former full citizens ) and widows of the rich elite , whose husbands had been killed at his orders . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Achaean League was upset that one of its members had remained under Spartan occupation and persuaded the Romans to revisit their decision to leave Sparta 's territorial gains intact . The Romans agreed with the Achaeans , as they did not want a strong and re @-@ organized Sparta causing trouble after the Romans left Greece . 
 In 195 BC , Titus Quinctius Flamininus , the Roman commander in Greece , called a council of the Greek states at Corinth to discuss whether or not to declare war on Nabis . Among the states whose delegates participated were the Aetolian League , Macedon , Rome , Pergamum , Rhodes , Thessaly and the Achaean League . All the states represented favored war , except for the Aetolian League and Thessaly , both of which wanted the Romans to leave Greece immediately . These two states offered to deal with Nabis themselves , but they met opposition from the Achaean League , which objected to any possible growth in the Aetolian League 's power . The modern historian Erich Gruen has suggested that the Romans may have used the war as an excuse to station a few legions in Greece in order to prevent the Spartans and the Aetolian League from joining the Seleucid King Antiochus III if he invaded Greece . 
 Flamininus first sent an envoy to Sparta , demanding that Nabis either surrender Argos to the Achaean League or face war with Rome and her Greek allies . Nabis refused to comply with Flamininus ' ultimatum , so 40 @,@ 000 Roman soldiers and their Greek allies advanced towards the Peloponnese . Entering the Peloponnese , Flamininus joined his force with that of the Achaean commander , Aristaenos , who had 10 @,@ 000 infantry and 1 @,@ 000 cavalry in <unk> . Together , they advanced towards Argos . 
 Nabis had appointed his brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Argive Pythagoras , as commander of his garrison of 15 @,@ 000 men in Argos . As the Romans and the Achaean League were advancing towards the city , a young Argive named Damocles attempted to stir up a revolution against the Spartan garrison . With a few followers , he stood in the city 's agora and shouted to his fellow Argives , exhorting them to rise in revolt . However , no mass uprising materialized and Damocles and most of his followers were surrounded and killed by the Spartan garrison . 
 A few survivors from Damocles ' group escaped from the city and went to Flamininus ' camp . They suggested to Flamininus that , if he moved his camp closer to the city gates , the Argives would revolt against the Spartans . 
 The Roman commander sent his light infantry and cavalry to find a position for the new camp . Upon spotting the small group of Roman soldiers , a group of Spartan troops sallied forth from the gates and skirmished with the Romans about 300 paces from the city walls . The Romans forced the Spartans to retreat back into the city . 
 Flamininus moved his camp to the position where the skirmish had occurred . For a day he waited for the Spartans to attack him but , when no attack came , he called a war council to discuss whether or not to press the siege . All the Greek leaders except Aristaenos thought that they should attack the city , as capturing it was their primary objective in going to war . Aristaenos , on the other hand , argued that they should instead strike directly at Sparta and Laconia . Flamininus agreed with Aristaenos and the army marched to Tegea in Arcadia . The next day , Flamininus advanced to <unk> , where he waited for allied auxiliaries to reinforce him . These forces soon arrived and joined the Romans ; they consisted of a contingent of Spartan exiles led by Agesipolis , the legitimate King of Sparta , who had been overthrown by the first Tyrant of Sparta , Lycurgus , twenty years earlier , and 1 @,@ 500 Macedonians with 400 Thessalian cavalry sent by Philip . News also reached the allies that several fleets had arrived off the Laconian shore : a Roman fleet under Lucius Quinctius with forty ships ; a Rhodian fleet with eighteen ships , led by <unk> , hoping that the defeat of Nabis would stop the pirates that plagued their ships ; and a Pergamene fleet of forty ships under King Eumenes II of Pergamum , who hoped to gain more favor with Rome and Roman support if Antiochus invaded . 
 = = Laconian campaign = = 
 Nabis drafted 10 @,@ 000 citizens into his army and hired 3 @,@ 000 additional mercenaries . Nabis ' Cretan allies , who profited from the naval bases on his territory , dispatched 1 @,@ 000 specially selected warriors to augment the 1 @,@ 000 they had already sent to Sparta 's aid . Nabis , fearing that the Roman approach might encourage his subjects to revolt , decided to terrorize them by ordering the execution of eighty prominent citizens . Flamininus left his base and descended upon Sellasia ; while the Romans were making camp , Nabis ' auxiliaries attacked them . The sudden surprise attack briefly threw the allies into a state of confusion , but the Spartans retreated back to the city when the main body of legionary cohorts arrived . As the Romans marched past Sparta on their way to Mount Menelaus , Nabis ' mercenaries attacked the allies ' rear . Appius Claudius , commander of the rearguard , rallied his troops and forced the mercenaries to retreat behind the city 's walls , inflicting heavy casualties on them in the process . 
 The coalition army then proceeded to <unk> , from whence they plundered the surrounding countryside . Lucius Quinctius , meanwhile , received the voluntary surrender of several coastal towns in Laconia . The allies then advanced on the largest city in the area , Sparta 's port and naval arsenal at Gythium . As the land forces began to invest the city , the allied navy arrived . The sailors from the three fleets set to construct siege engines within a few days . Though these machines had a devastating effect on the city walls , the garrison successfully held out . 
 Eventually , Dexagoridas , one of the two garrison commanders , sent word to the Roman legate that he was willing to surrender the city . This plan fell through when Gorgopas , the other commander , learned of it and slew Dexagoridas with his own hands . Gorgopas continued to resist fiercely until Flamininus arrived with 4 @,@ 000 additional troops that he had recently recruited . The Romans renewed their assault and Gorgopas was forced to surrender , though he did secure the condition that he and his garrison could leave unharmed and return to Sparta . 
 = = Siege of Sparta = = 
 During the siege at Gythium , Pythagoras had joined Nabis at Sparta , bringing with him 3 @,@ 000 men from Argos . When Nabis discovered that Gythium had surrendered he decided to send an envoy to Flamininus to open negotiations on the terms of a peace . Nabis offered to withdraw the rest of his garrison from Argos and to hand over to the Romans any deserters and prisoners . Flamininus called another war council . Most of the council felt that they should capture Sparta and unseat Nabis . 
 Flamininus replied to Nabis by proposing his own terms , under which Sparta and Rome would conclude a six @-@ month truce if Nabis would surrender Argos with all his garrisons from the Argolid ; give the coastal Laconian cities autonomy and give them his fleet ; pay a war indemnity over the next eight years and not enter into alliances with any Cretan cities . Nabis rejected this offer , claiming that he had enough supplies to withstand a siege . Flamininus therefore led his force of 50 @,@ 000 men to Sparta and , after defeating the Spartans in a battle outside the city , began investing the city . Flamininus resolved not to lay a regular siege to the city but to instead try and storm it . The Spartans initially held out against the allies , but their resistance was hampered by the fact that the Romans ' large shields made missile attacks futile . 
 The Romans launched an assault on Sparta and took the walls , but their advance was initially impeded by the narrowness of the roads in the city 's outskirts . However , the streets grew wider as they advanced into the city 's center , and the Spartans were forced further and further back . Nabis , seeing his defenses collapsing , tried to flee , but Pythagoras rallied the soldiers and ordered them to set fire to the buildings closest to the walls . Burning debris was thrown on the coalition 's soldiers entering the city , causing many casualties . Observing this , Flamininus ordered his forces to withdraw to their base . When the attack was renewed later , the Spartans managed to hold off the Roman assaults for three days before Nabis , seeing that the situation was hopeless , decided to send Pythagoras with an offer of surrender . At first , <unk> refused to see him , but when Pythagoras came to the Roman camp a second time Flamininus accepted the surrender , with the conditions of the treaty being the same as Flamininus had previously proposed . The treaty was later ratified by the Senate . 
 The Argives revolted when they heard that Sparta was under siege . Under the Argive <unk> , they attacked the garrison commanded by Timocrates of Pellene . Timocrates surrendered the citadel on condition that he and his men could leave unharmed . In return all the Argives serving in Nabis ' army were allowed to return home . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the war Flamininus visited the Nemean Games in Argos and proclaimed the polis free . The Argives immediately decided to rejoin the Achaean League . Flamininus also separated all coastal cities of Laconia from Spartan rule and placed them under Achean protection . The remains of Sparta 's fleet were put under custody of these coastal cities . Nabis also had to withdraw his garrisons from Cretan cities and revoke several social and economic reforms that had strengthened Sparta 's military capabilities . The Romans did not , however , remove Nabis from the Spartan throne . Even though Sparta was a landlocked and effectively powerless state , the Romans wanted an independent Sparta to act as a counterweight against the growing Achaean League . Nabis ' allegiance was secured by the fact that he had to surrender five hostages , amongst them his son , <unk> . The Romans did not restore the exiles , wishing to avoid internal strife in Sparta . They did , however , allow any woman who was married to an ex @-@ helot but whose husband was in exile to join him . 
 After the legions under Flamininus had returned to Italy , the Greek states were once again on their own . The dominant powers in the region at this time were the kingdom of Macedon , which had recently lost a war against Rome , the Aetolians , the strengthened Achaean League and a reduced Sparta . The Aetolians , who had opposed the Roman intervention in Greek affairs , incited Nabis to retake his former territories and position among the Greek powers . By 192 , Nabis who had built a new fleet and strengthened his army , besieged Gythium . The Achaeans responded by sending an envoy to Rome with a request for help . In response the Senate sent the praetor Atilius with a navy to defeat Nabis ' navy as well as an embassy headed by Flamininus . Instead of waiting for the Roman fleet to arrive , the Achaean army and navy headed towards Gythium under the command of Philopoemen . The Achaean fleet under Tiso was defeated by the recently constructed Spartan fleet , with the Achean flagship falling to pieces in the first ramming attack . On land as well the Achaeans could not defeat the Spartan forces outside Gythium and Philopoemen retreated to Tegea . When Philopoemen reentered Laconia for a second attempt his forces were ambushed by Nabis ' but nevertheless he managed to gain a victory . The Achaeans now could ravage Laconia for thirty days unopposed while the Spartan troops remained in their fortified city . Plans for capturing Sparta itself had been laid by the time the Roman envoy Flamininus arrived and convinced the Achaean <unk> Philopoemen to spare it . For the time being Nabis decided to accept the status quo in return and surrender under the same conditions as the last treaty . 
 Since Sparta 's army was now weakened , Nabis appealed to the Aetolians for help . They sent to Sparta 1 @,@ 000 cavalry under the command of <unk> . The story goes that while Nabis was observing his army 's drills , the Aetolian commander <unk> charged at him and killed him with his lance . Afterwards the Aetolian troops seized the palace and set about looting the city but the inhabitants of Sparta were able to rally and rout them out of town . As Sparta was in turmoil Philopoemen entered the city with the Achaean army and made Sparta a member state of the League . The polis of Sparta was allowed to keep its laws and territory , but the exiles , and their rule of the Spartan warrior demos were not restored . 
 In 189 BC , the hostages taken by Rome , excluding Nabis ' son , who fell ill and died , were allowed to return to Sparta . Still deprived of any port and suffering from political and economic problems from having the hostile exiles close by and not having access to the sea , the Spartans captured the city of Las , which was the home of many exiles and a member of the Union of free Laconians . The <unk> officially adopted this as the reason to finish Spartan independence once and for all . They demanded the surrender of the people responsible for the attack . The culprits responded by murdering thirty pro @-@ Achaean citizens , seceding from the League and requesting Roman tutelage . The Romans , who wanted to see division in the League , did nothing about the situation . In 188 , Philopoemen entered northern Laconia with an army and the Spartan exiles who insisted on returning to Sparta . He first massacred eighty anti @-@ Achaeans at <unk> , and then had the wall that Nabis built around Sparta demolished . Philopoemen then restored the exiles and abolished Spartan law , introducing Achaean law in its place . Thus ended Sparta 's role as a major power in Greece , while Achaea became dominant throughout the Peloponnese . 
 = Hurricane Alma ( 1962 ) = 
 Hurricane Alma saw the latest development of the first storm since 1941 . The first named storm of the 1962 Atlantic hurricane season , Alma formed from a tropical wave located offshore South Florida on August 26 . Initially a tropical depression , it subsequently moved inland over South Florida . Impact in the state was minor , generally limited to light rainfall and rough seas . Early on August 27 , the depression reemerged into the Atlantic Ocean and strengthened into Tropical Storm Alma later that day . Thereafter , it moved northeastward and remained offshore the East Coast of the United States . Alma strengthened into a hurricane on August 28 , while located offshore the Outer Banks of North Carolina . In the eastern portion of the state , strong winds downed electrical poles , which caused power outages . Storm tides caused erosion in some areas . Damage in North Carolina reached $ 35 @,@ 000 ( 1962 USD ) . 
 The storm continued to intensify and peaked as a 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale on August 29 . Alma weakened back to a Category 1 later on August 29 , while passing offshore New England . The outer bands brought rainfall , rough seas , and strong winds , especially in Massachusetts . However , the precipitation was mostly beneficial , as New England was suffering from drought conditions . In Massachusetts , strong winds caused power and telephone outages , and felled numerous trees . Rough seas offshore Massachusetts destroyed over 100 boats . Losses in New England were less than $ 1 million . Alma curved eastward and weakened to a tropical storm in the northwestern Atlantic on September 30 . Several hours later , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while situated south of Nova Scotia . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak circulation , associated with a tropical wave , was first observed by Television Infrared Observation Satellite ( TIROS ) in the eastern Atlantic Ocean on August 14 . The system tracked westward and was observed by a research flight on August 18 . Four days later , the system entered the Caribbean Sea and continued to remain disorganized . The wave moved across eastern Cuba on August 24 , before emerging into the Straits of Florida on the following day . The system finally began to organize , and at 1200 UTC on August 26 , a tropical depression developed offshore southeastern Florida coast . Shortly thereafter , the depression made landfall near Boca Raton , Florida with winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) . It traveled barely inland and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Fort Pierce early on August 27 . The depression moved northeastward and strengthened due to its location beneath an anticyclone . Later on August 27 , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Alma while situated about 150 mi ( 240 km ) east of the Florida – Georgia border . 
 Alma steadily intensified as it paralleled the coastline of The Carolinas , becoming a hurricane on August 28 a few miles off the coast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . Around that time , Alma attained its minimum barometric pressure of 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . At 0600 UTC on August 29 , Alma strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane . Meanwhile , the storm also attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . While located about 80 miles ( 130 km ) east @-@ southeast of Nantucket , Massachusetts , the storm weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane . A high pressure system over Atlantic Canada caused Alma to turn east @-@ southeastward , while weakening to a tropical storm on August 30 . Later that day , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while situated about 180 miles ( 290 km ) south @-@ southeast of the southwestern tip of Nova Scotia . The high pressure system also caused the extratropical remnants to execute a cyclonic loop between August 31 and September 2 . Later that day , the extratropical remnants of Alma curved northeastward , before dissipating south of Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 In Puerto Rico , heavy rainfall associated with the precursor tropical wave produced flooding in the southeastern portion of the island . On August 25 , a day before Alma developed , the precursor system brought high seas to the Atlantic coasts of Florida and Georgia ; this resulted in small craft warnings from Daytona Beach , Florida to Savannah , Georgia . Additionally , the storm brought light precipitation to some areas of both states . As the storm traveled parallel to the East Coast of the United States , smalls crafts were also advised to remain in port between Edisto Island and the mouth of the Little River in South Carolina . Along the coast of that state , Alma brought gusty winds and heavy to excessive precipitation in some area , though no damage was reported . 
 Despite its proximity to land , the storm produced peak wind gusts of only 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) in Nags Head . Wind gusts downed a power pole in Hatteras , which caused an hour long power outage for one @-@ third of the town . There , the storm tide was 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal , which resulted in some erosion . The highest rainfall total from Alma in the United States was a report of 10 @.@ 38 in ( 264 mm ) in Cape Hatteras . Damage in the state amounted to $ 35 @,@ 000 . The eye of Alma passed about 70 miles ( 110 km ) south @-@ southeast of the Virginia Capes , and brought light precipitation , gusty winds , and rough surf to the eastern portion of the state . Rainfall peaked at only 0 @.@ 64 inches ( 16 mm ) in Norfolk , causing no flooding . Minor beach erosion occurred due to tides 1 @.@ 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 40 m ) above normal at Hampton Roads . No significant wind damage occurred , as the strongest sustained wind speed in the area was 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) in Cape Henry . 
 In Massachusetts , the outer bands of Alma brought 40 hours of nearly continuous rainfall , as well as gale force winds for several hours . Precipitation amounts reached up to 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , though it was mostly beneficial , as the region of New England was suffering from drought conditions . Slick roads resulted in several traffic accidents . Tides reached 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) above normal in the state of Massachusetts , which resulted in minor coastal flooding . However , Alma produced strong waves that destroyed over 100 boats . Additionally , many cabin cruisers and smaller vessels broke loose from their moorings and smashed against the rocks . The storm produced northerly wind gust up to 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) to the Boston area , in addition to winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) along coastal sections of the state . As a result , many trees fell , causing power and telephone outages , and smashing a house and parked car in Lynn . At the Civil Defense facility in Melrose , winds and rainfall short @-@ circuited the sirens , causing them to wail for more than 2 hours . At the Fair Grounds in <unk> , a large tent was blown down . One indirect death occurred when a woman was struck by a truck that skidded off the road in Haverhill . 
 Elsewhere in New England , the storm brought rainfall and 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) winds to coastal Rhode Island . Storm damage was reported as far north as Portsmouth , New Hampshire , while precipitation extended northward into Maine . Damage from the storm in New England was estimated at less than $ 1 million . 
 = Migrate ( song ) = 
 " Migrate " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . It was written and produced by Carey and Danja , with additional songwriting from The Clutch and the tracks featured artist , T @-@ Pain . An up @-@ tempo hip hop club track , it is about Carey 's movement on a girls ' night out , ranging from the club , the bar , the VIP lounge , the after party and the hotel . Critical response was mixed , with many critics disapproving of Carey 's decision to use Auto @-@ Tune on her vocals . " Migrate " peaked at number ninety @-@ two on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart , ninety @-@ five on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and sixty @-@ nine on the Pop 100 chart . Carey and T @-@ Pain performed the song on Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Migrate " was written and produced by Mariah Carey and Danja , with additional songwriting from The Clutch and the tracks featured artist , T @-@ Pain , for Carey 's eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . Carey produced the track for Maroon Entertainment and by Danja on behalf of Dan <unk> Productions . Copyright is held by Rye Songs which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / Dan <unk> Musik ( SESAC ) , administered by W.B.M. Music Corp. ( SESAC ) / Universal @-@ Polygram International Tunes / <unk> Joints ( SESAC ) / <unk> Music - Universal Songs - Z Songs ( BMI ) . The song was recorded by Brian Garten at Roc the Mic Studios in New York and at Honeysouth Studios and Circle House Studios , both in Miami . Additional recording was carried out by James " Scrappy " Stassen . It was mixed by Marcella " Ms. Lago " Araica at The Hit Factory in Miami ; she was assisted by Miguel Bustamante . Carey and MaryAnn Tatum performed backgrounds . T @-@ Pain appears courtesy of Jive Records . 
 " Migrate " is an up @-@ tempo hip hop club track . Lyrically , it is about the freedom and independence of a girls ' night out . It documents Carey 's whereabouts and where she migrates from and to : " from the car to the club to the bar to the VIP lounge to the after @-@ party to the hotel " and contains a reference to Patrón , a brand of Mexican tequila . As the song is about movement from one place to another , T @-@ Pain tells her to " bounce " in response . Carey displays a sense of " confident , social forwardness " on " Migrate " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy thought that Carey sounded her " most diva @-@ like " on the song , with the references to champagne being " compliments of the club " while the DJ plays her " jam " . Melodically , Carey delivers the track over a " repeating " chorus backed by a " descending echo @-@ synth " . It contains a reduced number of notes in order to further accentuate the hook . While Carey employs a " sassy " tone of voice , both her and T @-@ Pain 's vocals are processed with Auto @-@ Tune . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic thought that the use of Auto @-@ Tune on Carey 's vocals served a " dual purpose " , and explained that while it " camouflages her slightly diminishing range " it also made her sound " modern " . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times felt that T @-@ Pain sounded more interesting than Carey despite the use of Auto @-@ Tune . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe described " Migrate " as " a frivolous , funky , self @-@ referential jam " . The New York Sun Jayanthi Daniels thought the track sounded like something that R. Kelly would release , and continued to write that Carey " is no longer looking for a ' Dreamlover ' to come and rescue her , as she did in 1993 : In ' Migrate , ' she 's already rescued , and enjoying the after @-@ party " . He also said that the song is " much stronger " than E = MC ² ' s lead single , " Touch My Body " . Writing for The Wichita Eagle , Mary Moore 's review on the song was positive , calling it as " an irresistible hip @-@ hop groove that works " . The Guardian 's Alex Macpherson labelled the track as " sinister " . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters was critical of " Migrate " , and called it " grating " and " a tepid and uninvolving attempt at a club anthem " . He continued to write that the song is void of a proper melodic structure and expressed disapproval of its use of processed vocal filters . Sawdey concluded by writing that despite the added production from Danja and guest vocals by T @-@ Pain , " it serves as a painfully dull opener " . Similarly , J. Freedom du Lac felt that the Auto @-@ Tune " needlessly distorts [ Carey 's ] greatest gift " . Jim Farber of the Daily News felt that the use of processed vocals was more appropriate for " stars " who cannot sing . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey was announced as a musical guest on an episode of Saturday Night Live , her fourth appearance during her career . Hosted by Jonah Hill , Carey substituted for Janet Jackson , who was scheduled to perform but had caught the flu and was unable sing . Carey performed " Migrate " , accompanied on stage by T @-@ Pain , and " Touch My Body " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Impedance analogy = 
 The impedance analogy is a method of representing a mechanical system by an analogous electrical system . The advantage of doing this is that there is a large body of theory and analysis techniques concerning complex electrical systems , especially in the field of filters . By converting to an electrical representation , these tools in the electrical domain can be directly applied to a mechanical system without modification . A further advantage occurs in electromechanical systems : Converting the mechanical part of such a system into the electrical domain allows the entire system to be analysed as a unified whole . 
 The mathematical behaviour of the simulated electrical system is identical to the mathematical behaviour of the represented mechanical system . Each element in the electrical domain has a corresponding element in the mechanical domain with an analogous constitutive equation . Every law of circuit analysis , such as Kirchhoff 's laws , that apply in the electrical domain also applies to the mechanical impedance analogy . 
 The impedance analogy is one of the two main mechanical @-@ electrical analogies used for representing mechanical systems in the electrical domain , the other being the mobility analogy . The roles of voltage and current are reversed in these two methods , and the electrical representations produced are the dual circuits of each other . The impedance analogy preserves the analogy between electrical impedance and mechanical impedance whereas the mobility analogy does not . On the other hand , the mobility analogy preserves the topology of the mechanical system when transferred to the electrical domain whereas the impedance analogy does not . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The impedance analogy is widely used to model the behaviour of mechanical filters . These are filters that are intended for use in an electronic circuit , but work entirely by mechanical vibrational waves . Transducers are provided at the input and output of the filter to convert between the electrical and mechanical domains . 
 Another very common use is in the field of audio equipment , such as loudspeakers . Loudspeakers consist of a transducer and mechanical moving parts . Acoustic waves themselves are waves of mechanical motion : of air molecules or some other fluid medium . A very early application of this type was to make significant improvements to the abysmal audio performance of phonographs . In 1929 Edward Norton designed the mechanical parts of a phonograph to behave as a maximally flat filter , thus anticipating the electronic Butterworth filter . 
 = = Elements = = 
 Before an electrical analogy can be developed for a mechanical system , it must first be described as an abstract mechanical network . The mechanical system is broken down into a number of ideal elements each of which can then be paired with an electrical analogue . The symbols used for these mechanical elements on network diagrams are shown in the following sections on each individual element . 
 The mechanical analogies of lumped electrical elements are also lumped elements , that is , it is assumed that the mechanical component possessing the element is small enough that the time taken by mechanical waves to propagate from one end of the component to the other can be neglected . Analogies can also be developed for distributed elements such as transmission lines but the greatest benefits are with lumped element circuits . Mechanical analogies are required for the three passive electrical elements , namely , resistance , inductance and capacitance . What these analogies are is determined by what mechanical property is chosen to represent ' ' effort ' ' , the analogy of voltage , and the property chosen to represent ' ' flow ' ' , the analogy of current . In the impedance analogy the effort variable is force and the flow variable is velocity . 
 = = = Resistance = = = 
 The mechanical analogy of electrical resistance is the loss of energy of a moving system through such processes as friction . A mechanical component analogous to a resistor is a shock absorber and the property analogous to resistance is damping . A resistor is governed by the constitutive equation of Ohm 's law , 
 <formula> 
 The analogous equation in the mechanical domain is , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 R is resistance 
 v is voltage 
 i is current 
 Rm is mechanical resistance , or damping 
 F is force 
 u is velocity induced by the force . 
 Electrical resistance represents the real part of electrical impedance . Likewise , mechanical resistance is the real part of mechanical impedance . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The mechanical analogy of inductance in the impedance analogy is mass . A mechanical component analogous to an inductor is a large , rigid weight . An inductor is governed by the constitutive equation , 
 <formula> 
 The analogous equation in the mechanical domain is Newton 's second law of motion , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 L is inductance 
 t is time 
 M is mass 
 The impedance of an inductor is purely imaginary and is given by , 
 <formula> 
 The analogous mechanical impedance is given by , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 Z is electrical impedance 
 j is the imaginary unit 
 ω is angular frequency 
 <unk> is mechanical impedance . 
 = = = Capacitance = = = 
 The mechanical analogy of capacitance in the impedance analogy is compliance . It is more common in mechanics to discuss stiffness , the inverse of compliance . The analogy of stiffness in the electrical domain is the less commonly used elastance , the inverse of capacitance . A mechanical component analogous to a capacitor is a spring . A capacitor is governed by the constitutive equation , 
 <formula> 
 The analogous equation in the mechanical domain is a form of Hooke 's law , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 D 
 = 1 / C is elastance 
 C is capacitance 
 S is stiffness 
 The impedance of a capacitor is purely imaginary and is given by , 
 <formula> 
 The analogous mechanical impedance is given by , 
 <formula> 
 Alternatively , one can write , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 Cm = 
 1 / S is mechanical compliance 
 which is more directly analogous to the electrical expression when capacitance is used . 
 = = = Resonator = = = 
 A mechanical resonator consists of both a mass element and a compliance element . Mechanical resonators are analogous to electrical LC circuits consisting of inductance and capacitance . Real mechanical components unavoidably have both mass and compliance so it is a practical proposition to make resonators as a single component . In fact , it is more difficult to make a pure mass or pure compliance as a single component . A spring can be made with a certain compliance and mass minimised , or a mass can be made with compliance minimised , but neither can be eliminated altogether . Mechanical resonators are a key component of mechanical filters . 
 = = = Generators = = = 
 <unk> exist for the active electrical elements of the voltage source and the current source ( generators ) . The mechanical analogue in the impedance analogy of the constant voltage generator is the constant force generator . The mechanical analogue of the constant current generator is the constant velocity generator . 
 An example of a constant force generator is the constant @-@ force spring . This is analogous to a real voltage source , such as a battery , which remains near constant @-@ voltage with load provided that the load resistance is much higher than the battery internal resistance . An example of a practical constant velocity generator is a lightly loaded powerful machine , such as a motor , driving a belt . 
 = = = Transducers = = = 
 Electromechanical systems require transducers to convert between the electrical and mechanical domains . They are analogous to two @-@ port networks and like those can be described by a pair of simultaneous equations and four arbitrary parameters . There are numerous possible representations , but the form most applicable to the impedance analogy has the arbitrary parameters in units of impedance . In matrix form ( with the electrical side taken as port 1 ) this representation is , 
 <formula> 
 The element <formula> is the open circuit mechanical impedance , that is , the impedance presented by the mechanical side of the transducer when no current ( open circuit ) is entering the electrical side . The element <formula> , conversely , is the clamped electrical impedance , that is , the impedance presented to the electrical side when the mechanical side is clamped and prevented from moving ( velocity is zero ) . The remaining two elements , <formula> and <formula> , describe the transducer forward and reverse transfer functions respectively . They are both analogous to transfer impedances and are hybrid ratios of an electrical and mechanical quantity . 
 = = = Transformers = = = 
 The mechanical analogy of a transformer is a simple machine such as a pulley or a lever . The force applied to the load can be greater or less than the input force depending on whether the mechanical advantage of the machine is greater or less than unity respectively . Mechanical advantage is analogous to transformer turns ratio in the impedance analogy . A mechanical advantage greater than unity is analogous to a step @-@ up transformer and less than unity is analogous to a step @-@ down transformer . 
 = = Power and energy equations = = 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = Simple resonant circuit = = = 
 The figure shows a mechanical arrangement of a platform of mass M that is suspended above the substrate by a spring of stiffness S and a damper of resistance R. The impedance analogy equivalent circuit is shown to the right of this arrangement and consists of a series resonant circuit . This system has a resonant frequency , and may have a natural frequency of oscillation if not too heavily damped . 
 = = = Model of the human ear = = = 
 The circuit diagram shows an impedance analogy model of the human ear . The ear canal section is followed by a transformer representing the eardrum . The eardrum is the transducer between the acoustic waves in air in the ear canal and the mechanical vibrations in the bones of the middle ear . At the cochlea there is another change of medium from mechanical vibrations to the fluid filling the cochlea . This example thus demonstrates the power of electrical analogies in bringing together three domains ( acoustic , mechanical and fluid flow ) into a single unified whole . If the nerve impulses flowing to the brain had also been included in the model then the electrical domain would have made four domains encompassed in the model . 
 The cochlea portion of the circuit uses a finite element analysis of the continuous transmission line of the cochlear duct . An ideal representation of such a structure would use infinitesimal elements , and there would thus be an infinite number of them . In this model the cochlea is divided into 350 sections and each section is modelled using a small number of lumped elements . 
 = = Advantages and disadvantages = = 
 The principal advantage of the impedance analogy over its alternative , the mobility analogy , is that it maintains the analogy between electrical and mechanical impedance . That is , a mechanical impedance is represented as an electrical impedance and a mechanical resistance is represented as an electrical resistance in the electrical equivalent circuit . It is also natural to think of force as analogous to voltage ( generator voltages are often called electromotive force ) and velocity as analogous to current . It is this basic analogy that leads to the analogy between electrical and mechanical impedance . 
 The principal disadvantage of the impedance analogy is that it does not preserve the topology of the mechanical system . Elements that are in series in the mechanical system are in parallel in the electrical equivalent circuit and vice versa . 
 The impedance matrix representation of a transducer transforms force in the mechanical domain into current in the electrical domain . Likewise , velocity in the mechanical domain is transformed into voltage in the electrical domain . A two @-@ port device that transforms a voltage into an analogous quantity can be represented as a simple transformer . A device that transforms a voltage into an analogue of the dual property of voltage ( that is , current , whose analogue is velocity ) is represented as a gyrator . Since force is analogous to voltage , not current , this may seem like a disadvantage on the face of it . However , many practical transducers , especially at audio frequencies , work by electromagnetic induction and are governed by just such a relationship . For instance , the force on a current @-@ carrying conductor is given by , 
 <formula> 
 where , 
 B is magnetic flux density 
 l is length of the conductor 
 = = History = = 
 The impedance analogy is sometimes called the Maxwell analogy after James Clerk Maxwell ( 1831 – 1879 ) who used mechanical analogies to explain his ideas of electromagnetic fields . However , the term impedance was not coined until 1886 ( by Oliver Heaviside ) , the idea of complex impedance was introduced by Arthur E. Kennelly in 1893 , and the concept of impedance was not extended into the mechanical domain until 1920 by Kennelly and Arthur Gordon Webster . 
 Henri Poincaré in 1907 was the first to describe a transducer as a pair of linear algebraic equations relating electrical variables ( voltage and current ) to mechanical variables ( force and velocity ) . <unk> , in 1921 , was the first to express these equations in terms of mechanical impedance as well as electrical impedance . 
 = Tanks in the Australian Army = 
 The Australian Army has used tanks from after the First World War , through the interwar period , the Second World War , the Cold War and to the present day . Throughout this period the Army has primarily been a light infantry force , with its tanks mainly being used in the direct support role . The Australian Army 's tanks have seen combat during the Second World War and the Vietnam War , where they proved successful despite some of the designs employed being considered obsolete . The first Australian tanks were a small number of British light tanks which were operated mainly for training purposes during the 1920s and 1930s . 
 The outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 led to a significant expansion of Australia 's armoured force . From 1942 large numbers of American light and medium tanks were delivered to Australia , along with British Matilda IIs . In addition , a small number of Australian @-@ designed Sentinel tanks were delivered to the Army during 1942 and 1943 , but the type was never issued to combat units . Three armoured divisions capable of independent operations were formed during the Second World War , but none were deployed outside Australia . Many individual units later fought against the Japanese in the Pacific , although only in regimental strength . 
 With few modern tanks at the time of the Korean War , the Australian Army had to rely on British and US tank support . During the 1950s the Army standardised on the British Centurion tank , which saw action in Vietnam and remained in service until it was replaced with the German Leopard 1 in the mid @-@ 1970s . After an internal debate on whether the Army should continue to operate tanks as part of its force structure , the Australian Government replaced the Leopards with a small fleet of American M1A1 Abrams tanks in 2007 , which are now the Army 's only tanks . In addition to these types , the Army has operated small numbers of other tank designs for training and evaluation purposes . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The operational use of tanks during the latter part of the First World War established the validity of the tank concept . After the war , many nations recognised the importance of tanks , but only a few had the industrial resources to design and build them . During and after the First World War , Britain and France were the intellectual leaders in tank design , while other countries generally followed , adopting their designs . The Australian Army , which had initially had bad experiences operating with British tanks during the early stages of their employment during the war , had come to realise their utility after the battles of 1918 , and in the post @-@ war period sought to build its own armoured force . Initially , the Australian Army procured a number of British @-@ made Vickers tanks , and American M3 Grant and M3 Stuart tanks , but it later went on to build and design some of its own during the Second World War . Since then Australia 's armoured forces have fought in a number of battles during key conflicts , such as those in the Second World War and the Vietnam War . Primarily a light infantry force for most of its history , the Australian Army has used tanks mainly in the direct support role as opposed to engaging in sweeping manoeuvre against other tanks . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 After the First World War , many European countries attempted to <unk> their cavalry . In parallel , Australian cavalry also shifted to military armoured units . The Australian Army ( like the US , French , British and Russian armies ) tried various methods to integrate modern armour into their traditional horse cavalry formations , as part of a gradual process of mechanisation between 1920 and 1940 . Experiences during the final year of the war , such as the Battle of Hamel in July 1918 and later during the Battle of Amiens in August where the Australians had fought as part of an attack by 10 Allied divisions — including Canadian , British and French forces — supported by more than 500 British tanks , had shown the impact that tanks could have on the battlefield . As a result , the Australian Army sought to obtain tanks of its own ; however , due to post @-@ war economic measures this was slow in occurring . Four British Vickers Medium Mark II tanks were procured in 1927 to build its force , with the formation of the Australian Tank Corps gazetted on 15 December 1927 . The 1st Tank Section was subsequently was formed as a part @-@ time Militia unit in 1930 . The unit was based at Randwick , New South Wales , and training was initially undertaken at <unk> , which was part of the Liverpool Military Area , in Sydney . 
 Despite these initial developments the Depression in the early 1930s largely halted the development of armour in Australia , although a limited capability was maintained by the regular tank cadre which operated mainly in an instructional role . The 1st Tank Section was disbanded in November 1937 with the men and equipment transferred to the newly created 1st Light Tank Company based at Randwick . It was not the Australian Army 's only armoured unit as the Second World War approached . The 2nd Light Tank Company was formed as a Militia unit at Caulfield , Victoria in March 1939 and was also equipped with Vickers Medium Mark II medium tanks . The light tank companies were then equipped with the Light Tank Mark <unk> , 10 of which had been acquired to replace the ageing Mark IIs . In addition , the 1st Royal New South Wales Lancers , which had been serving as a Light Horse regiment , having converted from horses to armoured vehicles to become a light cavalry ( reconnaissance ) regiment and took on the role of a motorised machine @-@ gun regiment during the inter @-@ war years . It subsequently saw action in the Second World War as the 1st Armoured Regiment equipped with Matilda infantry tanks . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Armoured formations and campaigns = = = 
 The outbreak of war in 1939 led to a significant expansion of Australia 's armoured force . At the start of the war , due to the limitations of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) , which prevented the government from sending the Militia to fight outside Australian territory , it was decided to raise an all @-@ volunteer force to serve overseas . This force was known as the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , and many of the 1st Light Horse ( Machine Gun ) Regiment 's members volunteered and were assigned to the 2 / 2nd Machine Gun Battalion , they took part in the fighting in the Mediterranean theatre . With the Australian Army only possessing a total of fourteen tanks – 10 Mark <unk> and four Mark IIs – orders for modern types were quickly placed in Britain and the United States . Thirteen M3 light tanks arrived in September 1941 , while another 400 more were soon delivered . However , 140 British Matilda tanks would not begin to arrive until July 1942 . Meanwhile , as steps were made to form the 1st Armoured Division in 1941 the armoured vehicles of the 1st and 2nd Light Tank Companies had been withdrawn to equip the newly formed AFV School at Puckapunyal , Victoria . The 1st Light Tank Company was subsequently expanded to form the 3rd Armoured Regiment , while the 2nd Light Tank Company was disbanded . 
 At the same time each of the four divisions in the 2nd AIF was authorised a cavalry reconnaissance regiment equipped with light tanks and scout carriers . While all four divisions were authorised a divisional cavalry regiment , only three regiments were eventually formed as it was believed that the 8th Division did not need armoured support in Malaya due to concerns about operating tanks in the jungle . The cavalry regiments of the 2nd AIF divisions operating in Mediterranean theatre against Italian and German forces were initially equipped with the Universal Carrier and unarmoured trucks before being progressively mechanised using British Army equipment , while carriers were also operated by the infantry battalions . A light armoured tracked vehicle they were armed with Bren light machine guns and Boys anti @-@ tank rifles and were widely used by British Commonwealth forces during the World War II . Meanwhile , the Australian Tank Corps was superseded following the formation of the Australian Armoured Corps in July 1941 . In October 1941 two independent light tank squadrons had been formed for service in Malaya ; however , neither was deployed due to a lack of vehicles to equip them . 
 In North Africa in 1941 , Australian troops were part of the force which captured Tobruk on 22 January as part of Operation Compass , yielding over 25 @,@ 000 prisoners along with 236 field and medium guns , 23 medium tanks and more than 200 other vehicles . During the capture of the town Australians from the 6th Division Cavalry Regiment had used a number of captured Italian M11 tanks which had been pressed into service due to a lack of their own tanks , painting kangaroos on the side so they would not be attacked by their own side . The regiment 's use of tanks in this fighting was significant , representing the first time that Australian forces had operated tanks in action . The 6th Division Cavalry Regiment later saw service in Syria against the Vichy French . Meanwhile , the 7th Division Cavalry Regiment had been sent to Cyprus in May 1941 , before relieving the 6th Division Cavalry Regiment in July . The regiment subsequently fought a number of actions using a variety of armoured personnel carriers , light tanks , and 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank guns before returning to Australia in March 1942 . The 9th Division Cavalry Regiment later also served in Syria and was the first Australian armoured unit to be equipped with modern vehicles , receiving British Crusader Mark II medium tanks and M3 Stuart light tanks . A number of captured French Renault R35 tanks were also used . The regiment returned to Australia in early 1943 . Between mid @-@ 1942 and early 1944 the Divisional Cavalry Regiments were converted to commando units and subsequently fought in the Pacific against the Japanese as dismounted infantry . 
 The Australian 1st Armoured Division was raised in 1941 as part of the 2nd AIF . While the division was originally to be deployed to North Africa in late 1941 , it was retained in Australia following the outbreak of the Pacific War . Universal Carriers were issued to the armoured regiments in 1941 and early 1942 for training purposes and to provide the Army with a minimal armoured capability as an emergency measure until the arrival of tanks ordered from the United States . The 1st Armoured Division 's armoured regiments subsequently began re @-@ equipping with M3 Grant medium tanks and M3 Stuart light tanks in April and May 1942 . Following this , the division was concentrated in northern New South Wales where it completed its training with a series of large exercises around Narrabri . The 2 / 6th Armoured Regiment was the first unit of the division to see action , deploying to Port Moresby and Milne Bay in New Guinea in September . In December two of its squadrons were subsequently shipped to Buna on the north coast of Papua to help break the deadlock in the Battle of Buna – Gona and although the lightly armoured M3 Stuart tanks proved to be unsuited to jungle warfare and suffered heavy casualties , the regiment played an important role in the eventual Australian victory at Buna during fighting between December 1942 and January 1943 . Meanwhile , in January 1943 the remainder of the division was moved to the area between Perth and Geraldton , Western Australia , where it formed part of III Corps , which was tasked to counter the perceived threat of a Japanese invasion of Western Australia . The 1st Armoured Division formed a key element of Australia 's mainland defences , but after that threat passed it was disbanded in Western Australia in September 1943 . 
 The 1st Light Horse ( Machine Gun ) Regiment ( Royal New South Wales Lancers ) was renamed the 1st Machine Gun Regiment in December 1941 . In March 1942 , the regiment was again renamed , being converted to the 1st Motor Regiment . This change was short lived however , and it was changed again in May to the 1st Tank Battalion , becoming part of the Australian 3rd Army Tank Brigade , equipped with Matilda tanks . In 1943 the unit became part of the 4th Armoured Brigade and was designated as an AIF unit , thus allowing it to be deployed to any theatre of the conflict , and it deployed to New Guinea in August 1943 and fought against the Japanese in the Battles of Sattelberg and Lakona . The unit was then withdrawn to Australia in mid @-@ 1944 . On 1 June 1944 , the unit was renamed the 1st Armoured Regiment , and in May 1945 , it took part in the amphibious landings at Balikpapan in support of the 7th Division , being involved in one of the final Australian campaigns of the war in Borneo . 
 The Australian 2nd Armoured Division was established on 21 February 1942 by redesignating and reorganising the 2nd Motor Division ( which was previously the 2nd Cavalry Division ) . As an armoured division , it consisted of one armoured brigade of three armoured regiments , and one motor brigade consisting of three motor regiments , supported by an armoured car regiment . It was equipped with M3 Grant medium tanks and M3 Stuart light tanks . The 2nd Armoured Division was disbanded in Queensland on 19 February 1943 . Similarly , the Australian 3rd Armoured Division was established on 15 November 1942 by redesignating the 1st Motor Division ( which was previously the 1st Cavalry Division ) . As an armoured division the 3rd Armoured was equipped with M3 Grant medium tanks and M3 Stuart light tanks . The division 's 3rd Motor Brigade was gradually disbanded between March to August 1943 and the 3rd Armoured Division was disbanded in Queensland on 19 October 1943 as a result of manpower shortages in the Australian Army . 
 The Australian 4th Armoured Brigade was formed in January 1943 to provide armoured support for Australian Army units operating in the South West Pacific Area . The brigade was never intended to serve as a single formation , rather its role was to provide a pool of armoured units from which units and sub @-@ units could be provided to augment infantry forces . The brigade was also responsible for developing doctrine and specialised armoured vehicles for armoured warfare in tropical terrain . In keeping with the brigade 's task of providing armoured units to other formations , its armoured regiments were organised into self @-@ supporting regimental groups and the brigade did not possess the reconnaissance , infantry and other supporting elements which were common in World War II @-@ era armoured brigades . Elements of the brigade saw action in the Huon Peninsula campaign of 1943 – 44 and attached to the Australian 6th Division during the Aitape – Wewak campaign from October 1944 until the end of the war . 
 Australian tanks also played a role in the Borneo Campaign of 1945 . In a series of amphibious assaults between 1 May and 21 July , the Australian I Corps , under Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead , attacked Japanese forces occupying the island . The Matilda tanks of C Squadron , 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment were attached to the 26th Brigade Group during the campaign which opened with Oboe 1 , with a landing on the small island of Tarakan , off the north east coast on 1 May 1945 , with the fighting continuing into June with the tanks taking part in the advance along the Anzac and Bourke Highways , helping to secure the airfield and the oilfields . This was followed by Oboe 6 , in which the remainder of the 2 / 9th Armoured Regiment was attached to the 9th Division , on 10 June 1945 with simultaneous assaults on the island of Labuan and the coast of Brunei , in the north west of Borneo . B Squadron took part in the landing at Labuan supporting the 24th Brigade 's advance , assisting in the capture of the airfield , and various positions along the MacArthur Road . At the same time , A Squadron landed on the Borneo peninsula , securing the town before being used in a defensive role due to the impenetrable terrain further inland , which was only passable on foot . 
 A week later , the Australians followed up with attacks on Japanese positions around Weston on the north @-@ eastern part of Brunei Bay . The 1st Armoured Regiment and Armoured Squadron ( Special Equipment ) operating Matilda II tanks were attached to the Australian 7th Division and took part in the Battle of Balikpapan which was the concluding stage of the Operation Oboe . The landings took place on 1 July 1945 and had been preceded by heavy bombing and shelling by Australian and US air and naval forces . Landing with the infantry , the tanks — including Matilda tank <unk> , newly modified Matilda Frog flamethrower tanks , and a <unk> bridge @-@ layer — mainly operated in small detachments in close support of the troops , even though the terrain offered the opportunity for more mobile tactics to be employed . Although the Australians were ultimately successful , casualties among the infantry were heavy and during this time the regiment was involved in some hard fighting , with the Japanese able to make effective use of strong natural defences in conjunction with minefields and anti @-@ tank ditches to compensate for their lack of anti @-@ tank guns . With the fighting coming to a conclusion however , tank operations ceased on 24 July . 
 Overall , while the armoured units that were involved in operations overseas acquitted themselves well , despite significant investment in the development of tank forces , they ultimately played a limited role in the Australian war effort . Three armoured divisions capable of independent operations were formed during World War II , but none were deployed outside Australia . Many individual units later fought against the Japanese in the Pacific , although only in regimental strength . Despite initial delays in receiving adequate equipment a considerable force had subsequently been developed , although it was not until late 1942 that the first units saw action in support of the infantry in New Guinea . Yet the need to quickly deploy units following the rapid Japanese advance and the nature of the terrain in the South West Pacific Area in which the bulk of Australian forces would fight meant they were unable to be deployed as a formation . Meanwhile , as the threat of invasion passed the need for large armoured formations had lessened , and the divisions had been broken up between mid @-@ 1943 and 1944 with only one operational brigade remaining by the end of the war . However , despite using tanks that were obsolete by the standards of the war in Europe the contribution of the Australian Armoured Corps to the success of later campaigns was significant , lessening casualties among the infantry and demonstrating the role of tanks in jungle operations . The Matilda proved the most successful tank used in jungle fighting by the Australian Army , achieving immediate success following its deployment to New Guinea in 1943 due to its heavy armour , manoeuvrability in close terrain , and the effectiveness of its 2 @-@ pounder against Japanese bunkers . 
 = = = Australian tank program and development = = = 
 Following Japan 's entry into the war in late 1941 , the Australian government initially feared they might invade the Australian mainland , and with the United Kingdom unable to spare tank production for Australia , a program to produce an indigenous tank was initiated . The Australian tank program designed and developed a cruiser tank called the Sentinel tank , which was the first tank to be built with a hull cast as a single piece , and the only tank to be produced in quantity in Australia . The few Sentinels that were built never saw action as Australia 's armoured divisions had been equipped by that time with British and American tanks . Due to a lack of experience in tank design a mission was sent to the US to examine the M3 design and a British officer with many years tank design experience was provided by the United Kingdom . The design used existing parts where available from the M3 , simplified where necessary to match the machining capacity present in Australia . The hull was cast as a single piece , as was the turret ; a technique not used on the hull of any other tanks of the era . 
 By the beginning of 1943 the Australian Armoured Corps was at its peak with 1 @,@ 460 tanks on strength , the majority of them Matildas and light and medium M3s . Meanwhile , 65 production <unk> vehicles and one AC3 had been completed by June 1943 . That year , the 3rd Army Tank Battalion was equipped with a squadron of <unk> tanks , which were modified to resemble German tanks and used in the filming of the movie , The Rats of Tobruk . This appears to have been the only time a squadron of Sentinels was used for any purpose . Nevertheless , the completed Sentinel tanks were used for evaluation purposes only and were not issued to operational armoured units , as the Australian Cruiser tank program was terminated in July 1943 . By this time the Japanese threat had lessened , and US and British @-@ made M3 Grant and Matilda tanks were being supplied to Australia from the Middle East , and it was felt that Australia 's manufacturing resources would be better spent on railway locomotive production . 
 Experience during operations later led to the development of specialised armoured equipment by Australian industry for use in jungle operations in the South West Pacific Area . A range of modifications were subsequently developed for the Matilda , including the fitting of wire mesh screens or metal tracking over the engine and air louvres to protect it against magnetic mines , an armoured shield on top of the hull to protect the turret ring , a microphone and headset attached to the rear to act as a telephone for infantry co @-@ operation , waterproofing equipment for deep wading , a tank dozer , a flamethrowing tank called the <unk> Frog , and one capable of firing a salvo of naval mortar bombs , known as the Matilda Hedgehog . Trials were also undertaken to fit air conditioning to the Matildas to improve the endurance of crews in tropical conditions . Limited modifications were also undertaken on the M3 Grant medium tanks , including the fitting of a small number of dozer variants and trials to waterproof the vehicles for wading . 
 = = Post @-@ 1945 = = 
 Following the end of the Second World War the Australian Army was demobilised and the 1st Armoured Regiment was reconstituted as a reserve formation in the Citizen Military Forces ( CMF ) on 1 April 1948 , adopting the designation of the 1st Armoured Regiment ( Royal New South Wales Lancers ) , in recognition of its previous history . During this time the regiment continued to operate Matilda tanks and was based at Lancer Barracks in Parramatta , in New South Wales . However , in 1949 the regiment was renamed the 1st Royal New South Wales Lancers and its battle honours and history were perpetuated by this unit , to reallocate the former name to the tank regiment that was to be established in the new Australian Regular Army . 
 The 1st Armoured Regiment was formed as a tank unit in the new Australian Regular Army on 7 July 1949 . Initially , the new regiment was equipped with Churchill tanks , although this was only a temporary measure until Centurion tanks could be acquired . However , due to the perceived unsuitability of the Churchill and the late arrival of the new platform , the regiment was not deployed as part of Australia 's commitment to the Korean War , although a number of officers served on exchange with British and US formations and the unit provided machine @-@ gunners and signallers to Australian infantry battalions as reinforcements . Meanwhile , the infantry had to rely on US and British tanks for armoured support . The first Centurions finally began arriving in June 1952 , with the regiment receiving 39 tanks . By this time though British and Canadian armoured units were operating in sufficient strength in Korea and there was no scope for the deployment of Australian forces . 
 A number of other CMF units operated M3 Grant medium tanks in the immediate post – war period , including the 8th / 13th Victorian Mounted Rifles ( 8th / 13th <unk> ) and the 4th / 19th Prince of Wales 's Light Horse ( 4th / 19th <unk> ) , before converting to Centurions . Meanwhile , the last of the Matildas were withdrawn from service with the CMF in 1955 . Later , in 1956 the 1st Royal New South Wales Lancers merged with the 15th Northern River Lancers to form the 1st / 15th Royal New South Wales Lancers ( 1st / 15th <unk> ) , which was also equipped with a small number of Centurion tanks . The CMF armoured units were rationalised in 1957 and consequently the change to the pentropic structure in the 1960s mostly resulted in a change in role only , with the 4th / 19th <unk> changing from an armoured unit to a reconnaissance regiment . However , the two CMF armoured brigade headquarters were disbanded . Following additional orders , a total of 127 Centurions had been acquired by 1961 , including 117 tanks , four bridgelayers and six Armoured Recovery Vehicles . 
 = = Vietnam War = = 
 In May 1965 the 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment had been deployed on active service to South Vietnam , with armoured mobility support initially provided by 1 Troop , A Squadron , 4th / 19th Prince of Wales Light Horse equipped with the new <unk> Armoured Personnel Carrier . The Australian government subsequently increased its commitment to a two @-@ battalion brigade , known as the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) , in March 1966 . Based at Nui Dat in Phuoc Tuy Province the force included an APC squadron but no tanks . However , in October 1967 it was announced that 1 ATF would be expanded to three infantry battalions , while additional supporting arms , including a tank squadron , would also be added to the force . As such in February 1968 , C Squadron , 1st Armoured Regiment was sent to Vietnam , with a total strength of 20 Centurion tanks . However , two of the four tank troops were initially held back until the Centurions had proved themselves capable of operating in the conditions . The tank squadron reached full strength on 5 September 1968 . 
 Over the next four years all three of the regiment 's operational squadrons eventually served in Vietnam , providing invaluable close support to the infantry , particularly during the clearance of Viet Cong bunker systems . Although their value in Vietnam was originally questioned by some , they proved a powerful weapon in both offence and defence , and were responsible for limiting infantry casualties . The Centurions were able to move through the countryside more easily than expected and although they were vulnerable to anti @-@ tank weapons and mines , their firepower and shock action had a decisive effect on the battlefield . The tanks played a significant role in the Battle of Coral – Balmoral in May and June 1968 . 
 In February 1969 , C Squadron was relieved by B Squadron . On 6 – 7 June , B Squadron was involved in a fierce action during the Battle of Binh Ba , a village 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) north of Nui Dat . One Australian was killed and 10 wounded , while Viet Cong and North Vietnamese losses included at least 107 killed , six wounded and eight captured . By late @-@ 1970 Australia was beginning to reduce its commitment to the war and the size of 1ATF was again reduced from three infantry battalions to two . The tanks , however , continued operations and were involved in heavy fighting at Long Khanh on 6 – 7 June 1971 , as well as numerous smaller actions . The last elements of the regiment were subsequently withdrawn from Vietnam in September 1971 . A total of 58 Centurions had served in Vietnam ; 42 had suffered battle damage , of which six were beyond repair , while two crewmen had been killed in action . 
 = = Post Cold War to the present = = 
 There were changes for the 1st Armoured Regiment , and for the Australian Army , with the abolition of National Service after the end of Australian involvement in Vietnam depleting its strength to the point where training was severely restricted until it was reinforced during 1974 . Meanwhile , the reserve 1st / 15th <unk> and 8th / 13th <unk> had both continued to operate as small number of Centurions in the early 1970s ; however , they were both later re @-@ roled and equipped with M113s , while the later was eventually disbanded . The last CMF armoured regiment gave up its tanks in 1971 , leaving the regular 1st Armoured Regiment as the only tank unit in the Australian Army . Meanwhile , the Centurions were mechanically worn @-@ out , and although additional vehicles had been acquired from New Zealand and British Army stocks , by 1972 the fleet was in need of replacement . 
 During 1973 , B Squadron , 1st Armoured Regiment — designated the Medium Tank Trials Unit ( <unk> ) — evaluated the German Leopard 1 against the American M60A1 Patton as a replacement for the obsolete Centurions . The Leopard was judged the superior tank , and 90 gun tanks , eight Leopard 1 Armoured Recovery Vehicles Medium and five Leopard 1 bridge layer tanks were ordered . The Australian tanks were designated the Leopard <unk> , and were based on the Leopard 1A3 which had been built for the German Army . The main difference between the Australian and German tanks was the inclusion of a SABCA fire control system , equipment to allow the tank to better operate in the tropics , additional storage boxes on the sides of the tank as well as improved trunnion bearings and combustion cleaners . These tanks were delivered to Australia in batches between 1976 and 1978 . During the Leopard 's service very little in the way of upgrades were undertaken , and by the 1990s they had become obsolete . 
 After an internal debate on whether the Army should continue to operate tanks as part of its force structure , in 2004 the Australian Government decided to replace the Leopards with a small fleet of American M1A1 Abrams tanks to provide close support for infantry when operating in jungle or urban areas . After 31 years of service the Leopards were subsequently replaced by 59 M1A1 Abrams AIM , which began entering service in 2007 . Seven M88A2 Hercules Armoured Recovery Vehicles ( <unk> ) were also acquired . The Leopards never saw operational service , although during the 1999 East Timor crisis the regiment was placed on standby to deploy in the event the conflict escalated , while it was not deployed during Australia 's involvement in the 2003 invasion of Iraq . By this time the Leopards were considered unsuitable for deployment in a high threat environment . 
 Today , the 1st Armoured Regiment is based in Darwin as part of the mechanised 1st Brigade , and is the only armoured unit in the Australian Army to be equipped with main battle tanks , operating the M1A1 Abrams AIM . A small number of <unk> are also operated by the School of Armour at Puckapunyal for training purposes . However , as part of the Plan Beersheba reorganisation the tanks currently operated by the 1st Armoured Regiment will be split across each of the three armoured cavalry regiments assigned to the Army 's multirole combat brigades located in Brisbane , Darwin and Townsville . It has been reported that this plan may require the acquisition of an additional 10 – 12 M1A1 Abrams and six M88A2 Hercules <unk> in order to allow the formation of three tank squadrons . Obstacle breaching and <unk> variants may also be acquired at a later date . 
 = = List of tanks used by the Australian Army = = 
 The following tanks have been used by the Australian Army : 
 Vickers Medium Mark II 
 Vickers Light Tank Mark VIA 
 M3 Stuart 
 M3 Lee – Grant and Lee variants , some used post @-@ war to 1955 , others converted to <unk> self @-@ propelled artillery 
 Matilda II 
 Australian Cruiser Tank Mk1 – Sentinel 
 Sherman Tank – three for trials purposes only 
 Churchill 
 Centurion 
 Leopard 1 Main Battle Tank 
 M1A1 Abrams AIM Main Battle Tank 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Fight for This Love = 
 " Fight for This Love " is the debut single by English singer Cheryl , recorded for her debut studio album , 3 Words ( 2009 ) . It was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland as the lead single on 30 October 2009 by Fascination Records and in 2010 in some European countries as the album 's second single through Universal Music . It was written and produced by Wayne Wilkins and Steve Kipner with an additional writing from Andre Merrit . The up @-@ tempo pop , dance @-@ pop and R & B song revolves around a lyrical content of not giving up on the partner . 
 " Fight for This Love " divided music critics ; some praised Cole 's vocals and the powerful production , noting that it had the potential to be a hit with the clubs while other critics criticised the sluggish verses and weak vocals . The accompanying music video was directed by Ray Kay . It was generally well received by media and critics who drew comparisons to the works of Janet Jackson and the video for " Put the Needle On It " ( 2002 ) by Dannii Minogue . 
 Following her first performance of the song on The X Factor it topped charts in Ireland and the United Kingdom . In May 2010 it was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry for shipments topping 600 @,@ 000 units . In December 2012 " Fight for This Love " became the 125th single to reach the million mark in UK Chart history , and the third to reach the feat in 2012 , along with Carly Rae Jepsen 's " Call Me Maybe " and Gotye 's " Somebody That I Used to Know " . " Fight for This Love " also achieved success in Europe by topping charts in Norway , Hungary and Denmark . " Fight for This Love " received a BRIT Award nomination in the Best British Single category . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Fight for This Love " is Cole 's first solo single outside of girl band Girls Aloud following 20 top @-@ ten singles with the group . 
 The song is an uptempo pop , dance @-@ pop and R & B song with a synthy production , written in the key of G major with a time signature in common time and a tempo of 123 beats per minute . The vocal range spans from E3 to D5 . The basic chord progression of the song is Am , G , D , G , Bm , and Em . In the middle eight it features a breakdown where the song 's usual instruments are replaced with hand claps whilst some of the media reported that Cole 's voice had a Whitney Houston @-@ like tone to it . NME magazine reported that some people noticed similarities between the song and a 2007 song " Lil Star " by American singer Kelis , though Cole 's representatives denied any similarities . Meanwhile , other media outlets reported that " Fight for This Love " has a similar chord progression to " All My Life " by K @-@ Ci & JoJo . The song was later covered by British boyband The Wanted , who released it as the B @-@ side to their number @-@ one single , " All Time Low " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception towards " Fight for This Love " has been mixed . Ruth Harrison from ' Female First ' was impressed by the song after initially being worried that Cole would not be able to cope going solo . She said " Whilst it does sound just a little bit Girls Aloud @-@ y , we still love it , and can see it being a huge hit on the club circuit up and down the country ... we think this is going to send her well on her way to global superstardom . " Popjustice also liked the song saying " ' Fight For This Love ' is very definitely not just a Girls Aloud single with one person singing it ... its one of those songs you can have on repeat for an hour and a half without getting bored . One thing that hits you is - well , is this really what Cheryl sounds like ? Vocally it 's a big surprise ... As it turns out , she sounds really great - strong , confident , direct . Like a proper pop singer . It 's a sleek , powerful production ... " 
 Meanwhile , David Balls of Digital Spy was only moderately impressed and argued that " Cole 's vocals aren 't terribly strong " but that she had " understated charm and lots of ' X Factor ' exposure " . Of the song itself he said " Cole has taken the subtle approach on her first solo single . ' Fight For This Love ' is a midtempo pop @-@ R & B track with subdued , synthy production and an infectious hook that gnaws into the consciousness - albeit after a few listens . " Whilst Fraser McAlpine partially agreed " In Cheryl 's favour , she 's obviously made an effort to record something that sounds different from the stuff she 'd be making with Girls Aloud , and as a result this solo effort is an interesting pop / dance / R & B hybrid , which actually suits her rather well , style @-@ wise . " However he too had issues with the voice " It 's just a shame it 's not stronger , " pointing out some weaknesses , " the best thing about the song is the bridge , which is sassy but vulnerable at the same time , and underpinned by a sweet melody , but the rest of the song can 't match up : the verses are sluggish ... " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Fight for This Love " debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart . It sold 134 @,@ 000 copies in one day beating the previous record held by Cole 's X Factor protégé Alexandra Burke with the song " Bad Boys " which sold 187 @,@ 100 over a seven @-@ day span . The final first week sales totalled 292 @,@ 000 copies beating the 213 @,@ 000 that Girls Aloud 's debut single , " Sound of the Underground " sold back in 2002 . The single remained at number one for two weeks and consequently went on to become the best selling single of the year up to that point . By the end of 2009 it was declared the fourth best @-@ selling single of the year , and 29th best selling of the decade ( 2000s ) . On 14 May 2010 , just over six months after release , the single was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and earned Cole a nomination for Best British Single at the 2010 BRIT Awards , which she had previously won at the 2009 BRIT Awards with Girls Aloud for their single , " The Promise " . However , she lost out to " Beat Again " by former X Factor runners @-@ up JLS in what was deemed a " controversial win , " as the announcer claimed Cole was the front @-@ runner . 
 " Fight for This Love " entered the Irish Singles Chart at number thirteen and the following week on the chart dated 22 October 2010 the song rose to number one , giving Cole her first chart topper in Ireland since " Sound of the Underground " with Girls Aloud . In Denmark the song peaked at number one on 12 March 2010 as well as topping the charts in Hungary and Norway . The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) certified the single platinum in Denmark and gold in Switzerland . As of December 2012 , " Fight for This Love " has sold over 1 million copies in the United Kingdom , making it the best selling single of Cheryl 's career both solo and with Girls Aloud . 
 Chart performance overall is however nowadays of limited value . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Ray Kay and was filmed in early September 2009 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video starts off with Cole in a simple white vest , and biker gloves , accompanied with an entourage of female dancers dressed in black . Various scenes throughout the video include Cole in silk leopard print bottoms , an all black outfit with silver sparks coming out from both sides of her top , standing in what would appear to be the nightclub toilet where Cole was arrested and charged for assaulting the middle aged female black toilet attendant . [ 4 ] 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jennifer <unk> of the <unk> praised the video saying " the songstress [ is ] looking sensational ... make @-@ up done to perfection ... giving her that edge . Her performance comes across as effortless . ... The HD quality video comes across as pure artwork . " Meanwhile , a reporter for The Daily Mail noted that ideas had been borrowed from other artists including one scene where Cole has her hands in the air with a grid in the background which is similar to a scene from Dannii Minogue 's 2002 single " Put the Needle On It " , a <unk> which had previously been seen on Lady Gaga and the transparent top that Cole wore beneath the military jacket has previously been worn by Coco , member of the former X Factor contestants : Kandy Rain . Grazia considered Cole 's military outfit " second rate Janet Jackson . " 
 Anna Pickard of The Guardian took a different opinion choosing to focus on how Cole appeared to be " making up for the lack of having Girls Aloud around her by pretending to be all of them at once " and anguish of her own marriage issues . She noted that Cole 's various outfits appear to distract people from the lyrics of the song which " seem to be , a thinly veiled reflection on her own marriage compounded by the sad mooning face she keeps pulling . [ It is not surprising when one is ] singing a solo song about one 's troubled ( though reconciled and apparently happy ) marriage . Although sometimes she looks cross instead . And quite a lot of the time , she looks like she 's her own evil sexy twin . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = UK and Ireland = = = 
 The single premiered on Chris Moyles 's breakfast show on 7 September on BBC Radio 1 . On Sunday 18 October 2009 the song was released for digital download in the UK . Cole took to the stage of The X Factor Live Results Show later that evening to perform the song for the first time . She adorned a military @-@ themed outfit by Welsh fashion designer Julien MacDonald . It consisted of a sheer bodysuit , a red military jacket with black epaulettes as well as other details , black harem trousers and Alexander Wang boots . The outfit itself was subject to media attention , with some reporting that online debates had drawn comparisons to the outfit worn by 1992 video game antagonist M. Bison from the Street Fighter series . Media also considered Cole 's outfit and performance inspired by Janet Jackson . Media speculated that the performance was mimed , something that Cole denied though she admitted to having some pre @-@ recorded vocals to help the live performance . The show , which also featured the first UK performance by Whitney Houston in six years , drew a record audience of 14 @.@ 8 million , making it the most watched episode in the show 's history at that time . 
 She also taped a performance for UK teen channel T4 , which aired 15 November 2009 . Rufus Hound would later go on to perform a parody of Cole 's X Factor <unk> on BBC 's Let 's Dance for Sport Relief . Cole appeared at ' Children in Need Rocks the Royal Albert Hall ' on 12 November 2009 ] to perform " Fight for This Love " in a white version of her ' X Factor ' performance outfit and later returning to perform Snow Patrol 's single " Set the Fire to the Third Bar " with Gary Lightbody . The performances were later televised as a part of the Children in Need 2009 telethon on 20 November . UK paper , The Daily Telegraph wrote that Cole " nailed the harmony vocal with a fragile empathy that should silence those who dare to suggest she can 't sing . " In December ITV1 aired a one @-@ off television special titled Cheryl Cole 's Night In , presented by Holly Willoughby . She performed " Fight for This Love " with her hair in a tight bun and a ninja @-@ inspired outfit , another variation on the military theme which had become synonymous with the song . The song also incorporated a dance break where Cole included a dance routine with samurai swords . 
 Then on 16 February Cole appeared at the 2010 BRIT Awards for a performance which began with Cole being " catapulted " on stage with her dancers . Cole and her dancers initially wore gold @-@ trimmed white trench coats before revealing a hooded black bodysuit . The performance included a bridge sampled from song " Be " which features vocals from former X Factor contestant <unk> <unk> . <unk> initially refused to allow Cole to use the sample and was disappointed that they had not asked her to sing it despite Polydor Records stating they would not use the sample , reports later surfaced surrounding an alleged legal battle . Cole also received media attention for performing without her wedding ring , following reports that husband Ashley had cheated , as well as for allegedly miming the song . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 In January 2010 Cole flew to Germany to perform " Fight for This Love " at German Award Ceremony , DLD <unk> at the Haus der Kunst in Munich . In March European promotion for the single and album resumed with an appearance and performance on Danish X Factor which consequently led to the song topping the Danish Singles Chart . Other performances in Europe included Vivement Dimanche in France ; Norway 's Skavlan , and Dutch The X Factor . In Germany the song was used as the title theme to the fifth series of Germany 's Next Topmodel . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " Fight for This Love " was recorded at ' SubZero Studios ' in Santa Monica , California whilst " Didn 't I " was recorded at <unk> Studio , Studio City ; The Red Room , Hollywood and <unk> Studios Burbank all in California . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Airplay premiere and release history = = 
 = The Beginning and the End ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' The Beginning and the End " is the first episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on September 19 , 1997 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " The Beginning and the End " featured a guest appearance by Doug Hutchison as the Polaroid Man . 
 In this episode , Millennium Group profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) must track down the man who has kidnapped his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) . During his hunt , Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) reveals that the Group is much more secretive and mysterious than Black had ever known . 
 " The Beginning and the End " marks the first episode produced with Morgan and Wong as co @-@ executive producers ; their tenure in charge of the series would last the entirety of the second season . Guest star Hutchison was a frequent collaborator with the writers , having worked together in several other series . The episode was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 15 million households in its original broadcast , and has received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins in media res from the ending of the preceding episode , " Paper Dove " , showing Millennium Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) returning by plane to Seattle with his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) and daughter Jordan ( Brittany Tiplady ) . As Black takes Jordan to their car , Catherine is drugged and kidnapped by a strange man ( Doug Hutchison ) . The abductor — the Polaroid Man — hides Catherine in his car and escapes with her to the mountains overlooking the city . 
 Black 's fellow Group members arrive to help , though he had not yet contacted any of them . They set up roadblocks throughout the city but are unsuccessful in finding Catherine . Black returns home , where his colleague Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) tells him about trying to conceive a son with his wife . Watts had once been assigned to a child @-@ murder case in which the dismembered infant 's body had been found in a cooler . He believed that God would reward him with his longed @-@ for son if he could find the killer — years later , he still only has his three daughters , which has caused him to realize it is impossible to sacrifice one thing to gain another . Watts then has a Group member install software on Black 's computer , allowing him access to sensitive documents — Black comments that he thought he already had full access before . Watts also explains that the Group 's interest in Black is the reason for the Polaroid Man 's actions . Elsewhere , the Polaroid Man ties up Catherine in a dark room . 
 Black struggles to find anything useful while investigating the abduction . However , he begins to experience seemingly @-@ psychic visions which lead him to believe she is being held in their former home . The police raid the address but find it empty ; Black finds a polaroid of another house inside . He is able to track down the address of this house , but goes alone this time . Reaching it , he finds Catherine in the basement , bound to a rafter . He goes to untie her but is blinded by a camera flash . He struggles with the Polaroid Man , which we see through a series of photographs taken by the man 's camera . Black is able to wrest the Polaroid Man 's knife away from him and stab him to death . 
 Returning home , Catherine packs a suitcase for Black , telling him that she cannot have him in their home for the time being , believing that he sacrificed a part of himself in killing her attacker . She hopes that time apart might help him recover what he is missing inside ; he takes the case and drives off . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Beginning and the End " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . Wright had previously directed five episodes of the first season — " Dead Letters " , " The Wild and the Innocent " , " The Thin White Line " , " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " and " Paper Dove " — and would go on to direct a further twenty episodes over the series ' run . Wright would also go on to direct " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . The episode was the fourth to have been written by Morgan and Wong , after " Dead Letters " , " 522666 " and " The Thin White Line " in the first season . The duo would go on to pen a further eleven episodes over the course of the second season , having taken the roles of co @-@ executive producers for the season . 
 Doug Hutchison 's character , credited here as " Polaroid Man " , had previously appeared in the first season finale " Paper Dove " . In that episode the character was credited as " The Figure " , and been portrayed by Paul Raskin . The character had been a presence in the series since " Pilot " , but had often merely been alluded to without being seen . Hutchison had worked with Morgan and Wong several times before ; they had first met during production of " Squeeze " , an episode of Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , and again on Morgan and Wong 's short @-@ lived series Space : Above and Beyond . 
 Discussing plans for the season , Morgan noted that " the Millennium Group is a much deeper organization " than seen in the first season , adding that " they 're considering [ Frank Black ] for a candidate for the group ( and ) trying to show him that at the millennium there 's going to be an event - either fire and brimstone or harmonic convergence " . Wong spoke about how the character of Catherine Black , saying " there 's a different relationship between Frank and his family this season because of the separation ... I think that will not only bring some kind of heartfelt drama but humor into it " . The episode makes use of the Talking Heads song " Life During Wartime " , taken from their 1979 album Fear of Music . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Beginning and the End " was first broadcast on the Fox network on September 19 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 3 during its original broadcast , meaning that 7 @.@ 3 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 7 @.@ 15 million households , and left the episode the fifty @-@ third most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Writing for The Buffalo News , Alan Pergament rated the episode three stars out of five , describing it as " moody " but " muddled and confusing " . Pergament noted that " the suspense of the premiere actually is enhanced by all the summer speculation about the future role of Gallagher " , and felt that Morgan and Wong were " trying to bring " Millennium " into " X @-@ File " territory " . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a A − , finding that it allows the series to " [ turn ] a corner , from a serial killer show with stained @-@ glass window overtones , to a show that revels in those overtones , a show that plays in age @-@ old symbols with a decided taste of the weird " . VanDerWerff also felt that a monologue delivered by O 'Quinn was an example of Morgan and Wong 's best writing , and that the actor 's delivery was the key to keeping the scene serious in tone . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , noting that it " starts Season 2 off in high style " . Gibron found that the episode " has a nice sense of internal adventure to it , giving us a chance to learn more about our main players while setting the groundwork for some certified surreality to come " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " The Beginning and the End " two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Shearman felt that the episode had " an overwritten quality " , citing the Polaroid Man 's dialogue as the main example of this ; he also believed that the development of Catherine Black as a character seemed poorly executed , with the character lacking enough depth to " retain the audience 's sympathies " . 
 = Gregor Strasser = 
 Gregor Strasser ( 31 May 1892 – 30 June 1934 ) was a prominent German Nazi official and politician . 
 Born in 1892 in Bavaria , Strasser served in World War I in an artillery regiment , rising to the rank of first lieutenant . He joined the Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) in 1920 and quickly became an influential and important figure . He took part in the abortive putsch in Munich in 1923 and was imprisoned , but released early on for political reasons . 
 Strasser joined a revived NSDAP in 1925 and once again established himself as a powerful and dominant member , hugely increasing the party 's membership and reputation in northern Germany . Personal and political conflicts with Adolf Hitler led to his death in 1934 during the Night of the Long Knives . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Gregor Strasser was born on 31 May 1892 into the family of a Catholic judicial officer who lived in the Upper Bavarian market town of <unk> . He grew up alongside his younger brother Otto Strasser who was considered the more intellectual of the two . He attended the local Gymnasium and after his final examinations , served an apprenticeship as a pharmacist in the Lower Bavarian village of <unk> from 1910 until 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 When war broke out in Europe in 1914 , Strasser suspended his studies at Ludwig <unk> University of Munich to enlist as a volunteer in the German Imperial Army . He served in the 1st Bavarian Field Artillery Regiment , rising to the rank of First Lieutenant and winning the Iron Cross of both classes for bravery . In 1918 , he resumed his studies at Friedrich @-@ Alexander @-@ University , Erlangen @-@ Nuremberg . He passed his state examination in 1919 and in 1920 started work as a pharmacist in Landshut . 
 = = = Paramilitary career = = = 
 In 1919 , Strasser and his brother joined the right @-@ wing Freikorps led by Franz Ritter von Epp . The aim of the group was to suppress Communism in Bavaria . He established and commanded the <unk> <unk> ( " Storm Battalion Lower Bavaria " ) , with the young Heinrich Himmler employed as his adjutant . By March 1920 , Strasser 's Freikorps was ready to participate in the failed Kapp Putsch , whereas his brother Otto had turned to the left of the political spectrum and helped combat this right @-@ wing coup d 'état . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Nazi Party activities = = = 
 By 1920 , Strasser , and his paramilitary group , had joined forces with Adolf Hitler 's Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) , another far @-@ right political party seated in Munich . During the autumn of 1922 , Strasser officially became a member of the Nazi Party and the SA . Strasser 's leadership qualities were soon recognized and he was appointed as regional head of the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Detachment " ; SA ) in Lower Bavaria . In November 1923 , he took an active part in the unsuccessful Beer Hall Putsch , an attempt by Hitler and his party to seize control of Munich . He was tried for high treason and in April 1924 was sentenced to five years ' imprisonment at Landsberg Prison . 
 After a few weeks on 4 May 1924 , Strasser was released because he had been elected a member of the Bavarian Landtag for the Nazi @-@ associated " Völkischer Block " . 
 Because Strasser led up to 2 @,@ 000 men in Landshut and was overworked , he began looking for an assistant . Heinrich Himmler , who obtained the job , was tasked with expanding the organization in Lower Bavaria . 
 On 7 December 1924 , Strasser won a seat in the Reichstag of the Weimar Republic for the <unk> <unk> ( " German @-@ Völkisch Freedom Party " ; DVF ) . In both elections , Strasser could not run for the NSDAP , which was banned after the abortive coup . Strasser remained a member of the Reichstag until December 1932 . 
 After the refoundation of the NSDAP by Adolf Hitler on 26 February 1925 , Strasser became the first Gauleiter of Lower Bavaria and Upper Palatinate . After the partition of this Gau , he was Gauleiter of Lower Bavaria from October 1928 until 1929 . From June 1926 until April 1930 , he was the NSDAP 's national leader for propaganda . 
 = = = Role in NSDAP 's national organisation = = = 
 In January 1925 , Strasser became leader of the NSDAP 's national organisation . He reorganised the party 's structure , both in its regional formation and its vertical management hierarchy . The party became a strictly centralist organization with the party 's own control machinery and high capability for propaganda . Through much of 1925 Strasser took full advantage of his liberties as a member of the Reichstag , traveling extensively throughout northern and western Germany appointing Gauleiters , setting up party branches and delivering numerous public speeches . 
 After 1925 , Strasser 's organizational skills helped the NSDAP make a big step from a marginal south German splinter party to a nationwide mass party , appealing to the lower classes and their tendency towards nationalism . Its membership increased from about 27 @,@ 000 in 1925 to more than 800 @,@ 000 by 1931 . Strasser established the NSDAP in northern and western Germany as a strong political association which quickly attained a higher membership than Hitler 's southern party section . The party 's own foreign organization was formed on Strasser 's initiative . Together with his brother Otto , Strasser founded the Berlin Kampf @-@ Verlag ( " Combat Publishing " ) in March 1926 , which went on to publish , among others , the left leaning weekly newspaper the Berliner <unk> ( " Berlin Workers Newspaper " ) . 
 The Strasser brothers ruled the Berlin party organization unchallenged and developed an independent ideological profile from the south German party wing around Hitler . They advocated an anti @-@ capitalist social revolutionary course for the NSDAP which at the same time was also strongly antisemitic and anti @-@ communist . 
 = = = Conflicts with Hitler = = = 
 In the mid 1920s , support for the Nazi Party was dropping as hyperinflation ended and the economy improved . Strasser believed the party could regain their popularity if the movement was led in a less dictatorial way . He put forward his ideas to Hitler at the Bamberg Conference in 1926 . There was , however , to be no debate ; Hitler just spoke for an hour , repudiating Strasser 's proposals and was then cheered by his supporters . 
 The Great Depression greatly impacted Germany and by 1930 there was a dramatic increase in unemployment . During this time , the Strasser brothers started publishing a new daily newspaper in Berlin , the Nationaler Sozialist . Like their other publications , it conveyed the brothers ' own brand of Nazism , including nationalism , anti @-@ capitalism , social reform , and anti @-@ <unk> . Goebbels complained vehemently about the rival Strasser newspapers to Hitler , and admitted that their success was causing his own Berlin newspapers to be " pushed to the wall " . In late April 1930 , Hitler publicly and firmly announced his opposition to Gregor Strasser and appointed Goebbels to replace him as Reich leader of NSDAP propaganda . One of Goebbels ' first acts was to ban the evening edition of the Nationaler Sozialist . 
 The ideological and personal rivalry with Hitler worsened dramatically when Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher offered Strasser the offices of Vice @-@ Chancellor of Germany and prime minister of Prussia in 1932 . Schleicher hoped to <unk> the Nazi Party with Strasser 's help and to pull the left wing of the Nazi Party over to his " national conservative " side , so as to prevent a revolution or takeover by Hitler . Hitler was furious and demanded that Strasser refuse Schleicher 's offer . 
 In December 1932 , Hitler was offered the job of vice @-@ chancellor by President Paul von Hindenburg , but he refused to take it . While many in his inner circle , like Goebbels , saw his resistance as heroic , Strasser was frustrated and believed Hitler was wrong to hold out for the Chancellorship , declaring : 
 He should realize he 's being consistently refused this position by everyone ! I 'm not going to wait for the Führer to be appointed Chancellor , because by then our movement would have collapsed . I therefore resign from the party and am now going to recuperate in the mountains . 
 Hitler seized upon his resignation to remove all party officials whose first loyalty was to Strasser . All new or continuing NSDAP officials were then required to swear an oath of loyalty to the Führer ; this prevented any other influential Nazis from leading a break @-@ away faction . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = The Black Front = = = 
 Strasser continued acting as a publicist , as he did before his fall from power . From June 1931 until its ban in February 1933 , he published the weekly newspaper Die Schwarze Front ( " The Black Front " ) , named after Otto 's Black Front political organisation , which had little impact on contemporaries because of its small circulation . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Having achieved national power in January 1933 , Hitler and the NSDAP began eliminating all forms of opposition in Germany . A " death list " of people regarded as dangerous to the survival of the regime was composed . While the list mostly contained the names of known anti @-@ Nazis and rivals , Hitler also used the opportunity to settle old scores . So as not to arouse suspicion , Hitler awarded Strasser the Golden Party Badge and rumors emerged that he would be named Interior Minister . 
 In what became known as the Night of the Long Knives , selected men of the Schutzstaffel ( " Protection Squadron " ; SS ) arrested and eventually killed at least 85 people from 30 June to 2 July 1934 . Among these was Strasser , who had been included in the purge on Hitler 's order . He was shot once in his main artery from behind in his cell , but did not die immediately . On the orders of SS general Reinhard Heydrich , Strasser was left to bleed to death which took almost an hour . His brother Otto , who had left the NSDAP in July 1930 , managed to avoid the Nazi purge and survived World War II . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " Gregor Strasser ( 1892 – 1934 ) " . Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 20 May 2015 . 
 " Hitler 's Bodyguard : Night of the Long Knives " . World Media Rights . Retrieved 20 May 2015 . 
 " The Dark Charisma of Adolf Hitler " . BBC . Retrieved 20 May 2015 . 
 = Kenneth Bainbridge = 
 Kenneth Tompkins Bainbridge ( July 27 , 1904 – July 14 , 1996 ) was an American physicist at Harvard University who did work on cyclotron research . His precise measurements of mass differences between nuclear isotopes allowed him to confirm Albert Einstein 's mass @-@ energy equivalence concept . He was the Director of the Manhattan Project 's Trinity nuclear test , which took place July 16 , 1945 . Bainbridge described the Trinity explosion as a " foul and awesome display " . He remarked to J. Robert Oppenheimer immediately after the test , " Now we are all sons of bitches . " This marked the beginning of his dedication to ending the testing of nuclear weapons and to efforts to maintain civilian control of future developments in that field . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kenneth Tompkins Bainbridge was born in Cooperstown , New York , the second of three sons of William Warin Bainbridge and Mary Grinnell Tompkins . He was educated at Horace Mann School in New York . While at high school he developed an interest in ham radio which inspired him to enter Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) in 1921 to study electrical engineering . In five years he earned both bachelor of science ( S.B. ) and master of science ( S.M. ) degrees . During the summer breaks he worked at General Electric 's laboratories in Lynn , Massachusetts and Schenectady , New York . While there he obtained three patents related to photoelectric tubes . 
 Normally this would have been a promising start to a career at General Electric , but it made Bainbridge aware of how interested he was in physics . Upon graduating from MIT in 1926 , he enrolled at Princeton University , where Karl T. Compton , a consultant to General Electric , was on the faculty . In 1929 , he was awarded a Ph.D. in his new field , writing his thesis on " A search for element 87 by analysis of positive rays " under the supervision of Henry DeWolf Smyth . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Bainbridge enjoyed a series of prestigious fellowships after graduation . He was awarded a National Research Council , and then a Bartol Research Foundation fellowship . At the time the Franklin Institute 's Bartol Research Foundation was located on the Swarthmore College campus in Pennsylvania , and was directed by W. F. G. Swann , an English physicist with an interest in nuclear physics . Bainbridge married Margaret ( " Peg " ) Pitkin , a member of the Swarthmore teaching faculty , in September 1931 . They had a son , Martin Keeler , and two daughters , Joan and Margaret Tomkins . 
 In 1932 , Bainbridge developed a mass spectrometer with a resolving power of 600 and a relative precision of one part in 10 @,@ 000 . He used this instrument to verify Albert Einstein 's mass @-@ energy equivalence , E = mc2 . Francis William Aston wrote that : 
 By establishing accurate comparisons of the masses of the light particles concerned in nuclear disintegrations , particularly that of 7Li , discovered by Cockcroft and Walton , he achieved a noteworthy triumph in the experimental proof of the fundamental theory of Einstein of the equivalence of mass and energy . 
 In 1933 , Bainbridge was awarded a prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship , which he used to travel to England and work at Ernest Rutherford 's Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge University . While there he continued his work developing the mass spectrograph , and became friends with the British physicist John Cockcroft . 
 When his Guggenheim fellowship expired in September 1934 , he returned to the United States , where he accepted an associate professorship at Harvard University . He started by building a new mass spectrograph that he had designed with at the Cavendish Laboratory . Working with J. Curry Street , he commenced work on a cyclotron . They had a design for a 37 @-@ inch ( 940 mm ) cyclotron provided by Ernest Lawrence , but decided to build a 42 @-@ inch ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) cyclotron instead . 
 Bainbridge was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1937 . His interest in mass spectroscopy led naturally to an interest in the relative abundance of isotopes . The discovery of nuclear fission in uranium @-@ 235 led to an interest in separating this isotope . He proposed using a <unk> pump to produce the vacuum necessary for this work , and enlisted George B. Kistiakowsky and E. Bright Wilson to help . There was little interest in their work because research was being carried out elsewhere . In 1943 , their cyclotron was requisitioned by Edwin McMillan for use by the U. S. Army . It was packed up and carted off to Los Alamos , New Mexico . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In September 1940 , with World War II raging in Europe , the British Tizard Mission brought a number of new technologies to the United States , including a cavity magnetron , a high @-@ powered device that generates microwaves using the interaction of a stream of electrons with a magnetic field . This device , which promised to revolutionize radar , demolished any thoughts the Americans had entertained about their technological leadership . Alfred Lee Loomis of the National Defense Research Committee established the Radiation Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop this radar technology . In October , Bainbridge became one of the first scientists to be recruited for the Radiation Laboratory by Ernest Lawrence . The scientists divided up the work between them ; Bainbridge drew pulse modulators . Working with the Navy , he helped develop high @-@ powered radars for warships . 
 In May 1943 , Bainbridge joined Robert Oppenheimer 's Project Y at Los Alamos . He initially led E @-@ 2 , the instrumentation group , which developed X @-@ ray instrumentation for examining explosions . In March 1944 , he became head of a new group , E @-@ 9 , which was charged with conducting the first nuclear test . In Oppenheimer 's sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory in August 1944 , the E @-@ 9 Group became X @-@ 2 . 
 On July 16 , 1945 , Bainbridge and his colleagues conducted the Trinity nuclear test . " My personal nightmare , " he later wrote , " was knowing that if the bomb didn 't go off or <unk> , I , as head of the test , would have to go to the tower first and seek to find out what had gone wrong . " To his relief , the explosion of the first atomic bomb went off without such drama , in what he later described as " a foul and awesome display " . He turned to Oppenheimer and said , " Now we are all sons of bitches . " 
 Bainbridge was relieved that the Trinity test had been a success , relating in a 1975 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists article , " I had a feeling of exhilaration that the ' gadget ' had gone off properly followed by one of deep relief . I wouldn 't have to go to the tower to see what had gone wrong . " 
 For his work on the Manhattan Project , Bainbridge received two letters of commendation from the project 's director , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr .. He also received a Presidential Certificate of Merit for his work at the MIT Radiation Laboratory . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 Bainbridge returned to Harvard after the war , and initiated the construction of a 96 @-@ inch <unk> @-@ cyclotron , which has since been dismantled . From 1950 to 1954 , he chaired the physics department at Harvard . During those years , he drew the ire of Senator Joseph McCarthy for his aggressive defense of his colleagues in academia . As chairman , he was responsible for the renovation of the old Jefferson Physical Laboratory , and he established the Morris Loeb Lectures in Physics . He also devoted a good deal of his time to improving the laboratory facilities for graduate students . 
 Throughout the 1950s , Bainbridge remained an outspoken proponent of civilian control of nuclear power and the abandonment of nuclear testing . In 1950 he was one of twelve prominent scientists who petitioned President Harry S. Truman to declare that the United States would never be the first to use the hydrogen bomb . Bainbridge retired from Harvard in 1975 . 
 Bainbridge 's wife Margaret died suddenly in January 1967 from a blood clot in a broken wrist . He married Helen Brinkley King , an editor at William Morrow in New York City , in October 1969 . She died in February 1989 . A scholarship was established at Sarah Lawrence College in her memory . He died at his home in Lexington , Massachusetts , on July 14 , 1996 . He was survived by his daughters from his first marriage , Joan Bainbridge Safford and Margaret Bainbridge Robinson . He was buried in the Abel 's Hill Cemetery on Martha 's Vineyard , in a plot with his first wife Margaret and his son Martin . His papers are in the Harvard University Archives . 
 = Ahmad Hasan Dani = 
 Professor Ahmad Hasan Dani ( Urdu : <unk> حسن <unk> ) <unk> , SI , HI ( 20 June 1920 – 26 January 2009 ) , was a Pakistani intellectual , archaeologist , historian , and linguist . He was among the foremost authorities on Central Asian and South Asian archaeology and history . He introduced archaeology as a discipline in higher education in Pakistan and Bangladesh . Throughout his career , Dani held various academic positions and international fellowships , apart from conducting archaeological excavations and research . He is particularly known for archaeological work on pre @-@ Indus Civilization and Gandhara sites in Northern Pakistan . He was also the recipient of various civil awards in Pakistan and abroad . As a prolific linguist , he was able to speak 35 local and international languages and dialects . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Dani , an ethnic Kashmiri , was born on 20 June 1920 in <unk> , Central Provinces , India . He graduated in 1944 , with an MA degree , to become the first Muslim graduate of Banaras Hindu University . He scored highest marks in the exams which earned him a Gold Medal . This also qualified him for a teaching fellowship from the same university . Although he was provided with the grant , he was not allowed to teach due to his religious beliefs . He stayed there for six months . In 1945 , he started working as a trainee in archaeology under the guidance of Mortimer Wheeler . At this time , he participated in excavations at Taxila and Mohenjo @-@ daro . He was subsequently posted at the Department of Archaeology of British India at Taj Mahal , Agra . He received his PhD from the Institute of Archaeology , University College London . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 After the Partition of India , Dani migrated to East Pakistan . There , in 1947 – 49 he worked as Assistant Superintendent of the Department of Archaeology . At this time , he renovated the <unk> Museum at Rajshahi . In 1949 , he married Safiya Sultana . Together , they had three sons ( Anis , <unk> and Junaid ) and a daughter ( <unk> ) . In 1950 , Dani was promoted to the position of Superintendent @-@ in @-@ Charge of Archaeology . In the same year , he became General Secretary of the Asiatic Society of Pakistan in Dhaka . Later on , in 1955 , he took the position of President of the National Committee for Museums in Pakistan . For a period of twelve years ( 1950 – 62 ) , Dani remained Associate Professor of History at the University of Dhaka while at the same time working as curator at the Dhaka Museum . During this period , he carried out archaeological research on the Muslim history of Bengal . 
 Dani moved to the University of Peshawar in 1962 as Professor of Archaeology and remained there until 1971 . During this time , he led the resetting and renovation works for the Lahore and Peshawar Museums . He became Chairman of the Research Society at the University of Peshawar in 1970 . In 1971 , he moved to the University of Islamabad to become Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences . He left the post in 1975 to concentrate on research as Professor of History . Meanwhile , the university was renamed Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam University in 1976 . He continued to work in various positions until his retirement in 1980 when he was made Emeritus Professor . During this period , he also served as President of the Archaeological and Historical Association of Pakistan ( 1979 ) and Co @-@ Director of the Pak @-@ German Team for Ethnology Research in Northern Areas of Pakistan ( 1980 ) . 
 He received an Honorary Doctorate from Tajikistan University , ( Dushanbe ) in 1993 . During the same year , Dani established the Islamabad Museum . In 1992 , he was appointed Advisor on archaeology to the Ministry of Culture of Pakistan , serving from 1992 – 96 . Between 1994 – 98 , he remained Chairman of the National Fund for Cultural Heritage in Islamabad . In 1997 , Dani became Honorary Director at the Taxila Institute of Asian Civilizations . He held the position until the time of his death . 
 On 22 January 2009 , he was admitted to the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences in Islamabad with heart , kidney and diabetes problems . He died on 26 January 2009 at the age of 88 years . He is buried in the H @-@ 11 Graveyard of Islamabad . 
 = = Visiting , research and honorary positions = = 
 During his Associate Professorship at Dhaka University , Dani worked as a Research Fellow at the School of Oriental and African Studies , University of London ( 1958 – 59 ) . Later , in 1969 he became Asian Fellow at the Australian National University , Canberra . In 1974 , he went to the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia as a visiting scholar . In 1977 , he was Visiting Professor at the University of Wisconsin – Madison . Over the span of his career , Dani was awarded honorary fellowships by the Royal Asiatic Society of Bangladesh ( 1969 ) , the German Archaeological Institute ( 1981 ) , the Istituto Italiano per l <unk> e l <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1986 ) , and the Royal Asiatic Society ( 1991 ) . 
 In 1991 , Dani was made an Honorary Citizen of Bukhara and an Honorary Member of the <unk> Society in Tajikistan . He was made an Honorary Life Patron of the Al @-@ Shifa Trust , Rawalpindi , in 1993 . 
 = = Research contributions = = 
 Dani remained engaged in excavation works on the pre @-@ Indus Civilization site of Rehman <unk> in Northern Pakistan . He also made a number of discoveries of Gandhara sites in the Peshawar and Swat Valleys , and worked on Indo @-@ Greek sites in Dir . From 1980 , he was involved in research focusing on the documentation of the rock carvings and inscriptions on ancient remains from the Neolithic age up to the late Buddhist period in the high mountain region of Northern Pakistan along with Karl <unk> , Volker <unk> and ( much later , since 1989 ) Harald Hauptmann of the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences , University of Heidelberg . In 1990 – 91 , he led the UNESCO international scientific teams for the Desert Route Expedition of the Silk Road in China and the Steppe Route Expedition of the Silk Road in the Soviet Union . 
 From his extensive fieldwork and research experience , Dani refuted any influence of South Indian culture on the Indus Valley Civilization . Using a geographic perspective of the socio @-@ political systems and cultural distribution of the Indus Basin and surrounding hinterland , he observed that the Indo @-@ Gangetic Plain did not play any significant role in the development of Indus Valley culture . Nor was there any invasion from the seaside during the Bronze Age , although the coastline facilitated maritime trade . The major influence , according to Dani , came from Central Asia in the west . He asserted that the hilly western borderland that appears as a boundary to the external eye is actually a network of hill plateaus where the local people have always moved freely . He therefore argued that the cultural history of Pakistan is more closely related to Central Asia through Buddhist , Persian and later Sufi influences . He strove to revive this relationship by promoting organisations such as the Pak @-@ Central Asia Friendship Association . 
 Dani maintained that despite the Arabian Sea allowing the <unk> to establish trade relations with Mesopotamia and Ancient Egypt , the majority of historical movements occurred between Central and South Asia . The geographic location as a link between the two regions has characterised the relationship " between the people of Pakistan and those of Central Asia in the field of culture , language , literature , food , dress , furniture and folklore " . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 The first Muslim student of Banaras Hindu University , Dani scored highest in the graduation exams and received the J. K. Gold Medal from that university in 1944 . Among other national awards , he received Sitara @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz in 1969 , <unk> @-@ e @-@ Kamal in 1992 and Hilal @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz in 2000 from the Government of Pakistan . In 2004 , he was awarded the title of ' Distinguished National Professor ' by the Higher Education Commission in recognition of his contributions and achievements . 
 Internationally , his contributions to archaeology , linguistics and ancient history were commended through various prestigious honours and awards such as : 
 1998 Légion d 'honneur , President of the French Republic 
 1997 Aristotle Silver Medal , UNESCO 
 1996 Order of the Merit , Government of Germany 
 1994 Knight Commander , Government of Italy 
 1990 Palmes <unk> , Government of France 
 1986 Gold Medal , Asiatic Society of Bangladesh 
 = = Publications = = 
 Dani had more than 30 published books and numerous journal articles to his credit . He spoke 35 languages and dialects , and was fluent in Bengali , French , Hindi , Kashmiri , Marathi , Pashto , Persian , Punjabi , Sanskrit , Saraiki , Sindhi , Tamil , Turkish , English and Urdu languages . He also published various texts in most of these languages . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 History of Pakistan : Pakistan through ages . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 2007 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ 2020 @-@ 0 
 Historic City of Taxila . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 2001 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 History of Northern Areas of Pakistan ( Up to 2000 AD ) . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 2001 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ 1231 @-@ 1 
 Romance of the Khyber Pass . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 1997 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 New Light on Central Asia . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 1996 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Central Asia Today . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 1996 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Human Records on Karakorum Highway . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications . 1995 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Peshawar : Historic City of the Frontier . Sang @-@ e @-@ Meel Publications , ( 2nd Revised edition ) . 1995 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 35 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Tribes and Peoples of Northern Punjab ( 500 BC to Present times ) . <unk> Islamabad Publications , 1993 . 
 A Short History of Pakistan , Book One : Pre @-@ Muslim Period . University of Karachi . ( 3 editions , 1967 , 1984 , 1992 ) . ISBN 969 @-@ 404 @-@ 008 @-@ 6 
 History of Northern Areas of Pakistan ( Historical studies ) . National Institute of Historical and Cultural Research . 1989 . ISBN 978 @-@ 969 @-@ 415 @-@ 016 @-@ 1 
 Perspectives of Pakistan . National Institute of Pakistan Studies , Quaid @-@ e @-@ Azam University . 1989 . ASIN <unk> 
 The historic city of Taxila . Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies . 1986 . ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 500 @-@ 3 
 <unk> : The City of Nanga Parvat ( <unk> ) . 1983 . ASIN <unk> 
 Thatta : Islamic architecture . Institute of Islamic History , Culture & Civilization . 1982 . ASIN <unk> 
 Indus Civilization : New Perspectives . Taxila institute of Asian Civilizations , Quaid @-@ i @-@ Azam University , Islamabad . 1981 
 <unk> 's Indica : A record of the cultural history of South Asia about A.D. 1030 . University of Islamabad Press , Islamabad . 1973 
 Indian palaeography . Clarendon P. 1963 . ASIN <unk> 
 Dacca : A record of its changing fortunes . S. S. Dani ( Publisher ) . 1962 . ASIN <unk> 
 Prehistory and <unk> of Eastern India : With a Detailed Account of the Neolithic Cultures . K. L. Mukhopadhyay . 1960 
 Bibliography of the Muslim Inscriptions of Bengal . 1957 
 = = = Co @-@ authored works = = = 
 With J @-@ P. <unk> ( eds . ) , History of Humanity , Volume III , From the Third Millennium to the Seventh Century BC . New York : Routledge / Paris : UNESCO . 1996 . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 With V. M. Masson ( eds . ) , History of Civilizations of Central Asia , UNESCO , Paris . 1992 – ( 6 volumes ) ISBN 92 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 ( <unk> ) 
 = Arena ( countermeasure ) = 
 Arena ( Russian : <unk> ) is an active protection system ( APS ) developed at Russia 's Kolomna @-@ based Engineering Design Bureau for the purpose of protecting armoured fighting vehicles from destruction by light anti @-@ tank weapons , anti @-@ tank guided missiles ( ATGM ) , and missiles with top attack warheads . It uses a Doppler radar to detect incoming warheads . Upon detection , a defensive rocket is fired that detonates near the inbound threat , destroying it before it hits the vehicle . 
 Arena is the successor to Drozd , a Soviet active protection system from the late 1970s , which was installed on several T @-@ 55s during the Soviet war in Afghanistan . The system improved the vehicle 's survivability rate , increasing it by up to 80 % . Drozd was followed by Shtora in the late 1980s , which used an electro @-@ magnetic jammer to confuse inbound enemy anti @-@ tank missiles and rockets . In late 1994 the Russian Army deployed a large number of armoured fighting vehicles to Chechnya , where they were ambushed and suffered heavy casualties . The effectiveness of Chechen rocket @-@ propelled grenades against Russian combat vehicles prompted the Kolomenskoye machine @-@ building design bureau to devise the Arena active protection system in the early and mid @-@ 1990s . An export variant , Arena @-@ E , was also developed . The system has been tested on the T @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 , demonstrated at Omsk in 1997 , and was considered for use on the South Korean K2 Black Panther main battle tank . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Soviet Union developed the first active protection system between 1977 and 1982 , named Drozd ( Russian : <unk> ) . This system was designed as an alternative to passive or reactive armour , to defend against enemy anti @-@ tank weapons . The system 's development was stimulated in large part by the introduction of new high explosive anti @-@ tank warheads . Drozd was designed to destroy these warheads before they hit the armour of the vehicle being attacked . It was composed of three main parts : two launcher arrays placed on either side of the turret and an auxiliary power unit located to the rear of the turret . The arrays were controlled by two millimeter @-@ wave radar antennae . The system used a 19 kilograms ( 42 lb ) , 107 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 2 in ) cone @-@ shaped fragmentation warhead . Drozd could protect a tank between the elevations of − 6 and 20 degrees along the vertical plane , and between 40 and 60 degrees along the horizontal plane . Although reported to offer an 80 % increase in survival rate during its testing in Afghanistan , the radar was unable to adequately detect threats and the firing of its rockets caused unacceptably high levels of collateral damage . About 250 Drozd systems were manufactured , all of which were installed on T @-@ 55s belonging to the Soviet Union 's naval infantry . 
 In the late 1980s , the Soviet Army began development of the Shtora @-@ 1 electro @-@ optical jammer . It was first mounted on a T @-@ <unk> in 1989 , and later showcased on a T @-@ <unk> ( renamed T @-@ <unk> and later T @-@ 90 ) . Shtora @-@ 1 is designed to jam incoming anti @-@ tank missiles using a one @-@ kilowatt infrared radiator . In 1995 , it was fitted on a Ukrainian T @-@ 84 . The Shtora @-@ 1 system consists of an infra @-@ red radiator interface station , composed of the jammer , modulator and control panel , a number of forward @-@ firing grenade discharges capable of producing a smoke screen , a laser @-@ warning system and a general control panel . Shtora offers 360 degree all @-@ around protection , between the elevations of − 5 and 25 degrees . The system is activated when the laser warning system alerts the tank commander , who responds by pressing a button on his control panel which automatically orients the turret towards the threat . This triggers the grenade launch , creating a smoke screen to reduce the ability of the missile to lock @-@ on the vehicle . The jammers are designed to jam the infra @-@ red seekers on the inbound missiles . According to the manufacturers , Shtora decreases the chances of a tank being hit by an anti @-@ tank missile , such as the Dragon , by a factor of 4 – 5 : 1 . 
 The large number of Russia 's casualties during the First Chechen War prompted Russia to consider the development of a new active protection system . During the Battle of Grozny , for example , the Russian Army lost between 200 and 250 armoured fighting vehicles to Chechen rebels . Vehicles which were knocked @-@ out included main battle tanks such as the T @-@ 72 and T @-@ 80 , and lighter armoured vehicles such as the BMP @-@ 2 . The majority of tanks deployed to Chechnya were not issued with explosive reactive armour , due to the " lack of time and funds " , while some of those that were issued with reactive armour did not have the explosive charge to start the reaction . Some of the most dangerous threats to Russian armour were rocket @-@ propelled grenades fired from buildings in Grozny . As a result of these vulnerabilities , Kolomenskoye developed the Arena active protection system , with the goal of providing Russian armour more reliable protection against these threats . 
 = = System details = = 
 The Arena system was primarily designed to defeat threats such as the rocket propelled grenade and the anti @-@ tank missile , including newer anti @-@ tank missiles with longer ranges . The active protection system can protect against missiles fired from both infantry carried rocket launchers and from helicopters , which attack the vehicle directly or by overflying it . Modern rocket propelled grenades can penetrate almost 1 metre ( 39 in ) of steel armour , posing a serious threat to tanks operating in environments of asymmetric warfare . Therefore , increased tank protection requires either an increase in armour thickness and weight , or alternatively the use of an active protection system , like Arena . 
 The system uses a multi @-@ function Doppler radar , which can be turned on and off by the tank commander . In conjunction with radar input , a digital computer scans an arc around the tank for threats , and evaluates which of the tank 's 26 quick @-@ action projectiles it will release to intercept the incoming threat . In selecting the projectile to use for defeating the threat , the ballistic computer employs the information processed by the radar , including information such as flight parameters and velocity . The computer has a reaction time of 0 @.@ 05 seconds and protects the tank over a 300 @-@ degree arc , everywhere but the rear side of the turret . The system engages targets within 50 metres ( 55 yd ) of the vehicle it is defending , and the ammunition detonates at around 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 @.@ 6 yd ) from the threat . It will engage any threat approaching the tank between the velocities of 70 metres per second ( 230 ft / s ) and 700 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) , and can detect false targets , such as outgoing projectiles , birds and small caliber bullets . Arena works during the day and night , and the lack of electromagnetic interference allows the system to be used by multiple vehicles as a team . The 27 @-@ volt system requires approximately one kilowatt of power , and weighs around 1 @,@ 100 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 400 lb ) . Arena increases a tank 's probability of surviving a rocket @-@ propelled grenade by between 1 @.@ 5 – 2 times . 
 Shtora was a soft @-@ kill system , designed to passively defeat anti @-@ tank missiles by jamming their guidance systems . By contrast , Arena is a hard @-@ kill system like Drozd , designed to destroy the warhead through the use of munitions before the missile can engage the vehicle being protected . 
 = = Deployment = = 
 The Arena active protection system was first tested at the Kubinka proving grounds in early 1995 , successfully defending a Russian tank against an anti @-@ tank guided missile . A Russian T @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 , with Arena , was demonstrated to the public at Omsk in late 1997 . Arena was also mounted on the BMP @-@ 3M modernization package , developed by the <unk> Joint Stock Company , although the package has received no export orders . 
 An export variant , named Arena @-@ E ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , is available , worth an estimated $ 300 @,@ 000 . According to Russia , it was selected to be used on the South Korean K2 main battle tank , although this was not confirmed by South Korea . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 321 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 321 ( PA 321 ) is a 43 @.@ 8 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 70 @.@ 5 km ) state highway located in Elk and McKean counties in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania , maintained by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation ( PennDOT ) . The southern terminus is at U.S. Route 219 ( US 219 ) in the community of Wilcox . The northern terminus is at PA 346 within the Allegheny National Forest . PA 321 heads northwest from Wilcox through rural areas to the borough of Kane , where it forms a brief concurrency with US 6 . North of here , the route heads through the national forest and runs along the shore of the Allegheny Reservoir . PA 321 runs east briefly with PA 59 before winding north through more forest to its northern terminus . A portion of the route along the Allegheny Reservoir is designated as the Longhouse National Scenic Byway , a Pennsylvania Scenic Byway and National Forest Scenic Byway . 
 The road between Wilcox and Kane was designated as part of Legislative Route 97 ( LR 97 ) in 1911 and as part of PA 6 in 1924 . US 119 became concurrent with PA 6 in 1926 before US 219 replaced both designations on this stretch of road two years later . The road between Kane and Kinzua was built in the late 1920s and became an extension of PA 68 in 1935 . In 1952 , US 219 was relocated off the road between Wilcox and Kane . Plans were made to construct the Kinzua Dam in 1960 , and several new roads would need to be built to accommodate the reservoir including a relocation of PA 68 . In 1961 , the PA 321 designation was approved for the unnumbered road between Wilcox and Kane and PA 68 between Kane and Kinzua in order to provide an access road to the planned recreation area ; signs were posted the following year . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , improvements were planned for PA 321 . The PA 321 designation north of Kane was removed in 1966 . In the late 1960s , the section between 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane and PA 346 was constructed , including a new alignment between Red Bridge and PA 59 . Work on the 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) segment north of Kane took place in the early 1970s . In Kane , PA 321 was relocated from following US 6 through the downtown area to use Hacker Street to the east , with reconstruction finished in 1973 . The road between Wilcox and Kane , including a bypass of the former , was rebuilt in the mid @-@ 1970s . In 1974 , PA 321 was extended from US 6 in Kane north to PA 346 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 321 begins at an intersection with US 219 in the community of Wilcox in Jones Township , Elk County , heading north on two @-@ lane undivided Buena Vista Highway . The road bypasses the center of Wilcox to the west as it passes through an industrial area . The highway crosses the West Branch Clarion River and curves northwest into forests . The route runs through <unk> and continues along the eastern border of Allegheny National Forest , with a Buffalo and Pittsburgh Railroad line a short distance to the west of the road . 
 PA 321 enters Wetmore Township in McKean County and becomes Brickyard Road , departing the Allegheny National Forest . The road continues through rural land , passing through Sergeant and East Kane . The route heads into the borough of Kane and becomes Westerberg Way , running through industrial areas as it crosses an abandoned railroad line and comes to an intersection with US 6 . Here , PA 321 turns west briefly for a concurrency with US 6 on Biddle Street , immediately turning north @-@ northwest onto Hacker Street , where it is lined with homes . After passing Glenwood Park , the road curves northeast as Kinzua Avenue and leaves Kane for Wetmore Township , becoming Kane @-@ Marshburg Road and heading north @-@ northwest into wooded areas . The route re @-@ enters the Allegheny National Forest and continues northwest , crossing into Hamilton Township and intersecting Longhouse Drive . 
 PA 321 comes to a bridge over the Kinzua Creek arm of the Allegheny Reservoir near the Red Bridge Recreation Area , which contains a picnic area , a campground , and a bank fishing area . From here , the highway follows the northeastern shore of the reservoir , passing through Dunkle Corners . The road turns to the east and runs along the south shore of Chappel Bay , soon heading away from the reservoir and turning northeast . The route continues into Corydon Township and reaches an intersection with PA 59 near the Bradford Ranger Station . 
 At this point , PA 321 turns east for a concurrency with PA 59 and the name remains Kane @-@ Marshburg Road . The road leaves the national forest and heads through the community of Klondike before PA 321 splits to the northwest onto Sugar Run Road in Lafayette Township . The road crosses back into Corydon Township and runs through more of the Allegheny National Forest . The route passes to the north of a section of the Allegheny Reservoir again and turns to the northeast . PA 321 winds north and serves the Tracy Ridge Trailhead , which consists of a campground and hiking trails leading to the reservoir . The route comes to its northern terminus at PA 346 a short distance south of the New York border . 
 The portion of PA 321 between Longhouse Drive and PA 59 is part of the Longhouse National Scenic Byway , a Pennsylvania Scenic Byway and National Forest Scenic Byway that encircles the Kinzua Creek arm of the Allegheny Reservoir and serves multiple recreational areas . In 2014 , PA 321 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 7 @,@ 300 vehicles along the US 6 concurrency in Kane to a low of 100 vehicles between PA 59 and PA 346 . The portion of PA 321 that is concurrent with US 6 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 The PA 321 designation was approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways ( PDH ) in 1961 , replacing what was known as " Old 219 " between Wilcox and Kane and a portion of PA 68 between Kane and Kinzua ; signs were installed the following year . Plans for improving PA 321 were announced in 1963 , including a new alignment north of Red Bridge to PA 59 that would follow the shore of the Allegheny Reservoir . In 1965 , construction began on a portion of the road between north of Kane and Red Bridge . Signage for PA 321 north of Kane was removed in 1966 . The portion of PA 321 in the Red Bridge area was completed in 1966 while the section south of Red Bridge to north of Kane was finished the following year . In 1967 , construction began on the new alignment between Red Bridge and PA 59 , which was finished the next year . The road between PA 59 near Marshburg and the New York border was completed in 1968 . Construction of the 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of PA 321 north of Kane took place between 1970 and 1971 . Construction of the section of PA 321 between East Kane and Kane and along Hacker <unk> in Kane occurred from 1972 to 1973 . The final section of the route between Wilcox and East Kane was rebuilt between 1972 and 1975 . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 Following the passage of the Sproul Road Bill in 1911 , the highway between Wilcox and Kane was incorporated as part of LR 97 . The Wilcox @-@ Kane road was built in the mid @-@ 1920s . In 1925 , this roadway became a part of PA 6 ( the Buffalo @-@ Pittsburgh Highway ) , which ran from the Maryland border near Meyersdale north to Bradford . With the creation of the U.S. Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , US 119 was cosigned with PA 6 on this stretch of road . US 219 replaced the US 119 / PA 6 designation between Wilcox and Kane in 1928 . The roadway between Kane and Red Bridge was improved by Works Progress Administration labor between 1929 and 1930 in order to " get the rural areas ' out of the mud ' . " The road was built with a soft stone base that would not handle the heavier traffic volumes that would later use the road . This section of highway was patched by the state several times in order to keep it usable for traffic . The road between Kane and Kinzua became a northward extension of PA 68 in 1935 . Plans were announced in 1949 for a direct alignment of US 219 between Wilcox and Lantz Corners to bypass the westerly jog to Kane . In 1952 , US 219 was relocated off the roadway between Wilcox and Kane and US 6 between Kane and Lantz Corners to use the new direct alignment . 
 In 1960 , plans were made to construct the Kinzua Dam in the Allegheny National Forest , with road relocations necessary for the new reservoir that would be formed . Among the roads that would need to moved was PA 68 between Kane and Kinzua . The route was to be relocated to follow the shore of the reservoir before coming to an intersection with PA 59 . This new road would provide access to the Kinzua Dam from Kane . A meeting was held on February 24 , 1960 between state and federal officials to discuss the road relocations for the dam construction , including PA 68 . Plans were announced in March 1961 to repave " Old Route 219 " between Wilcox and Kane , with completion planned for the summer . The next month , the Special Highways Committee of the Kane Chamber of Commerce planned to meet with the supervisor of the Allegheny National Forest to discuss access roads to the Kinzua Dam . Among the ideas offered was extending PA 255 from <unk> north to Kane , running concurrent with US 219 between <unk> and Wilcox and following the unnumbered road between Wilcox and Kane . By May of that year , no decision was made on how PA 68 would be routed to the north of Red Bridge with the construction of the Kinzua Dam . 
 In 1961 , the Special Highways Committee recommended a new designation for LR 97 between Wilcox and Kane , which was known as " Old 219 " , along with improving the Wilcox @-@ Kane road and PA 68 between Kane and Red Bridge . A new road was favored north of Red Bridge to serve the proposed recreational area at the Allegheny Reservoir . The PA 321 designation was approved by the PDH on December 7 of that year . The route replaced LR 97 between Wilcox and Kane , where it joined US 6 and followed that route to the Easton Street intersection . Between Kane and Kinzua , PA 321 replaced a section of PA 68 , with the northern terminus of PA 68 cut back to US 6 / PA 321 at the intersection of Fraley and Greeves streets in Kane . The new designation was suggested by the president of the Kane Chamber of Commerce , Victor Westerberg , to provide a connection to the Kinzua Dam via Kane . The roadway north of Kane was also designated as LR <unk> . PA 321 was signed between Wilcox and Kinzua in May 1962 . 
 Signage for PA 321 from Kane northward had been removed by March 1966 as that section of road was under construction , with the northern terminus of the route moved to US 6 at the south end of Kane . In April 1968 , signage was installed in Kane pointing the way to the Kinzua Dam via US 6 ; PA 321 remained unsigned pending the completion of the road north of Kane . With the construction of PA 321 , the route remained unsigned north of Kane . In addition , there were a lack of signs at the PA 59 intersection pointing the way to Kane and a lack of signage in Kane directing motorists to attractions in the Kinzua Dam area . Also , a 1972 map from the Pennsylvania Game Commission incorrectly labeled PA 66 north into Kane along with the road between Kane and the Kinzua Dam area as PA 68 . Plans were announced to improve signage between the two points in September 1972 . In June 1974 , PA 321 was signed between US 6 in Kane and PA 346 near the New York border . On May 7 , 1990 , the portion of PA 321 between Longhouse Drive and PA 59 was designated as the Longhouse National Scenic Byway , a National Forest Scenic Byway . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 When PA 321 was designated in 1961 , improvement work along the section between Kane and Wilcox along with the portion between Kane and Red Bridge was planned for spring 1962 . In February 1963 , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) and the Allegheny National Forest agreed that PA 321 would be relocated to a new alignment following the shore of the reservoir north to PA 59 . 
 On June 20 , 1963 , officials from the borough of Kane met with district highway engineer Stanton Funk to determine the progress of improving PA 321 . At that time , no progress had been made on improving the route . The state had no plans to build the new alignment of PA 321 north of Red Bridge ; a tentative route was decided upon but no work had begun . As a result of this meeting , Kane borough officials voted on July 1 to protest both Governor William Scranton and the Pennsylvania General Assembly for the state bypassing Kane and not improving the roads in the area . The construction of PA 59 to provide access to the dam provided a shortcut to US 6 between Warren and Smethport , along with the US 219 bypass through Lantz Corners to Wilcox , kept traffic heading to the dam away from Kane . Therefore , the state determined that they did not need to improve the highways in the Kane area . However , Kane officials felt improving PA 321 would provide better access to the dam and would boost tourism to their town . 
 On November 2 , 1963 , plans were revealed by Representative Albert W. Johnson to improve PA 321 . With these plans , the portion of the route between Wilcox and Kane would have several curves eliminated . In Kane , the curbs on the portion of US 6 / PA 321 running along Fraley Street would be replaced . The section of PA 321 between Kane and Red Bridge , known as the Kinzua Road , was resurveyed in summer 1963 and advanced to the design stage , with funding split between the PDH and the U.S. Forest Service . The route north of Red Bridge would be built along a new alignment as the last highway relocation in the creation of the Kinzua Dam reservoir . Work on these projects was scheduled to begin in 1964 . The new alignment of PA 321 north of Red Bridge was planned to parallel the original route to Morrison , where it would split and follow the North Fork Run to an intersection with the relocated alignment of PA 59 . A new bridge carrying the route over Kinzua Creek near Red Bridge would be constructed . The new bridge would be higher than the original bridge to accommodate the higher water level of the reservoir . 
 Plans were made in 1964 to realign PA 321 to follow Hacker Street in Kane to access the Kinzua Road , avoiding the downtown area along US 6 . On January 12 , 1965 , a meeting was held between Kane borough officials , local government and planning commission officials , and Funk and chief engineer Robert <unk> regarding the construction of PA 321 , including improving the road between Wilcox and Kane , building a bypass to the east of Kane , and constructing the road north to PA 59 . At this time , no plans existed to improve US 6 / PA 321 on Fraley Street in Kane . In this meeting , it was announced construction on building the route north of Kane was planned to start before July 1 , 1965 , with work progressing from Red Bridge , where the highway was in the worst condition , south to Kane . The route would be built as a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide road with 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide shoulders . Also , there was opposition to routing PA 321 along Clay Street in Kane and instead the state agreed to improve the existing alignment between the borough and the Elk County border , with one @-@ way streets discussed as a possibility for the route through Kane . The Clay Street alignment would involve building new road and would lower the grade of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad tracks ; instead , a routing by way of Hacker Street was suggested which would not involve altering the railroad tracks , with a traffic light installed at the junction of US 6 and PA 321 to slow down traffic along US 6 . There was also a proposal to have PA 321 bypass Kane to the east and intersect a relocated PA 68 south of Kane and a relocated US 6 east of the borough . On March 11 , 1965 , plans were unveiled by PDH secretary Henry <unk> for constructing PA 321 , with bidding expected to begin soon after . The new bridge over the Kinzua Creek at Red Bridge would be a continuous steel girder bridge with two concrete piers , 327 feet ( 100 m ) long and 52 feet ( 16 m ) high . A three @-@ span bridge would be built over Chappel Forks . Work would take place on the route from 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane north to Red Bridge . Between the Elk County line and Kane , PA 321 would be improved along its existing alignment . At this time , the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of the road to the north of Kane was still under design , with bidding planned for later in the year . Between Kane and Red Bridge , PA 321 would become a Forest Service Highway and would be built as a heavy @-@ duty road . 
 On May 28 , 1966 , it was announced that the State Highways Commission would hold a meeting concerning road projects in the Clearfield District on June 1 , asking for input from residents . Among the projects to be recommended by Representative Westerberg and other Kane officials were the improvement of US 6 / PA 321 on Fraley Street in Kane along with completing the remaining segments of PA 321 . At the meeting , Westerberg presented a need for improved highways in McKean County , including completing PA 321 in an expedited manner in order to provide access between Kane and Kinzua Lake . He called for work to begin on the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north of Kane , as the existing 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) road could not handle traffic heading to the lake . On July 20 , 1966 , Westerberg announced that a construction notice would be posted for the section between the Elk County line and Kane , with work to begin pending public hearings . Westerberg would also inquire about the status of the section between Red Bridge and PA 59 . 
 On June 7 , 1967 , the state released its " 5th and 6th Year Program " , which called for Fraley Street in Kane to be widened and also listed for the sections of PA 321 between Wilcox and Kane and 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north of Kane to be reconstructed . The route was planned to be built as a 22 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) road between Wilcox and the county line , a 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) road between the county line and East Kane , and a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) road north of Kane . The slow progress of constructing PA 321 led to people in Kane feeling they were being neglected in not getting road access to Kinzua Dam . 
 In October 1967 , it was announced by Secretary of Highways Robert G. Bartlett that a meeting would soon be held to speed up highway construction projects in the Kane area . Among the items called for was the replacement of the curbs on Fraley Street , which was projected to start in 1968 . In addition , plans for constructing the route between Wilcox and Kane and along Hacker Street through Kane would be discussed . In December 1967 , several recommendations were made to the Pennsylvania Highway Commission for the six @-@ year program , including completing PA 321 . At this time , final design was underway for PA 321 between Wilcox and 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane . Bids for improving Fraley Street in Kane were advertised in December . Also , a 5 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 5 km ) road known as Sugar Run Road was proposed to be built between Marshburg and the Kinzua Reservoir at a cost of $ 3 @,@ 806 @,@ 000 , providing a connection for PA 321 north of PA 59 . 
 On October 30 , 1968 , a meeting was held between the PDH and local officials . At this meeting , changes were made by the state to the PA 321 project at the southern end of Kane , with construction pushed back to 1969 and 1970 . In addition , a design for an interchange with a possible US 6 bypass of Kane was revealed . The alignment of PA 321 between Wilcox and Kane was to be a reconstruction of the existing alignment with relocations in a few places . In Kane , the route would follow Hacker Street , which would be widened to 33 feet ( 10 m ) . 
 = = = Kane to Red Bridge = = = 
 The section of PA 321 between Kane and Kinzua was closed to through traffic in early 1963 , though it started to see its heaviest traffic volumes ever . In early 1964 , the U.S. Forest Service committed funds to the construction of PA 321 between Kane and Red Bridge . On June 19 , 1964 , Representative Victor Westerberg asked that the PDH give priority to three road projects in McKean County , including PA 321 , to help improve access to the Kinzua Dam . As of this time , the section of the route from Kane to Red Bridge was waiting for action from the state for construction to begin . 
 On November 9 , 1964 , preliminary work on building PA 321 between Kane and Red Bridge was scheduled to get underway . This road would be reconstructed to eliminate or reduce several sharp curves . However , the notices for building the road did not include Easton and Chase streets in Kane , which carried two blocks of PA 321 to the north of US 6 . The construction of PA 321 north of Kane was expected to block the town 's access to the Kinzua Dam area and an alternate route via Forest Highway 262 was not anticipated to be completed in time , with traffic detoured via US 6 or US 219 to PA 59 . In late November , a $ 285 @,@ 000 bid was submitted to clear the valley of the Kinzua Creek for the reservoir . At this time , the state had $ 500 @,@ 000 allocated for constructing PA 321 from Kane to Red Bridge , with construction scheduled to begin in July 1965 . The section of PA 321 between Kane and Red Bridge was scheduled to have construction contracts issued in June 1965 with construction beginning on July 1 . Surveys of PA 321 north of Kane were completed by March 1965 . 
 By April 1965 , work was underway in clearing the way for the reservoir that was to be formed by the Kinzua Dam . In July 1965 , a $ 688 @,@ 540 bid was submitted by <unk> Construction Company to construct PA 321 from 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane to Red Bridge . 
 Construction on the first section of PA 321 between north of Kane and Red Bridge started on October 2 , 1965 and was moving ahead of schedule . The section of PA 321 running 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane was unfunded , with the project scheduled for 1966 . Work was scheduled to be completed on the section from 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane to Red Bridge in 1966 , while the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north of Kane was planned to be finished in 1967 . With the construction projects underway , PA 321 was closed north of Kane and traffic was detoured via US 6 to Warren or via US 6 and US 219 to reach PA 59 and the Kinzua Dam . 
 In January 1966 , work on the road south of Red Bridge was suspended for the winter . Construction of the road between north of Kane and Red Bridge was affected by mud . By May 1966 , no action had been taken on the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of PA 321 north of Kane along with the road between Red Bridge and PA 59 , with no plans for access between Kane and the Kinzua Dam to be finished that year . It was confirmed that PA 321 between Kane and PA 59 would be a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) road with a 6 @-@ to @-@ 8 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) berm , after an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) road was initially planned . 
 By June 1966 , construction resumed on the section of PA 321 to the south of Red Bridge , though progress was slow . The section between 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane and Red Bridge was plagued by equipment and worker shortages . By October , final touches were being put in place on the section of the route south of Red Bridge , which were slated to be finished in spring 1967 . The 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of the road north of Kane remained without funds and the section north to PA 59 had been approved by the USACE and was waiting for contract letting by the state , possibly not to be completed until 1968 . The <unk> Recreational Area in the Allegheny National Forest was scheduled for a limited opening on June 1 , 1967 . 
 In August 1968 , it was announced that contract letting for the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of PA 321 to the north of Kane would begin in December . It was determined that most of this section of road would be relocated onto a new alignment mostly to the west . It was anticipated the existing road would remain open to traffic while the new alignment was built . 
 In April 1969 , the PDH requested taking a portion of Glenwood Park for $ 2 @,@ 020 to construct the route heading out of Kane . It was announced by state Senator Richard Frame and Representative Westerberg that the PA 321 project to the north of Kane was included in $ 6 million of capital fund projects introduced to the Pennsylvania State Senate by Frame on June 25 ; bids were scheduled for September 12 . 
 The reconstruction of PA 321 north of Kane was shelved on November 7 , 1969 due to lack of funds , but remained on the state Senate calendar . It was announced by Senator Frame and Representative Westerberg in March 1970 that bidding for the section of PA 321 north of Kane would begin on April 24 . The Clearfield District held an information meeting on April 23 , 1970 , at which Representative Westerberg was in attendance . It was determined that the alignment of PA 321 on Hacker Street in Kane would be modified to extend the street northwest to the realigned PA 321 and pass to the west of the existing alignment in order to reduce the number of curves and avoid taking a portion of Glenwood Park . The low bidders to construct the section of PA 321 to the north of Kane were Putnam and Greene , Inc. for $ 1 @,@ 768 @,@ 997 @.@ 11 , with construction work projected to start in mid @-@ May . During construction of the new alignment of the route , traffic traveling between Kane and the Kinzua Dam was expected to be detoured . In May 1970 , the state began surveying the modified routing of PA 321 at the north end of Kane . 
 By October 1970 , work was underway on the relocation of PA 321 immediately to the north of Kane . A 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) cut was made to extend Hacker Street north , with the removed fill used to extend and level the athletic fields at Glenwood Park . Construction on this section was halted for the winter but was anticipated to resume in April 1971 . The 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) section of PA 321 north of Kane was partially opened to traffic by December 1971 , with guardrail installation underway . This section was fully completed by the end of 1971 . In 1972 , a fault from a deep spring developed 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Kane , leading to that section of highway being replaced . 
 = = = North of Red Bridge = = = 
 The USACE and the state were responsible for the section of the route between Red Bridge and PA 59 , which included the bridge over Kinzua Creek . The state would build this section of road for the USACE . The bridge over the Kinzua Creek was advanced to the review stage by September 1964 , and construction of the new road between Red Bridge and PA 59 was scheduled to be built starting in 1965 . By November of that year , the bridge over the reservoir and the highway north to PA 59 were under review by the USACE . 
 By February 1965 , the new bridge at Red Bridge had been engineered while plans for the section between Red Bridge and PA 59 were again under review by the USACE after being returned for some minor revisions . 
 By October 2 , 1965 , the first section between Red Bridge and PA 59 , which involved the new bridge over Kinzua Creek , was under contract to O 'Block Construction Company at a bid of $ 924 @,@ 285 , with construction starting the following week . On December 31 , 1965 , work began on building the concrete piers for the new bridge at Red Bridge . Progress continued on the Kinzua Creek bridge piers through the winter . Work on the bridge and its approach continued as weather permitted during the winter months . By the following month , the rock fill for the bridge approach was halfway complete while the path of the road leading to the bridge was being cut in order to be graded . The rock fill for the Kinzua Creek bridge was leveled with the piers by March 1966 . 
 The same month , the section between Red Bridge and PA 59 was again placed for review for more revisions to be made while the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north of Kane was surveyed but without funding . The bridge piers and rock fill were completed by May 1966 . Construction of the Kinzua Creek bridge was affected by mud , though construction of the bridge remained on schedule . 
 In June 1966 , right @-@ of @-@ way negotiations were underway between Red Bridge and PA 59 . On June 3 , 1966 , pilings began to be driven for the bridge abutments at Kinzua Creek . By the following month , steel beams for the bridge over Kinzua Creek began to be put in place , with the bridge project ahead of schedule . In October 1966 , the new bridge over the Kinzua Creek at Red Bridge along 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of road to the north of the bridge were completed and opened to traffic , with work on the berms remaining . In December 1966 , the former bridge at Red Bridge was listed for demolition as part of clearing the basin for the lake . 
 On January 10 , 1967 , it was announced by Representative Westerberg that bidding for the relocation of PA 321 between Red Bridge and PA 59 , which included the new Chappel Forks bridge , would open on February 10 . The O 'Block Construction Company submitted a low bid of $ 1 @,@ 579 @,@ 713 , with completion expected later in the year . Construction was underway on building the relocated PA 321 between Red Bridge and PA 59 by June 1967 . On June 2 , clearing began to build the bridge at Chappel Forks . Construction equipment was shifted from the Forest Route 262 project to PA 321 as the forest road project was slowed for special tests . By the later part of the month , a lot of progress was made on building the road north of Red Bridge , although construction was slowed by rainy weather ; the relocation was on target for a 1968 completion date . In addition to building the road , campsites and boat ramps would also be built adjacent to the road serving the lake . At Dunkle Corners , three boat ramps would be constructed where the former Kinzua Road crossed the lake and was submerged . 
 By October 1967 , the section between Red Bridge and PA 59 was partially complete , but was impassable at several points and in need of a repave to handle heavy traffic . The steel needed to finish the Chappel Forks Bridge was delayed by a strike . The section between Red Bridge and PA 59 was ready to be paved starting in April . On June 5 , the road was closed to traffic to allow paving to begin . By August of that year , the section between Red Bridge and PA 59 was paved while finishing touches on berms and guardrails were underway ; the road remained closed to traffic and was planned to be opened in September . In addition , a connecting road between PA 59 in Marshburg through Willow Bay to the New York border was completed . 
 By late September , the project between Red Bridge and PA 59 was almost complete and would be opened to traffic following a formal inspection . On October 3 , 1968 , an inspection was scheduled with the USACE , USFS , PDH , and O 'Block Construction Company officials touring the highway . This inspection revealed no issues with the road , and a final inspection was scheduled on October 8 before it would open . The section of PA 321 between Red Bridge and PA 59 opened to traffic on the afternoon of October 8 , 1968 following a final inspection . 
 = = = Kane = = = 
 In October 1968 , signs were installed on PA 321 at each end of Kane advising that the road would be improved from 1968 to 1969 . On April 4 , 1968 , the borough of Kane made an offer with the state to give Hacker Street to the state for the alignment of PA 321 in exchange for parts of Easton Street , Chase Street , and Kinzua Avenue . 
 On February 3 , 1969 , it was revealed that several highway projects in the Kane area were stalled . The improvement of Fraley Street was halted due to the Kane Gas Company not having the money to replace its lines . In addition , the rebuilding of the 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) stretch of PA 321 to the north of Kane was removed from the construction agenda for 1969 . The construction of PA 321 south of Kane was still scheduled to begin later in the year , but the project was sent to the redesign stage for modifications to be made to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad crossing to avoid grade changes . In November 1969 , the borough of Kane and McKean County received plans from the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad for modifications to the railroad crossing along the route . 
 On December 31 , 1969 , it was announced that plans for the PA 321 project in Kane and East Kane would be on display to the public at Kane 's borough hall on January 5 , 1970 . The first public hearing on the project was held the following day at the Central Fire Building in Kane to discuss the section of PA 321 through Kane and East Kane . Nearly 100 people , including PDH representatives , attended this hearing , where the state explained the project and the residents offered their opinions . At this hearing , it was mentioned that it was decided to route PA 321 through Kane rather than along an eastern bypass as the borough was intended to be a destination for motorists using the highway . 
 Construction on the Hacker Street section of PA 321 was scheduled to begin in summer 1970 . The road was to have concrete travel lanes with asphalt shoulders . The proposed routing of PA 321 through Kane would cost $ 1 @,@ 095 @,@ 000 and would require acquiring one residential property . An alternate alignment was considered to provide a better intersection with US 6 ; however , it would have cost $ 1 @,@ 123 @,@ 000 and would have required taking two properties along with cutting off a railroad siding to a plant . 
 On March 2 , 1970 , the Kane borough council voted to consider withdrawing its offer to let the state use Hacker Street for the alignment of PA 321 as the state would require borough taxpayers to pay around $ 60 @,@ 000 of the approximate $ 100 @,@ 000 cost to relocate sewer , water , and gas lines . Several residents on Hacker Street were against the construction project . The Kane Borough Planning Commission discussed on July 6 , 1970 the routing of PA 321 along Hacker Street . The state felt the street needed to be lowered more for a better construction base while the borough felt it needed to be lowered less in order to avoid relocating underground utilities . In addition , the residential property at US 6 and Hacker Street received a notice to be razed for construction of PA 321 . On September 14 , 1970 , the borough of Kane was assured that it would receive 95 percent state aid for the $ 80 @,@ 000 cost to lower the sanitary sewer on Hacker Street for construction of the route . The remaining $ 4 @,@ 000 cost would come from McKean County from the Liquid Fuels <unk> . At this time , there was no start date for construction along Hacker Street . 
 On February 25 , 1971 , it was announced that contract letting for the section of the route between Glenwood Park in Kane and East Kane , including Hacker Street , would take place on April 30 . Residents in East Kane voiced opposition to reconstructing the route in their village in March 1971 , and believed that the state found it more important to provide a route to Kane while taking a lot of land from people in East Kane to construct the highway . In late April , the opening of bids for the section of PA 321 through Kane was postponed due to approval needed from the Public Utilities Commission on changes made to the nearby Baltimore and Ohio Railroad siding . 
 On April 10 , 1972 , work continued along the section of PA 321 in Kane and East Kane , with full scale construction starting May 1 when ground conditions were more suitable . Work would first take place between East Kane and Kane and at the US 6 intersection , while construction along Hacker Street would follow . Hacker Street was intended to be the last part of PA 321 in Kane to be constructed to have the least impact on local residents . The same day , it was announced that bids would open on May 5 for concrete paving between Wilcox and East Kane . As full scale work began between East Kane and Kane on May 1 , plans were accelerated for construction on the Hacker Street section of the route to begin by mid @-@ May . During construction of Hacker Street , the street would be closed while US 6 and one cross street would remain open . 
 By July 1972 , the road between East Kane and US 6 in Kane was being graded , with concrete pouring scheduled for August , while utility relocation was underway along Hacker Street . By September 1972 , concrete was poured for the route between East Kane and Kane , and an overhead grade crossing signal was installed at the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad crossing to the south of Kane . The intersection with US 6 was nearly complete , with curb work to take place . Construction continued south from East Kane towards Wilcox , with several curves eliminated . 
 On August 6 , 1973 , asphalt paving began along Hacker Street in Kane , which was expected to take ten days to complete . Following that , sidewalks along the street would be improved . The following month , the borough of Kane received $ 10 @,@ 000 from the liquid fuels tax to restore the sidewalks along Hacker Street . The street was anticipated to be opened following the completion of the sidewalk project by the borough and PennDOT . In October 1973 , the section of PA 321 between East Kane and Kane and along Hacker Street in Kane was completed . An inspection of this segment by PennDOT , local officials , and E. M. Brown , Inc. officials was held prior to being opened to traffic after road signs along Hacker Street were installed . On November 4 , 1974 , PennDOT gave Kinzua Avenue to the borough of Kane in exchange to acquiring Hacker Street with the completion of the project along that street . On April 5 , 1976 , the Kane borough council voted to replace the incandescent street lights along Hacker Street with mercury vapor lights . 
 = = = Wilcox to Kane = = = 
 In October 1965 , the section of PA 321 between Wilcox and 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Kane was unfunded . In March 1966 , it was announced by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways that construction would begin later in the year on the section of PA 321 between the Elk County border and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad crossing between Kane and East Kane at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 2 million . At this time , a decision was still needed for how the route would cross the railroad tracks into Kane , with surveys to be conducted . Also , there were no plans for PA 321 to bypass Kane . The section of the route between Wilcox and the county line was still under design . In addition , it was soon determined that the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad crossing in Kane would be lowered to build the highway . The project for PA 321 between Wilcox and Kane was taken " off the shelf " by the state in February 1967 . By March 1968 , the section of the route that would bypass Wilcox was listed at a cost of $ 550 @,@ 000 . Contracts were scheduled to be let for PA 321 south of Kane in 1968 . 
 A public hearing took place January 27 , 1970 at Kane Area Junior High School to discuss the section between Wilcox and East Kane . On February 25 , 1971 , it was announced that contracts were anticipated to be issued for the section between Wilcox and East Kane on June 25 but could possibly be pushed into July . By this time , property acquisition south of Kane was underway . The section of PA 321 between Wilcox and Kane had severely deteriorated at this point and was plagued with potholes . Bidding on the section of route between Wilcox and East Kane was scheduled to begin in the fall . 
 On June 25 , 1971 , E. M. Brown , Inc. was the low bidder at $ 1 @,@ 652 @,@ 027 to construct the section of PA 321 between Kane and East Kane ; construction was scheduled to start 30 days later and the project was to be completed by spring 1973 . Traffic would be detoured between Kane and Wilcox along US 6 and US 219 while construction took place . The state gave the " notice to proceed " for construction of the route in Kane and East Kane on September 30 , 1971 ; construction was planned to begin on October 11 . 
 PennDOT dropped plans to construct a bypass carrying PA 321 to the west of Wilcox on October 13 , 1971 as it would have cut through Wilcox Baseball Park and a parcel of land owned by the Wilcox Area Industrial Development Corporation that was planned as a future industrial site . As a result , the improvement project for the route would be ended 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the north of Wilcox . The project would use state and federal funds . The bypass issue was resolved on December 2 , 1971 following community petitions for the bypass and a meeting with the Wilcox Area Industrial Development Corporation ; bids were scheduled to be let on December 17 . The state had reached an agreement with the Wilcox Area Industrial Development Corporation to use the land for the bypass and made an exchange with the baseball field for it to be built in a new location . This section of PA 321 was to be constructed as a 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) road , with the US 219 intersection located 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 490 m ) south of the original intersection . The bidding for this section of PA 321 was pulled on December 17 and postponed to February or April 1972 because revisions were needed to account for transition in funding for the Wilcox bypass from the PDH to PennDOT , in which the state would do bonding and the projects would go through the Legislature as bills and be signed by the Governor . 
 By July 1972 , construction was underway on the segment of PA 321 between Wilcox and East Kane , with clearing of the right @-@ of @-@ way starting in East Kane and moving south . Completion of this segment was expected in 1974 . During the middle part of 1972 , construction was slowed by wet weather . Concrete paving for the route between Wilcox and East Kane was scheduled to begin by September 1 , 1974 , with the road possibly open to traffic in the fall . The paving of this section of road progressed from East Kane south to Wilcox in the course of a month . The concrete paving was completed in October 1974 . 
 In June 1975 , construction was slated to be completed between Wilcox and Kane . On June 12 , 1975 , it was announced a ribbon cutting ceremony for PA 321 between Wilcox and Kane would take place on July 2 . The section of PA 321 between Wilcox and Kane was opened at a ceremony held at 11 : 30 am on July 2 , 1975 at Kane Area Senior High School , with PennDOT secretary Jacob Kassab cutting the ribbon . A total of 200 people were in attendance for the ceremony , including Senator Frame , Congressman Johnson , Representative Westerberg , Kane Mayor Edgar James , and other local officials . The Kane Area Senior High School marching band performed at the ceremony . Following this , a luncheon was held at a restaurant near Kane with 70 persons in attendance . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Representative peer = 
 In the United Kingdom , representative peers were those peers elected by the members of the Peerage of Scotland and the Peerage of Ireland to sit in the British House of Lords . At this time , all members of the Peerage of England held the right to sit in the House of Lords ; they did not elect a limited group of representatives . All peers who were created after 1707 as Peers of Great Britain and after 1801 as Peers of the United Kingdom held the same right to sit in the House of Lords . 
 Representative peers were introduced in 1707 , when the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland were united into the Kingdom of Great Britain . At the time , there were 168 English and 154 Scottish peers . The English peers feared that the House of Lords would be swamped by the Scottish element , and consequently the election of a small number of representative peers to represent Scotland was negotiated . A similar arrangement was adopted when the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Ireland merged into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in January 1801 . 
 Scotland was allowed to elect sixteen representative peers , while Ireland could elect twenty @-@ eight . Those chosen by Scotland sat for a single term , and following each dissolution new Scottish peers were elected . In contrast , Irish representative peers sat for life . Elections for Irish peers ceased when the Irish Free State came into existence as a Dominion in December 1922 . However , already @-@ elected Irish peers continued to be entitled to sit until their death . Elections for Scottish peers ended in 1963 , when all Scottish peers obtained the right to sit in the House of Lords . 
 Under the 1999 House of Lords Act , a new form of representative peer was introduced to allow some hereditary peers to stay in the House of Lords . 
 = = Scotland = = 
 Under articles XXII and XXIII of the Act of Union of 1707 , Scottish peers were entitled to elect sixteen representative peers to the House of Lords . Each served for one Parliament or a maximum of seven years , but could be re @-@ elected during future Parliaments . Upon the summons of a new Parliament , the Sovereign would issue a proclamation summoning Scottish peers to the Palace of Holyroodhouse . The elections were held in the Great Gallery , a large room decorated by eighty @-@ nine of Jacob de Wet 's portraits of Scottish monarchs , from Fergus Mór to Charles II . The Lord Clerk Register would read out the Peerage Roll as indicates his presence when called . The Roll was then re – read , with each peer responding by publicly announcing his votes and the return being sent to the clerk of the crown at London . The same procedure was used whenever a vacancy arose . 
 The block voting system was used , with each peer casting as many votes as there were seats to be filled . The system , however , permitted the party with the greatest number of peers , normally the Conservatives , to procure a disproportionate number of seats , with opposing parties sometimes being left entirely unrepresented . The Lord Clerk Register was responsible for tallying the votes . The return issued by the Lord Clerk Register was sufficient evidence to admit the representative peers to Parliament ; however , unlike other peers , Scottish representatives did not receive writs of summons . The position and rights of Scottish peers in relation to the House of Lords remained unclear during most of the eighteenth century . In 1711 , The 4th Duke of Hamilton , a peer of Scotland , was made Duke of Brandon in the Peerage of Great Britain . When he sought to sit in the House of Lords , he was denied admittance , the Lords ruling that a peer of Scotland could not sit in the House of Lords unless he was a representative peer , even if he also held a British peerage dignity . They reasoned that the Act of Union 1707 had established the number of Scots peers in the House of Lords at no more and no less than sixteen . In 1782 , however , the House of Lords reversed the decision , holding that the Crown could admit anyone it pleases to the House of Lords , whether a Scottish peer or not , subject only to qualifications such as being of full age . 
 Under the Peerage Act 1963 , all Scottish peers procured the right to sit in the House of Lords , and the system of electing representative peers was abolished . Scottish as well as British and English hereditary peers lost their automatic right to sit in the Upper House with the passage of the House of Lords Act 1999 . During the debate on the House of Lords Bill , a question arose as to whether the proposal would violate the Treaty of Union . In suggesting that the Bill did indeed violate the Articles of Union , it was submitted that , prior to Union , the Estates of Parliament , Scotland 's old , pre @-@ Union parliament , was entitled to impose conditions , and that one fundamental condition was a guarantee of representation of Scotland in both Houses of Parliament at Westminster . It was implied , furthermore , that the Peerage Act of 1963 did not violate the requirement of Scottish representation , set out in the Article XXII of the Treaty of Union , by allowing all Scottish peers to sit in the House of Lords : as long as a minimum of sixteen seats were reserved for Scotland , the principles of the Article would be upheld . It was further argued that the only way to rescind the requirement of Article XXII would be to dissolve the Union between England and Scotland , which the House of Lords Bill did not seek to do . 
 Counsel for the Government held a different view . It was noted that the Peerage Act 1963 explicitly repealed the portions of the Articles of Union relating to elections of representative peers , and that no parliamentary commentators had raised doubts as to the validity of those repeals . As Article XXII had been , or at least purportedly , repealed , there was nothing specific in the Treaty that the bill transgressed . It was further asserted by the Government that Article XXII could be repealed because it had not been entrenched . Examples of entrenched provisions are numerous : England and Scotland were united " forever " , the Court of Session was to remain " in all time coming within Scotland as it is now constituted " , and the establishment of the Church of Scotland was " effectually and unalterably secured " . Article XXII , however , did not include any words of entrenchment , making it " fundamental or unalterable in all time coming " . 
 Further , the Government pointed out that , even if the election of Scottish peers were entrenched , Parliament could amend the provision under the doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty . Though the position of the Church of Scotland was " unalterably " secured , the Universities ( Scotland ) Act 1853 repealed the requirement that professors declare their faith before assuming a position . In Ireland , the Church of Ireland was entirely disestablished in 1869 , though the Articles of Union with Ireland had clearly entrenched the establishment of that body . In December 1922 , the Union with most of Ireland was dissolved upon the creation of the Irish Free State , though Great Britain and all of Ireland were supposedly united " forever . " It was therefore suggested that Parliament could , if it pleased , repeal an Article of Union as well amend as any underlying principle . 
 The Privileges Committee unanimously found that the Articles of Union would not be breached by the House of Lords Bill if it were enacted . The bill did receive Royal Assent , and from 1999 , hereditary peers have not had the automatic right to sit in Parliament . 
 = = Ireland = = 
 Under the Acts of Union in 1800 , Irish peers were allowed to elect twenty @-@ eight representative peers , each of whom could serve for life . The Chamber of the Irish House of Lords , located in Parliament House on College Green in central Dublin , housed the first election , attended by the peers or their proxies . The Clerk of the Crown in Ireland was responsible for electoral arrangements ; each peer voted by an open and public ballot . The results of the first election were announced by the Clerk of the Crown and published in both The Dublin Gazette and The London Gazette . After the Union , new elections were held whenever vacancies occurred due to the death of any peer . The Lord Chancellor of Great Britain — the presiding officer of the House of Lords — certified the vacancy , while the Lord Chancellor of Ireland directed the Clerk of the Crown to issue ballots to Irish peers . The ballots were returned to the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland , who was responsible for determining the victor . 
 Ireland was further represented in the House of Lords by four Lords Spiritual , who sat in rotation for terms lasting one session each . At any one time , an Archbishop and three Bishops represented Ireland , with the seats passing according to a fixed rotation , except that those Lords Spiritual who were also elected to serve as representative peers would be omitted . The rotation was changed by the Church <unk> Act of 1833 , which merged many dioceses and degraded the archbishoprics of Tuam and Cashel to bishoprics . Following its disestablishment in 1871 by the Irish Church Act 1869 , the Church of Ireland ceased to send spiritual representatives to the Lords . 
 Following the establishment of the Irish Free State in December 1922 , Irish peers ceased to elect representatives , although those already elected were allowed to serve for life ; the last of the temporal peers , The 4th Earl of Kilmorey ( a peer from an Ulster family ) , died in 1961 . Disputes then arose as to whether representative peers could still be elected . The Act establishing the Irish Free State was silent on the matter , although the Irish Free State ( Consequential Provisions ) Act 1922 had abolished the office of Lord Chancellor of Ireland , whose involvement was required in the election process ; the office of Clerk of the Crown had also been abolished in Ireland . Various Irish peers petitioned the House of Lords for a restoration of their right to elect representatives . In 1962 , the Joint Committee on House of Lords Reform rejected such plans . In the next year , when the Peerage Act 1963 ( which , among other things , gave all peers in the Peerage of Scotland the right to sit in the House of Lords ) was being considered , an amendment to similarly allow Irish peers to attend was defeated , ninety to eight . Instead , the new Act gave all Irish peers the right to stand for election to the House of Commons , and to vote at parliamentary elections . 
 In 1965 , The 8th Earl of Antrim ( another peer from Ulster ) and other Irish peers petitioned the House of Lords , arguing that the right to elect representative peers had never been formally abolished . The House of Lords ruled against the Irish peers . Lord Reid , a Lord of Appeal in Ordinary , based his ruling on the Act of Union , which stated that representative peers sat " on the part of Ireland . " He reasoned that , since the island had been divided into the Irish Free State and Northern Ireland , there was no such political entity called " Ireland " which the representative peers could be said to represent . Lord Reid wrote , " A statutory provision is impliedly repealed if a later enactment brings to an end a state of things the continuance of which is essential for its operation . " In contrast , Lord Wilberforce , another Lord of Appeal in Ordinary , disagreed that a major enactment such as the Act of Union could be repealed by implication . He argued instead on the basis that the Irish Free State Act 1921 — which was silent on the election of representative peers — abolished the posts of Lord Chancellor of Ireland and Clerk of the Crown in Ireland . The Lord Chancellor of Ireland was responsible for calling elections of representative peers , and the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland was responsible for sending peers their ballots . Since these offices had been abolished ; Lord Wilberforce argued against any mechanism by which Irish peers could be elected . Here too , the petitioners lost . 
 The petitioners failed to raise the status of Northern Ireland as part of the United Kingdom . Burke 's Peerage & Baronetage suggests that if this fact had been foremost , Lord Wilberforce 's arguments relating to the removal of the electoral mechanism for the election could be rebutted , as the Lord Chancellor of Ireland and the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland did have replacements in Northern Ireland . The reason for excluding the arguments relating to Northern Ireland from the petition " was that leading counsel for the petitioning Irish peers was convinced that the members of the Committee for Privileges were with him on what he considered was his best argument and did not want to alienate them by introducing another point . " To prevent further appeals on the matter , Parliament repealed , as a part of the Statute Law ( Repeals ) Act 1971 , the sections of the Acts of Union relating to the election of Irish representative peers . 
 = = House of Commons = = 
 After the Union of England and Scotland in 1707 , Scottish peers , including those who did not sit as representative peers , were excluded from the House of Commons . Irish peers were more favoured and not subjected to the same restrictions . Irish members not nominated as representative peers were allowed serve in Parliament as a representative of a constituency in Great Britain , although not in Ireland , provided they gave up their privileges as a peer . Lord Curzon , for example , specifically requested an Irish peerage so he would not be debarred from sitting in the House of Commons . 
 The Peerage Act 1963 allowed all Scottish peers to sit in the House of Lords ; it also permitted all Irish peers to sit in the House of Commons for any constituency in the United Kingdom , as well as to vote in parliamentary elections , without being deprived of the remaining privileges of peerage . 
 = = Hereditary " representative peers " = = 
 During the passage of the House of Lords Bill in 1999 , controversy surrounding House of Lords reform remained , and the Bill was conceived as a first stage of Lords reform . The " Weatherill " amendment — so called since it was proposed by former House of Commons Speaker Bernard Weatherill — provided for a number of hereditary peers to remain as members of the House of Lords , during the first stage of Lords reform . It could then be reviewed during the next stage of the reform , when the system of appointed life peerages came under examination . In exchange for the House not delaying the passage of the Bill into law , the Government agreed to this amendment , and it then became part of the House of Lords Act 1999 , and 92 hereditary peers were allowed to remain . 
 The ninety @-@ two peers are made up of three separate groups . Fifteen ' office @-@ holders ' comprise Deputy Speakers and Deputy Chairmen , and are elected by the House , while seventy @-@ five party and <unk> members are elected by their own party or group . In addition , there are two royal appointments : the Lord Great Chamberlain , currently the Marquess of Cholmondeley , is appointed as the Queen 's representative in Parliament , while the post of Earl Marshal remains purely hereditary ; the office has been held since 1672 by the Dukes of Norfolk and is responsible for ceremonies such as the State Opening of Parliament . 
 = Rozen Maiden = 
 Rozen Maiden ( Japanese : ローゼンメイデン , Hepburn : Rōzen Meiden ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Peach @-@ Pit . It was serialized in Monthly Comic <unk> between the September 2002 and July 2007 issues . The individual chapters were collected and released into eight tankōbon volumes by Gentosha . The eight volumes were localized to North America by Tokyopop between March 2003 and June 2007 . The story follows Jun Sakurada , a middle school student who withdrew from society after suffering persecutions from his classmates . Following his withdrawal , he is chosen to become the master to a Rozen Maiden named Shinku . Rozen Maidens are seven sentient bisque dolls who compete against each other to become a perfect doll dubbed as Alice . 
 Rozen Maiden received a sequel under the series ' katakana title . It was serialized in Shueisha 's Weekly Young Jump between April 2008 and January 2014 . Rozen Maiden has spun off anthology manga and novel stories , art books , and four anime series ; the four anime series are titled Rozen Maiden , Rozen Maiden : Träumend , Rozen Maiden : Ouvertüre , and Rozen Maiden : Zurückspulen . Tokyo Broadcasting System were the producers for the anime with Nomad as the animation studio for the first three series and Studio Deen for Zurückspulen . The anime adaptions resulted in several audio disc releases and three video games . 
 In 2007 , Geneon Entertainment USA licensed the first two anime series for North American release and had later signed Funimation on as a distributor , after shutting down in September 2007 . In 2011 , Sentai Filmworks acquired both seasons as well as the third series ; they made the three series available for streaming on Anime Network . Crunchyroll later acquired streaming rights to the first two series . For the fourth series , Sentai Filmworks had acquired the license for digital and home video release , while Crunchyroll acquired streaming rights . 
 Tokyopop 's volumes of Rozen Maiden have appeared on ICv2 's monthly top one @-@ hundred selling graphic novels . Reviews towards the manga were generally positive with reviewers praising balance in drama and comedy . For the anime , reception towards the first series was mixed while Träumend was mostly negative . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the 20th century , a legendary doll maker named Rozen created seven bisque dolls which were powered and given sentience with a gem called Rosa <unk> 2 Since then , Rozen sent the dolls away to find masters and to battle among themselves to gather each other 's Rosa Mysticas ; this competition is referred to as the Alice Game . When a doll obtains all seven , they are to become a perfect doll dubbed as Alice and will be reunited with <unk> 5 By order of creation , the seven Rozen Maidens are named Suigintou , Kanaria , Suiseiseki , Souseiseki , Shinku , Hinaichigo , and Kirakisho . 
 Rozen Maiden follows Jun Sakurada , a middle school student who has withdrawn from society after suffering persecutions from his classmates . He is chosen to become Shinku 's master and joins the Alice <unk> 2 As the series progresses , Jun also becomes the master to Hinaichigo and Suiseiseki . After Souseiseki 's Rosa Mystica is taken by Suigintou , Jun 's Rozen Maidens resolve to revive her and to end the Alice Game peacefully ; Phase 21 they later befriend Kanaria who shares their sentiments . However , the group is attacked by Kirakisho who absorbs Hinaichigo and traps Shinku and Suiseiseki in the N @-@ field , a plane of consciousness which connects the universe . Rozen Maiden concludes with Jun preparing to enter the N @-@ field to save the <unk> 43 
 Rozen Maiden 's plot is continued in the sequel serialization which uses the katakana title of the <unk> Inside the N @-@ field , Jun is forced into hiding by Kirakisho and contacts an adult version of himself from an alternate <unk> 1 The adult Jun is able to free Shinku and unite the Rozen Maidens to defeat <unk> 25 Kirakisho returns and successfully captures all the Rozen Maidens ' masters . The Rozen Maidens pursue her eventually resulting in most of their defeat except Shinku and Kirakisho . Shinku 's sympathy towards Kirakisho 's loneliness convinces the latter to surrender her Rosa Mystica . With all seven gathered , Shinku becomes <unk> 65 Using her new powers , Shinku revives her sisters and is put into a coma in <unk> 66 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Jun Sakurada ( <unk> <unk> , Sakurada Jun ) 
 Jun is a middle school student who withdrew from society after he was outed and bullied for being a dress <unk> 27 Since then , he becomes irritated whenever something related to school is brought up and sinks into a depression when pressured on the topic . His interactions with the Rozen Maidens and their masters changes his outlook on life and he works up the courage to return to society . He has an older sister named Nori Sakurada . Jun is voiced by Asami Sanada and English dubbed by Mona Marshall . 
 In an alternate world without Rozen Maidens , Jun eventually returns to society and is a friendless university student who works at a <unk> 1 His interactions with Shinku gives him the opportunity to befriend his co @-@ worker , Saitou , which leads him to join a theatrics club . At the end of the series , he becomes Kirakisho 's <unk> 66 The adult Jun is voiced by <unk> <unk> . 
 Rozen Maidens 
 A legendary doll maker named Rozen ( <unk> , Rōzen ) wanted to create a perfect doll dubbed as Alice . His attempts resulted in seven sentient bisque dolls which became known as Rozen <unk> 13 The dolls ' sentient nature are powered by a magical gem called Rosa Mystica . To become Alice , a Rozen Maiden must gather all seven Rosa Mysticas ; this contest is referred to as the Alice Game . Each Rozen Maiden has a production order , their own personal suitcase , and are accompanied by an artificial spirit which serves the doll . Rozen Maidens rely on a contract with a human master to supply themselves with power for <unk> 6 Since then , Rozen has forgo a physical body and lives within the N @-@ field , waiting for <unk> 62 
 Suigintou ( <unk> , <unk> ) is the first Rozen Maiden and is accompanied by the artificial spirit <unk> . She is the most ambitious of her sisters and wishes to become Alice to earn Rozen 's <unk> 29 Suigintou possesses black wings which she uses for mobility and offensive purposes . Her master is Megu <unk> , an ill girl with a cynical <unk> 23 Megu sees Suigintou as an angel of death who will end her suffering . Suigintou is voiced by Rie Tanaka and English dubbed by Karen Strassman . Megu is voiced by Shiho <unk> and English dubbed by Erika Weinstein . 
 Kanaria ( <unk> ) is the second Rozen Maiden and is accompanied by the artificial spirit Pizzicato . She is sociable , energetic , eccentric and habitually ends her sentences with lit . " Possibly " ( <unk> 〜 , Kashira ) . She was initially a loyal participant of the Alice game but is convinced for a peaceful lifestyle instead . For battle , she plays her violin and manipulates the sound waves to cause destruction . Her master is Mitsu <unk> , a doll clothing designer . Mitsu greatly adores the Rozen Maidens which scares the dolls . Kanaria is voiced by Yumi Shimura and English dubbed by Cristina Valenzuela . Mitsu is voiced by Akiko Kawase and English dubbed by <unk> Sampler . 
 Suiseiseki ( <unk> ) is the third Rozen Maiden and is accompanied by the artificial spirit Sui Dream . She is a tsundere ; she openly insults others but does care about them . Suiseiseki speaks with the copula desu and always speaks in third person . She has no intention of participating in the Alice Game and only wishes to live happily with her twin sister , <unk> 25 Suiseiseki 's ability is to supply nourishment to souls and memories and is able to summon plants for offensive purposes with her watering <unk> 19 Jun becomes her master during the events of the <unk> 17 Suiseiseki is voiced by Natsuko <unk> and English dubbed by Rebecca <unk> . 
 Souseiseki ( <unk> , <unk> ) is the fourth Rozen Maiden and is accompanied by the artificial spirit Lempicka . She speaks in as masculine manner and has a strong sense of duty towards her master and role as a Rozen Maiden . Souseiseki 's ability is to cut souls and memories with her <unk> 19 Her master is Kazuha <unk> , a rich man who is haunted by his twin brother 's death . Kazuha disproved of his brother 's marriage forcing the latter elope and drown in a ferry accident ; as such , he intends to use Souseiseki to make his brother 's widow suffer . After Souseiseki reveals Kazuha 's hatred comes from grief she uses her abilities to leave him at <unk> 20 During the series , Souseiseki 's Rosa Mystica is taken by Suigintou and her body by Kirakisho . Souseiseki is later , revived and becomes Jun 's Rozen <unk> 16 Afterwards , Souseiseki willingly gives Suigintou her Rosa <unk> 50 Souseiseki is voiced by Rika Morinaga and English dubbed by Julie Ann Taylor . In the anime series by Nomad , Souseiseki 's master is an elderly man who substitutes her for his dead son though he overcomes his grief afterwards . 
 Shinku ( <unk> ) is the fifth Rozen Maiden and is accompanied by the artificial spirit Hollie . She has a southern belle personality and treats Jun as her servant . Shinku treats regular dolls as if they are alive , and is an avid fan of the fictional puppet show Detective Kun <unk> 14 Shinku wishes to complete the Alice Game without killing her <unk> 6 For battles , she is able to create and control rose petals . She is voiced by Miyuki Sawashiro and English dubbed by Mela Lee . 
 Hinaichigo ( <unk> ) is the sixth Rozen Maiden and is accompanied by the artificial spirit <unk> . She has a childlike personality and dislikes being <unk> 30 She often ends her sentences with " na no " ( <unk> 〜 ? ) and occasionally speaks in French . For battle , Hinaichigo is able to summon and control strawberry <unk> 8 Her master was Tomoe <unk> , Jun 's classmate who delivers his school work during his withdrawal . When Hinaichigo 's naivety endangers Tomoe 's life , Shinku defeats Hinaichigo in the Alice Game and has her become a servant instead of taking her Rosa <unk> 6 During the series , Hinaichigo is absorbed by Kirakisho and gives her Rosa Mystica to <unk> 35 Hinaichigo is voiced by Sakura <unk> and English dubbed by Sherry Lynn . Tomoe is voiced by Masayo Kurata and English dubbed by Dorothy Elias @-@ Fahn . 
 Kirakisho ( <unk> , <unk> ) is the seventh Rozen Maiden who is accompanied by the artificial spirit Rosary . She was created without a physical body as Rozen tested whether physical limitations prevented him from creating <unk> 34 Her ability allows her to materialize illusions . Because she can not exist outside the N @-@ Field , her main goal is to capture the Rozen Maiden 's masters to ease her loneliness . After her defeat , Kirakisho uses her illusions to create a middle school student named Kaito Toriumi to replace Rozen and to craft imitated Rozen Maidens to be her sister . Following her second defeat , Kirakisho is touched by Shinku 's love and surrenders her Rosa <unk> 65 She was later revived with a physical body and is in possession of the adult <unk> 66 Kirakisho is voiced by <unk> Chiba . 
 Laplace 's Demon ( <unk> , <unk> no Ma ) 
 Laplace 's Demon is a humanoid with a rabbit 's head who dwells in the N @-@ <unk> 5 He is the referee to the Alice Game and often assists the protagonists through riddles or as a directional guide . He is voiced in Träumend and Ouvertüre by <unk> <unk> with English dubbing by Keith Silverstein . In Zurückspulen , he is voiced by Satoshi Mikami . 
 Bara @-@ Suishou ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Enju ( <unk> ) 
 Bara @-@ Suishou and Enju are characters who appear in the Rozen Maiden : Träumend anime and audio drama . Enju is Rozen 's apprentice and the creator of Bara @-@ Suishou , an imitation of a Rozen Maiden . Enju plots a battle between Bara @-@ Suishou and the Rozen Maidens in order to prove his superiority over Rozen . Once Bara @-@ Suishou gathered six Rosa Mysticas , her body overloads , killing her and Enju . Bara @-@ Suishou is voiced by Saori Gotō and English dubbed by Tara Platt . Enju is voiced by Daisuke Ono and English dubbed by Jason C. Miller . 
 = = Original work = = 
 Rozen Maiden is authored by Peach @-@ Pit and was serialized in Gentosha 's Monthly Comic <unk> between issues September 2002 and July 2007 . Gentosha compiled the individual chapters into eight tankōbon volumes released between March 2003 and June 2007 . These volumes were later recompiled into seven <unk> volumes by Shueisha and released between April 2008 and November 2008 . Tokyopop localized Gentosha 's tankōbon volumes in English for North America and released them between May 2006 and May 2008 . In 2011 , Tokyopop 's North American division was closed down and their licenses to manga franchises were revoked . Tokyopop 's translations were distributed in Australasia by Madman Entertainment . The series has also been localized in other languages such as Chinese , French , and Italian . 
 In March 2008 , Peach @-@ Pit published a one @-@ shot titled Shōjo no <unk> ( <unk> ? , lit . " How to Make a Girl " ) in the 16th issue of Weekly Young Jump . In the following issue , a serialization for Rozen Maiden was announced . Serialization began in Weekly Young Jump 's 20th issue in April 2008 until its conclusion in the issue 8 in January 2014 . The second series was published under the katakana for Rozen MaidenKK , and is a sequel to the first series . The series has been localized in other languages such as Italian , French , and Chinese . Peach @-@ Pit also published a one @-@ shot in the October 2013 issue of Ribon which focuses on the Rozen Maidens ' past . 
 = = Media adaptations = = 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Rozen Maiden was adapted into an anime , produced by Tokyo Broadcasting System and animated by Nomad . It premiered on Tokyo Broadcasting System and was broadcast between October 7 , 2004 and December 23 , 2004 . It was also broadcast on <unk> Mainichi Broadcasting , Mainichi Broadcasting System , BS @-@ i , and Kids Station . Pony Canyon released the series in six DVDs and a box set . Geneon USA localized the series for North America and released it on three DVD volumes . In 2008 , Funimation gained distribution rights from Geneon and released a box collection of the series . Sentai Filmworks licensed the series in 2011 and included it in the Rozen Maiden : The Complete Collection DVD box release . Sentai also made the series available for streaming on networks such as Anime Network and Crunchyroll . MVM Films distributed the series in the United Kingdom . 
 The second series , Rozen Maiden : Träumend ( ローゼンメイデン <unk> , Rōzen Meiden <unk> ) , was first announced in March 2005 and is a continuation of the previous series . It premiered on Tokyo Broadcasting System and was broadcast between October 20 , 2005 and January 26 , 2006 . It was also broadcast on Mainichi Broadcasting System , Chubu @-@ Nippon Broadcasting , BS @-@ i , and Kids Station . Pony Canyon released the series in six DVDs and a box set . As for the first series , Geneon USA localized the series for North America and released the first volume before closing all DVD distribution in September 2007 . Following Funimation acquiring the distribution rights , Funimation released the series in three DVD volumes and later , released a box set for the series . Funimation later released a box set which included the first series and Träumend on May 4 , 2010 . Sentai Filmworks later licensed the series in 2011 and included it in the Rozen Maiden : The Complete Collection DVD box release . Sentai made the series available for streaming on networks such as Anime Network and Crunchyroll . MVM Films distributed the series in the United Kingdom . 
 The third series is Rozen Maiden : Ouvertüre ( ローゼンメイデン <unk> , Rōzen Meiden <unk> ) , a two episode series which explores Suigintou 's origins . It premiered on Tokyo Broadcasting System and was broadcast on December 22 and 23 , 2006 . The episodes were released on DVD on February 21 , 2007 . Sentai Filmworks licensed the series in 2011 and included it in the Rozen Maiden : The Complete Collection DVD box release and as a stand @-@ alone DVD . Sentai made the series available for streaming on Anime Network . MVM Films distributed the series in the United Kingdom . 
 The fourth series is Rozen Maiden : Zurückspulen , referred only as Rozen MaidenKK in Japan , was announced in November 2012 in Weekly Young Jump . It is an adaption of the second manga series . Unlike the previous three anime series , it is animated by Studio Deen . It premiered on Tokyo Broadcasting System and was broadcast between July 4 , 2013 and September 26 , 2013 . It was also broadcast on Mainichi Broadcasting System , Chubu @-@ Nippon Broadcasting , and BS @-@ TBS . Crunchyroll licensed the series for simulcast followed by Sentai Filmworks who made it available for simulcast on Anime Network and released the series on home video in October 2014 . 
 = = = Discography = = = 
 The four anime series resulted in several theme music , radio dramas , soundtracks , and two radio programs . The first radio program is Rozen Maiden Web Radio : Rose Scented Garden Party , an internet radio program that aired on Lantis Web Radio between May 13 , 2005 and September 30 , 2005 . It is hosted by Miyuki Sawashiro and Asami Sanada , the voice of Shinku and Jun respectively . The second is Suigintou 's Night of <unk> , a live radio hosted by <unk> 's voice actress Rie Tanaka during Tokyo Broadcasting System 's Anime Festa 2006 . Due to positive reception , it was continued through additional CD releases . The soundtracks from the Rozen Maiden video games have also been released . Prior to the anime 's creation , a radio drama was produced by Frontier Works who used their own voice cast . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Three video games have been produced for the series . Rozen Maiden : <unk> is a PlayStation 2 video game developed by Taito Corporation and released on April 27 , 2006 . Its soundtrack , Rozen Maiden <unk> Disk , was included with the game 's preorder . The game re @-@ released under the label " Taito Best " on March 25 , 2007 . Taito released a second game for the PlayStation 2 titled Rozen Maiden : <unk> on March 22 , 2007 . Its soundtrack , Rozen Maiden <unk> Disk 2 , was included with the preorder . The third video game is Rozen Maiden : <unk> Sie Welt Ab by 5pb. for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita ; it was released on January 30 , 2014 . 
 = = = Anthology manga and novels = = = 
 Several manga spin @-@ offs were created . An anthology tankōbon entitled Rozen Maiden : Entr 'acte was published by <unk> in 2005 . Two anthology series were created based on the second series . The first is Rozen Maiden Dolls <unk> by Haru <unk> . It was serialized in Ribon between the January 2012 to April 2014 issues . The second is <unk> wa <unk> Rozen Maiden ( <unk> ? , lit . " The Rozen Maiden That Should Not Have <unk> " ) by <unk> . It began serialization in Miracle Jump issue 12 , which was released on December 27 , 2012 . 
 Two anthology novel series have been written . <unk> Higurashi wrote the anthology novel series Die Romane der Rozen Maiden which consisted of two novels subtitled Schwarzer Wind and <unk> Augen . <unk> <unk> wrote the second novel series , Rozen MaidenKK , which consisted of two novels subtitled <unk> and Roth Schwarz . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Rozen Maiden anime has been adapted into three film comic volumes by Gentosha . Two fan books based on the anime were also published : Rozen Maiden : Edel Rose covers the anime Rozen Maiden and is published by Impress Group ; Rozen Maiden : Träumend Nocturne covers Rozen Maiden : Träumend and is published by Gentosha ; Rozen Maiden Comic & Anime Official Guide Book covers Rozen Maiden : Zurückspulen and is published by Shueisha . Four art books were also released : Rozen Maiden : Erinnerung published by SoftBank Creative , Rozen Maiden : <unk> by Ichijinsha , Peach @-@ Pit Art book ( Rozen Maiden ) and Rozen Maiden Art Book : Rose Maiden , both by Shueisha . 
 Many merchandise has been released based on the Rozen Maiden franchise such as dolls , clothing and accessories , and other miscellaneous items . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tokyopop 's localized volumes appeared on ICv2 's monthly top one @-@ hundred selling graphic novels . The Rozen Maiden manga has received generally positive reviews . Anime News Network praised Peach @-@ Pit 's works as always being able to evoke excitement or laughter from its readers but was critical about Rozen Maiden 's lack of plot and criticized how the dialogue or layout can be vague . Comic Book Bin wrote that while Rozen Maiden was not a splendid manga , its emphasis on psychology and emotion was something American comics should follow to expand their readership . Active Anime praised several aspects of the series : the combination of mystery , comedy , and cuteness with a balance of fantasy and drama ; the visual esthetics of the images and characters ; and a broadness that extends towards teens and adults . Initially , Anime Land praised the balance between comedic daily life and the underlying dark side of the plot . In later volumes though , Anime Land criticized the story 's pacing and the abrupt ending . In their review of the sequel , Anime Land wrote they were surprised by the dark tone and how the plot was confusing even with knowledge from the first series . Manga @-@ News also praised the story 's alteration between moments of peace and conflict but panned the latter volumes for being rushed and losing the story 's complexity . In their review of the sequel , Manga @-@ News praised the introduction for being interesting and accessible to new readers . 
 In 2005 , Japanese television network TV Asahi conducted a " Top 100 " online web poll and the Rozen Maiden anime adaptation placed 50th . In the subsequent year , Rozen Maiden : Träumend ranked 7th in a " Top 20 " poll conducted by Japanese anime magazine Animage . Active Anime had several reviewers for the anime series Rozen Maiden and its sequel Rozen Maiden : Träumend . Christopher Seaman wrote several praises for the anime : the high quality visuals and the detail in the dolls ' designs ; the soundtrack which compliments the visuals ; and the story which he considered to be engaging , fast paced , and comedic . Sandra Scholes described the series as a lavish production and that while it is battle oriented during fight scenes , it also offers emotional moments that cater to girls . Davey C. Jones commented the series is something Chobits fans would enjoy and that Rozen Maiden : Träumend 's ending is not a " feel good " ending . Rachel Bentham however , was critical of the plot . Bentham described Jun 's antisocial personality and friendship with the dolls to be disturbing and criticized the " there can be only one " competition between the dolls calling it misogynistic in nature . 
 Mania initially expressed skepticism of the show 's combination of gothic lolita , dolls , magic , and comedy but later calls it a successful experiment and praised the character interactions and the dolls ' designs . In their Rozen Maiden : Träumend review , Mania praised the visuals and characters but criticized the unbalanced comic and dark comments and described the revelations and finale as rushed . Anime News Network 's review of Rozen Maiden : Träumend were mostly negative and addressed several points : the failed attempts at serious drama which were considered cliché and resulted in cheesy and melodramatic dialogue ; the recycled background music ; and the ending which was described as inconclusive and slapdash . 
 Anime News Network 's reviews of Rozen Maiden : Zurückspulen was generally positive . Carl Kimlinger described the characterization of the adult Jun as a " highly believable mixture of bruised pride , desperate loneliness , and downtrodden numbness " and praised how relatable the character is compared to his younger self . He also praised the scripting for Jun 's life and the scene where Jun 's personality is being dissected by his boss to be intelligently written . Bamboo Dong praised Zurückspulen 's introduction for revitalizing the series . Both reviewers praised the art and dolls ' designs and expressed concerns about the confusing plot . 
 = HMS Nile ( 1888 ) = 
 HMS Nile was one of two Trafalgar @-@ class ironclad battleships built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s . Late deliveries of her main guns delayed her commissioning until 1891 and she spent most of the decade with the Mediterranean Fleet . Nile returned home in 1898 and became the coast guard ship at Devonport for five years before she was placed in reserve in 1903 . The ship was sold for scrap in 1912 and broken up at Swansea , Wales . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Trafalgar @-@ class ships was derived from the layout of the earlier ironclad battleship Dreadnought and the Admiral class , coupled with the heavy armour of the preceding Victoria class . The Trafalgars displaced 12 @,@ 590 long tons ( 12 @,@ 790 t ) ; the addition of more armour and ammunition during construction added an additional 650 long tons ( 660 t ) of weight and increased their draught by a foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) below their designed waterline . They had a length between perpendiculars of 345 feet ( 105 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 73 feet ( 22 @.@ 3 m ) , and a draught of 28 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) . Nile 's crew consisted of 537 officers and ratings in 1903 and 527 two years later . The low freeboard of the Trafalgars made them very wet and they could not maintain full speed except in a calm . 
 The ships were powered by a pair of three @-@ cylinder , vertical inverted , triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which were designed to produce a total of 12 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 900 kW ) and a maximum speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) using steam provided by six cylindrical boilers with forced draught . During her sea trials , Nile slightly exceeded this with a speed of 16 @.@ 88 knots ( 31 @.@ 26 km / h ; 19 @.@ 43 mph ) from 12 @,@ 102 ihp ( 9 @,@ 024 kW ) . The Trafalgar class carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 100 long tons ( 1 @,@ 118 t ) of coal which gave them a range of 6 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 700 km ; 7 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armour = = = 
 The Trafalgar @-@ class ships ' main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Each gun was provided with 80 rounds . The muzzles of these guns were only 3 feet 6 inches ( 1 m ) above the deck , and were very hard to fight in a seaway due to the spray breaking over the forward turret . 
 Their secondary armament was originally planned to consist of eight BL 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns , but these were replaced during construction by six quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) guns . 200 rounds per gun were carried by the ships . Eight QF 6 @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 2 in ( 57 mm ) ) and nine QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . The ships carried four 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes and another pair were added in August 1890 . 
 The Trafalgars ' armour scheme was similar to that of Dreadnought , although the waterline belt of compound armour did not cover the complete length of the ship and a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) deck extended fore and aft of the armoured citadel to the bow and stern . The belt was 230 feet ( 70 @.@ 1 m ) long and was 20 – 14 inches ( 508 – 356 mm ) thick ; it was closed off by traverse 16 – 14 @-@ inch ( 406 – 356 mm ) bulkheads . Above it was a strake of 18 – 16 @-@ inch ( 457 – 406 mm ) armour that covered the bases of the gun turrets . Another strake above that protected the secondary armament and was 5 – 4 inches ( 127 – 102 mm ) thick . The sides of the gun turrets were 18 inches thick and the conning tower was protected by 14 @-@ inch plates . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Nile , named after the Battle of the Nile , was the third ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy . She was laid down on 8 April 1886 by Pembroke Dockyard . The ship was launched on 27 March 1886 by Mrs. Maud Hamilton , wife of Lord George Hamilton , First Lord of the Admiralty . She was completed in July 1890 , although her main guns were not delivered until the following year , at a cost of £ 885 @,@ 718 . 
 After delivery , she was commissioned at Portsmouth on 30 June 1891 for manoeuvres , following which she was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet . When the battleships Victoria and Camperdown collided on 22 June 1893 , Nile was next astern and it was only through the skillful manoeuvring of Captain Gerard Noel that his ship was not also involved in the collision . Nile had her 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns replaced by QF 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns in 1896 . She came home in January 1898 to become the port guardship at Devonport , and Captain Robert Rolleston was in command in June 1902 . In February 1903 , the ship was relegated to the reserve at Devonport , where she remained until she was sold on 9 July 1912 for £ 34 @,@ 000 to be broken up at Swansea by T. Ward . 
 = USS Triton ( SSRN @-@ 586 ) = 
 USS Triton ( SSRN / SSN @-@ 586 ) , a United States Navy radar picket nuclear submarine , was the first vessel to execute a submerged circumnavigation of the Earth ( Operation Sandblast ) , doing so in early 1960 . Triton accomplished this objective during her shakedown cruise while under the command of Captain Edward L. " Ned " Beach , Jr . The only member of her class , she also had the distinction of being the only Western submarine powered by two nuclear reactors . 
 Triton was the second submarine and the fifth ship of the United States Navy to be named for the Greek god Triton . At the time of her commissioning in 1959 , Triton was the largest , most powerful , and most expensive submarine ever built , at $ 109 million excluding the cost of nuclear fuel and reactors ( $ 885 million in present @-@ day terms ) . 
 After operating for only two years in her designed role , Triton 's mission as a radar picket submarine was made obsolete by the introduction of the carrier @-@ based Grumman WF @-@ 2 Tracer airborne early warning aircraft . Converted to an attack submarine in 1962 , she became the flagship for the Commander , Submarine Forces , U.S. Atlantic Fleet ( COMSUBLANT ) in 1964 . She was decommissioned in 1969 , the first U.S. nuclear submarine to be taken out of service . 
 Triton 's hull was moored at the St. Julien 's Creek Annex of Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth , Virginia as part of the reserve fleet until 1993 , though she was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in 1986 . In 1993 , she was towed to Puget Sound Naval Shipyard to await the Nuclear Powered Ship and Submarine Recycling Program . The former Triton landed on the keel resting blocks in the drydock basin on 1 October 2007 to begin this recycling process which was completed effective 30 November 2009 . 
 = = Design history = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Triton is considered a first @-@ generation U.S. nuclear @-@ powered submarine , along with Nautilus , Seawolf , Halibut , and Skate ( and her sisters ) . While serving as fully operational units of the U.S. Navy , the vessels also played key developmental roles . Nautilus introduced the use of nuclear power for ship propulsion . Seawolf utilized a liquid @-@ metal nuclear reactor using liquid sodium as an alternative heat exchange medium to pressurized water . Halibut was the first nuclear @-@ powered submarine to perform a strategic nuclear deterrence patrol armed with Regulus cruise missiles . The Skates were the first nuclear @-@ powered submarine class with more than one ship built . Triton 's unique contribution to the development of nuclear power for naval propulsion was her dual reactor plant , which provided the speed required for radar picket missions . 
 Radar picket submarines ( Navy classification " SSR " ) were developed during the post @-@ war period to provide intelligence information , electronic surveillance , and fighter aircraft interception control for forward @-@ deployed naval forces . Unlike destroyers used as radar picket ships during World War Two , these submarines could avoid attack by submerging if detected . The U.S. Navy 's Migraine program involved converting existing fleet submarines into radar picket vessels , and the Navy also ordered two purpose @-@ built diesel @-@ electric SSRs , Sailfish and Salmon . However , these were incapable of sustaining the high submerged or surfaced speeds necessary to operate with fast carrier task forces and therefore unsuitable to the task . 
 Nuclear power offered the only possible solution . Triton was designed in the mid @-@ 1950s as a radar picket submarine capable of operating at high speed , on the surface , in advance of an aircraft carrier task force . Triton 's high speed came from her twin @-@ reactor nuclear propulsion plant , with a designed speed , surfaced and submerged , of 28 kn ( 32 mph ; 52 km / h ) . On 27 September 1959 , Triton achieved " well in excess of " 30 kn ( 35 mph ; 56 km / h ) during her initial sea trials . 
 To meet her radar picket role , Triton 's main air search radar initially used the AN / SPS @-@ 26 , the U.S. Navy 's first electronically scanned , three @-@ dimensional search radar which was laboratory tested in 1953 . The first set was installed on board the destroyer leader Norfolk prior to its installation on board Triton in 1959 . Since it was scanned electronically in elevation , the AN / SPS @-@ 26 set did not need a separate height @-@ finding radar . A submarine version of SPS @-@ 26 , designated BPS @-@ 10 , was under development , and it was slated for installation on Triton . To process its radar , electronic , and air traffic data , Triton had a Combat Information Center ( CIC ) located in a separate air control compartment , situated between Triton 's reactor and operations compartments . 
 Design work on a nuclear @-@ powered radar picket submarine ( SSRN ) began in 1954 – 1955 . As initially designed , it had a three @-@ level hull , with its Combat Intelligence Center ( CIC ) ( see image ) located on the middle level . Its overall length was initially 400 feet ( 120 m ) , with a beam of 38 feet ( 12 m ) . Also as initially designed , its displacement was 4800 tons surfaced and 6500 tons submerged . January 1955 performance estimates called for the SAR propulsion plant to produce 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower , with a surfaced speed of 27 kn ( 31 mph ; 50 km / h ) and a submerged speed of 23 kn ( 26 mph ; 43 km / h ) . Triton initially had the same dual radar system installed on the non @-@ nuclear Sailfish @-@ class radar picket submarines ( i.e. , BPS @-@ 2 search radar and BPS @-@ 3 height @-@ finder set ) housed in a large , stepped sail ( see image ) . Construction cost was initially estimated at $ 78 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Subsequent growth of the SAR propulsion plant necessitated the overall increase in Triton 's length and tonnage , although without any loss in speed , while the installation of the AN / SPS @-@ 26 3 @-@ D search radar allowed the elimination of a separate height @-@ finder . 
 Triton was to be the lead ship of a proposed class of nuclear @-@ powered radar picket submarines . A December 1955 long @-@ range naval planning report envisioned five carrier strike groups , each supported by two radar picket submarines . The total force included two non @-@ nuclear Sailfish class submarines and eight nuclear submarines . With construction costs for Triton escalating , this long @-@ range requirement was revised in 1957 to provide four nuclear @-@ powered radar picket submarines for a single nuclear @-@ powered carrier group , with the four remaining conventionally powered carrier groups supported by two diesel @-@ electric radar picket submarines each . 
 At the time of her construction , Triton was the largest submarine ever built . Her knife @-@ like bow , with its bulbous forefoot , provided improved surfaced sea @-@ keeping for her radar picket role . Her surface sea @-@ keeping was further enhanced by high reserve buoyancy ( 30 % ) , provided by 22 ballast tanks , the most ever in an American submarine . She was the last submarine to have a conning tower , as well as the last American submarine to have twin screws or a stern torpedo room . Her sail was the largest ever aboard an American submarine , measuring 70 feet ( 21 m ) long , 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) tall , and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , and designed to house the large AN / SPS @-@ 26 3 @-@ D air @-@ search radar antenna when not in use . She also had a compartment solely for crew berthing , with 96 bunks , and two separate chief petty officers ' ( <unk> ' ) quarters . With an overall length of 447 @.@ 5 feet ( 136 @.@ 4 m ) , Triton was the longest submarine in the history of the United States Navy until the nuclear @-@ powered ballistic missile submarine USS Ohio ( <unk> @-@ 726 ) was formally commissioned in 1981 as a unit of the U.S. Navy . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Triton was the only submarine outside of the Soviet Union designed with a two @-@ reactor propulsion plant . Her <unk> reactors were seagoing versions of the land @-@ based <unk> reactor prototype . Both reactors comprised the Submarine Advanced Reactor ( SAR ) program , a joint venture between the U.S. Navy , Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , and General Electric . As originally designed , Triton 's total reactor output was rated at 34 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) . However , Triton achieved 45 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 34 @,@ 000 kW ) during her sea trials ( pictured ) , and her first commanding officer , Captain Edward L. Beach , Jr . , believed Triton 's plant could have reached 60 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 45 @,@ 000 kW ) " had that been necessary . " 
 Both of Triton 's reactors share the same compartment , with its number one reactor located forward and its number two reactor located aft within that compartment . The number one reactor supplied steam to the forward engine room and the starboard propeller shaft . The number two reactor supplied steam to the after engine room and the port propeller shaft . Each reactor could individually supply steam for the entire ship , or the reactors could be cross @-@ connected as required . It is this enhanced reliability , redundancy , and dependability of its dual @-@ reactor plant that was a key factor in the selection of Triton to undertake the first submerged circumnavigation of the world . 
 Triton 's dual @-@ reactor plant met a number of operational and engineering objectives , specifically the high speed requirement to meet its radar picket mission , which continues to be sources of speculation and controversy to this day . During the early 1950s , many engineers at Naval Reactors branch of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) were concerned about depending on single @-@ reactor plants for submarine operations , particularly involving under @-@ the @-@ ice Arctic missions . The presence of two de @-@ aerating feed tanks , which are used only on surface warships , suggested that Triton 's twin @-@ reactor plant may have served as a testbed for future multi @-@ reactor surface warships . The SAR program was the first production naval reactor developed by General Electric for the U.S. Navy , and GE used this SAR experience for the High Power Reactor ( <unk> ) program that led to the development of the <unk> and <unk> naval reactors used on the Bainbridge , Truxtun , California , and Virginia classes of nuclear @-@ powered surface ships . 
 Finally , the U.S. Navy was debating the best approach to optimize performance , particularly underwater speed , for its nuclear submarine fleet . Triton achieved high speeds through brute horsepower , rather than the more hydrodynamically efficient teardrop @-@ shaped hull form pioneered by Albacore which , when combined with nuclear power , allowed Skipjack to achieve higher speed with less horsepower . 
 = = = Combat systems = = = 
 = = = = Weapon systems = = = = 
 Triton 's armament consisted of six Mark 60 torpedo tubes , four bow and two stern . The Mark 60 system was a 249 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 6 @,@ 340 mm ) -long hydraulic @-@ launch tube that did not have power handling capability . The standard torpedo carried by Triton was the Mark 37 , with a weapon load of ten forward and five aft . Triton 's first commanding officer , " Ned " Beach , noted the torpedo load in the forward torpedo room could have been doubled with the removal of a single support girder . 
 = = = = Fire control and electronics = = = = 
 Triton 's main air search radar was the electronically scanned , three @-@ dimensional AN / SPS @-@ 26 . This system had a range of 65 nautical miles ( 120 km ; 75 mi ) and was capable of tracking aircraft up to an altitude of 75 @,@ 000 feet ( 23 @,@ 000 m ) . Since it scanned electronically in elevation , it did not need a separate height @-@ finding set . When not in use , the SPS @-@ 26 radar was lowered into its <unk> housing for stowage within Triton 's massive sail ( pictured ) . A submarine version of SPS @-@ 26 , designated BPS @-@ 10 , was under development at the time of Triton 's construction , slated for eventual installation on Triton . 
 Triton 's long @-@ range , passive detecting @-@ ranging sonar was the AN / BQR @-@ 7 , which had a listening range up to 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) for surfaced or snorkeling submarines , optimized to 35 nautical miles ( 65 km ; 40 mi ) , with target tracking capability within 5 degrees of accuracy . The chin @-@ mounted AN / BQR @-@ 2 passive sonar array supplemented the active <unk> @-@ 4 , with a range up to 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) and a bearing accuracy of 1 / 10 of degree , allowing the BQR @-@ 2 to be used for fire control in torpedo attacks . 
 Triton 's target fire @-@ control system ( <unk> ) was the Mark 101 , a post @-@ war development that incorporated target tracking and ranging data into a position keeper , with a pair of analyzers that automatically revised torpedo gyros and settings as the target position changed . This automation greatly simplified a targeting solution for a plotting party . Previously targeting solutions were manually estimated target bearings which were then fed into the Torpedo Data Computer ( TDC ) , a method used throughout the Pacific War . However , while entirely capable of providing efficient fire control solutions against post @-@ war non @-@ nuclear hunter @-@ killer submarines , the Mark 101 proved to be less responsive to the rapid changes associated with nuclear submarine operations . 
 The Number One periscope was Triton 's navigational periscope , and it had a built @-@ in sextant developed by the <unk> Optical Company that allowed navigators to observe celestial bodies in order to obtain an accurate star fix to plot the ship 's course and position . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 = = = Authorization = = = 
 The U.S. Navy ordered a " large radar picket using the advanced two @-@ reactor system , " designated SCB 132 , in October 1955 under the U.S. Department of Defense appropriation for Fiscal Year 1956 . This 1956 shipbuilding program was significant because it included authorization for the construction of eight submarines in total , the largest such order since World War II . Along with Triton , the FY @-@ 56 program included four additional nuclear @-@ powered submarines – the guided missile submarine Halibut , the lead ship for the Skipjack class , and the final two Skate @-@ class attack submarines , <unk> and <unk> . The 1956 program not only completed the final authorization for all of the U.S. Navy 's first @-@ generation nuclear submarines , but with the Skipjack , it also marked the initial authorization for a second @-@ generation nuclear submarine . Finally , the 1956 program included the three submarines of the diesel @-@ electric Barbel class , the last non @-@ nuclear attack submarines to be built for the U.S. Navy . Henceforth , the U.S. Navy submarine service would be a nuclear @-@ powered force . 
 = = = Keel @-@ laying = = = 
 Triton 's keel was laid down on 29 May 1956 in Groton , Connecticut , by the Electric Boat Division of the General Dynamics Corporation . Her length presented Electric Boat with many problems during her construction . She was so long her bow obstructed the slipway 's railway facility , used for transporting material around the yard . Consequently , the lower half of her bow was cut away to facilitate yard operations , and the bow was re @-@ attached just days prior to her launch . Similarly , the last 50 feet ( 15 m ) of her stern was built on an adjoining slip and attached to the rest of the hull before Triton 's launch . Her sail was found to be too high to go under the scaffolding , so the top 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) was cut away and re @-@ attached later . 
 Even before her launch , there was considerable discussion of Triton 's role beyond her radar picket mission . An internal Navy memorandum set forth four options for the submarine 's extended use . These included configuration to serve as a command ship ( <unk> ) for a fleet or force commander , an advanced sonar scout for the fleet , a Regulus missile submarine ( SSGN ) , or a minelaying submarine . However , with the exception of the command ship option , all of these proposed configurations required extensive modification of her original design . 
 Another potential mission was as an underwater tug , able to rescue disabled submarines under the Arctic ice pack . Triton 's first commanding officer , Captain Edward L. Beach , Jr . , requested plans be drawn up for this modification , which he characterized as " easy and inexpensive " . Although there was consideration for a deployment to Arctic waters , there is no evidence that Triton was ever employed as an underwater tug . 
 = = = Launching = = = 
 Triton was launched on 19 August 1958 , with Louise Willis , the wife of Vice Admiral John Wills USN ( ret . ) , as her sponsor . The principal address was delivered by Admiral <unk> Wright , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the U.S. Atlantic Command ( <unk> ) , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet ( <unk> ) and Supreme Allied Commander Atlantic ( <unk> ) for NATO . Over 35 @,@ 000 guests attended , the largest crowd to witness a submarine launching up to that time . 
 = = = Fitting out = = = 
 On 1 February 1959 , Triton was provisionally accepted for service in the U.S. Navy , with Captain Beach , the Prospective Commanding Officer ( <unk> ) , now designated as Officer @-@ in @-@ Charge . Triton met several key milestones before her commissioning . On 8 February 1959 , reactor No. 2 achieved initial criticality , while reactor No 1 achieved this milestone on 3 April 1959 . 
 Two shipboard accidents occurred during Triton 's post @-@ launch fitting @-@ out . On 2 October 1958 , prior to the nuclear reactor fuel being installed , a steam valve failed during testing , causing a large cloud of steam that filled the number two reactor compartment , and on 7 April 1959 , a fire broke out during the testing of a deep @-@ fat fryer and spread from the galley into the ventilation lines of the crew 's mess . Both incidents , neither nuclear related , were quickly handled by ship personnel , with Lt. Commander Leslie B. Kelly , the prospective chief engineering officer , being awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his quick action during the incident on 2 October . 
 = = = Sea trials = = = 
 Triton began her sea trials on 27 September 1959 . Over the next five days , the ship 's systems and equipment were thoroughly tested under the overall direction of Hyman G. Rickover of the Bureau of Ships ' Naval Reactors branch and Captain A. C. Smith , the Supervisor of Shipbuilding at Electric Boat . Triton generated 45 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 34 @,@ 000 kW ) on sea trials , reaching her design surface speed of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , and achieved a surface speed well in excess of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . Triton subsequently executed a four @-@ hour , full @-@ power submerged run and a crash @-@ back maneuver . The only significant problem encountered during her initial sea trials was the overheating of the lubricating oil system for the starboard <unk> spring bearing . At the recommendation of Admiral Rickover , a hose was rigged to spray the bearing housing with a steady stream of sea water to keep the shaft cool , as well as a special watch set to monitor the temperature of the <unk> oil . 
 Triton began her preliminary acceptance trials ( PAT ) on 20 September 1959 . These trials were conducted under the supervision of Rear Admiral Francis Douglas McCorkle of the U.S. Navy 's Board of Inspection and Survey ( <unk> ) . After three days of at @-@ sea tests , Triton was passed by the <unk> as being ready to enter service as a U.S. naval vessel . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Commissioning = = = 
 Triton was commissioned on 10 November 1959 with Captain Edward L. Beach , Jr. in command . Vice Admiral Bernard L. Austin , the Deputy CNO for Plans and Policy , made the keynote address , noting : 
 As the largest submarine ever built , her performance will be carefully followed by naval designers and planners the world over . For many years strategists have speculated on the possibilities of tankers , cargo ships and transports that could navigate under water . Some of our more futuristic dreamers have talked of whole fleets that submerge . Triton is a bold venture into this field . 
 The widow of the late Rear Admiral Willis A. " <unk> " Lent presented the original ship 's bell from the first Triton at the new commissioning ceremony . The late Admiral Lent had been the earlier Triton 's first commanding officer . A watercolor painting of the ship also was presented by the American Water Color Society . The final cost of building Triton , less her reactors , nuclear fuel , and other related costs paid by the AEC , was $ 109 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 USD , making Triton the most expensive submarine ever built at the time of her commissioning . 
 Triton was assigned to Submarine Squadron 10 , the U.S. Navy 's first all @-@ nuclear force , based at the U.S. Submarine Base in New London , Connecticut , under the command of Commodore Tom Henry . Triton subsequently completed torpedo trials at Naval Station Newport and conducted other special tests at the Norfolk Navy Base before returning to Electric Boat on 7 December 1959 in order to install special communications equipment , including a prototype of the BRA @-@ 3 towed communications buoy system housed in a large fairing located on the after end of the main deck . Work on Triton at Electric Boat was delayed as priority was given to completing the Navy 's first two fleet ballistic missile ( <unk> ) submarines , George Washington and Patrick Henry , with the objective for both vessels to start their first nuclear deterrence patrols before the end of 1960 . 
 On 20 January 1960 , Triton got underway to conduct an accelerated series of at @-@ sea testing . Triton returned on 1 February as preparations continued for her forthcoming shakedown cruise , scheduled for departure on 16 February 1960 , which involved operating with the command ship Northampton , flagship of the U.S. Second Fleet , in northern European waters . On 1 February , Captain Beach received a message from Rear Admiral Lawrence R. " Dan " Daspit ( COMSUBLANT ) instructing Beach to attend a top secret meeting at The Pentagon on 4 February 1960 that led to the execution of Operation Sandblast , the first submerged circumnavigation of the world . 
 = = = Shakedown cruise = = = 
 During her shakedown cruise , Triton successfully executed the first submerged circumnavigation of the world , code named Operation Sandblast , following the same track as the first circumnavigation led by Ferdinand Magellan . The mission 's objectives were set forth in the published ship 's log ( pictured ) : 
 For purposes of geophysical and oceanographic research and to determine habitability , endurance and psychological stress – all extremely important to the Polaris program – it had been decided that a rapid round @-@ the @-@ world trip , touching the areas of interest , should be conducted . Maximum stability of the observing platform and unbroken continuity around the world were important . Additionally , for reasons of the national interest it had been decided that the voyage should be made entirely submerged undetected by our own or other forces and completed as soon as possible . TRITON , because of her size , speed and extra dependability of her two @-@ reactor plant , had been chosen for the mission . 
 The actual mission was summarized by the U.S. Navy 's Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships : 
 Triton put to sea on her shakedown cruise on 15 February 1960 , bound for the South Atlantic . She arrived in the middle Atlantic off St. Peter and St. Paul Rocks on 24 February to commence a history @-@ making voyage . Having remained submerged since her departure from the east coast , Triton continued on south towards Cape Horn , rounded the tip of South America , and headed west across the Pacific . After transiting the Philippine and Indonesian archipelagos and crossing the Indian Ocean , she rounded the Cape of Good Hope and arrived off the St. Peter and Paul Rocks on 10 April — 60 days and 21 hours after departing the mid @-@ ocean landmark . Only once did her sail break the surface of the sea , when she transferred a sick sailor to Macon ( CA @-@ 132 ) off Montevideo , Uruguay , on 6 March . She arrived back at Groton , Connecticut , on 10 May , having completed the first submerged circumnavigation of the earth . 
 Triton 's globe @-@ girdling cruise proved invaluable to the United States . Politically , it enhanced the nation 's prestige . From an operational viewpoint , the cruise demonstrated the great submerged endurance and sustained high @-@ speed transit capabilities of the first generation of nuclear @-@ powered submarines . Moreover , during the voyage , the submarine collected reams of oceanographic data . At the cruise 's conclusion , Triton received the Presidential Unit Citation and Captain Beach received the Legion of Merit from President Dwight D. Eisenhower . 
