 Triton 's commanding officer during Operation Sandblast , Captain Edward L. Beach , also provided a unique perspective on the circumnavigation in the published log : 
 The sea may yet hold the key to the salvation of man and his civilization . That the world may better understand this , the Navy directed a submerged retrace of Ferdinand Magellan 's historic circumnavigation . The honor of doing it fell to the Triton , but it has been a national accomplishment ; for the sinews and the power which make up our ship , the genius which designed her , the thousands and hundreds of thousands who labored , each at his own metier , in all parts of the country , to build her safe , strong , self @-@ reliant , are America . Triton , a unit of their Navy , <unk> and respectfully dedicates this voyage to the people of the United States . 
 The noted historian Bern <unk> placed the significance of Operation Sandblast into historical context : 
 The epochal achievement of the fleet of Magellan in circumnavigating the globe was echoed in the magnificent accomplishment by the nuclear submarine Triton in 1960 . Like the voyage of Magellan , that of the Triton created stirring philosophical concepts . It demonstrated that a company of men could live and work in the depth of the ocean for months at a time . It was shown that through the new technology a source of power had been made in such abundance and so manageable that , without refueling , an 8000 @-@ ton vehicle would be driven through the water around the world . It was also shown that the arts of observation , navigation , communication and control had reached the point where travel under the water was possible with pinpoint accuracy . 
 Also , in his 2000 book Ships Of Discovery And Exploration , historian Lincoln P. Paine further noted : 
 Although the voyage had been conceived as a way for Eisenhower to impress Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev at the Paris summit , this conference was canceled after U @-@ 2 pilot Francis Gary Powers was shot down over the Soviet Union on May 1 . But coming less than two years after the transpolar expedition of the USS Nautilus , the Triton 's accomplishment was a clear reaffirmation of U.S. technological supremacy . 
 The actual submerged circumnavigation occurred between 24 February and 25 April 1960 , covering 26 @,@ 723 nautical miles ( 49 @,@ 491 km ; 30 @,@ 752 mi ) in 60 days and 21 hours at the average speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) while crossing the Equator on four different occasions . Also , the total duration of Triton 's shakedown cruise was 84 days 19 hours 8 minutes , covering 36 @,@ 335 @.@ 1 nautical miles ( 67 @,@ 292 @.@ 6 km ; 41 @,@ 813 @.@ 7 mi ) , and Triton remained submerged for a total of 83 days 9 hours , covering 35 @,@ 979 @.@ 1 nautical miles ( 66 @,@ 633 @.@ 3 km ; 41 @,@ 404 @.@ 0 mi ) during her maiden voyage . 
 The New York Times described Triton 's submerged circumnavigation of the world as " a triumph of human prowess and engineering skill , a feat which the United States Navy can rank as one of its bright victories in man 's ultimate conquest of the seas . " 
 = = = Initial deployments = = = 
 Following her post @-@ shakedown availability ( PSA ) , Triton assumed her duties as a radar picket submarine in August 1960 . She deployed to northern European waters with the Second Fleet to participate in NATO exercises oriented around detecting and intercepting Soviet bombers overflying the Arctic . Triton also participated in NATO exercises against British naval forces led by the aircraft carriers Ark Royal and Hermes under the command of Rear Admiral Sir Charles Madden , RN . For two days during these NATO exercises , Rear Admiral Thomas H. Moorer and his flag lieutenant , Lt. William P. Lawrence , were aboard Triton to observe its submarine radar @-@ picket operations . At the time , Moorer was serving as Commander Carrier Division Six which included the carriers Essex and Saratoga . Triton completed its first overseas deployment with a port visit to Bremerhaven , West Germany , the first by a nuclear @-@ powered ship to a European port , from 2 – 9 October 1960 , with an estimated 8 @,@ 000 touring the boat during this port @-@ call . 
 For the first half of 1961 , Triton conducted operational patrols and training exercises with the Atlantic Fleet . This included an at @-@ sea exercise involving low @-@ power testing in support of the development of a proposed natural circulation reactor ( NCR ) . She also deployed to monitor the Soviet 50 @-@ megaton hydrogen bomb initiation at Novaya Zemlya in the Arctic Ocean during late October 1961 . 
 During this period , the rising threat posed by Soviet submarine forces increased the Navy 's demands for nuclear @-@ powered attack submarines with antisubmarine warfare ( ASW ) capability . Following the development of the carrier @-@ based Grumman WF @-@ 2 Tracer airborne early warning aircraft , Triton 's AN / SPS @-@ 26 3 @-@ D long @-@ range air search radar was no longer needed , and the development of the submarine version of this 3 @-@ D radar system , the BPS @-@ 10 , was canceled in 1960 . Accordingly , upon the demise of the Navy 's radar picket submarine program , Triton was redesignated SSN @-@ 586 on 1 March 1961 . 
 = = = Overhaul and conversion = = = 
 Triton entered the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in June 1962 for conversion to an attack submarine . Her crew complement was reduced from 172 to 159 . She was overhauled and refueled at Groton , Connecticut , from September 1962 to January 1964 , which included modification to serve as the flagship for COMSUBLANT . Since the Navy no longer had any plans to use Triton 's radar picket capability , her SPS @-@ 26 radar set was replaced by a two @-@ dimensional AN / BPS @-@ 2 air search radar , with Triton now providing the fleet with an at @-@ sea air strike control capability . 
 Because she subsequently served as COMSUBLANT 's flagship following her overhaul , one area of continuing speculation is whether Triton was part of the National Emergency Command Post Afloat ( NECPA ) program . NECPA was tasked to provide afloat facilities for the President of the United States in case of an emergency or war , with the command cruisers Northampton ( pictured ) and Wright assigned to perform this mission . 
 Triton had a number of attributes that made her a potential NECPA platform . Her size allowed ample room for additional shipboard systems and personnel accommodations . Her designed speed provided the capability for rapid transit , and her nuclear power plant offered virtually unlimited endurance and range . The Combat Information Center ( CIC ) provided substantial command and control capabilities as did the communication buoy system that could receive and send radio transmissions while submerged . As she was a submarine , Triton offered superior protection against nuclear @-@ biological @-@ chemical ( NBC ) contaminants over surface ships or an airborne command centre . However , the record remains unclear if such an explicit NECPA conversion was ever undertaken for Triton . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 In March 1964 , upon completion of her overhaul , Triton 's home port was changed from New London , to Norfolk . On 13 April 1964 , she became the flagship for COMSUBLANT . On 20 January 1965 , Triton rescued the pilot and a passenger of a charter aircraft that had ditched in the Atlantic Ocean off St. Croix in the Virgin Islands . Triton was relieved as COMSUBLANT 's flagship by the Sturgeon @-@ class submarine Ray on 1 June 1967 . Eleven days later , Triton was shifted to her original home port of New London , Connecticut . 
 = = = Commanding officers = = = 
 Edward L. Beach , Jr . : November 1959 – July 1961 
 George Morin : July 1961 – September 1964 
 Robert Rawlins : September 1964 – November 1966 . 
 Frank Wadsworth : November 1966 – May 1969 
 = = = Honors and awards = = = 
 = = = = Presidential Unit Citation = = = = 
 On 10 May 1960 , Secretary of the Navy William B. Franke presented the Presidential Unit Citation ( PUC ) to Triton for Operation Sandblast , the first submerged circumnavigation of the world . Chief <unk> 's Mate Chester Raymond <unk> , the chief of the boat , accepted the PUC on behalf of Triton 's officers and crew . The citation reads : 
 For meritorious achievement from 16 February 1960 to 10 May 1960 . During this period the TRITON circumnavigated the earth submerged , generally following the route of Magellan ’ s historic voyage . In addition to proving the ability of both crew and nuclear submarine to accomplish a mission which required almost three months of submergence , TRITON collected much data of scientific importance . The performance , determination and devotion to duty of the TRITON ’ s crew were in keeping with the highest traditions of the naval service . All members of the crew who made this voyage are authorized to wear the Presidential Unit Citation ribbon with a special clasp in the form of a golden replica of the globe . 
 Up to that time , this was only the second time that a U.S. Navy vessel had been awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for a peacetime mission , with the nuclear submarine USS Nautilus ( SSN @-@ 571 ) receiving the first peacetime PUC in recognition of Operation Sunshine , the first submerged voyage under the North Pole in 1958 . To commemorate the first submerged circumnavigation of the world , all Triton personnel who made that voyage were authorized to wear their Presidential Unit Citation ribbon with a special clasp in the form of a golden replica of the globe ( pictured ) . 
 = = = = Naval Unit Commendation = = = = 
 The citation reads : 
 For exceptionally meritorious service during a period in 1967 . USS Triton conducted important and arduous independent submarine operations of great importance to the national defense of the United States . The outstanding results achieved during the highly successful operations attest to the exceptional professional skill , resourcefulness and ingenuity of the Triton 's officers and men . Their inspiring performance of duty throughout was in keeping with the highest traditions of the naval service . 
 = = Decommissioning and final disposition = = 
 Due to cutbacks in defense spending , as well as the expense of operating her twin nuclear reactors , Triton 's scheduled 1967 overhaul was canceled , and the submarine — along with 60 other vessels — was slated for inactivation . While Triton 's twin reactor plant was designed to be refueled by a submarine tender like other U.S. nuclear submarines , because of the complexity of her zirconium @-@ clad fuel elements , Triton 's previous re @-@ fueling had been done in a shipyard during her 1962 – 1964 overhaul . Although new fuel elements were procured and available for installation , Triton 's overhaul was canceled , a source of controversy . One speculation suggests that the cancellation of Triton 's overhaul allowed funds to be redirected for the repairs to the supercarrier Forrestal which had been extensively damaged off Vietnam . From October 1968 through May 1969 , she underwent preservation and deactivation processes , and she was decommissioned on 3 May 1969 . Triton became the U.S. Navy 's first nuclear @-@ powered submarine to be taken out of service , and second in the world , after the Soviet Navy 's November @-@ class submarine K @-@ 27 in 1968 . On 6 May 1969 , Triton departed New London under tow and proceeded to Norfolk , Virginia , where she was placed in the reserve fleet . She remained berthed at Norfolk or at the St. Julien 's Creek Annex of Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth , Virginia , into 1993 . She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Registry on 30 April 1986 . In August 1993 , the hulks of the ex @-@ Triton and the ex @-@ Ray were towed by the salvage tug Bolster to the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard ( <unk> ) , in Bremerton , Washington , arriving on 3 September 1993 , to await their turn in the Nuclear Powered Ship and Submarine Recycling Program ( SRP ) . 
 Effective 1 October 2007 , ex @-@ Triton landed on the keel resting blocks in the drydock basin to begin recycling ( pictured ) . The long delay in the disposal of ex @-@ Triton has been attributed to the complexity of her dual reactor plant . Final recycling was completed effective 30 November 2009 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The importance of the Triton goes beyond the specific military task which has been assigned her . The Triton , in her operations , will test an advanced type of nuclear propulsion plant and will pave the way for the submersible capital ships of the future . 
 = = = Triton plaque = = = 
 In the eight days prior to Triton 's departure on her around @-@ the @-@ world submerged voyage , Captain Beach approached Lt. Tom B. <unk> , Triton 's Auxiliary Division Officer , to design a commemorative plaque for their upcoming voyage , as well as the first circumnavigation led by Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan . The plaque 's eventual design consisted of a brass disk about 23 inches ( 58 cm ) in diameter , bearing a sailing ship reminiscent of Magellan 's carrack , Trinidad , above the submarine dolphin insignia with the years 1519 and 1960 between them , all within a laurel wreath . Outside the wreath is the motto AVE <unk> DUX , <unk> <unk> EST ( " Hail Noble Captain , It Is Done Again " ) . 
 Commodore Tom Henry , commanding Submarine Squadron 10 , supervised the completion of the plaque . The carving of the wooden form was done by retired Chief Electrician 's Mate Ernest L. Benson at New London . The actual molding of the plaque was done by the Mystic Foundry . 
 During the homeward leg of her around @-@ the @-@ world voyage , Triton rendezvoused with the destroyer John W. Weeks on 2 May 1960 off Cadiz , Spain , the departure point for Magellan 's earlier voyage . Triton broached , and John W. Weeks transferred the finished plaque to Triton for transport back to the United States . The plaque was subsequently presented to the Spanish government by John Davis Lodge , the United States Ambassador to Spain . This plaque is located at the City Hall in Sanlúcar de Barrameda , Spain , and it is mounted on the wall of the city hall with a marble slab memorializing the 1960 Triton submerged circumnavigation . 
 <unk> of the Triton Plaque were also presented to the Mystic Seaport Museum in Mystic , Connecticut , and the Naval Historical Association in Washington , D.C. , as well as the U.S. Navy Submarine School and the U.S. Navy Submarine Force Library and Museum , both located in Groton , Connecticut . 
 = = = Triton memorials = = = 
 Triton Light is a navigational beacon on the seawall of the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , Maryland , where the Severn River meets Spa Creek and the Annapolis harbor . It was donated to the Academy and named for the Greek god by the United States Naval Academy Class of 1945 . The crew of Triton provided samples of water taken from the 22 seas through which their ship had passed during their submerged 1960 circumnavigation . These samples filled a globe built into the Triton Light , and the naming of the light and significance of the globe are explained in a commemorative marker . 
 Beach Hall is the new headquarters for the United States Naval Institute which was dedicated on 21 April 1999 ( pictured ) . The facility is named after Captain Edward L. Beach , Sr. , who served as the Institutes secretary @-@ treasurer , and his son , Edward L. Beach , Jr . , who commanded Triton during Operation Sandblast . The dive wheel from Triton 's conning tower is on display in the lobby of Beach Hall . 
 Triton was the 2003 inductee into the Submarine Hall of Fame following her nomination by the Tidewater chapter and Hampton Roads Base of the United States Submarine Veterans , Inc . ( <unk> ) . A shadow box filled with Triton memorabilia was placed in Alcorn Auditorium of Ramage Hall located at the U.S. Navy Submarine Learning Center , Naval Station Norfolk . 
 USS Triton Recruit Barracks ( Ship 12 ) was dedicated in ceremonies at the U.S. Navy 's Recruit Training Command , Naval Station Great Lakes , near North Chicago , Illinois , on 25 June 2004 . The facility honors the memory of two submarines named Triton and includes memorabilia from both . Triton Hall is the fifth barracks constructed under the RTC <unk> Project , covering 172 @,@ 000 square feet ( 15 @,@ 979 square meters ) in floor space . The facility is designed to accommodate 1056 recruits , and it includes berthing , classrooms , learning resource centers , a galley , a quarterdeck , and a modern HVAC system . On 17 May 2012 , in a dedication ceremony , the long @-@ missing ship 's bell was added to the collection of artifacts in Triton Hall 's quarterdeck ( pictured ) . 
 The USS Triton Submarine Memorial Park is located on the Columbia River , at the end of Port of Benton Boulevard in north Richland , Washington . Its purpose is " to establish a permanent park in north Richland in recognition of all the decommissioned reactor cores off @-@ loaded at the Port ’ s barge slip , transported and stored at the Hanford Site . " 
 The park features Triton 's sail superstructure ( pictured ) and an information display on the history of Triton . The park also serves as a tourist attraction , especially due to its location , since Hanford is the resting place of spent reactor cores from several Navy ships . Planning called for the sail to be cut up for transport and reassembled at the park site . Ground @-@ breaking was initially scheduled to take place on 3 April 2008 , with the dedication ceremony set for 19 August 2008 and a Fall 2009 start @-@ date for construction . On 23 October 2009 , the Port of Benton encased Triton 's conning tower in concrete at its new USS Triton Submarine Memorial Park in north Richland , Washington . In mid @-@ December 2009 , the final pieces of Triton 's sail were welded together at the park 's site . During the 11 August 2010 Port of Benton commission meeting , it was reported that bids for the first phase , which includes the park 's electrical lighting system and the pouring the concrete around Triton 's sail , would be announced shortly by the port authority . The second phase would involve the park 's landscaping , and the third phase would be the installation of a parking lot . The park is part of the Richland Riverfront Trail , a marked hiking trail that focuses on the state of Washington 's contribution to the nuclear history of the United States , and it connects to the Sacagawea Heritage Trail . The USS Triton Submarine Memorial Park is located off George Washington Way near the Columbia River , and it was formally dedicated on 10 November 2011 , the 52nd anniversary of the commissioning of the USS Triton . 
 In 2011 , the USS Triton , Operation Sandblast , and Captain Edward L. Beach , Jr . , were included in the Technology for the Nuclear Age : Nuclear Propulsion display for the Cold War exhibit at the U.S. Navy Museum in Washington , DC . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 Triton 's submerged circumnavigation , Operation Sandblast , was the subject of the ABC television series Expedition ! broadcast on Tuesday , 14 February 1961 . Hosted by John D. Craig , this episode was titled Saga of the Triton , and it featured film footage from Operation Sandblast with voice @-@ over narration extracted from Captain Beach 's logbook . 
 Triton is referenced briefly in three popular Cold War novels . In The Last Mayday by Keith Wheeler ( 1968 ) , Triton is depicted as participating in a submarine training exercise at the beginning of the novel , with special notice made of her large , rectangular sail . In the 1978 novel Cold is the Sea by Edward L. Beach , the second sequel to his 1955 best @-@ seller Run Silent , Run Deep , Triton is mentioned several times . Also , the under @-@ ice towing capability that was considered for Triton served as a key plot point for the novel . Finally , in The Hunt for Red October by Tom Clancy , the biographical background for Marko Ramius mentions that , while commanding a Charlie @-@ class submarine , Ramius had " hounded [ Triton ] mercilessly for twelve hours " in the Norwegian Sea . Subsequently , Ramius " would note with no small satisfaction that the Triton was soon thereafter retired , because , it was said , the oversized vessel had proven unable to deal with the newer Soviet designs . " 
 Two films of the period , Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea and Around the World Under the Sea , dramatized globe @-@ circling submerged voyages similar to Operation Sandblast . Also , in the teaser of the episode " Mutiny " of the Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea television series , broadcast on 11 January 1965 , the fictional nuclear submarine Neptune is on her shakedown cruise , under the supervision of Admiral Harriman Nelson ( Richard Basehart ) , and when the submarine 's port shaft bearing begins overheating , Admiral Nelson orders a hose be rigged to cool the port shaft down with sea water , the same solution Admiral Rickover had suggested during Triton 's sea trials . 
 The 1960 The Button @-@ Down Mind of Bob Newhart comedy album ( pictured ) included a sketch entitled " The Cruise of the U.S.S. Codfish " which was a monologue involving the final address by the captain to the crew of a nuclear @-@ powered submarine after completing a two @-@ year @-@ long , around @-@ the @-@ world underwater voyage . Bob Newhart noted in a 2006 interview that : 
 You know , I think the Triton kind of , I think was a spur for that routine as I think back . Because I then imagined what a trip like that would have been like with a totally incompetent commander , and the cruise of the USS Codfish was the final result . 
 Captain Beach reportedly played " The Cruise of the U.S.S. Codfish " over the ship 's public address system during Triton 's first overseas deployment in the Fall of 1960 . Antigua @-@ Barbuda issued a commemorative stamp of Triton 's 1960 submerged circumnavigation . Also , Triton was the name of one of the submersibles featured in the Submarine Voyage attraction at Disneyland which operated from 1959 to 1998 . 
 = = = 50th anniversary of Operation Sandblast = = = 
 The 50th anniversary of Operation Sandblast and Triton 's submerged circumnavigation of the world was celebrated on 10 April 2010 , during the 2010 Submarine Birthday Ball held at the Foxwoods Resort Casino in <unk> , Connecticut , with Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy ( <unk> ) Rick D. West delivering opening remarks ( pictured ) to the 2 @,@ 200 attendees . The U.S. Navy Submarine Force Library and Museum sponsored additional events and activities , entitled " 9 @,@ 000 Leagues Under the Sea , " between 10 – 12 April and 14 – 18 April 2010 . 
 Also , on 9 April 2010 , retired Admiral Henry G. Chiles , Jr . , who served in Triton from 1963 – 1966 , was the keynote speaker at the graduation class of the Basic Enlisted Submarine School at the New London Naval Submarine Base in Groton , Connecticut . The graduation class was named in honor of Triton , and each graduate received a certificate of course completion and a commemorative coin celebrating the 50th anniversary of Triton 's submerged circumnavigation . The Dolphin Scholarship Foundation used the 50th anniversary of Operation Sandblast to promote its Race Around the World fund @-@ raising program to support its Dolphin Scholarship program . Finally , former members of Triton 's crew received commemorative souvenirs of the ship 's pressure hull at their 2010 re @-@ union . 
 On 25 April 2010 , the University of Texas Marine Science Institute posted a radio program article on its Science and the Sea web site commemorating Operation Sandblast and the Triton . 
 For the 50th anniversary of Operation Sandblast , writer @-@ historian Carl <unk> wrote " Incredible Voyage " for the June 2010 edition of Naval History magazine , and John Beach wrote " The First Submerged Circumnavigation " for the April 1960 issue of The Submarine Review , the official magazine of the Naval Submarine League . Mr. Beach is the nephew of Captain Edward L. Beach , the commanding officer of the USS Triton during Operation Sandblast . Finally , the Naval Institute Press published Beneath the Waves by Dr. Edward F. Finch , a 2010 biography of the late Captain Beach , which includes extensive coverage of Operation Sandblast . 
 The legacy of Operation Sandblast on its 50th anniversary was summarized by retired Captain James C. Hay who had served on Triton during its historic submerged around @-@ the @-@ world voyage . On the editorial page of the April 1960 issue of The Submarine Review , the official magazine of the Naval Submarine League , Captain Hay noted : 
 It is truly a cruise which tested the crew 's mettle and proved the skipper 's tenacity . More than that , however , it again proved to all who cared to listen that the US Navy could go anywhere , at any time , and do what ever was required . It 's a good sea story about doing what had to be done . On the fiftieth anniversary of the First Submerged Circumnavigation it 's a good thing to do to re @-@ read about one of the forerunners of all we 're done since . 
 = Piano Concerto No. 24 ( Mozart ) = 
 The Piano Concerto No. 24 in C minor , K. 491 , is a concerto for keyboard ( usually a piano or fortepiano ) and orchestra composed by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart . Mozart composed the concerto in the winter of 1785 – 1786 , finishing it on 24 March 1786 , three weeks after the completion of the Piano Concerto No. 23 ( K. 488 ) in A major . He premiered the work in early April 1786 at the Burgtheater in Vienna . 
 The work is one of only two minor @-@ key piano concertos that Mozart composed , the other being the No. 20 ( K. 466 ) in D Minor . None of Mozart 's other piano concertos features a larger array of instruments : the work is scored for strings , woodwinds , horns , trumpets and timpani . The concerto consists of three movements . The first , Allegro , is in sonata form and is the longest opening movement for a concerto that Mozart had hitherto composed . The second movement , Larghetto , is in the relative major of E flat and features a strikingly simple principal theme . The final movement , Allegretto , returns to the home key of C minor and presents a theme followed by eight variations . 
 The work is one of Mozart 's most advanced compositions in the concerto genre . Its early admirers included Ludwig van Beethoven and Johannes Brahms . Musicologist Arthur Hutchings considered it to be Mozart 's greatest piano concerto . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mozart composed the concerto in the winter of 1785 @-@ 86 , during his fourth season in Vienna . It was the third in a set of three concertos composed in quick succession , the others being No. 22 ( K. 482 ) in E @-@ flat major and No. 23 ( K. 488 ) in A major . Mozart finished composing the No. 24 shortly before the premiere of The Marriage of Figaro ; the two works are assigned adjacent numbers of 491 and 492 in the Köchel catalogue . While composed at the same time , the two works contrast greatly : the opera is almost entirely in major keys while the concerto is one of Mozart 's few minor @-@ key works . The pianist and musicologist Robert D. Levin suggests that the concerto may have served as an outlet for a darker aspect of Mozart 's creativity at the time he was composing the comic opera . The premiere of the concerto was either on 3 or 7 April 1786 at the Burgtheater in Vienna ; Mozart would have featured as the soloist and conducted the orchestra from the keyboard . 
 In 1800 , Mozart 's widow <unk> sold the original score of the work to the publisher Johann Anton André of Offenbach am Main . It passed through a number of private hands during the nineteenth century before Sir George Donaldson , a Scottish philanthropist , donated it to the Royal College of Music in 1894 . The College still houses the manuscript today . The original score contains no tempo markings ; the tempo for each movement is known only from the entries Mozart made into his catalogue . The orchestral parts in the original score are written in a clear manner . The solo part , on the other hand , is often incomplete , due to Mozart notating only the outer parts of passages of scales or broken chords . This suggests that Mozart improvised much of the solo part when performing the work . The score also contains a number of late additions , including that of the second subject of the first movement 's orchestral exposition . There is the occasional notation error in the score , which musicologist Friedrich Blume attributed to Mozart having " obviously written in great haste and under internal strain " . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The concerto is divided into the following three movements : 
 Allegro in C minor ( 3 / 4 time ) 
 Larghetto in E @-@ flat major ( cut common time ) 
 Allegretto ( Variations ) in C minor ( cut common time ) 
 The concerto is scored for one flute , two oboes , two clarinets , two bassoons , two horns , two trumpets , timpani and strings . This amounts to the largest orchestra for which Mozart composed any of his concertos . It is the only one of Mozart 's piano concertos that is scored for both oboes and clarinets . Robert D. Levin writes : " The richness of wind sonority , due to the inclusion of oboes and clarinets , is the central timbral characteristic of [ the concerto ] : time and again in all three movements the winds push the strings completely to the side . " The solo instrument for the concerto is scored as a " <unk> " . This term often denotes a harpsichord , but in this concerto , Mozart used it as a generic term that encompassed the fortepiano . 
 = = First movement = = 
 The first movement is longer and more complex than any that Mozart had hitherto composed in the concerto genre . It is in 3 / 4 time ; among Mozart 's piano concertos , No. 11 in F major and No. 14 in E @-@ flat major are the only others to commence in triple metre . 
 The first movement follows the standard outline of a sonata form concerto movement of the Classical period . It begins with an orchestral exposition , which is followed by a solo exposition , a development section , a recapitulation , a cadenza and a coda . Within this conventional outline , Mozart engages in extensive structural innovation . 
 = = = Exposition = = = 
 The orchestral exposition , 99 measures long , presents two groups of thematic material , one primary and one secondary , both in the tonic of C minor . The orchestra opens the principal theme in unison , but not powerfully : the dynamic marking is piano . The theme is tonally ambiguous , not asserting the home key of C minor until its final cadence in the thirteenth measure . It is also highly chromatic : in its 13 measures it utilises all 12 notes of the chromatic scale . 
 The solo exposition follows its orchestral counterpart , and it is here that convention is discarded from the outset : the piano does not enter with the principal theme . Instead , it has an 18 @-@ measure solo passage . It is only after this passage that the principal theme appears , carried by the orchestra . The piano then picks up the theme from its seventh measure . Another departure from convention is that the solo exposition does not re @-@ state the secondary theme from the orchestral exposition . Instead , a succession of new secondary thematic material appears . Musicologist Donald Tovey considered this introduction of new material to be “ utterly subversive of the doctrine that the function of the opening tutti [ the orchestral exposition ] was to predict what the solo had to say . ” 
 One hundred measures into the solo exposition , which is now in the relative major of E @-@ flat , the piano plays a cadential trill , leading the orchestra from the dominant seventh to the tonic . This suggests to the listener that the solo exposition has reached an end , but Mozart instead gives the woodwinds a new theme . The exposition continues for another 60 or so measures , before another cadential trill brings about the real conclusion , prompting a ritornello that connects the exposition with the development . The pianist and musicologist Charles Rosen argues that Mozart thus created a " double exposition " . Rosen also suggests that this explains why Mozart made substantial elongations to the orchestral exposition during the composition process ; he needed a longer orchestral exposition to balance its " double " solo counterpart . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The development begins with the piano repeating its entry to the solo exposition , this time in the relative major of E flat . The Concerto No. 20 is the only other of Mozart 's concertos in which the solo exposition and the development commence with the same material . In the Concerto No. 24 , the material unfolds in the development in a manner different from the solo exposition : the opening solo motif , with its half cadence , is repeated four times , with one intervention from the woodwinds , as if asking question after question . The final question is asked in C minor , and is answered by a descending scale from the piano that leads to an orchestral statement , in F minor , of the movement 's principal theme . The orchestral theme is then developed : the motif of the theme 's fourth and fifth measures descends through the circle of fifths , accompanied by an elaborate piano figuration . After this , the development proceeds to a stormy exchange between the piano and the orchestra , which the twentieth @-@ century Mozart scholar Cuthbert Girdlestone describes as " one of the few [ occasions ] in Mozart where passion seems really unchained " , and which Tovey describes as a passage of " fine , severe massiveness " . The exchange resolves to a passage in which the piano plays a treble line of sixteenth notes , over which the winds add echoes of the main theme . This transitional passage ultimately modulates to the home key of C minor , bringing about the start of the recapitulation with the conventional re @-@ statement , by the orchestra , of the movement 's principal theme . 
 = = = Recapitulation , cadenza and coda = = = 
 The wide range of thematic material presented in the orchestral and solo expositions poses a challenge for the recapitulation . Mozart manages to recapitulate all of the themes in the home key of C minor . The themes are necessarily compressed , presented in a different order and with few virtuosic moments for the soloist . The last theme to be recapitulated is the secondary theme of the orchestral exposition , which has not been heard for some 400 measures and is now adorned by a passage of triplets from the piano . The recapitulation concludes with the piano playing arpeggiated sixteenths before a cadential trill leads into a ritornello . The ritornello in turn leads into a fermata that prompts the soloist 's cadenza . 
 Mozart did not write down a cadenza for the movement , or at least there is no evidence of him having done so . The lack of a Mozart cadenza led many 19th @-@ century composers and performers , including Johannes Brahms , to write their own . Uniquely among Mozart 's concertos , the score does not direct the soloist to end the cadenza with a cadential trill . The omission of the customary trill is likely to have been deliberate , with Mozart choosing to have the cadenza connect directly to the coda without one . 
 The conventional Mozartian coda would have seen the soloist with hands in lap ( or perhaps conducting ) while an orchestral tutti concluded the movement . In this movement , Mozart breaks with convention : the soloist interrupts the tutti with a virtuosic passage of sixteenth notes , and accompanies the orchestra through to the final pianissimo chords . These chords bring an end to the movement in the concerto 's home key of C minor . 
 = = Second movement = = 
 Alfred Einstein , writing in 1962 , said of the concerto 's second movement that it " moves in regions of the purest and most moving tranquility , and has a transcendent simplicity of expression " . Marked Larghetto , the movement is in E @-@ flat major and cut common time . The trumpets and timpani play no part in the movement ; they return for the third movement . 
 The movement opens with the soloist playing the four @-@ measure principal theme alone ; it is then repeated by the orchestra . This theme is , in the words of Michael Steinberg , one of " extreme simplicity " . This was not always the case : Mozart 's first sketch of the movement was much more complex . Mozart likely simplified the theme to provide a greater contrast with the dark intensity of the first movement . After the orchestra repeats the principal theme there is a very simple four @-@ measure bridge passage that Girdlestone calls to be ornamented by the soloist , arguing that " to play it as printed is to betray the memory of Mozart " . Following the bridge passage , the soloist plays the initial four @-@ measure theme for a second time , before the orchestra commences a new section of the movement , in C minor . A brief return of the principal theme , its rhythm altered , separates the C minor section from a section in A @-@ flat major . After the A @-@ flat major section , the principal theme returns to mark the end of the movement , its rhythm altered yet again . Now , the theme is played twice by the soloist , the two appearances being connected by the same simple four @-@ measure bridge passage from the beginning of the movement . Girdlestone argues that here " the soloist will have to draw on his imagination to adorn [ the simple bridge passage ] a second time " . The overall structure of the movement is thus <unk> . The use of a recurring principal theme ( " A " , in E @-@ flat major ) and two secondary sections ( " B " , in C minor , and " C " , in A @-@ flat major ) makes the movement <unk> as being in rondo form . 
 In the middle statement of the principal theme ( between the C minor and A @-@ flat major sections ) there is a notational error which , in a literal performance of the score , causes a harmonic clash between the piano and the winds . Mozart probably wrote the piano and wind parts at different times , resulting in an oversight by the composer . Alfred Brendel , who has recorded the concerto on multiple occasions , argues that performers should not follow the score literally but correct Mozart 's error . Brendel further argues that the time signature for the whole movement is a notational error : played in cut common time , the movement is , in his view , too fast . 
 = = Third movement = = 
 The third movement features eight variations on a C @-@ minor theme . Hutchings considered it " both Mozart 's finest essay in variation form and also his best concerto finale . " 
 The tempo marking for the movement is " Allegretto " . Rosen opines that this calls for a march @-@ like speed and argues that the movement is " generally taken too fast under the delusion that a quick tempo will give it a power commensurate with that of the opening movement . " Pianist Angela Hewitt sees in the movement not a march but a " sinister dance " . 
 The movement opens with the first violins stating the theme over a string and wind accompaniment . This theme consists of two eight @-@ measure phrases , each repeated : the first phrase modulates from C minor to the dominant , G minor ; the second phrase modulates back to C minor . The soloist does not play any part in the statement of the theme , entering only in Variation I. Here , the piano ornaments the theme over an austere string accompaniment . 
 Variations II to VI are what Girdlestone and Hutchings separately describe as " double " variations . Within each variation , each of the eight @-@ measure phrases from the theme is further varied upon its repeat ( <unk> ) . Variations IV and VI are in major keys . Tovey refers to the former ( in A @-@ flat ) as " cheerful " and the latter ( in C ) as " graceful " . Between the two major @-@ key variations , Variation V returns to C minor ; Girdlestone describes this variation as " one of the most moving " . Variation VII is half the length of the preceding variations , as it omits the repeat of each eight @-@ measure phrase . This variation concludes with an extra three @-@ measure passage that culminates in a dominant chord , announcing the arrival of a cadenza . 
 After the cadenza , the soloist opens the eighth and final variation alone , with the orchestra joining after 19 measures . The arrival of the final variation also brings a change in metre : from cut common time to compound duple time . The final variation and the coda which follows both contain numerous <unk> @-@ sixth chords ( which , in C minor , are composed of F , A @-@ flat and D @-@ flat ) . Girdlestone referred to the " haunting " effect of these chords and stated that the coda ultimately " proclaims with desperation the triumph of the minor mode " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Ludwig van Beethoven admired the concerto and it may have influenced his Piano Concerto No. 3 , also in C minor . After hearing the work in a rehearsal , Beethoven reportedly remarked to a colleague that " [ w ] e shall never be able to do anything like that . " Johannes Brahms also admired the concerto , encouraging Clara Schumann to play it and writing his own cadenza for the first movement . Brahms referred to the work as a " masterpiece of art and full of inspired ideas . " 
 Among modern and twentieth @-@ century scholars , Girdlestone states that the concerto " is in all respects one of [ Mozart 's ] greatest ; we would fain say : the greatest , were it not impossible to choose between four of five of them . " Referring to the " dark , tragic and passionate " nature of the concerto , Einstein states that " it is hard to imagine the expression on the faces of the Viennese public " when Mozart premiered the work . Musicologist Simon P. Keefe , in an exegesis of all of Mozart 's piano concertos , writes that the No. 24 is " a climactic and culminating work in Mozart 's piano concerto oeuvre , firmly linked to its predecessors , yet decisively transcending them at the same time . " The verdict of the Mozart scholar Alexander Hyatt King is that the concerto is " not only the most sublime of the whole series but also one of the greatest pianoforte concertos ever composed " . Arthur Hutchings 's view is that " [ w ] hatever value we put upon any single movement from the Mozart concertos , we shall find no work greater as a concerto than this K. 491 , for Mozart never wrote a work whose parts were so surely those of ' one stupendous whole ' . " 
 = 61st Infantry Division ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 61st Infantry Division was an infantry division of the British Army , raised in 1939 as part of the expansion of the Territorial Army in response to the Nazi German occupation of Czechoslovakia . The division was created as a duplicate of the 48th ( South Midland ) Infantry Division , and was assigned to home defence duties . 
 While the division was never deployed overseas , its headquarters staff was deployed to Norway and briefly fought in the Norwegian Campaign . Afterwards , the division was deployed to Northern Ireland for almost three years as a result of rumours of a German intention to invade . In Northern Ireland , the division manned static defences , conducted internal security , and trained for future operations . Returning to England , the division participated in numerous military exercises and was scheduled to join the 21st Army Group for the Operation Overlord ; the Allied invasion of German @-@ occupied France . By late 1943 , this role had been taken away from the division and it was assigned to train replacements for combat units . Throughout 1944 , the division aided Overlord in various deception formats while most of the men were posted to combat formations within 21st Army Group . In late 1945 , the division was re @-@ organized as a light division and was going to be deployed to the Far East to fight Imperial Japan . The Japanese surrender resulted in the move not being made , and in November the division was disbanded . 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout the 1930s tensions built between Nazi Germany and the United Kingdom as well as its allies . During late 1937 , and throughout 1938 , German demands for the annexation of Czechoslovakia 's Sudetenland led to an international crisis . In an attempt to avoid war , British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain met with German Chancellor Adolf Hitler in September and brokered the Munich Agreement . The agreement averted war and allowed Germany to annex the Sudetenland . While it had been intended as an agreement to reconcile differences , and for future issues to be resolved peacefully , relations between both countries soon deteriorated . On 15 March 1939 , Germany breached the terms of the agreement by invading and occupying the remnants of the Czech state . 
 In response , on 29 March , the British Secretary of State for War Leslie Hore @-@ Belisha announced plans to increase the Territorial Army from 130 @,@ 000 men to 340 @,@ 000 and in so doing double the number of territorial divisions . The intended plan of action was for the existing units to recruit over their allowed establishments ( aided by an increase in pay for territorials , the removal of restrictions on promotion that had been a major hindrance to recruiting during the preceding years , the construction of better quality barracks , and an increase in supper @-@ time rations ) and then form ' Second Line ' divisions from small cadres that could be built upon . As a result , the 61st Infantry Division was to be created as a Second Line unit , a duplicate of the First Line 48th ( South Midland ) Infantry Division . In April , limited conscription was introduced . At that time 34 @,@ 500 ' Militiamen ' , all of the age of 20 , were conscripted into the regular army with the intent of being trained for six months before being deployed to the forming second line units . However , despite the intention for the army to grow in size , the programme was complicated by a lack of central guidance on the expansion and duplication process , and issues regarding the lack of facilities , equipment , and instructors . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Initial service = = = 
 Despite the ongoing efforts and some regiments being able to recruit the required numbers to form new battalions , the whole process had – in the words of historian James P. Levy – " not progressed beyond the paper stage when [ the Second World War ] began in September . " By the outbreak of the war , the division was active , under the command of Major @-@ General Robert J. Collins , and was composed of the 182nd , 183rd , and 184th Infantry Brigades and supporting elements . Following the division 's formation , it was assigned to Southern Command . At the end of November , Major @-@ General Adrian Carton de Wiart took command . The division was spread out , ranging from Birmingham to Portsmouth , and Cheltenham to Reading , and with the headquarters based in Oxford . On 15 April , Carton de Wiart , as well as the divisional staff , were deployed to Norway , and Major @-@ General Edmond Schreiber was given command of the division . 
 = = = Headquarters deployed to Norway = = = 
 In their opening assault upon Norway , German troops had seized Trondheim . In response , the British Army planned to launch a two pronged pincer attack to retake the city . The troops to undertake this attack came from the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division ( a first line territorial division ) , which had already been earmarked for service in Norway prior to the German invasion . The division was temporarily broken up , with its brigades acting as individual commands . The 146th Infantry Brigade , which would make up the bulk of Mauriceforce and form the northern pincer began landing on 17 April . Due to time restraints and troops already assigned to the expedition , the division was not deployed to Norway . Instead , Carton de Wiart was given command of Mauriceforce and was allowed to select his staff which he drew from his headquarters . The southern pincer , 200 miles ( 320 km ) to the south and separated by mountainous terrain and rivers , was to be undertaken by Major @-@ General Bernard Paget 's <unk> that had landed at Åndalsnes . 
 Soon after arriving , the 146th 's leading battalions began to move south . On 21 April , Carton De Wiart 's troops engaged in the first encounter of the war between British and German troops . The British troops , largely confined to the road network and advancing in deep snow , were engaged by a slightly larger German force that was supported by artillery and air support . The Germans , utilizing sledges , motorcycles , and ski @-@ troops were able to outmanoeuvre and force back the British . German follow @-@ up attacks did not materialize , however the Luftwaffe heavily bombed the small port at Namsos . Carton De Wiart cabled the War Office and stated " with my lack of equipment I was quite incapable of advancing on Trondheim and could see very little point in remaining in that part of Norway sitting out like rabbits in the snow . " The evacuation was not ordered until the end of the month and then completed in the early days of May , following the loss of 157 men of Mauriceforce . The lack of success in Norway , and the withdrawal of the forces attempting to retake Trondheim resulted in the collapse of Chamberlain 's Government . Carton De Wiart , considered a daring and aggressive commander , was – per historian Jack Adams – " hampered by ... climatic and geographic conditions " in addition to his troops being " inexperienced , poorly prepared and badly backed up " . 
 = = = Deployment to Northern Ireland = = = 
 As early as the middle of May , while the Battle of France was still being waged , the British Government began to fear that Germany would immediately launch an invasion of the British Isles . This fear was compounded by , as historian Paul McMahon commented , the " catastrophic Allied defeats " that soon followed , which produced " two <unk> in the summer of 1940 : first , fear of imminent invasion and , second , a ' fifth column panic ' . " The initial fear of invasion was aroused by the alleged capture of German documents , by the Dutch , which contained plans for a German invasion and also included information regarding a simultaneous attack on Ireland by paratroopers who were to be assisted by the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) . This document , which no longer exists , caused panic within the British Government . This information was reinforced , in the following months , by reports warning of a German intent to invade Ireland from diplomatic missions and the Secret Intelligence Service ( SIS ) . On 14 May , following his return to the United Kingdom , Carton De Wiart resumed command of the 61st Infantry Division . After the British Expeditionary Force was evacuated from France , the British acted on the rumours of the German intent to invade Ireland , and the decision was made to reinforce the garrison ( the 53rd ( Welsh ) Infantry Division ) by deploying the 61st Infantry Division ( Over the following 12 months , the division would be followed by the 5th and 48th ( South Midland ) Divisions and the 71st and 72nd Independent Infantry Brigades ) . 
 McMahon commented that the SIS had a history of " furnish [ ing ] unreliable information on the IRA 's foreign intrigues . " Yet , these past failures were ignored as the reports reinforced the fears of invasion . <unk> suggested that " It is even possible that the plans discovered in Holland were planted . Whether deliberate deception or not , British intelligence was well and truly deceived . " Historian <unk> O <unk> argued that while the Dutch document could be seen as a British fabrication , " it is now known ... that German deception operations prepared in anticipation of Operation ' Sealion ' included the manufacturing of rumours and stories of plans to attack Ireland as a feint during the build up to an invasion of Southern England . " Nicholas Mansergh commented that " Ireland had no place " in the initial Sealion plans , and it was not until 3 December 1940 that German planners even looked at the possibility before concluding that such an operation was not possible or if launched would result in failure . In his memoirs , Carton De Wiart commented " I can never believe the Germans had any intention of invading Ireland but I am very grateful for any reason which sent us there , for it was an ideal training ground for troops and the division improved enormously from the moment of our arrival . " 
 The 61st moved to Northern Ireland , and came under the command of Northern Ireland District on 20 June . The division was responsible for manning the static defences across Northern Ireland and defending Belfast , as well as being responsible for the internal security of the country . While based across most of Northern Ireland , it was largely positioned within County Antrim , County Londonderry , and County Tyrone , with the divisional headquarters at Ballymena . The division trained to repel seaborne invasions from German forces , in addition to airborne landings and small raids . The beaches of County Antrim and Londonderry were seen as the most likely areas for an invasion , and by the end of autumn , concrete pillars , barbed wire entanglements , and camouflaged firing positions had been constructed . During the division 's stay in Northern Ireland , Lieutenant @-@ General Henry Pownall took command of British forces in the country . His appointment resulted in Carton De Wiart losing command of the division on grounds of his age ( one month shy of his 61st birthday ) . Carton De Wiart was replaced by Major @-@ General Charles <unk> @-@ Leggatt , who assumed command on 6 April 1941 , and was in turn followed by Major @-@ General John Owen Carpenter on 15 September 1942 . 
 = = = Return to England , training , and Operation Overlord = = = 
 The division returned to the England on 4 February 1943 , and was placed under the command of XI Corps and based in Essex . Between 4 – 12 March , the division participated in Exercise Spartan ; the largest military exercise ever held in the United Kingdom . David French commented that the exercise " was designed to analyse the problems that would arise after a force had landed on a hostile shore and was advancing from a bridgehead . " The exercise revealed weaknesses in elements of the senior leadership , in particular the officers in overall command of the armies deployed for the exercise , and highlighted the improvements made in general by the infantry . In May , the division was transferred to II Corps and moved to Kent following @-@ which Major @-@ General Charles Wainwright took command . The division was earmarked for a role in Operation Overlord and Marcus Cunliffe wrote that Exercise Spartan " seemed to be every indication that " the division was to be a front @-@ line unit . In September , the division in conjunction with the 1st Polish Armoured Division was placed under the control of II Canadian Corps for Exercise Link . In the months following the exercise , the division was relegated to ' Lower Establishment ' status . This meant that the division was now to be strictly used for home defence in a static role compared to ' Higher Establishment ' divisions that were intended for deployment overseas and combat . As part of this change in priorities , the division also became a training formation and one intended to find suitable replacements for fighting formations . By October , the division had also been assigned to anti @-@ invasion duties in Kent . While based there , German cross @-@ Channel guns periodically shelled the area , and in 1944 V @-@ 1 flying bombs became a minor issue . In December 1943 , the division ( reinforced , for the exercise , by the 31st Tank Brigade ) played the defending force in Exercise Vulcan ; a four @-@ day training exercise aimed at improving the attacking process of the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division . 
 During 1944 , the division aided Operation Overlord in a number of formats . On 9 April , the 183rd Infantry Brigade ceased to exist as an formation and formed HQ <unk> Concentration Area to aid the invasion preparation . The 4th Battalion , Northamptonshire Regiment and the 10th Battalion , Worcestershire Regiment were attached to 21st Army Group to aid 185th Camouflage Field Company , Royal Engineers . The men of the 4th Northamptonshire Regiment created 150 fake Landing Craft Tanks ( LCTs ) , made from steel tubing and canvas , and positioned them along the River Deben at Ipswich , as well as at Oulton Broad , Lowestoft and Great Yarmouth . The 10th Worcestershire Regiment constructed fake landing craft at Dover , Folkestone , and Harwich , in addition to fake LCTs on the River Orwell . By 6 June , the battalion had constructed 122 such dummy displays . In May , as part of Operation Fortitude , Juan Pujol García ( the British double agent known as Garbo ) reported to the Germans that the division was ostensibly based around Brighton and Newhaven . Here , in addition to 45th Infantry Division and Royal Marines , it allegedly took part in the build @-@ up of the notional First United States Army Group ( FUSAG ) . The division was then made part of the fictional British VII Corps , part of the equally fake Fourth Army , and ' travelled ' to Scotland before returning south to FUSAG . Furthermore , signallers from the division maintained wireless traffic to give the Germans the impression that VII Corps also included the notional 80th Division . 
 By mid @-@ 1944 , the five ' Lower Establishment ' divisions allocated to home defence duties ( the 38th ( Welsh ) , the 45th , the 47th ( London ) , the 55th ( West Lancashire ) , and the 61st ) had a combined total of 17 @,@ 845 men . Of this number , around 13 @,@ 000 were available as replacements for the 21st Army Group fighting in France . The remaining 4 @,@ 800 men were considered ineligible at that time for service abroad for a variety of reasons , including a lack of training or being medically unfit . Over the following six months , up to 75 per cent of these men would be deployed to reinforce 21st Army Group following the completion of their training and certification of fitness . For example , those eligible for overseas service from the 9th Battalion , Worcestershire Regiment were transferred to 21st Army Group . The battalion was then tasked with training those who were considered unfit , re @-@ training soldiers who had recovered from wounds , and training men from anti @-@ aircraft units to become infantry . On 18 July , HQ <unk> Concentration Area reverted to its former infantry role . Two days later , the brigade staff of 184th Infantry Brigade became the headquarters of 183rd Infantry Brigade and likewise the headquarters staff of the 183rd became HQ 184th Infantry Brigade . In August , the 4th Northamptonshire was transferred to Force 135 that was planning to end the German occupation of the Channel Islands . Such an attack did not materialize , and the entire force was transferred to Europe to reinforce 21st Army Group . On 1 September , the 184th Infantry Brigade ( while remaining part of the division ) was transferred to the Orkney and Shetland Islands for a two @-@ month stint as the defensive garrison . Over the remainder of the year , and into 1945 the makeup of the division changed . However , the role of the division remained the same . For example , the 4th Battalion , Devonshire Regiment role was find drafts for other battalions fighting overseas . 
 = = = Light division , and disbandment = = = 
 In August 1945 , following the conclusion of the war in Europe , the division was reorganized as a light division . The light division concept had been undertaken during the Burma Campaign following the initial defeats . Historian F.W. Perry commented that the British Indian Army concluded that " existing Indian formations were over @-@ mechanised and road @-@ bound . " Therefore , the surviving 17th Indian Division was reorganised as a light division . This included being reduced to two infantry brigades , all non @-@ cross country capable vehicles being replaced with mules , jeeps , and four @-@ wheel drive trucks , and the field artillery either completely replaced by pack howitzers or mechanised . These changes greatly increased the off @-@ road mobility , and the increase in pack animals allowed it to operate away from a road network for an extended period of time . 
 The 61st retained its three infantry brigades , although there were changes to the divisional troops along the above lines . It was intended that the division would be able to be transferred by air to any theatre of war , and its personnel trained to fight in any terrain encountered . Once on the ground , the entire division would be mobile utilizing only jeeps . To help adapt to this new role , training exercises were carried out . The initial destination for the division was the Far East to support the fight against Imperial Japan . However , the Japanese surrender resulted in the move being cancelled , and the division never left the United Kingdom . In November , the division was disbanded . 
 = = General officer commanding = = 
 = = Order of Battle = = 
 = Smells Like Teen Spirit = 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " is a song by the American rock band Nirvana . It is the opening track and lead single from the band 's second album , Nevermind ( 1991 ) , released on DGC Records . Written by Kurt Cobain , Krist Novoselic , and Dave Grohl ( lyrics by Cobain , music by Nirvana ) and produced by Butch Vig , the song uses a verse @-@ chorus form where the main four @-@ chord riff is used during the intro and chorus to create an alternating loud and quiet dynamic . The sound of the song ( as Cobain admitted ) is modeled after the sound of the Pixies . 
 The unexpected success of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " in late 1991 propelled Nevermind to the top of the charts at the start of 1992 , an event often marked as the point where alternative rock entered the mainstream . " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was Nirvana 's biggest hit , reaching number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and placing high on music industry charts all around the world in 1991 and 1992 . 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " received many critical plaudits , including topping the Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics ' poll and winning two MTV Video Music Awards for its music video , which was in heavy rotation on music television . The song was dubbed an " anthem for apathetic kids " of Generation X , but the band grew uncomfortable with the success and attention it received as a result . In the years since Cobain 's death , listeners and critics have continued to praise " Smells Like Teen Spirit " as one of the greatest songs of all time . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 In a January 1994 Rolling Stone interview , Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain revealed that " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was an attempt to write a song in the style of the Pixies , a band he greatly admired . He explained : 
 I was trying to write the ultimate pop song . I was basically trying to rip off the Pixies . I have to admit it . When I heard the Pixies for the first time , I connected with that band so heavily that I should have been in that band — or at least a Pixies cover band . We used their sense of dynamics , being soft and quiet and then loud and hard . 
 Cobain did not begin to write " Smells Like Teen Spirit " until a few weeks before recording started on Nirvana 's second album , Nevermind , in 1991 . When he first presented the song to his bandmates , it comprised just the main riff and the chorus vocal melody , which bassist Krist Novoselic dismissed at the time as " ridiculous . " In response , Cobain made the band play the riff for " an hour and a half . " In a 2001 interview , Novoselic recalled that after playing the riff repeatedly , he thought , " ' Wait a minute . Why don 't we just kind of slow this down a bit ? ' So I started playing the verse part . And Dave [ started ] playing a drum beat . " As a result , it is the only song on Nevermind to credit all three band members as authors . 
 Cobain came up with the song 's title when his friend Kathleen Hanna , at the time the lead singer of the riot grrrl band Bikini Kill , wrote " Kurt Smells Like Teen Spirit " on his wall . Since they had been discussing anarchism , punk rock , and similar topics , Cobain interpreted the slogan as having a revolutionary meaning . What Hanna actually meant , however , was that Cobain smelled like the deodorant Teen Spirit , which his then @-@ girlfriend Tobi Vail wore . Cobain later claimed he was unaware that it was a brand of deodorant until months after the single was released . 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was , along with " Come as You Are " , one of a few new songs that had been written since Nirvana 's first recording sessions with producer Butch Vig in 1990 . Prior to the start of the Nevermind recording sessions , the band sent Vig a rough cassette demo of song rehearsals that included " Teen Spirit " . While the sound of the tape was wildly distorted due to the band playing at a loud volume , Vig could pick out some of the melody and felt the song had promise . Nirvana recorded " Smells Like Teen Spirit " at Sound City recording studio in Van Nuys , California with Vig in May 1991 . Vig suggested some arrangement changes to the song , including moving a guitar ad lib into the chorus , and trimming down the chorus length . The band recorded the basic track for the song in three takes , and decided to keep the second one . Vig incorporated some sonic corrections into the basic live band performance because Cobain had timing difficulties when switching between his guitar effects pedals . Vig was only able to get three vocal takes from Cobain ; the producer commented , " I was lucky to ever get Kurt to do four takes . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " follows a F – B ♭ – A ♭ – D ♭ chord progression , with the main guitar riff constructed from four power chords played in a syncopated sixteenth note strum by Cobain . The guitar chords were double tracked because the band " wanted to make it sound more powerful , " according to Vig . The chords occasionally lapse into suspended chord voicings as a result of Cobain playing the bottom four strings of the guitar for the thickness of sound . Listeners made many comments that the song bore a passing resemblance to Boston 's 1976 hit " More Than a Feeling " . Cobain himself held similar opinions , saying that it " was such a clichéd riff . It was so close to a Boston riff or [ The Kingsmen 's ] ' Louie Louie . ' " However , Rikky Rooksby points out that " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and " More Than a Feeling " follow different chord progressions . 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " uses a " somewhat conventional formal structure " consisting of four- , eight- , and twelve @-@ bar sections that includes an eight @-@ bar verse , an eight @-@ bar first chorus ( pre @-@ chorus ) , and a twelve @-@ bar second chorus ( main chorus ) . Musicologist Graeme Downes , who led the band The <unk> , says that " Smells Like Teen Spirit " illustrates developing variation . Elements of the song 's structure are marked off with shifts in volume and dynamics , going back and forth from quiet to loud a number of times during the length of the recording . This structure of " quiet verses with wobbly , chorused guitar , followed by big , loud hardcore @-@ inspired choruses " became a much @-@ emulated template in alternative rock because of " Teen Spirit " . 
 During the verses the band maintains the same chord progression as the chorus . Cobain plays a two @-@ note guitar line over Novoselic 's root @-@ note eighth note bassline , which outlines the chord progression . As the song moves closer to the choruses , Cobain begins to play the same two notes on every beat of the measure and repeats the word " Hello " . Following the first and second choruses , Cobain simultaneously sings the word " Yay " and performs a unison bend on his guitar . After the second chorus , Cobain plays a 16 @-@ bar guitar solo that almost completely restates his vocal melody from the verse and pre @-@ chorus . During the closing refrain , Cobain sings " A denial " repeatedly ; his voice becomes strained and is almost shot from the force of yelling . 
 = = Release , success , and acclaim = = 
 Issued to radio on August 27 , 1991 , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was released two weeks later on September 10 as the lead single from Nevermind , the band 's major label debut on DGC Records . The song did not initially chart , and it sold well only in regions of the United States with an established fanbase for the group . " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was not expected to be a hit , for it was merely intended to be the base @-@ building alternative rock cut from the album . It was anticipated that the follow @-@ up single " Come as You Are " would be the song that could cross over to mainstream formats . However , campus radio and modern rock radio stations picked up on the track , and placed it on heavy rotation . Danny Goldberg of Nirvana 's management firm Gold Mountain later admitted that " none of us heard it as a crossover song , but the public heard it and it was instantaneous [ . . . ] They heard it on alternative radio , and then they rushed out like lemmings to buy it . " The video received its world premiere on MTV 's late @-@ night alternative rock program 120 Minutes , and proved so popular that the channel began to air it during its regular daytime rotation . MTV added the video to its " Buzz Bin " selection in October , where it stayed until mid @-@ December . By the end of the year , the song , its accompanying video , and the Nevermind album had become hits . Both the song and Nevermind became a rare cross @-@ format phenomenon , reaching all the major rock radio formats including modern rock , hard rock , album rock , and college radio . 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " became a critical and commercial success . The song topped the 1991 Village Voice " Pazz & Jop " and Melody Maker year @-@ end polls , and reached number two on Rolling Stone 's list of best singles of the year . The single peaked at number six on the Billboard singles chart the same week that Nevermind reached number one on the albums chart . " Teen Spirit " hit number one on the Modern Rock Tracks chart , and has since been certified platinum ( one million copies shipped ) by the Recording Industry Association of America . However , many American Top 40 stations were reluctant to play the song in regular rotation due to its sound , and restricted it to night @-@ time play . The single was also successful in other countries . In the United Kingdom , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " reached number seven and charted for 184 weeks . The song was nominated for two Grammy Awards : Best Hard Rock Performance with Vocal and Best Rock Song . Entertainment Weekly would later name Nirvana 's loss to Eric Clapton in the Best Rock Song category as one of the 10 biggest upsets in Grammy history . 
 In the wake of Nirvana 's success , Michael Azerrad wrote in a 1992 Rolling Stone article , " ' Smells Like Teen Spirit ' is an anthem for ( or is it against ? ) the ' Why Ask Why ? ' generation . Just don 't call Cobain a spokesman for a generation . " Nevertheless , the music press awarded the song an " anthem @-@ of @-@ a @-@ generation " status , placing Cobain as a reluctant spokesman for Generation X. The New York Times observed that " ' Smells Like Teen Spirit ' could be this generation ’ s version of the Sex Pistols ' 1976 single , ' Anarchy in the U.K. ' , if it weren ’ t for the bitter irony that pervades its title , " and added , " As Nirvana knows only too well , teen spirit is routinely bottled , shrink @-@ wrapped and sold . " The band grew uncomfortable with the song 's success , and in later concerts often pointedly excluded it from the set list . Prior to the release of the band 's 1993 follow @-@ up album In Utero , Novoselic remarked , " If it wasn 't for ' Teen Spirit ' I don 't know how Nevermind would have done , " and observed , " There are no ' Teen Spirits ' on In Utero . " Cobain said in 1994 , " I still like playing ' Teen Spirit , ' but it 's almost an embarrassment to play it [ . . . ] Everyone has focused on that song so much . " 
 In the years following Cobain 's 1994 death and the band 's breakup , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " has continued to garner critical acclaim , and is now often listed as one of the greatest songs of all time . It was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's list of " The Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " in 1997 . In 2000 , VH1 rated the song at number forty @-@ one on its " 100 Greatest Rock Songs " list , while MTV and Rolling Stone ranked it third on their joint list of the " 100 Greatest Pop Songs " . The Recording Industry Association of America placed " Smells Like Teen Spirit " at number eighty on their 2001 " Songs of the Century " list . In 2002 , NME awarded the song the number two spot on its list of " 100 Greatest Singles of All Time " , with Kerrang ! ranking it at number one on its own list of the " 100 Greatest Singles of All Time " . VH1 placed " Smells Like Teen Spirit " at number one on its list of " 100 Greatest Songs of the Past 25 Years " in 2003 , while that same year , the song came third in a Q poll of the " 1001 Best Songs Ever " . In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked " Smells Like Teen Spirit " ninth on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , and described its impact as " a shock wave of big @-@ amp purity , " noting that " [ it ] wiped the lingering jive of the Eighties off the pop map overnight . " The song was placed at number six in NME 's " Global Best Song Ever Poll " in 2005 . In the 2006 VH1 UK poll The Nation 's Favourite Lyric , the line " I feel stupid and contagious / Here we are now , entertain us " was ranked as the third @-@ favorite song lyric among over 13 @,@ 000 voters . VH1 placed " Smells Like Teen Spirit " at number one on its list of the " 100 Greatest Songs Of The ' 90s " in 2007 , while Rolling Stone ranked it number ten on its list of " The 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " . In 2009 , the song was voted number one for the third time in a row on the Triple J Hottest 100 of All Time in Australia ( it was first place previously in 1991 and 1998 ) . That same year , VH1 ranked the song seventh on its list of the " 100 Greatest Hard Rock Songs " . Despite previously proposing in its 2006 entry for Nevermind on " The All @-@ TIME 100 Albums " that " ' Smells Like Teen Spirit ' [ . . . ] may be the album 's worst song , " Time magazine later included it on its list of " The All @-@ TIME 100 Songs " in 2011 . That same year , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " kept its number nine ranking on Rolling Stone 's updated list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . NME placed the song at number two on its list of the " 100 Best Tracks Of The ' 90s " in 2012 , and at number one on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " in 2014 . In 2015 , the song was also named the most iconic song of all time according to a study by Goldsmith 's College , which analysed various songs featured in numerous ' all @-@ time best ' lists , using analytical software to compare their key , BPM , chord variety , lyrical content , timbral variety , and sonic variance – the result of which designated the title to this song . 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was re @-@ released as a limited edition 7 @-@ inch vinyl single in December 2011 . In an attempt to emulate a successful 2009 Facebook campaign to promote Rage Against the Machine 's song " Killing in the Name " , a similar online campaign has been launched to promote the Nirvana single to 2011 Christmas number one in the UK Singles Chart in protest at the dealings of The X Factor television series with the children 's charity <unk> . A similar campaign was also launched in Ireland to get the track to 2011 Christmas number one in the Irish Singles Chart . The campaign resulted in the song reaching number 11 on the UK Singles Chart , with 30 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 = = Lyrics and interpretation = = 
 The lyrics to " Smells Like Teen Spirit " were often difficult for listeners to decipher , both due to their <unk> and because of Cobain 's slurred , guttural singing voice . This problem was compounded by the fact that the Nevermind album liner notes did not include any lyrics for the songs aside from selected lyrical fragments . This <unk> contributed to the early resistance from radio stations towards adding the song to their playlists ; one Geffen promoter recalled that people from rock radio told her , " We can 't play this . I can 't understand what the guy is saying . " MTV went as far as to prepare a version of the video that included the lyrics running across the bottom of the screen , which they aired when the video was added to their heavy rotation schedule . The lyrics for the album — and some from earlier or alternate versions of the songs — were later released with the liner notes of the " Lithium " single in 1992 . American rock critic Dave Marsh noted comments by disc jockeys of the time that the song was " the ' Louie Louie ' of the nineties " and wrote , " Like ' Louie , ' only more so , ' Teen Spirit ' reveals its secrets reluctantly and then often incoherently . " Marsh , trying to decipher the lyrics of the song , felt after reading the correct lyrics from the song 's sheet music that " what I imagined was quite a bit better ( at least , more gratifying ) than what Nirvana actually sang , " and added , " Worst of all , I 'm not sure that I know more about [ the meaning of ] ' Smells Like Teen Spirit ' now than before I <unk> down for the official version of the facts . " 
 " Teen Spirit " is widely interpreted to be a teen revolution anthem , an interpretation reinforced by the song 's music video . In an interview conducted the day Nevermind was released , Cobain stated the song was about his friends , explaining , " We still feel as if we 're teenagers because we don 't follow the guidelines of what 's expected of us to be adults [ . . . ] It also has kind of a teen revolutionary theme . " As Cobain did more interviews , he changed his explanation of the song and rarely gave specifics about the song 's meaning . When discussing the song in Michael Azerrad 's biography Come as You Are : The Story of Nirvana , Cobain revealed that he felt a duty " to describe what I felt about my surroundings and my generation and people my age . " 
 The book Teen Spirit : The Stories Behind Every Nirvana Song describes " Teen Spirit " as " a typically murky Cobain exploration of meaning and meaninglessness . " Azerrad plays upon the juxtaposition of Cobain 's contradictory lyrics ( such as " It 's fun to lose and to pretend " ) and states " the point that emerges isn 't just the conflict of two opposing ideas , but the confusion and anger that the conflict produces in the narrator — he 's angry that he 's confused . " Azerrad 's conclusion is that the song is " alternately a sarcastic reaction to the idea of actually having a revolution , yet it also embraces the idea . " In Heavier Than Heaven , Charles R. Cross ' biography of Kurt Cobain , the author argues that the song is a reference to Cobain 's relationship with ex @-@ girlfriend Tobi Vail . Cross cites the line " She 's over @-@ bored and self @-@ assured " and states the song " could not have been about anyone else . " Cross backs up his argument with lyrics which were present in earlier drafts , such as " Who will be the King & Queen of the <unk> [ sic ] teens . " 
 Cobain has said , " The entire song is made up of contradictory ideas [ . . . ] It 's just making fun of the thought of having a revolution . But it 's a nice thought . " Drummer Dave Grohl has stated he does not believe the song has any message , and said , " Just seeing Kurt write the lyrics to a song five minutes before he first sings them , you just kind of find it a little bit hard to believe that the song has a lot to say about something . You need syllables to fill up this space or you need something that rhymes . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was the first for director Samuel Bayer . Bayer stated he believed he was hired because his test @-@ reel was so poor the band anticipated his production would be " punk " and " not corporate . " The video was based on the concept of a school concert which ends in anarchy and riot . Inspiration was taken from Jonathan Kaplan 's 1979 film , Over the Edge , as well as the Ramones ' film Rock ' n ' Roll High School . Filmed on a soundstage in Culver City , the video featured the band playing at a pep rally in a high school gym to an audience of apathetic students on bleachers , and cheerleaders wearing black dresses with the Circle @-@ A anarchist symbol . Occasionally , the scene would cut to a janitor ( played by Tony De La Rosa ) wearing a navy blue jumpsuit and dancing with a push broom handle . The video ends with the assembled students destroying the set and the band 's gear . The demolition of the set captured in the video 's conclusion was the result of genuine discontent . The extras that filled the bleachers had been forced to stay seated through numerous replays of the song for an entire afternoon of filming . Cobain convinced Bayer to allow the extras to mosh , and the set became a scene of chaos . " Once the kids came out dancing they just said ' fuck you , ' because they were so tired of this shit throughout the day , " Cobain said . Cobain disliked Bayer 's final edit and personally oversaw a re @-@ edit of the video that resulted in the version finally aired . One of Cobain 's major additions was the next @-@ to @-@ last shot of the video , which was a close @-@ up of his own face after it had been obscured for most of the video . Bayer noted that unlike subsequent artists he worked with , Cobain did not care about vanity , rather that " the video had something that was truly about what they were about . " The video had an estimated budget between $ 30 @,@ 000 and $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Like the song itself , the music video for " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was well received by critics . Rolling Stone writer David Fricke described the video as looking like " the greatest gig you could ever imagine . " In addition to a number one placing in the singles category , " Teen Spirit " also topped the music video category in the Village Voice 's 1991 " Pazz & Jop " poll . The video won Nirvana the Best New Artist and Best Alternative Group awards at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards , and in 2000 the Guinness World Records named " Teen Spirit " the Most Played Video on MTV Europe . In subsequent years Amy Finnerty , formerly of MTV 's Programming department , claimed the video " changed the entire look of MTV " by giving them " a whole new generation to sell to . " Rolling Stone placed the music video for " Smells Like Teen Spirit " at number two on their 1993 list of " The 100 Top Music Videos " . MTV ranked the song 's music video at number three on its " 100 Greatest Music Videos Ever Made " list in 1999 . VH1 placed the debut of the " Teen Spirit " video at number eighteen on its 2000 list of " 100 Greatest Rock & Roll Moments on TV " , noting that " the video [ ushered ] in alternative rock as a commercial and pop culture force . " In 2001 , VH1 ranked the video fourth on its " 100 Greatest Videos " list . The video has been parodied at least twice : in " Weird Al " Yankovic 's music video for " Smells Like Nirvana " and in Bob Sinclar 's 2006 music video for " Rock This Party ( Everybody Dance Now ) " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was first performed live on April 17 , 1991 at the OK Hotel in Seattle , Washington . The performance is featured on the DVD of the 2004 box set With the Lights Out , while shorter clips are included on the Nevermind Classic Albums DVD , as well as the documentary film Hype ! As the song 's lyrics had not yet been entirely written , there are notable differences between it and the final version . For example , the first performance started with " Come out and play , make up the rules " instead of the eventual opening of " Load up on guns , bring your friends . " A recording of the earlier version appears on With the Lights Out and again on Sliver : The Best of the Box . A similar early live performance of the song is found in the documentary 1991 : The Year Punk Broke , filmed during a 1991 summer tour in Europe with Sonic Youth . 
 Nirvana often altered the song 's lyrics and tempo for live performances . Some live performances of the song had the line " our little group has always been " changed to " our little tribe has always been , " which can be heard on the 1996 live album From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah . Rolling Stone remarked that the Wishkah version of " Teen Spirit " " [ found ] Cobain 's guitar reeling outside the song 's melodic boundaries and sparking new life in that nearly played @-@ out hit . " A notable alternate performance of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " occurred on BBC 's Top of the Pops in 1991 , during which the band refused to mime to the pre @-@ recorded backing track and Cobain sang in a deliberately low voice and altered numerous lyrics in the song ( for example , " Load up on guns , bring your friends " became " Load up on drugs , kill your friends " ) . Cobain later said he was trying to sound like former Smiths frontman Morrissey . When Top of the Pops was cancelled in 2006 , The Observer listed Nirvana 's performance of " Smells Like Teen Spirit " as the third greatest in the show 's history . This performance can be found on the 1994 home video Live ! Tonight ! Sold Out ! ! . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Smells Like Teen Spirit " has been covered by numerous artists . One of the first cover recordings was an acoustic piano version by Tori Amos on her 1992 Crucify EP , which Cobain referred to as " a great breakfast cereal version " . The jazz trio The Bad Plus recorded the track for its CD These Are the <unk> , the Melvins recorded a version on The Crybaby featuring former child star Leif Garrett , and the industrial act <unk> also released a tribute . The Moog Cookbook put out a synthesizer @-@ based cover version on The Moog Cookbook and the Japanese <unk> <unk> has recorded a beatboxed cover version . British group The Flying Pickets released an a cappella version of the song on their album The Original Flying Pickets : Volume 1 . Covers of the song on tribute albums include Blanks 77 on Smells Like Bleach : A Punk Tribute to Nirvana , and Beki Bondage on Smells Like Nirvana ; both released in 2000 . In 2005 , " Teen Spirit " was covered as a swing song by 1950s star Paul Anka . In 2006 , the band Flyleaf covered the song for Yahoo ! ' s LAUNCHcast service . In 2007 , Patti Smith included a cover version , which incorporated a piece of her poetry , on her album of cover songs Twelve . This was particularly a lyrical and melodic version of the song . A family @-@ friendly barbershop quartet version was performed by Beaker , Link Hogthrob , Rowlf the Dog , and Sam Eagle for the 2011 film The Muppets and its soundtrack . A version appears on J * <unk> 's 2011 EP Evil Christian Cop . Robert Glasper Experiment covered the song on its Grammy @-@ Award winning Black Radio album . 
 In January 2015 , Daniel Johns performed an innovative live cover of the song at Triple J 's Beat The Drum birthday celebration . 
 The song has been adapted into other forms over the years . Germany 's Atari Teenage Riot sampled " Smells Like Teen Spirit " in the song " Atari Teenage Riot " from their 1997 album , Burn , Berlin , Burn ! DJ Balloon , a German techno DJ , also used the sample in his song " <unk> " . An instrumental cover version ( slightly altered and named " Self High @-@ Five " to avoid legal complications ) was produced by World Championship Wrestling as the entrance music for wrestler Diamond Dallas Page . 
 In addition to cover versions , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " has also inspired a few parodies . " Weird Al " Yankovic parodied the song in 1992 with " Smells Like Nirvana " , a song about Nirvana itself . Yankovic parodied the difficulty in understanding Cobain 's singing as well as the lyrics and their meaning . Yankovic has said Kurt Cobain told him he realized that Nirvana had " made it " when he heard the parody . In 1995 , the queercore band Pansy Division recorded a parody of the song called " Smells Like Queer Spirit " for its Pile Up album . Pansy Division guitarist Jon <unk> insisted that his band 's version of the song was not a parody but " an affectionate tribute " . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Kurt Cobain – guitar , vocals 
 Krist Novoselic – bass 
 Dave Grohl – drums 
 = Typhoon Ida ( 1958 ) = 
 Typhoon Ida , also known as the Kanogawa Typhoon ( <unk> , Kanogawa Taifū ) , was the third deadliest typhoon in Japan . On September 20 , Ida formed in the Western Pacific near Guam . It moved to the west and rapidly intensified into a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) typhoon by the next day . On September 22 , Ida turned to the north and continued its quick rate of intensification . Two days later , the Hurricane Hunters observed a minimum barometric pressure of 877 mb ( 25 @.@ 9 inHg ) , as well as estimated peak winds of 325 km / h ( 200 mph ) . This made Ida the strongest tropical cyclone in the world at the time , although it was surpassed by Typhoon June 17 years later . Ida weakened as it continued to the north @-@ northeast , and made landfall in Japan on southeastern Honshū with winds of 80 mph on September 26 . It became extratropical the next day , and dissipated on the 28th to the east of the country . Ida caused torrential flooding to southeastern Japan , resulting in over 1 @,@ 900 mudslides . Damage was estimated at $ 50 million , and there were 1 @,@ 269 fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Ida formed east of Guam on September 20 , 1958 . The storm moved westward , crossing the island as it gradually intensified into a typhoon . On September 22 , Ida began a motion to the north , following a path typical of September typhoons . Around that time , the Hurricane Hunters reported that the eye was obscured , and over the subsequent 24 hours the eyewall remained incomplete . However , over a 14 @-@ hour period beginning at 1500 UTC on September 23 , Typhoon Ida began undergoing rapid deepening , at times a rate of 5 @.@ 8 mbar ( 0 @.@ 17 inHg ) per hour . The eye became increasingly well @-@ defined , and near 0500 UTC on September 24 , a reconnaissance aircraft deployed a dropsonde in the typhoon about 600 mi ( 970 km ) northwest of Guam . The instrument recorded a barometric pressure of 877 mbar ( 25 @.@ 9 inHg ) , which made Ida the strongest tropical cyclone on record at the time as measured by pressure . 
 Around the time of its lowest pressure , the Hurricane Hunters estimated sustained winds in Ida of 345 km / h ( 215 mph ) . The reconnaissance flight observed a surface temperature in the eye of 33 ° C ( 92 ° F ) with 50 % humidity ; such a warm and dry eye was rather unusual for being located over the open ocean . By less than 36 hours after its peak intensity , aircraft reported that the eye had become filled with clouds , which indicated weakening . Ida 's winds gradually decreased , and the typhoon struck Japan in southeastern Honshu on September 26 with winds of 190 km / h ( 120 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 949 millibars ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) . The typhoon crossed the eastern portion of the country and emerged from Fukushima Prefecture into the Pacific Ocean . Early on September 27 , Ida became extratropical , and its remnants moved through Sapporo and the Kuril Islands before dissipating late on September 28 . 
 When the Hurricane Hunters reported Ida 's lowest pressure , the measurement was 10 mb ( 0 @.@ 30 inHg ) lower than the previous record of 887 mbar ( 26 @.@ 2 inHg ) , set by a typhoon in 1927 . Ida retained its status as the most intense typhoon until 1973 , when Typhoon Nora attained the same minimum pressure . In November 1975 , Typhoon June surpassed both and attained a minimum pressure of 875 mbar ( 25 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Typhoon Tip in October 1979 became the strongest on record with a minimum pressure of 870 mbar ( 26 inHg ) , which remains the record . Ida 's record pressure and wind speeds were broken by Hurricane Patricia of 2015 , which had a minimum pressure of 872 mbar ( 25 @.@ 8 inHg ) and 215 mph wind speeds . 
 = = Impact = = 
 While Typhoon Ida was striking Japan , it produced heavy rainfall that reached 748 @.@ 6 mm ( 29 @.@ 47 in ) on Mount Amagi on the Izu Peninsula . In the capital city of Tokyo , the storm dropped almost 430 mm ( 17 in ) of rainfall , which was the highest daily total since record @-@ keeping began in 1876 . Across the country , the rains caused flooding along the Kano , <unk> , and Arakawa rivers ; the flooding of the Kano River destroyed to villages along the Izu Peninsula . The rains resulted in at least 1 @,@ 900 landslides , including 786 in the Tokyo area . There was a storm tide of 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) in Chiba , which flooded 120 @,@ 000 acres of rice fields . Along the coast , there were 32 ships that were missing or sunk , and another 20 were damaged . In addition to the rains , the typhoon produced winds of up to 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) , with gusts of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) recorded in Tokyo ; however , wind damage was minor . 
 A report by Time Magazine in early October 1958 referred to Ida as the worst Japanese typhoon in 24 years , since the 1934 <unk> typhoon . In the Tokyo area , the storm caused widespread power outages and severely disrupted the transportation system . During the storm , communications were severed with the Izu Peninsula , where damage was heaviest . Across the country , more than 520 @,@ 000 homes were flooded , which is the most on record . As a result , the Japan Meteorological Agency gave Ida the special local name of the " Kanogawa Typhoon " . The typhoon damaged 16 @,@ 743 homes to some degree , including 2 @,@ 118 that were destroyed and another 2 @,@ 175 that were severely damaged . Although it was initially reported that the storm left about 500 @,@ 000 people homeless , the total was later lowered to 12 @,@ 000 people left homeless due to the storm . In addition , the typhoon destroyed more than 244 road or rail bridges . Overall damage was estimated at $ 50 million ( 1958 USD ) , or 20 @.@ 6 billion yen . Overall , the typhoon injured 1 @,@ 138 people and killed a total of 1 @,@ 269 people ; this makes Ida the third deadliest storm in the country . Included in the death toll were 381 people that were missing and presumed killed . 
 After the storm subsided , the United States military provided supplies and soldiers to assist in relief work . About 200 firemen along the Kano River assisted in relief efforts . 
 = Urania 's Mirror = 
 Urania 's Mirror ; or , a view of the Heavens is a set of 32 astronomical star chart cards , first published in November 1824 . They had illustrations based on Alexander Jamieson 's A Celestial Atlas , but the addition of holes punched in them allowed them to be held up to a light to see a depiction of the constellation 's stars . They were engraved by Sidney Hall , and were said to be designed by " a lady " , but have since been identified as the work of the Reverend Richard Rouse Bloxam , an assistant master at Rugby School . 
 The cover of the box @-@ set showed a depiction of Urania , the muse of astronomy , and came with a book entitled A Familiar Treatise on Astronomy ... written as an accompaniment . P. D. Hingley , the researcher who solved the mystery of who designed the cards a hundred and seventy years after their publication , considers them amongst the most attractive star chart cards of the many produced in the early 19th century . 
 = = Description = = 
 Urania 's Mirror illustrates 79 constellations , some of which are now obsolete , and various <unk> , such as Caput <unk> ( the head of Medusa , carried by Perseus ) . It was originally advertised as including " all the constellations visible in the British Empire " , but , in fact , leaves out the southern constellations and , by the second edition , advertisements merely claimed illustration of the constellations visible from " Great Britain " . Some cards focus on a single constellation , others include several , with Card 32 , centered on Hydra , illustrating twelve constellations ( several of which are no longer recognised ) . Card 28 has six , and no other card has more than four . Each card measures 8 inches by 5 1 ⁄ 2 ( about 20 by 14 cm ) . A book by Jehoshaphat Aspin entitled A Familiar Treatise on Astronomy ( or , to give its full name , A Familiar Treatise on Astronomy , Explaining the General Phenomena of the Celestial Bodies ; with Numerous Graphical Illustrations ) was written to accompany the cards . Both the book and cards were originally published by Samuel Leigh , 18 Strand , London , although the publishing firm had moved to 421 Strand and changed its name to M. A. Leigh by the fourth edition . The cards and books came within a box illustrated with a woman almost certainly intended to be Urania , muse of astronomy . 
 P.D. Hingley calls it " One of the most charming and visually attractive of the many aids to astronomical self @-@ instruction produced in the early nineteenth century " . On its main gimmick , the holes in the stars meant to show the constellation when held in front of a light , he notes that , as the size of the holes marked correspond to the magnitude of the stars , a quite realistic depiction of the constellation is provided . Ian Ridpath mostly concurs . He describes the device as an " attractive feature " , but notes that , due to the light at the time being provided primarily by candles , many cards likely burned up due to carelessness when trying to hold them in front of the flame . He notes three other attempts to use the same gimmick — Franz Niklaus König 's Atlas céleste ( 1826 ) , Friedrich Braun 's Himmels @-@ Atlas in <unk> Karten ( 1850 ) , and Otto <unk> 's <unk> ( 1851 ) , but states that they lack Urania 's Mirror 's artistry . 
 = = <unk> from A Celestial Atlas = = 
 The depictions of the constellations are redrawn from those in Alexander Jamieson 's A Celestial Atlas , published about three years earlier , and include unique quirks of Jamieson 's sky atlas , including the new constellation of <unk> the owl , and " Norma <unk> " – a measuring device for the Nile floods – held by Aquarius the water bearer . 
 = = Mystery of the designer , and solution = = 
 Advertisements for Urania 's Mirror , as well as the introduction to its companion book A Familiar Treatise on Astronomy , credit the design of the cards simply to a " lady " , who is described in the introduction of the book as being " young " . This led to speculation for over a century ; some proposed prominent female astronomers such as Caroline Herschel and Mary Somerville , others credited the engraver Sidney Hall , but no guess was seen as a particularly credible fit . The designer 's real identity was not discovered for some 170 years ; in 1994 , while archiving early election certificates used to propose people to be admitted to the Royal Astronomical Society , P. D. Hingley found one proposing the Reverend Richard Rouse Bloxam and naming him as " Author of Urania 's Mirror " . While he had several notable sons , he has no other known publications , his main distinction being to have served as assistant master at Rugby School for 38 years . 
 The reasons for the disguise are unknown . Hingley notes that many contemporary publications attempted to suggest women had played a role in their creation , perhaps to make them sound less threatening . He suggests that anonymity might have been necessary to protect Bloxam 's position at Rugby , but notes Rugby was quite progressive , which makes this unlikely ; and , finally , suggests modesty as a possibility . Ian Ridpath , noting the plagiarism of the art from A Celestial Atlas , suggests that this alone might be sufficient to cause the author to wish to remain anonymous . 
 = = Editions = = 
 A December 1824 advertisement , which states the cards were " just published " , offered the cards " plain " at £ 1 / 8s or " fully coloured " for £ 1 / 14s . This first edition did not include any stars surrounding the named constellations , leaving those parts blank . This was changed for the second edition , which added back stars around <unk> constellations . An American edition was published in 1832 . Modern reprints were produced in 1993 , and Barnes & Noble reproduced the American edition ( with accompanying book ) in 2004 . The accompanying book , A Familiar Treatise on Astronomy by Jehoshaphat Aspin went through at least four editions , with the last coming out in 1834 . The second edition featured a marked expansion in content , growing from 121 pages in the first edition to 200 pages in the second . The book , by the time of the 1834 American edition , consisted of an introduction , a list of the northern and southern constellations , a description of each of the plates , with the history and background of the constellations depicted , and an alphabetical list of named stars ( such as Achernar ) with their Bayer designation , magnitude , and respective constellation . 
 A " Second Part " of Urania 's Mirror , which was to have included illustrations of the planets and a portable orrery , was advertised , but no evidence exists to show it was ever released . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Constellations depicted = = 
 The constellations depicted , in the order they are listed on the cards , are : 
 In addition , Mons <unk> is shown below Boötes , Caput <unk> is shown as part of Perseus , and Cerberus is shown with Hercules . 
 = El Amor ( Ricardo Arjona song ) = 
 " El Amor " is a latin pop song by Guatemalan recording artist Ricardo Arjona , released on 23 August 2011 as the lead single from his thirteenth studio album , Independiente ( 2011 ) . The song was written and produced by Arjona along with longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos , with additional production work from Puerto Rican singer @-@ songwriter Tommy Torres . " El Amor " is the first single Arjona releases under his new record label , Metamorfosis . 
 Lyrically , " El Amor " was written by Arjona in an attempt to show all sides of love , explaining that " So many good things about love has been shown , that somebody had to turn it around and tell the bad ones " . The song became Arjona 's fourth single to reach number one on the US Billboard Top Latin Songs , and the seventh to do so on the Latin Pop Songs chart . It also became his first song ever to reach number one on the Tropical Songs chart , improving his previous peak of number two almost twelve years prior . " El Amor " also topped several national charts from Latin America . 
 An accompanying music video for " El Amor " was released in September 2011 . It was directed by Ricardo Calderón and filmed in black and white . The clip shows Arjona singing while a wedding is being celebrated inside a chapel . " El Amor " was performed by Arjona as part of a televised show broadcast by Televisa , which included guest appearances by Gaby Moreno , Ricky Muñoz from Mexican band Intocable and Paquita la del Barrio . It was also included on the set list for his ongoing tour , the Metamorfosis World Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 Independiente is the first album Arjona released as an independent artist , and through his own record label , Metamorfosis , a company he created to refocus his career . Presided by Arjona and some friends , Metamorfosis is based in Miami and Mexico City , and also includes the photographer and director Ricardo Calderón , Universal Music México 's executive Humberto Calderon and BMG 's Miriam Sommerz . Although the album is marketed with the new label , distribution was handled by Warner Music . Arjona commented many times , that he considered the way he decided to go independent raised more compromise than freedom , saying that " Inside the word ' Independent ' , even when it sounds like extreme freedom , there 's a big amount of compromise and the responsibility of being able to administrate , in the best way possible , such independence . " 
 Independiente was composed and written within one year , and marks the fourth time Arjona had collaborated with Tommy Torres , who had helped writing , composing , producing and providing backing vocals . The other three albums in which the two artists had worked together are Quién Dijo Ayer , in which Torres helped producing the singles " Quién " and " Quiero " , and offering additional work on the new versions of Arjona 's hits ; 5to Piso , and Adentro , respectively . Also , in the album , Arjona returned to his classic and trademark sound , which Torres has helped crafting it since six years now , after the drastic change he made in Poquita Ropa . On that album , the artist made use of the fewest instruments possible , simplifying his sound , and introducing what he called a " stripped @-@ down version of his music " . 
 Weeks before the release of Independiente , Arjona issued a letter in which he talked about his past relations with recording companies . In the letter , he revealed that he entered in his first record label as an exchange , commenting that " a producer , friend of mine , told them [ the record label ] that if they don 't sign me they won 't sign two artists he had [ at that time ] " , and that he received the " minimum royalty percentage " out from his most successful albums . Billboard notes that although other groups have decided to launch independently their works after having a contract with major record labels , Arjona is by far the most important artist in the Latin pop to follow this trend . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " El Amor " is a piano and guitar mid @-@ tempo Latin pop ballad written by Arjona and produced by himself alongside longtime collaborators Dan Warner , Lee Levin and Tommy Torres . Recording work was held by Torres , alongside Carlos " Junior " Cabral , Isaias García , Jerald Romero and Dan Rudin . The song is the first lead single to be produced by Arjona along with Torres since 5to Piso 's " Como Duele " back in 2008 . Poquita Ropa 's lead single , " Puente " ( 2010 ) , was produced by Arjona and Dan Warner . Torres also provided background vocals on the song . 
 " El Amor " was written by Arjona in an attempt to show all sides of love . As said by Arjona himself , " So many good things about love has been shown , that somebody had to turn it around and tell the bad ones " . The development of " El Amor " was motivated by Arjona 's idea of showing " those big dark events within love that nobody talk about " , saying that " love 's dark sides are really fundamental to understand its great value " . 
 In an interview in February 2012 , the singer stated that " El Amor " was the " most tawdry " song he has released throughout his career . He further added that the fact that they chose the song was a " contradiction " because it was not " the song which could better represent the entire album . " He also added that the song was " very strong " and " a bit dark " . The song marks the return of the signature and more mainstream sound of Arjona on a music basis , after the multi @-@ genre and politically charged Poquita Ropa 's lead single , " Puente " , which failed to make impact on the United States and only managed to reach # 36 on the Latin Pop Songs chart . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " El Amor " became Arjona 's first top ten single in the Billboard Top Latin Songs since " Sin Ti ... Sin Mi " in 2008 and the first to chart there since " Tocando Fondo " in 2009 . The song also restored Arjona 's chart success , after the Poquita Ropa era , on which none of the three singles released off the album managed to attain chart success , and eventually only one appeared on any chart . The song finally reached number one position on the list , becoming his fourth chart @-@ topper , and the first to do so since " El Problema " , ten years prior . On the Latin Pop Songs chart , " El Amor " became Arjona 's seventh song to reach the top spot of the chart , and the first to do so since " Como Duele " in 2008 . Also , " El Amor " became his first song ever to reach number one on the Tropical Songs chart , breaking his previous record held by " Cuando " , which reached number two twelve years prior , in 2000 . In Venezuela , " El Amor " reached a peak of number five . It also reached number six on Mexico . The song also became a hit in the rest Latin America , reaching number one in Argentina , Colombia , Chile , Costa Rica , Panama and Guatemala . On the Billboard year @-@ end charts for 2011 , " El Amor " finished at number 73 on the Top Latin Songs chart . The song also finished within the top fifty songs on the Latin Pop Songs and Tropical Songs charts , appearing at number 41 and number 44 , respectively . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 " El Amor " was released as the first single from Independiente on 23 August 2011 in Canada , United States and Mexico as a digital download through the iTunes Store . The single was later made available on the rest of Latin America and some European countries such as the United Kingdom , Spain , Germany and France on 6 September 2011 . " El Amor " is the first single Arjona released under his recently founded record label , Metamorfosis . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 Ricardo Arjona released on 8 September 2011 the music video for " El Amor " . It debuted on Arjona 's official website , and then was sent to music channels around United States and Latin America . The clip was shot in Mexico City and was filmed entirely in black @-@ and @-@ white . The music video was directed by Ricardo Calderón , who has also directed the music video for Arjona 's 2008 single " Como Duele " . Calderón also produced the video , as well as developing the story and design . Before releasing the video , the singer launched a contest on his website that consisted on uploading to his official YouTube account videos related to the song , and the winner received a trip to Argentina to meet him . 
 The clip starts with a bride reaching , on a limousine , the chapel on which she 's about to get married . As she is shown walking inside the chapel 's doors , Arjona starts to sing while sit on the chairs in the empty chapel . Then , the bride is shown again alongside the groom in the altar , ready to make the vows , while the chapel is filled with the invitees . Then , scenes of Arjona playing the piano and singing , and scenes of the ceremony are interpolated , showing the behaviour of the invitees . Later , the invitees are shown involved in discussions and fights while Arjona keeps singing the chorus and verses of the song . As the fights between the invitees increase , the groom rejects the bride and she , stunned , escapes from the chapel . Then , it is shown that all was an illusion from the bride , and they are shown exiting the chapel , married . As of 11 July 2012 , the video has reached 14 million views on YouTube . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 " El Amor " was in the set list for a televised program in 2011 . The special included guest singers such as Gaby Moreno , Ricky Muñoz ( from Mexican band Intocable ) and Paquita la del Barrio . Broadcast by Televisa , the program was made to showcast the new fourteen songs included on Independiente . Ricky Muñoz commented that he was " happy to do things for Ricardo [ Arjona ] " and elaborated that the met each other " some time ago " and that it was " a very special situation . " The show was later bordcasted on 5 November 2011 by Canal de las Estrellas . The song is also present on his ongoing Metamorfosis World Tour . It is performed while on the first of the four ambiences on the concert , alongside " Lo Que Está Bien Está Mal " , " Animal Nocturno " , " Hay Amores " and " Desnuda " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from Independiente liner notes . 
 = = Trackslisting = = 
 Digital Download 
 " El Amor " – 4 : 47 
 Remix featuring O 'Neill 
 " El Amor " ( featuring O 'Neill ) – 4 : 02 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Boat Race 1867 = 
 The 24th Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 13 April 1867 . In a race where the lead was exchanged several times , Oxford won by half a length in a time of 22 minutes and 39 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 14 – 10 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by three lengths in the previous year 's race and led overall with thirteen wins to Cambridge 's ten . 
 Cambridge , according to The Field were " as nearly fit to row as possible ... their rowing was really a pleasure to behold " . They were coached by Rev. W. Maule ( who had rowed for Cambridge at the Henley Royal Regatta in 1947 ) and D. F. <unk> ( who had rowed in the Boat Race in the 1864 and 1865 races ) . Walter Bradford Woodgate , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1862 and 1863 races , and George Morrison , former Oxford University Boat Club president who had rowed three times between the 1859 and 1861 race , coached the Dark Blue crew . Although Cambridge arrived at Putney in very good form , it was considered to their disadvantage because , according to Drinkwater , " no crew can be kept at the top of its form for more than a few days " . During practice runs , Oxford demonstrated they could outpace Cambridge , but with Frank Willan suffering from a boil , Oxford 's stroke was instructed to keep the rating low for the race . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 0 @.@ 5 lb ( 76 @.@ 2 kg ) , 2 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than their opponents ; for the first time in the race history , a crew weighed more than an average of 12 st ( 76 @.@ 0 kg ) . The Oxford crew saw the cox Charles Tottenham make his fourth Boat Race appearance and three rowers return , including Willan who was competing for the third time . Five former Blues returned for Cambridge , with William Griffiths and Herbert Watney making their third appearance in the event . According to a report in The Times , " sixteen finer or better trained young men it would have been difficult to find in England " . 
 = = Race = = 
 According to the Oxford Book , the weather on the morning of the race was " filthy ... raining and blowing like anything . " Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . The race commenced shortly before 9am , with Cambridge making the better start . Oxford slowly drew back into contention and the crews rowed side by side towards Hammersmith Bridge , by which point the Light Blues held a length 's lead . Beyond the bridge , Oxford began to close the gap once again , and lead was exchanged twice before Barnes Bridge . Following a number of spurts from both crews , Cambridge appeared to be exhausted , allowing Oxford the advantage , winning the race by half a length . It was Oxford 's seventh consecutive victory and took the overall record to 14 – 10 in their favour . 
 = General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon = 
 The General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon is a single @-@ engine multirole fighter aircraft originally developed by General Dynamics ( now Lockheed Martin ) for the United States Air Force ( USAF ) . Designed as an air superiority day fighter , it evolved into a successful all @-@ weather multirole aircraft . Over 4 @,@ 500 aircraft have been built since production was approved in 1976 . Although no longer being purchased by the U.S. Air Force , improved versions are still being built for export customers . In 1993 , General Dynamics sold its aircraft manufacturing business to the Lockheed Corporation , which in turn became part of Lockheed Martin after a 1995 merger with Martin Marietta . 
 The Fighting Falcon has key features including a frameless bubble canopy for better visibility , side @-@ mounted control stick to ease control while maneuvering , a seat reclined 30 degrees to reduce the effect of g @-@ forces on the pilot , and the first use of a relaxed static stability / fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight control system which helps to make it a nimble aircraft . The F @-@ 16 has an internal M61 Vulcan cannon and 11 locations for mounting weapons and other mission equipment . The F @-@ 16 's official name is " Fighting Falcon " , but " Viper " is commonly used by its pilots and crews , due to a perceived resemblance to a viper snake as well as the Battlestar Galactica Colonial Viper starfighter . 
 In addition to active duty for U.S. Air Force , Air Force Reserve Command , and Air National Guard units , the aircraft is also used by the USAF aerial demonstration team , the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds , and as an adversary / aggressor aircraft by the United States Navy . The F @-@ 16 has also been procured to serve in the air forces of 25 other nations . As of 2015 , it is the second most common currently operational military aircraft in the world . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Lightweight Fighter program = = = 
 Experiences in the Vietnam War revealed the need for air superiority fighters and better air @-@ to @-@ air training for fighter pilots . Based on his experiences in the Korean War and as a fighter tactics instructor in the early 1960s Colonel John Boyd with mathematician Thomas Christie developed the Energy – maneuverability theory to model a fighter aircraft 's performance in combat . Boyd 's work called for a small , lightweight aircraft that could maneuver with the minimum possible energy loss , and which also incorporated an increased thrust @-@ to @-@ weight ratio . In the late 1960s , Boyd gathered a group of like @-@ minded innovators that became known as the Fighter Mafia and in 1969 they secured Department of Defense funding for General Dynamics and Northrop to study design concepts based on the theory . 
 Air Force F @-@ X proponents remained hostile to the concept because they perceived it as a threat to the F @-@ 15 program . However , the Air Force 's leadership understood that its budget would not allow it to purchase enough F @-@ 15 aircraft to satisfy all of its missions . The Advanced Day Fighter concept , renamed F @-@ XX , gained civilian political support under the reform @-@ minded Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard , who favored the idea of competitive prototyping . As a result , in May 1971 , the Air Force Prototype Study Group was established , with Boyd a key member , and two of its six proposals would be funded , one being the Lightweight Fighter ( LWF ) . The Request for Proposals issued on 6 January 1972 called for a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) class air @-@ to @-@ air day fighter with a good turn rate , acceleration and range , and optimized for combat at speeds of Mach 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 6 and altitudes of 30 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 – 12 @,@ 000 m ) . This was the region where USAF studies predicted most future air combat would occur . The anticipated average flyaway cost of a production version was $ 3 million . This production plan , though , was only notional as the USAF had no firm plans to procure the winner . 
 = = = = Finalists selected and flyoff = = = = 
 Five companies responded and in 1972 , the Air Staff selected General Dynamics ' Model 401 and Northrop 's P @-@ 600 for the follow @-@ on prototype development and testing phase . GD and Northrop were awarded contracts worth $ 37 @.@ 9 million and $ 39 @.@ 8 million to produce the YF @-@ 16 and YF @-@ 17 , respectively , with first flights of both prototypes planned for early 1974 . To overcome resistance in the Air Force hierarchy , the Fighter Mafia and other LWF proponents successfully advocated the idea of complementary fighters in a high @-@ cost / low @-@ cost force mix . The " high / low mix " would allow the USAF to be able to afford sufficient fighters for its overall fighter force structure requirements . The mix gained broad acceptance by the time of the prototypes ' flyoff , defining the relationship of the LWF and the F @-@ 15 . 
 The YF @-@ 16 was developed by a team of General Dynamics engineers led by Robert H. Widmer . The first YF @-@ 16 was rolled out on 13 December 1973 , and its 90 @-@ minute maiden flight was made at the Air Force Flight Test Center ( <unk> ) at Edwards AFB , California , on 2 February 1974 . Its actual first flight occurred accidentally during a high @-@ speed taxi test on 20 January 1974 . While gathering speed , a roll @-@ control oscillation caused a fin of the port @-@ side wingtip @-@ mounted missile and then the starboard stabilator to scrape the ground , and the aircraft then began to veer off the runway . The test pilot , Phil <unk> , decided to lift off to avoid a potential crash , safely landing six minutes later . The slight damage was quickly repaired and the official first flight occurred on time . The YF @-@ 16 's first supersonic flight was accomplished on 5 February 1974 , and the second YF @-@ 16 prototype first flew on 9 May 1974 . This was followed by the first flights of Northrop 's YF @-@ 17 prototypes on 9 June and 21 August 1974 , respectively . During the flyoff , the YF @-@ 16s completed 330 sorties for a total of 417 flight hours ; the YF @-@ 17s flew 288 sorties , covering 345 hours . 
 = = = Air Combat Fighter competition = = = 
 Increased interest would turn the LWF into a serious acquisition program . North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) allies Belgium , Denmark , the Netherlands , and Norway were seeking to replace their F @-@ <unk> Starfighter fighter @-@ bombers . In early 1974 , they reached an agreement with the U.S. that if the USAF ordered the LWF winner , they would consider ordering it as well . The USAF also needed to replace its F @-@ 105 Thunderchief and F @-@ 4 Phantom II fighter @-@ bombers . The U.S. Congress sought greater commonality in fighter procurements by the Air Force and Navy , and in August 1974 redirected Navy funds to a new Navy Air Combat Fighter ( <unk> ) program that would be a navalized fighter @-@ bomber variant of the LWF . The four NATO allies had formed the " Multinational Fighter Program Group " ( <unk> ) and pressed for a U.S. decision by December 1974 ; thus the USAF accelerated testing . 
 To reflect this serious intent to procure a new fighter @-@ bomber , the LWF program was rolled into a new Air Combat Fighter ( ACF ) competition in an announcement by U.S. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger in April 1974 . Schlesinger also made it clear that any ACF order would be in addition to the F @-@ 15 , which extinguished opposition to the LWF . ACF also raised the stakes for GD and Northrop because it brought in competitors intent on securing what was touted at the time as " the arms deal of the century " . These were Dassault @-@ Breguet 's proposed Mirage F1M @-@ 53 , the Anglo @-@ French SEPECAT Jaguar , and the proposed Saab <unk> " Eurofighter " . Northrop offered the P @-@ 530 Cobra , which was similar to the YF @-@ 17 . The Jaguar and Cobra were dropped by the <unk> early on , leaving two European and the two U.S. candidates . On 11 September 1974 , the U.S. Air Force confirmed plans to order the winning ACF design to equip five tactical fighter wings . Though computer modeling predicted a close contest , the YF @-@ 16 proved significantly quicker going from one maneuver to the next , and was the unanimous choice of those pilots that flew both aircraft . 
 On 13 January 1975 , Secretary of the Air Force John L. <unk> announced the YF @-@ 16 as the winner of the ACF competition . The chief reasons given by the Secretary were the YF @-@ 16 's lower operating costs , greater range , and maneuver performance that was " significantly better " than that of the YF @-@ 17 , especially at supersonic speeds . Another advantage of the YF @-@ 16 – unlike the YF @-@ 17 – was its use of the Pratt & Whitney F100 turbofan engine , the same powerplant used by the F @-@ 15 ; such commonality would lower the cost of engines for both programs . Secretary <unk> announced that the USAF planned to order at least 650 , possibly up to 1 @,@ 400 production F @-@ 16s . In the Navy Air Combat Fighter ( <unk> ) competition , on 2 May 1975 the Navy selected the YF @-@ 17 as the basis for what would become the McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet . 
 = = = Into production = = = 
 The U.S. Air Force initially ordered 15 " Full @-@ Scale Development " ( FSD ) aircraft ( 11 single @-@ seat and four two @-@ seat models ) for its flight test program , but was reduced to eight ( six F @-@ 16A single @-@ seaters and two F @-@ 16B two @-@ seaters ) . The YF @-@ 16 design was altered for the production F @-@ 16 . The fuselage was lengthened by 10 @.@ 6 in ( 0 @.@ 269 m ) , a larger nose radome was fitted for the AN / APG @-@ 66 radar , wing area was increased from 280 sq ft ( 26 m2 ) to 300 sq ft ( 28 m2 ) , the tailfin height was decreased , the ventral fins were enlarged , two more stores stations were added , and a single door replaced the original nosewheel double doors . The F @-@ 16 's weight was increased by 25 % over the YF @-@ 16 by these modifications . 
 The FSD F @-@ 16s were manufactured by General Dynamics in Texas at United States Air Force Plant 4 in late 1975 ; the first F @-@ 16A rolled out on 20 October 1976 and first flew on 8 December . The initial two @-@ seat model achieved its first flight on 8 August 1977 . The initial production @-@ standard F @-@ 16A flew for the first time on 7 August 1978 and its delivery was accepted by the USAF on 6 January 1979 . The F @-@ 16 was given its formal nickname of " Fighting Falcon " on 21 July 1980 , entering USAF operational service with the 34th Tactical Fighter Squadron , 388th Tactical Fighter Wing at Hill AFB in Utah on 1 October 1980 . 
 On 7 June 1975 , the four European partners , now known as the European Participation Group , signed up for 348 aircraft at the Paris Air Show . This was split among the European Participation Air Forces ( EPAF ) as 116 for Belgium , 58 for Denmark , 102 for the Netherlands , and 72 for Norway . Two European production lines , one in the Netherlands at Fokker 's Schiphol @-@ Oost facility and the other at SABCA 's <unk> plant in Belgium , would produce 184 and 164 units respectively . Norway 's Kongsberg <unk> and Denmark 's Terma A / S also manufactured parts and subassemblies for EPAF aircraft . European co @-@ production was officially launched on 1 July 1977 at the Fokker factory . Beginning in November 1977 , Fokker @-@ produced components were sent to Fort Worth for fuselage assembly , then shipped back to Europe for final assembly of EPAF aircraft at the Belgian plant on 15 February 1978 ; deliveries to the Belgian Air Force began in January 1979 . The first Royal Netherlands Air Force aircraft was delivered in June 1979 . In 1980 , the first aircraft were delivered to the Royal Norwegian Air Force by SABCA and to the Royal Danish Air Force by Fokker . 
 During the late 1980s and 1990s , Turkish Aerospace Industries ( TAI ) produced 232 Block 30 / 40 / 50 F @-@ 16s on a production line in Ankara under license for the Turkish Air Force . TAI also produced 46 Block 40s for Egypt in the mid @-@ 1990s and 30 Block 50 from 2010 . Korean Aerospace Industries opened a production line for the KF @-@ 16 program , producing 140 Block 52s from the mid @-@ 1990s to mid @-@ 2000s ( decade ) . If India had selected the F @-@ 16IN for its Medium Multi @-@ Role Combat Aircraft procurement , a sixth F @-@ 16 production line would be built in India . In May 2013 , Lockheed Martin stated there were currently enough orders to keep producing the F @-@ 16 until 2017 . 
 = = = Improvements and upgrades = = = 
 One change made during production was augmented pitch control to avoid deep stall conditions at high angles of attack . The stall issue had been raised during development , but had originally been discounted . Model tests of the YF @-@ 16 conducted by the Langley Research Center revealed a potential problem , but no other laboratory was able to duplicate it . YF @-@ 16 flight tests were not sufficient to expose the issue ; later flight testing on the FSD aircraft demonstrated there was a real concern . In response , the areas of the horizontal stabilizer were increased 25 % on the Block 15 aircraft in 1981 and later retrofitted to earlier aircraft . In addition , a manual override switch to disable the horizontal stabilizer flight limiter was prominently placed on the control console , allowing the pilot to regain control of the horizontal stabilizers ( which the flight limiters otherwise lock in place ) and recover . Besides reducing the risk of deep stalls , the larger horizontal tail also improved stability and permitted faster takeoff rotation . 
 In the 1980s , the Multinational Staged Improvement Program ( <unk> ) was conducted to evolve the F @-@ 16 's capabilities , mitigate risks during technology development , and ensure the aircraft 's worth . The program upgraded the F @-@ 16 in three stages . The <unk> process permitted the quick introduction of new capabilities , at lower costs and with reduced risks compared to traditional independent upgrade programs . In 2012 , the USAF had allocated $ 2 @.@ 8 billion to upgrade 350 F @-@ 16s while waiting for the F @-@ 35 to enter service . One key upgrade has been an auto @-@ <unk> ( Ground collision avoidance system ) to reduce instances of controlled flight into terrain . Onboard power and cooling capacities limits the scope of upgrades , which often involves the addition of more power @-@ hungry avionics . 
 Lockheed won many contracts to upgrade foreign operator 's F @-@ 16s . BAE Systems also offers various F @-@ 16 upgrades , receiving orders from South Korea , Oman , Turkey , and the US Air National Guard ; BAE lost the South Korean contract due to a price breach in November 2014 . In 2012 , the USAF assigned the total upgrade contract to Lockheed Martin . Upgrades include Raytheon ’ s Center Display Unit , which replaces several analog flight instruments with a single digital display . 
 In 2013 , sequestration budget cuts cast doubt on the USAF 's ability to complete the Combat Avionics Programmed Extension Suite ( CAPES ) , a part of secondary programs such as Taiwan 's F @-@ 16 upgrade . ACC 's General Mike Hostage stated that if he only had money for SLEP ( service life extension program ) or CAPES , he would fund SLEP to keep the aircraft flying . Lockheed Martin responded to talk of CAPES cancellation with a fixed @-@ price upgrade package for foreign users . CAPES was not included in the Pentagon 's 2015 budget request . The USAF said that the upgrade package will still be offered to Taiwan , and Lockheed said that some common elements with the F @-@ 35 will keep the radar 's unit costs down . In 2014 the USAF issued a RFI to SLEP 300 F @-@ 16 C / Ds . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The F @-@ 16 is a single @-@ engine , highly maneuverable , supersonic , multi @-@ role tactical fighter aircraft ; it was designed to be a cost @-@ effective combat " workhorse " that can perform various missions and maintain around @-@ the @-@ clock readiness . It is much smaller and lighter than predecessors , but uses advanced aerodynamics and avionics , including the first use of a relaxed static stability / fly @-@ by @-@ wire ( RSS / FBW ) flight control system , to achieve enhanced maneuver performance . Highly nimble , the F @-@ 16 was the first fighter aircraft purpose @-@ built to pull 9 @-@ g maneuvers and can reach a maximum speed of over Mach 2 . Innovations include a frameless bubble canopy for better visibility , side @-@ mounted control stick , and reclined seat to reduce g @-@ force effects on the pilot . It is armed with an internal M61 Vulcan cannon in the left wing root and has multiple locations for mounting various missiles , bombs and pods . It has a thrust @-@ to @-@ weight ratio greater than one , providing power to climb and accelerate vertically . 
 The F @-@ 16 was designed to be relatively inexpensive to build and simpler to maintain than earlier @-@ generation fighters . The airframe is built with about 80 % aviation @-@ grade aluminum alloys , 8 % steel , 3 % composites , and 1 @.@ 5 % titanium . The leading @-@ edge flaps , stabilators , and ventral fins make use of bonded aluminum honeycomb structures and graphite epoxy lamination coatings . The number of lubrication points , fuel line connections , and replaceable modules is significantly lower than predecessors ; 80 % of access panels can be accessed without stands . The air intake was placed so it was rearward of the nose but forward enough to minimize air flow losses and reduce aerodynamic drag . 
 Although the LWF program called for a structural life of 4 @,@ 000 flight hours , capable of achieving 7 @.@ 33 g with 80 % internal fuel ; GD 's engineers decided to design the F @-@ 16 's airframe life for 8 @,@ 000 hours and for 9 @-@ g maneuvers on full internal fuel . This proved advantageous when the aircraft 's mission changed from solely air @-@ to @-@ air combat to multi @-@ role operations . Changes in operational use and additional systems have increased weight , necessitating multiple structural strengthening programs . 
 = = = General configuration = = = 
 The F @-@ 16 has a cropped @-@ delta wing incorporating wing @-@ fuselage blending and <unk> vortex @-@ control strakes ; a fixed @-@ geometry , underslung air intake ( with splitter plate ) to the single turbofan jet engine ; a conventional tri @-@ plane empennage arrangement with all @-@ moving horizontal " stabilator " tailplanes ; a pair of ventral fins beneath the fuselage aft of the wing 's trailing edge ; and a tricycle landing gear configuration with the aft @-@ retracting , steerable nose gear deploying a short distance behind the inlet lip . There is a boom @-@ style aerial refueling receptacle located behind the single @-@ piece " bubble " canopy of the cockpit . Split @-@ flap <unk> are located at the aft end of the wing @-@ body fairing , and a tailhook is mounted underneath the fuselage . A fairing beneath the rudder often houses ECM equipment or a drag chute . Later F @-@ 16 models feature a long dorsal fairing along the fuselage 's " spine " , housing additional equipment or fuel . 
 Aerodynamic studies in the 1960s demonstrated that the " vortex lift " phenomenon could be harnessed by highly swept wing configurations to reach higher angles of attack , using leading edge vortex flow off a slender lifting surface . As the F @-@ 16 was being optimized for high combat agility , GD 's designers chose a slender cropped @-@ delta wing with a leading edge sweep of 40 ° and a straight trailing edge . To improve maneuverability , a variable @-@ camber wing with a NACA 64A @-@ 204 airfoil was selected ; the camber is adjusted by leading @-@ edge and trailing edge flaperons linked to a digital flight control system ( FCS ) regulating the flight envelope . The F @-@ 16 has a moderate wing loading , reduced by fuselage lift . The vortex lift effect is increased by leading edge extensions , known as strakes . Strakes act as additional short @-@ span , triangular wings running from the wing root ( the juncture with the fuselage ) to a point further forward on the fuselage . Blended into the fuselage and along the wing root , the strake generates a high @-@ speed vortex that remains attached to the top of the wing as the angle of attack increases , generating additional lift and allowing greater angles of attack without stalling . Strakes allow a smaller , lower @-@ aspect @-@ ratio wing , which increases roll rates and directional stability while decreasing weight . Deeper <unk> also increase structural strength and internal fuel volume . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Early F @-@ 16s could be armed with up to six AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder heat @-@ seeking short @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles ( AAM ) by employing rail launchers on each wingtip , as well as radar guided AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow medium @-@ range AAMs in a weapons mix . More recent versions support the AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM . The aircraft can carry various other AAMs , a wide variety of air @-@ to @-@ ground missiles , rockets or bombs ; electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) , navigation , targeting or weapons pods ; and fuel tanks on 9 hardpoints – six under the wings , two on wingtips , and one under the fuselage . Two other locations under the fuselage are available for sensor or radar pods . The F @-@ 16 carries a 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) M61A1 Vulcan cannon for close range aerial combat and strafing . 
 = = = Negative stability and fly @-@ by @-@ wire = = = 
 The F @-@ 16 was the first production fighter aircraft intentionally designed to be slightly aerodynamically unstable , also known as " relaxed static stability " ( RSS ) , to improve maneuverability . Most aircraft are designed with positive static stability , which induces aircraft to return to straight and level flight attitude if the pilot releases the controls ; this reduces maneuverability as the inherent stability has to be overcome . Aircraft with negative stability are designed to deviate from controlled flight and thus be more maneuverable . At supersonic speeds the F @-@ 16 gains stability ( eventually positive ) due to aerodynamic changes . 
 To counter the tendency to depart from controlled flight — and avoid the need for constant trim inputs by the pilot , the F @-@ 16 has a quadruplex ( four @-@ channel ) fly @-@ by @-@ wire ( FBW ) flight control system ( <unk> ) . The flight control computer ( FLCC ) accepts pilot input from the stick and rudder controls , and manipulates the control surfaces in such a way as to produce the desired result without inducing control loss . The FLCC conducts thousands of measurements per second on the aircraft 's flight attitude to automatically counter deviations from the pilot @-@ set flight path ; leading to a common aphorism among pilots : " You don 't fly an F @-@ 16 ; it flies you . " 
 The FLCC further incorporates limiters governing movement in the three main axes based on attitude , airspeed and angle of attack ( AOA ) ; these prevent control surfaces from inducing instability such as slips or skids , or a high AOA inducing a stall . The limiters also prevent maneuvers that would exert more than a 9 g load . Flight testing has revealed that " assaulting " multiple limiters at high AOA and low speed can result in an AOA far exceeding the 25 ° limit , colloquially referred to as " departing " ; this causes a deep stall ; a near @-@ freefall at 50 ° to 60 ° AOA , either upright or inverted . While at a very high AOA , the aircraft 's attitude is stable but control surfaces are ineffective ; the pitch limiter locks the stabilators at an extreme pitch @-@ up or pitch @-@ down attempting to recover , this can be overridden so the pilot can " rock " the nose via pitch control to recover . 
 Unlike the YF @-@ 17 , which had <unk> controls serving as a backup to the FBW , General Dynamics took the innovative step of eliminating mechanical linkages between the control stick and rudder pedals , and the flight control surfaces . The F @-@ 16 is entirely reliant on its electrical systems to relay flight commands , instead of traditional mechanically @-@ linked controls , leading to the early moniker of " the electric jet " . The quadruplex design permits " graceful degradation " in flight control response in that the loss of one channel renders the <unk> a " triplex " system . The FLCC began as an analog system on the A / B variants , but has been supplanted by a digital computer system beginning with the F @-@ 16C / D Block 40 . The F @-@ 16 's controls suffered from a sensitivity to static electricity or electrostatic discharge ( <unk> ) . Up to 70 – 80 % of the C / D models ' electronics were vulnerable to <unk> . 
 = = = Cockpit and ergonomics = = = 
 A key feature of the F @-@ 16 's cockpit is the exceptional field of view . The single @-@ piece , bird @-@ proof polycarbonate bubble canopy provides 360 ° all @-@ round visibility , with a 40 ° look @-@ down angle over the side of the aircraft , and 15 ° down over the nose ( compared to the common 12 – 13 ° of preceding aircraft ) ; the pilot 's seat is elevated for this purpose . Furthermore , the F @-@ 16 's canopy lacks the forward bow frame found on many fighters , which is an obstruction to a pilot 's forward vision . The F @-@ 16 's ACES II zero / zero ejection seat is reclined at an unusual tilt @-@ back angle of 30 ° ; most fighters have a tilted seat at 13 – 15 ° . The tilted seat can accommodate taller pilots and increases G @-@ force tolerance ; however it has been associated with reports of neck ache , possibly caused by incorrect head @-@ rest usage . Subsequent U.S. fighters have adopted more modest tilt @-@ back angles of 20 ° . Due to the seat angle and the canopy 's thickness , the ejection seat lacks canopy @-@ breakers for emergency egress ; instead the entire canopy is jettisoned prior to the seat 's rocket firing . 
 The pilot flies primarily by means of an armrest @-@ mounted side @-@ stick controller ( instead of a traditional center @-@ mounted stick ) and an engine throttle ; conventional rudder pedals are also employed . To enhance the pilot 's degree of control of the aircraft during high @-@ g combat maneuvers , various switches and function controls were moved to centralised " hands on throttle @-@ and @-@ stick ( HOTAS ) " controls upon both the controllers and the throttle . Hand pressure on the side @-@ stick controller is transmitted by electrical signals via the FBW system to adjust various flight control surfaces to maneuver the F @-@ 16 . Originally the side @-@ stick controller was non @-@ moving , but this proved uncomfortable and difficult for pilots to adjust to , sometimes resulting in a tendency to " over @-@ rotate " during takeoffs , so the control stick was given a small amount of " play " . Since introduction on the F @-@ 16 , HOTAS controls have become a standard feature on modern fighters . 
 The F @-@ 16 has a head @-@ up display ( HUD ) , which projects visual flight and combat information in front of the pilot without obstructing the view ; being able to keep his head " out of the cockpit " improves a pilot 's situation awareness . Further flight and systems information are displayed on multi @-@ function displays ( MFD ) . The left @-@ hand MFD is the primary flight display ( <unk> ) , typically showing radar and moving @-@ maps ; the right @-@ hand MFD is the system display ( SD ) , presenting information about the engine , landing gear , slat and flap settings , and fuel and weapons status . Initially , the F @-@ 16A / B had monochrome cathode ray tube ( CRT ) displays ; replaced by color liquid @-@ crystal displays on the Block 50 / 52 . The MLU introduced compatibility with night @-@ vision goggles ( NVG ) . The Boeing Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System ( <unk> ) is available from Block 40 onwards , for targeting based on where the pilot 's head faces , unrestricted by the HUD , using high @-@ off @-@ boresight missiles like the AIM @-@ 9X . 
 = = = Fire @-@ control radar = = = 
 The F @-@ 16A / B was originally equipped with the Westinghouse AN / APG @-@ 66 fire @-@ control radar . Its slotted planar array antenna was designed to be compact to fit into the F @-@ 16 's relatively small nose . In <unk> mode , the APG @-@ 66 uses a low pulse @-@ repetition frequency ( PRF ) for medium- and high @-@ altitude target detection in a low @-@ clutter environment , and in look @-@ down / shoot @-@ down employs a medium PRF for heavy clutter environments . It has four operating frequencies within the X band , and provides four air @-@ to @-@ air and seven air @-@ to @-@ ground operating modes for combat , even at night or in bad weather . The Block 15 's APG @-@ 66 ( V ) 2 model added a more powerful signal processing , higher output power , improved reliability and increased range in cluttered or jamming environments . The Mid @-@ Life Update ( MLU ) program introduced a new model , APG @-@ 66 ( V ) 2A , which features higher speed and more memory . 
 The AN / APG @-@ 68 , an evolution of the APG @-@ 66 , was introduced with the F @-@ 16C / D Block 25 . The APG @-@ 68 has greater range and resolution , as well as 25 operating modes , including ground @-@ mapping , Doppler beam @-@ sharpening , ground moving target indication , sea target , and track while scan ( TWS ) for up to 10 targets . The Block 40 / 42 's APG @-@ 68 ( V ) 1 model added full compatibility with Lockheed Martin Low @-@ Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infra @-@ Red for Night ( <unk> ) pods , and a high @-@ PRF pulse @-@ Doppler track mode to provide continuous @-@ wave radar ( CW ) target illumination for semi @-@ active radar @-@ homing ( <unk> ) missiles like the AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow . Block 50 / 52 F @-@ 16s initially used the more reliable APG @-@ 68 ( V ) 5 which has a programmable signal processor employing Very @-@ High @-@ Speed Integrated Circuit ( <unk> ) technology . The Advanced Block 50 / 52 ( or 50 + / 52 + ) are equipped with the APG @-@ 68 ( V ) 9 radar , with a 30 % greater air @-@ to @-@ air detection range and a synthetic aperture radar ( SAR ) mode for high @-@ resolution mapping and target detection @-@ recognition . In August 2004 , Northrop Grumman were contracted to upgrade the APG @-@ 68 radars of Block 40 / 42 / 50 / 52 aircraft to the ( V ) 10 standard , providing all @-@ weather autonomous detection and targeting for Global Positioning System ( GPS ) <unk> precision weapons , SAR mapping and terrain @-@ following radar ( TF ) modes , as well as <unk> of all modes . 
 The F @-@ 16E / F is outfitted with Northrop Grumman 's AN / APG @-@ 80 active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar . Northrop Grumman developed the latest AESA radar upgrade for the F @-@ 16 ( selected for USAF and Taiwan Air Force F @-@ 16 upgrades ) , named the Scalable Agile Beam Radar ( SABR ) . In July 2007 , Raytheon announced that it was developing a Next Generation Radar ( <unk> ) based on its earlier AN / APG @-@ 79 AESA radar as a competitor to Northrop Grumman 's AN / APG @-@ 68 and AN / APG @-@ 80 for the F @-@ 16 . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The initial powerplant selected for the single @-@ engined F @-@ 16 was the Pratt & Whitney F100 @-@ PW @-@ 200 afterburning turbofan , a modified version of the F @-@ 15 's F100 @-@ PW @-@ 100 , rated at 23 @,@ 830 lbf ( 106 @.@ 0 kN ) thrust . During testing , the engine was found to be prone to compressor stalls and " rollbacks " , wherein the engine 's thrust would spontaneously reduce to idle . Until resolved , the Air Force ordered F @-@ 16s to be operated within " dead @-@ stick landing " distance of its bases . It was the standard F @-@ 16 engine through the Block 25 , except for new @-@ build Block 15s with the Operational Capability Upgrade ( OCU ) . The OCU introduced the 23 @,@ 770 lbf ( 105 @.@ 7 kN ) F100 @-@ PW @-@ 220 , later installed on Block 32 and 42 aircraft : the main advance being a Digital Electronic Engine Control ( DEEC ) unit , which improved reliability and reduced stall occurrence . Beginning production in 1988 , the " <unk> " also supplanted the F @-@ 15 's " -100 " , for commonality . Many of the " <unk> " engines on Block 25 and later aircraft were upgraded from 1997 onwards to the " <unk> " standard , which enhanced reliability and maintainability ; unscheduled engine removals were reduced by 35 % . 
 The F100 @-@ PW @-@ 220 / <unk> was the result of the USAF 's Alternate Fighter Engine ( AFE ) program ( colloquially known as " the Great Engine War " ) , which also saw the entry of General Electric as an F @-@ 16 engine provider . Its F110 @-@ GE @-@ 100 turbofan was limited by the original inlet to thrust of 25 @,@ 735 lbf ( 114 @.@ 5 kN ) , the Modular Common Inlet <unk> allowed the F110 to achieve its maximum thrust of 28 @,@ 984 lbf ( 128 @.@ 9 kN ) . ( To distinguish between aircraft equipped with these two engines and inlets , from the Block 30 series on , blocks ending in " 0 " ( e.g. , Block 30 ) are powered by GE , and blocks ending in " 2 " ( e.g. , Block 32 ) are fitted with Pratt & Whitney engines . ) 
 The Increased Performance Engine ( IPE ) program led to the 29 @,@ 588 lbf ( 131 @.@ 6 kN ) F110 @-@ GE @-@ 129 on the Block 50 and 29 @,@ 160 lbf ( 129 @.@ 4 kN ) F100 @-@ PW @-@ 229 on the Block 52 . F @-@ 16s began flying with these IPE engines in the early 1990s . Altogether , of the 1 @,@ 446 F @-@ 16C / Ds ordered by the USAF , 556 were fitted with F100 @-@ series engines and 890 with <unk> . The United Arab Emirates ’ Block 60 is powered by the General Electric F110 @-@ GE @-@ 132 turbofan with a maximum thrust of 32 @,@ 500 lbf ( 144 @.@ 6 kN ) , the highest thrust engine developed for the F @-@ 16 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Due to their ubiquity , F @-@ 16s have participated in numerous conflicts , most of them in the Middle East . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The F @-@ 16 is being used by the active duty USAF , Air Force Reserve , and Air National Guard units , the USAF aerial demonstration team , the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds , and as an adversary @-@ aggressor aircraft by the United States Navy at the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center . 
 The U.S. Air Force , including the Air Force Reserve and the Air National Guard , flew the F @-@ 16 in combat during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 and in the Balkans later in the 1990s . F @-@ 16s also patrolled the no @-@ fly zones in Iraq during Operations Northern Watch and Southern Watch and served during the wars in Afghanistan ( Operation Enduring Freedom ) and Iraq ( Operation Iraqi Freedom ) from 2001 and 2003 respectively . In 2011 , Air Force F @-@ 16s took part in the intervention in Libya . 
 The F @-@ 16 had been scheduled to remain in service with the U.S. Air Force until 2025 . Its replacement was planned to be the F @-@ 35A variant of the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II , which is expected gradually begin replacing several multi @-@ role aircraft among the program 's member nations . However , due to delays in the F @-@ 35 program , all USAF F @-@ 16s will receive service life extension upgrades . 
 = = = Israel = = = 
 The F @-@ 16 's first air @-@ to @-@ air combat success was achieved by the Israeli Air Force ( IAF ) over the Bekaa Valley on 28 April 1981 , against a Syrian Mi @-@ 8 helicopter , which was downed with cannon fire . On 7 June 1981 , eight Israeli F @-@ 16s , escorted by F @-@ 15s , executed Operation Opera , their first employment in a significant air @-@ to @-@ ground operation . This raid severely damaged Osirak , an Iraqi nuclear reactor under construction near Baghdad , to prevent the regime of Saddam Hussein from using the reactor for the creation of nuclear weapons . 
 The following year , during the 1982 Lebanon War Israeli F @-@ 16s engaged Syrian aircraft in one of the largest air battles involving jet aircraft , which began on 9 June and continued for two more days . Israeli Air Force F @-@ 16s were credited with 44 air @-@ to @-@ air kills during the conflict . 
 In January 2000 , Israel completed a purchase of 102 new " F @-@ <unk> " planes in a deal totaling $ 4 @.@ 5 billion . F @-@ 16s were also used in their ground @-@ attack role for strikes against targets in Lebanon . IAF F @-@ 16s participated in the 2006 Lebanon War and during the attacks in the Gaza strip in December 2008 . During and after 2006 Lebanon war , IAF F @-@ 16s shot down Iranian @-@ made UAV drones launched by Hezbollah , using Rafael Python 5 air @-@ to @-@ air missile . 
 = = = Pakistan = = = 
 During the Soviet @-@ Afghan war , between May 1986 and January 1989 , Pakistan Air Force F @-@ 16s shot down at least eight intruders from Afghanistan . The first three of these ( one Su @-@ 22 , one probable Su @-@ 22 , and one An @-@ 26 ) were shot down by two pilots from No. 9 Squadron . No. 14 Squadron pilots destroyed the other five intruders ( two Su @-@ 22s , two MiG @-@ 23s , and one Su @-@ 25 ) . Most of these kills were by AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinders , but at least one ( a Su @-@ 22 ) was destroyed by cannon fire . Flight Lieutenant Khalid Mahmoud is credited with three of these kills . One F @-@ 16 was lost in these battles during an encounter between two F @-@ 16s and four Soviet Air Force MiG @-@ 23s on 29 April 1987 ; the pilot ejected safely . 
 The Pakistan Air Force has used its F @-@ 16s in various foreign and internal military exercises , such as the " Indus Vipers " exercise in 2008 conducted jointly with Turkey . Since May 2009 , the PAF has also been using their F @-@ 16 fleet to attack militant positions and support the Pakistan Army 's operations in North @-@ West Pakistan against the Taliban insurgency . As of November 2011 , PAF F @-@ 16 have launched 5 @,@ 500 sorties in operations . More than 80 % of the dropped munitions were laser @-@ guided bombs . 
 PAF F @-@ 16s patrolled the Indian border during the Kargil Conflict and during the 2008 tension with India . 
 = = = Turkey = = = 
 The Turkish Air Force acquired its first F @-@ 16s in 1987 . Turkish F @-@ 16s participated in the Bosnia Herzegovina and Kosovo since 1993 in support of United Nations resolutions . 
 On 18 June 1992 , a Greek Mirage F @-@ 1 crashed during dogfight with a Turkish F @-@ 16 . On 8 February 1995 , a Turkish F @-@ 16 crashed into the Aegean after being intercepted by Greek Mirage F1 fighters . 
 On 8 October 1996 , 7 months after the escalation over <unk> a Greek Mirage 2000 reportedly fired an <unk> Magic II missile and shot down a Turkish F @-@ 16D over the Aegean Sea . The Turkish pilot died , while the co @-@ pilot ejected and was rescued by Greek forces . In August 2012 , after the downing of a RF @-@ 4E on the Syrian Coast , Turkish Defence Minister İsmet <unk> confirmed that the Turkish F @-@ 16D was shot down by a Greek Mirage 2000 with an <unk> Magic II in 1996 after violating Greek airspace near Chios island . 
 On 23 May 2006 , two Greek F @-@ 16s intercepted a Turkish RF @-@ 4 reconnaissance aircraft and two F @-@ 16 escorts off the coast of the Greek island of Karpathos , within the Athens FIR . A mock dogfight ensued between the two sides , resulting in a midair collision between a Turkish F @-@ 16 and a Greek F @-@ 16 . The Turkish pilot ejected safely , but the Greek pilot died due to damage caused by the collision . 
 Turkey used its F @-@ 16s extensively in its conflict with separatist Kurds in Kurdish parts of Turkey and Iraq . Turkey launched its first cross @-@ border raid on 16 December 2007 , a prelude to the 2008 Turkish incursion into northern Iraq , involving 50 fighters before Operation Sun . This was the first time Turkey had mounted a night @-@ bombing operation on a massive scale , and also the largest operation conducted by Turkish Air Force . 
 During the Syrian Civil War , Turkish F @-@ 16s were tasked with airspace protection on the Syrian border . After the RF @-@ 4 downing in June 2012 Turkey changed its rules of engagements against Syrian aircraft , resulting in scrambles and <unk> of Syrian combat aircraft . A Turkish Air Force F @-@ 16 shot down a Russian Air Force Sukhoi Su @-@ 24 on the Turkey @-@ Syria border on 24 November 2015 . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 On 16 February 2015 , Egyptian F @-@ 16s performed air strikes on <unk> weapons caches and training camps in Libya in revenge of the murder of 21 workers by masked militants affiliated with the Islamic State ( ISIS ) . The air strikes killed 64 ISIS fighters , including three leaders in Derna and Sirte on the coast . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 The Royal Netherlands Air Force , Belgian Air Force , Royal Danish Air Force , Royal Norwegian Air Force , Pakistan Air Force , and Venezuela Air Force have flown the F @-@ 16 on combat missions . A Serbian MiG @-@ 29 was shot down by a Dutch F @-@ <unk> during the Kosovo War in 1999 . Belgian and Danish F @-@ 16s also participated in joint operations over Kosovo during the war . Dutch , Belgian , Danish , and Norwegian F @-@ 16s were deployed during the 2011 intervention in Libya and in Afghanistan . In Libya , Norwegian F @-@ 16s dropped almost 550 bombs and flew 596 missions , some 17 % of the total strike missions including the bombing of Muammar Gaddafi 's headquarters . 
 = = Variants = = 
 F @-@ 16 models are denoted by increasing block numbers to denote upgrades . The blocks cover both single- and two @-@ seat versions . A variety of software , hardware , systems , weapons compatibility , and structural enhancements have been instituted over the years to gradually upgrade production models and retrofit delivered aircraft . 
 While many F @-@ 16s were produced according to these block designs , there have been many other variants with significant changes , usually due to modification programs . Other changes have resulted in role @-@ specialization , such as the close air support and reconnaissance variants . Several models were also developed to test new technology . The F @-@ 16 design also inspired the design of other aircraft , which are considered derivatives . Older F @-@ 16s are being converted into QF @-@ 16 drone targets . 
 F @-@ 16A / B 
 The F @-@ 16A ( single seat ) and F @-@ 16B ( two seat ) were initial production variants . These variants include the Block 1 , 5 , 10 and 20 versions . Block 15 was the first major change to the F @-@ 16 with larger horizontal stabilizers . It is the most numerous F @-@ 16 variant with 475 produced . 
 F @-@ 16C / D 
 The F @-@ 16C ( single seat ) and F @-@ 16D ( two seat ) variants entered production in 1984 . The first C / D version was the Block 25 with improved cockpit avionics and radar which added all @-@ weather capability with beyond @-@ visual @-@ range ( BVR ) AIM @-@ 7 and AIM @-@ 120 air @-@ air missiles . Block 30 / 32 , 40 / 42 , and 50 / 52 were later C / D versions . The F @-@ 16C / D had a unit cost of US $ 18 @.@ 8 million ( 1998 ) . Operational cost per flight hour has been estimated at $ 7 @,@ 000 to $ 22 @,@ 470 or $ 24 @,@ 000 , depending on calculation method . 
 F @-@ 16E / F 
 The F @-@ 16E ( single seat ) and F @-@ 16F ( two seat ) are newer F @-@ 16 variants . The Block 60 version is based on the F @-@ 16C / D Block 50 / 52 and has been developed especially for the United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) . It features improved AN / APG @-@ 80 active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar , avionics , conformal fuel tanks ( <unk> ) , and the more powerful General Electric F110 @-@ GE @-@ 132 engine . 
 F @-@ 16IN 
 For the Indian MRCA competition for the Indian Air Force , Lockheed Martin offered the F @-@ 16IN Super Viper . The F @-@ 16IN is based on the F @-@ 16E / F Block 60 and features conformal fuel tanks ; AN / APG @-@ 80 AESA radar , GE F110 @-@ GE @-@ 132A engine with FADEC controls ; electronic warfare suite and infra @-@ red searching ( IRST ) ; updated glass cockpit ; and a helmet @-@ mounted cueing system . As of 2011 , the F @-@ 16IN is no longer in the competition . 
 F @-@ <unk> 
 In September 2010 , the Defense Security Cooperation Agency informed the United States Congress of a possible Foreign Military Sale of 18 F @-@ <unk> aircraft along with the associated equipment and services to the newly reformed Iraqi Air Force . Total value of sale is estimated at US $ 4 @.@ 2 billion . 
 F @-@ 16N 
 The F @-@ 16N is an adversary aircraft operated by the U.S. Navy . It is based on the standard F @-@ 16C / D Block 30 and is powered by the General Electric F110 @-@ GE @-@ 100 engine . However , the F @-@ 16N has a strengthened wing and is capable of carrying an Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation ( ACMI ) pod on the starboard wingtip . Although the single @-@ seat F @-@ 16Ns and twin @-@ seat ( T ) F @-@ 16Ns are based on the early @-@ production small @-@ inlet Block 30 F @-@ 16C / D airframe , they retain the APG @-@ 66 radar of the F @-@ 16A / B. In addition , the aircraft 's 20 mm cannon has been removed , as has the <unk> , and they carry no missiles . Their EW fit consists of an ALR @-@ 69 radar warning receiver ( RWR ) and an ALE @-@ 40 chaff / flare dispenser . The F @-@ 16Ns and ( T ) F @-@ 16Ns have the standard Air Force tailhook and undercarriage and are not aircraft carrier capable . Production totaled 26 airframes , of which 22 are single @-@ seat F @-@ 16Ns and 4 are twin @-@ seat TF @-@ 16Ns . The initial batch of aircraft were in service between 1988 and 1998 . At that time , hairline cracks were discovered in several bulkheads and the Navy did not have the resources to replace them , so the aircraft were eventually retired , with one aircraft sent to the collection of the National Naval Aviation Museum at NAS Pensacola , Florida , and the remainder placed in storage at Davis @-@ Monthan AFB . These aircraft were later replaced by embargoed ex @-@ Pakistani F @-@ 16C / Ds in 2003 . The original inventory of F @-@ 16Ns were previously operated by adversary squadrons at NAS Oceana , Virginia ; NAS Key West , Florida and the former NAS Miramar , California . The current aircraft are operated by the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center at NAS Fallon , Nevada . 
 F @-@ 16V 
 At the 2012 Singapore Air Show Lockheed Martin unveiled plans for the new F @-@ 16V variant with the V suffix for its Viper nickname . It is to feature an active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar , a new mission computer and electronic warfare suite , and various cockpit improvements ; this package is an option on current production F @-@ 16s and can be retrofitted to most in service F @-@ 16s . 
 QF @-@ 16 
 In September 2013 , an unmanned F @-@ 16 was tested by Boeing and US Air Force , with two US Air Force pilots controlling the airplane from the ground as it flew from Tyndall AFB over the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = Operators = = 
 4 @,@ 500 F @-@ 16s had been delivered by July 2010 . 
 = = = Former operators = = = 
 Italy – Italian Air Force leased up to 30 F @-@ 16As and 4 F @-@ 16Bs from the USAF from 2001 until 2012 . 
 = = Notable accidents and incidents = = 
 The F @-@ 16 has been involved in over 650 hull @-@ loss accidents as of June 2016 . 
 On 8 May 1975 , while practicing a 9 @-@ g aerial display maneuver with the second YF @-@ 16 ( tail number 72 @-@ 1568 ) at Fort Worth , Texas , prior to being sent to the Paris Air Show , one of the main landing gear jammed . The test pilot , Neil Anderson , had to perform an emergency gear @-@ up landing and chose to do so in the grass , hoping to minimize damage and to avoid injuring any observers . The aircraft was only slightly damaged , but due to the mishap the first prototype was sent to the Paris Air Show in its place . 
 On 15 November 1982 , while on a training flight outside Kunsan Air Base in South Korea , USAF Captain Ted <unk> died when he crashed inverted into a mountain ridge . In 1985 , <unk> 's widow filed a lawsuit against General Dynamics claiming an electrical malfunction , not pilot error , as the cause ; a jury awarded the plaintiff $ 3 @.@ 4 million in damages . However , in 1989 , the U.S. Court of Appeals ruled the contractor had immunity to lawsuits , overturning the previous judgment . The court did remand the plaintiff 's claim of electrical malfunction as the cause , noting that General Dynamics and the USAF knew about chafing of instrumentation wiring , which they had not initially disclosed . The accident and subsequent trial was the subject of the 1992 film Afterburn . 
 On 23 March 1994 , during a joint Army @-@ Air Force exercise at Pope AFB , North Carolina , F @-@ 16D ( AF Serial No. 88 @-@ <unk> ) of the 23d Fighter Wing / 74th Fighter Squadron was simulating an engine @-@ out approach when it collided with a USAF C @-@ 130E . Both F @-@ 16 crew members ejected , but their aircraft , on full afterburner , continued on an arc towards Green Ramp and struck a USAF C @-@ 141 that was being boarded by US Army paratroopers . This accident resulted in 24 fatalities and at least 80 others injured . It has since been known as the " Green Ramp disaster " . 
 On 15 September 2003 , a USAF Thunderbird F @-@ 16C crashed during an air show at Mountain Home AFB , Idaho . Captain Christopher Stricklin attempted a " Split S " maneuver based on an incorrect mean @-@ sea @-@ level altitude of the airfield . Climbing to only 1 @,@ 670 ft ( 510 m ) above ground level instead of 2 @,@ 500 ft ( 760 m ) , Stricklin had insufficient altitude to complete the maneuver , but was able to guide the aircraft away from spectators and ejected less than one second before impact . Stricklin survived with only minor injuries ; the aircraft was destroyed . USAF procedure for demonstration " Split @-@ S " maneuvers was changed , requiring both pilots and controllers to use above @-@ ground @-@ level ( AGL ) altitudes . 
 On 30 November 2014 , a US air force F @-@ 16 crashed in Jordan due to a technical problem ; the pilot died . 
 On 26 January 2015 , a Greek F @-@ 16D crashed while performing a NATO training exercise in Albacete , Spain . Both crew members and nine French soldiers on the ground died when it crashed in the flight @-@ line , destroying or damaging two Italian <unk> , two French Alpha jets , and one French Mirage 2000s . 
 On 11 May 2015 , a Moroccan F @-@ 16 crashed in Yemen while on a mission against Houthis , killing the pilot . 
 On 7 July 2015 , an F @-@ <unk> collided with a Cessna 150M over Moncks Corner , South Carolina , U.S. The pilot of the F @-@ 16 ejected safely , but both people in the Cessna were killed . 
 On 27 October 2015 , a Royal Danish Air Force pilot had to eject after his F @-@ 16 's landing gear was damaged during takeoff . The aircraft crashed into the North Sea near <unk> , and the pilot was quickly extracted from the water with minor injuries . 
 On 21 January 2016 , a USAF F @-@ 16 of the 56th Fighter Wing crashed in Arizona killing the Taiwanese pilot training in the US . 
 = = Aircraft on display = = 
 = = = Belgium = = = 
 F @-@ 16A 
 FA @-@ 01 – On display at the Royal Museum of the Armed Forces and Military History in Brussels , Belgium 
 FA @-@ 55 – On display at the Chateau de Savigny les Beaune in Beaune , France . A former Belgian Air Force example . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 F @-@ 16A 
 78 @-@ 0057 – Pylon display at Spangdahlem AB , Germany 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 F @-@ 16A 
 78 @-@ 0053 – Pylon display at Misawa AB , Japan 
 = = = The Netherlands = = = 
 F @-@ 16A 
 78 @-@ <unk> – RNLAF designation j @-@ 215 . Former RNLAF f @-@ 16A on display at the National Military museum at former airbase <unk> in the Netherlands . 
 = = = Turkey = = = 
 F @-@ 16C 
 89 @-@ 0032 - F @-@ 16C Block 40A at Istanbul Aviation Museum . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 YF @-@ 16 
 72 @-@ 1567 – Virginia Air and Space Center , Hampton , Virginia 
 YF @-@ 16B 
 75 @-@ <unk> – Frontiers of Flight Museum , Dallas , Texas 
 F @-@ 16A 
 75 @-@ <unk> – Pylon @-@ mounted gate guard , McEntire Air National Guard Base , South Carolina 
 75 @-@ <unk> – Cadet Area Quadrangle , U.S. Air Force Academy , Colorado 
 75 @-@ 0750 – On display at the Experimental Aircraft Display Hangar , National Museum of the United States Air Force , Wright @-@ Patterson AFB , Ohio 
 78 @-@ 0001 – Langley AFB Memorial Park , Langley AFB , Virginia . First production model F @-@ 16A delivered to USAF . 
 78 @-@ 0005 – <unk> Fighter Wing Park , Tucson Air National Guard Base , Arizona 
 78 @-@ 0025 – Gate guard , Burlington Air National Guard Base , Vermont 
 78 @-@ 0042 – Gate guard , Montgomery Air National Guard Base / <unk> Field , Alabama 
 78 @-@ 0052 – Eielson AFB Heritage Park , Eielson AFB , Alaska 
 78 @-@ 0059 – Selfridge Military Air Museum and Air Park , Selfridge ANGB , Michigan 
 78 @-@ 0065 – 388th Fighter Wing and 419th Fighter Wing combined Headquarters , Hill AFB , Utah 
 78 @-@ 0066 – On display in Kansas Air National Guard Memorial Park area , McConnell AFB , Kansas 
 79 @-@ <unk> – On display at Great Falls Air National Guard Base , Montana . 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Gate guard , Jacksonville Air National Guard Base , Florida 
 79 @-@ <unk> – On display at Cannon AFB Air Park , Cannon AFB , New Mexico 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Base park area adjacent to <unk> Headquarters , Shaw AFB , South Carolina . Painted as 20th Fighter Wing F @-@ 16C 93 @-@ <unk> . Memorial to Maj Brinson Phillips , 20 FW , killed 19 Mar 2000 while flying F @-@ 16C 93 @-@ <unk> 
 79 @-@ <unk> – On pylon display , 8th Street Park , Douglas , Arizona 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Gate guard , Homestead Air Reserve Base , Florida 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Pedestal mounted memorial , Luke AFB , Arizona . Painted in <unk> Fighter Squadron markings , to include World War II Tuskegee Airmen " Red Tails " empennage 
 79 @-@ <unk> – USS Alabama Battleship Memorial Park , Mobile , Alabama 
 79 @-@ 0337 – Ground @-@ mobile static display aircraft , normally located at Hancock Field Air National Guard Base , New York . Utilized by New York Air National Guard 's 174th Attack Wing ( former 174th Fighter Wing ) at fairs and expositions for Air National Guard recruiting . 
 79 @-@ <unk> – On static display with 23d Wing at Moody AFB , Georgia 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Memorial park static display , Mountain Home AFB , Idaho 
 79 @-@ <unk> – On display at Buckley AFB , Colorado . Aircraft painted in markings of Colorado Air National Guard 's 140th Fighter Wing based at Buckley AFB . 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Hill Aerospace Museum , Hill AFB , Utah 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Hill Aerospace Museum , Hill AFB , Utah 
 79 @-@ <unk> – Intrepid Sea , Air & Space Museum , New York City , New York 
 80 @-@ <unk> – Display on Parade Ground , Sheppard AFB , Texas . 
 80 @-@ <unk> – Former Arizona Air National Guard <unk> Fighter Wing aircraft destined for transfer to / display at the Pima Air and Space Museum , Tucson , Arizona . 
 80 @-@ <unk> – City park in Pinellas Park , Florida . Painted in markings of 56th Tactical Training Wing @-@ cum @-@ 56th Fighter Wing , previously assigned to nearby MacDill AFB in the 1980s and early 1990s . 
 80 @-@ <unk> – Air Force Armament Museum , Eglin AFB , Florida . 
 80 @-@ <unk> – Memorial park static display at Puerto Rico National Guard 's Camp Santiago , Salinas , Puerto Rico . Former Puerto Rico Air National Guard F @-@ <unk> , painted in markings of <unk> 's former 198th Fighter Squadron , but marked as <unk> . 
 81 @-@ <unk> – On display in United States Air Force Thunderbirds markings at the National Museum of the United States Air Force , Wright @-@ Patterson AFB , Dayton , Ohio . 
 81 @-@ <unk> – Museum of Aviation , Robins AFB , Warner Robins , Georgia 
 81 @-@ <unk> – MacDill AFB Memorial Park , MacDill AFB , Florida . Former Florida Air National Guard 125th Fighter Wing F @-@ <unk> repainted in markings of a 56th Fighter Wing F @-@ 16A previously assigned to MacDill in the 1980s . 
 82 @-@ 0930 – On display at Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base , Houston , Texas 
 F @-@ 16B 
 78 @-@ <unk> – On display at the Naval Air Station Wildwood Aviation Museum , Cape May County Airport , New Jersey 
 78 @-@ 0101 – On display at United States Space Camp / Aviation Challenge , Huntsville , Alabama 
 78 @-@ <unk> – On display adjacent to Parade Ground , Lackland AFB , Texas 
 79 @-@ 0430 – Stafford Air & Space Museum , Weatherford , Oklahoma 
 81 @-@ <unk> – Pylon display gate guard , Atlantic City Air National Guard Base , New Jersey 
 81 @-@ <unk> – Russell Military Museum , Russell , Illinois . 
 F @-@ 16C 
 83 @-@ 1126 – Pylon display at Hill Memorial Park , Hill AFB , Utah 
 84 @-@ 1264 – Air park display , Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station , Indiana . Aircraft retains Air Force Heritage paint scheme honoring 358th Fighter Group during World War II . 
 84 @-@ 1393 – Pylon display at Texas National Guard 's Camp Mabry , Austin , Texas . Former Texas Air National Guard 147th Fighter Wing / 111th Fighter Squadron aircraft . 
 85 @-@ 1469 – Static display at Joe Foss Field Air National Guard Station , South Dakota 
 87 @-@ <unk> – Preserved as Thunderbird 1 in front of the USAF Air Demonstration Squadron / United States Air Force Thunderbirds hangar , Nellis AFB , Nevada . Assigned to Thunderbirds in the 1992 – 2008 timeframe . Had number 1 attached on 11 Jun 1999 ; number 2 in the 2004 season ; number 3 on 3 Mar 2003 and number 4 on 1 Apr 2005 . 
 F @-@ 16N 
 <unk> – San Diego Aerospace Museum , San Diego , California 
 <unk> – Pacific Coast Air Museum , Santa Rosa , California 
 <unk> – Palm Springs Air Museum , Palm Springs , California 
 <unk> – NAS Fort Worth <unk> , Fort Worth , Texas . It is painted in <unk> colors of the 457th FS , 301st FW . 
 <unk> – National Naval Aviation Museum , Naval Air Station Pensacola , Pensacola , Florida 
 <unk> – Air Power Park , Naval Air Station Fallon , Nevada 
 = = Specifications ( F @-@ 16C Block 50 ) = = 
 Data from USAF sheet , International Directory of Military Aircraft 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 49 ft 5 in ( 15 @.@ 06 m ) 
 Wingspan : 32 ft 8 in ( 9 @.@ 96 m ) 
 Height : 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 88 m ) 
 Wing area : 300 ft ² ( 27 @.@ 87 m ² ) 
 Airfoil : NACA <unk> root and tip 
 Empty weight : 18 @,@ 900 lb ( 8 @,@ 570 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 26 @,@ 500 lb ( 12 @,@ 000 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 42 @,@ 300 lb ( 19 @,@ 200 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × General Electric F110 @-@ GE @-@ 129 ( for F @-@ 16C / D Block 30 @-@ 40 @-@ 50 ) afterburning turbofan 
 Dry thrust : 17 @,@ 155 lbf ( 76 @.@ 3 kN ) 
 Thrust with afterburner : 28 @,@ 600 lbf ( 127 kN ) 
 Internal fuel : 7 @,@ 000 pounds ( 3 @,@ 200 kg ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : At sea level : Mach 1 @.@ 2 ( 915 mph , 1 @,@ 470 km / h ) 
 At altitude : Mach 2 ( 1 @,@ 320 mph , 2 @,@ 120 km / h ) clean configuration 
 Combat radius : 340 mi ( 295 nmi , 550 km ) on a hi @-@ lo @-@ hi mission with four 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs 
 Ferry range : 2 @,@ 280 nmi ( 2 @,@ 620 mi , 4 @,@ 220 km ) with drop tanks 
 Service ceiling : 50 @,@ 000 + ft ( 15 @,@ 240 + m ) 
 Rate of climb : 50 @,@ 000 ft / min ( 254 m / s ) 
 Wing loading : 88 @.@ 3 lb / ft ² ( 431 kg / m ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 1 @.@ 095 ( 1 @.@ 24 with loaded weight & 50 % internal fuel ) 
 Maximum g @-@ load : + 9 @.@ 0 g 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) M61A1 Vulcan 6 @-@ barrel Gatling cannon , 511 rounds 
 Hardpoints : 2 × wing @-@ tip Air @-@ to @-@ air missile launch rails , 6 × under @-@ wing , and 3 × under @-@ fuselage pylon ( 2 of 3 for sensors ) stations with a capacity of Up to 17 @,@ 000 lb ( 7 @,@ 700 kg ) of stores 
 Rockets : 4 × LAU @-@ 61 / LAU @-@ 68 rocket pods ( each with 19 / 7 × Hydra 70 mm / APKWS rockets , respectively ) 
 4 × LAU @-@ 5003 rocket pods ( each with 19 × CRV7 70 mm rockets ) 
 4 × LAU @-@ 10 rocket pods ( each with 4 × Zuni 127 mm rockets ) 
 Missiles : Air @-@ to @-@ air missiles : 
 2 × AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow 
 6 × AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder 
 6 × AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM 
 6 × IRIS @-@ T 
 6 × Python @-@ 4 
 Air @-@ to @-@ ground missiles : 
 6 × AGM @-@ 65 Maverick 
 4 × AGM @-@ 88 HARM 
 AGM @-@ 158 Joint Air @-@ to @-@ Surface Standoff Missile ( JASSM ) 
 Anti @-@ ship missiles : 
 2 × AGM @-@ 84 Harpoon 
 4 × AGM @-@ 119 Penguin 
 Bombs : 8 × CBU @-@ 87 Combined Effects Munition 
 8 × CBU @-@ 89 Gator mine 
 8 × CBU @-@ 97 Sensor <unk> Weapon 
 4 × Mark 84 general @-@ purpose bombs 
 8 × Mark 83 GP bombs 
 12 × Mark 82 GP bombs 
 8 × GBU @-@ 39 Small Diameter Bomb ( SDB ) 
 4 × GBU @-@ 10 Paveway II 
 6 × GBU @-@ 12 Paveway II 
 4 × GBU @-@ 24 Paveway III 
 4 × GBU @-@ 27 Paveway III 
 4 × Joint Direct Attack Munition ( JDAM ) series 
 4 × AGM @-@ 154 Joint Standoff Weapon ( JSOW ) 
 Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser ( WCMD ) 
 B61 nuclear bomb 
 B83 nuclear bomb 
 Others : 
 SUU @-@ <unk> / A Flares / Infrared decoys dispenser pod and chaff pod or 
 AN / ALQ @-@ 131 & AN / ALQ @-@ 184 ECM pods or 
 <unk> , Lockheed Martin Sniper XR & LITENING targeting pods or 
 Up to 3 × 300 / 330 / 370 / 600 US gallon Sargent Fletcher drop tanks for ferry flight / extended range / loitering time or 
 UTC Aerospace DB @-@ 110 long range EO / IR sensor pod on centerline 
 Avionics 
 AN / APG @-@ 68 radar 
 MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1553 bus 
 = = Notable appearances in media = = 
 = It 's About Time ( Christina Milian album ) = 
 It 's About Time is the second studio album by American singer Christina Milian . The album was released by Island Records on June 15 , 2004 in Japan , and July 13 , 2004 in the United States . It 's About Time served as Milian 's debut in the US ; the September 11 attacks occurred two weeks prior to her debut album was scheduled to be released , and Milian opted to record a new album for the US market . 
 For the production of the album , Milian worked with Bloodshy & Avant , Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , Cory Rooney , Warryn Campbell , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox and Poli Paul . Milian received writing credit for seven songs on the album , often basing them on personal experiences . The musical style of It 's About Time is primarily urban pop , compared to the teen pop styling of Milian 's previous album . The style and sound of the album was compared to that of Beyoncé Knowles and Jennifer Lopez by several critics . 
 The album peaked at number 14 on the US Billboard 200 album chart and number 21 in the United Kingdom , selling a total of 382 @,@ 000 and 63 @,@ 708 copies respectively . The album achieved Silver certification in the UK , and received a Grammy nomination for Best Contemporary R & B Album . The album 's lead single , " Dip It Low " , became Milian 's most successful to date ; peaking at number two on the UK Singles Chart and number five on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart ; it eventually went gold . The second single " Whatever U Want " was less successful , peaking on the UK singles chart at number nine . The critical response to It 's About Time was mixed . The club tracks , most notably " Dip It Low " , were praised , however the ballads were said to be disappointing . 
 = = Background = = 
 Milian 's self @-@ titled debut album was released worldwide in October 2001 ; however , its domestic release was postponed because of the September 11 attacks , which occurred just two weeks before its release date . Her label opted to release it later that year , in the fourth quarter , but as Milian explained , new artists generally do not release their albums during that time . As a result , the album was again delayed until the first quarter of 2002 . After the international release of her debut album , Milian went back into the recording studio . The singer felt that music trends had changed into rock music , hardcore hip hop and tribute songs , and her music did not fall into those categories . Milian decided to stop recording and toured overseas for a year and a half . When she returned to the US , she decided not to release her previous album domestically , and started working on a new album . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 Milian traveled the world to record the album , working with the popular producers of the time . The album featured production from Bloodshy & Avant , " Darkchild " , Cory Rooney , Warryn Campbell , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox and Poli Paul . Basing her lyrics on past personal experiences , Milian wrote seven songs on the album . Milian later explained that she wrote what she thought other people would like , rather than writing for herself and what she liked . When promoting the album , Milian said that she was excited about the album because she had matured since her last album , and it was " nice for people to see this change " . 
 Compared to her " bubble @-@ gum pop " debut album , Milian described the genre of It 's About Time as more R & B. Discussing the change of genre between her lead singles , Milian said that the " first single off my last album , ' AM to PM ' , was more of a kiddie kind of thing , very pop . [ Dip It Low ] is more R & B , kind of a club / party kind of vibe . " An issue Milian had with the album was that it did not flow . The various pop and urban influences in that album , she found , confused the audience . For her next studio album , Milian said that she wanted a more consistent feel . 
 For " Dip It Low " ' s music video , Milian danced in a bed of black paint . Milian explained that body art was common in the 1960s : " they would dip in paint and they would roll around on a canvas and make art on the canvas . So I kind of ' dip ' in the paint and do the same thing . " The song 's lyrics are about putting an effort into the relationship as a female : " if you wanna be a little more sexy , you gotta dip it low " . Several years after the release of It 's About Time , Milian admitted that her new image for " Dip It Low " and the whole album was mainly for shock value . She had to make her way back into the US market , and by choosing a sexier image , she made a name for herself . " Dip It Low " was also meant to show that she was not the same eighteen @-@ year @-@ old girl in the " AM to PM " video . To create her new image , Milian also decided to change her appearance and lightened her hair . Taking inspiration from Janet Jackson who constantly changed her image , Milian thought to herself , " ' When did I like Janet Jackson the most ? ' It was when she had her lightened hair . " 
 The style and sound of the album was compared to that of Beyoncé , Paula Abdul and Jennifer Lopez by several critics , as well as Britney Spears , Aaliyah and Ashanti . After several comparisons to Beyoncé Knowles in regards to appearance , Milian said " I think she is a lovely artist , very talented but the only reason I changed my color hair is because I was getting bored of my same old look and I wanted to do something different . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today found that with Milian 's " slight , sweet vocals and blithe , breezy pop @-@ soul sensibility " , the genre of the album was more pop than R & B. Andy Kellman of Allmusic described " Dip It Low " as " a clever and ubiquitous slice of high @-@ class raunch " , and compared the album 's sound to both Beyoncé 's " Dangerously in Love " and Jennifer Lopez 's " This Is Me ... Then " . Eric R. Danton of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel said " Dip It Low " had the " plinking of an unusual Far Eastern @-@ sounding stringed instrument " , and " Whatever U Want " " rolls on a bass @-@ and @-@ drum combo " . Danton found the rest of the album to be " simply bland padding , with plodding , canned beats and half @-@ hearted hooks " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received mixed reviews among critics . Jim Farber of Entertainment Weekly felt that the songs from It 's About Time " sound like they fell off a Paula Abdul album " . Farber criticized the lyricists for writing " so many cliches " , and said that Milian 's voice " suggests a slightly more forceful version of Janet Jackson 's pant " . Farber gave the album a " D " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that while It 's About Time was " certainly not the worst album of the year " , it was " pretty damn crappy " . The reviewer enjoyed " Whatever U Want " , " I 'm Sorry " and " Get Loose " , which he said " contribute some guilty pleasure ear candy " . Eric Danton of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel found the album " suffers from the same problem afflicting most major @-@ label albums dumped on the market by an industry desperate for quick cash — It 's About Time features one hit single , a couple of lesser tracks and a lot of filler . " Danton felt that the only hit from It 's About Time was " Dip It Low " , while " Whatever U Want " and " <unk> " were the album 's lesser tracks . Danton praised Milian 's vocal talent , but said that ultimately , " the lackluster material [ ... ] rarely gives her a chance to shine " . 
 Andy Kellman of Allmusic praised the club tracks , feeling that they " work best and easily outrank the slower songs " . Kellman called " Dip It Low " the biggest highlight of the album , but said that despite the album 's " handful of bright spots " , Milian " will need to be more convincing during the ballads next time out in order to be considered a true force . " Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times said that although " Dip It Low " was one of the summer 's most popular songs , the album included an even better song , " I Need More " . Sanneh explained that Milian " breathes a serpentine melody over a beat that consists of jagged snippets : some guitar chugging , a few handclaps , a couple of strategically placed beeps and , in the chorus , an unexpected nose @-@ diving bass line . " Contrary to the views of other critics , Barry Walters of Rolling Stone said that although the ballads were " gooey " , " the love songs work better than the dance tracks " . Etta James of People believed that Milian struggled to find her own musical identity on the " fun but formulaic CD " . James praised the " sexy booty bumper " " Dip It Low " for its " reggae @-@ ish bass groove , a hypnotic Middle Eastern refrain " , and called Fabolous ' rap " perfectly chilled " . The reviewer thought " Highway " , the album 's " most erotically charged track " , sounded like a female answer to R. Kelly 's " Ignition " . While James found the album 's most personal song , " Oh Daddy " , to be the unsuccessful , she said that at least " it gives us a glimpse into the real Christina " . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 It 's About Time was released in the US on July 13 , 2004 ; it debuted and peaked at number 14 on the Billboard 200 album chart , and sold a total of 382 @,@ 000 copies . Internationally , the album peaked at number 35 on the Swiss Albums Chart , 55 on the German Albums Chart , and 66 on the Dutch Albums Chart . In the UK , the album peaked at number 21 , selling a total of 63 @,@ 708 copies , and achieving Silver certification by the British Phonographic Industry . The album received a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Contemporary R & B Album " in 2005 . To promote her album , Milian performed as an opening act on the Usher and Kanye West tour . The album 's first single , " Dip It Low " , became Milian 's biggest hit to date , reaching number two in the UK and number five in the US . The single was certified Gold by the RIAA for digital sales , and earned a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Rap / Sung Collaboration " . The album 's second and final single , " Whatever U Want " featuring Joe Budden , reached the top ten in the UK . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 In August 2008 , Milian sued the writer and producer of " Dip It Low " , Poli Paul . Milian claimed that Paul " very definitively " assured her that " there were no samples whatsoever in [ … ] ' Dip It Low ' " . However , in February 2005 , Thomas <unk> , Larry Crook and Dan Dickey sued Milian over the song , claiming that it contained a sample from a track they released in 1983 called La Sirena . The lawsuit claimed that Paul heard the album while in a record store , liked the tune and sampled 12 seconds of it for " Dip It Low " . Milian claimed that she had to spend more than $ 300 @,@ 000 defending herself in the case , which she settled in 2006 , and wanted $ 300 @,@ 000 plus damages from Paul and his associate , Spencer Cowlings Entertainment . In November 2008 , Paul countersued the Island Def Jam Music Group and its parent company , Universal Music Group . Paul alleged that Island Def Jam was " negligent in its obligation to obtain clearance and proper licensing for any copyrighted material " used on the album . In February 2009 , a superior court judge ruled that Paul 's attorneys had failed to file a sworn declaration in the given period of time , but allowed them to file an amended complaint . Paul 's lawyers amended the countersuit and added Milian as a defendant , saying that she was also negligent and that she should compensate him for money he spent in the copyright action . In June 2009 , Universal Music Group filed a breach @-@ of @-@ contract suit against Milian and Paul . The record label claimed it was forced to pay attorney fees as a result of the litigation between Milian and Paul . The suit also said that Paul owes the company attorneys ' fees from an earlier federal court case involving " Dip It Low " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of It 's About Time . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = South Kensington tube station = 
 South Kensington is a London Underground station in Kensington , west London . It is served by the District , Circle and Piccadilly lines . On the District and Circle lines , the station is between Gloucester Road and Sloane Square , and on the Piccadilly line , it is between Gloucester Road and Knightsbridge . It is in Travelcard Zone 1 . The main station entrance is located at the junction of Old Brompton Road ( <unk> ) , Thurloe Place , Harrington Road , Onslow Place and Pelham Street . Subsidiary entrances are located in Exhibition Road giving access by pedestrian tunnel to the Natural History , Science and Victoria and Albert Museums . Also close by are the Royal Albert Hall , Imperial College London , the Royal College of Music , the London branch of the Goethe @-@ Institut and the Ismaili Centre . 
 The station is in two parts : sub @-@ surface platforms opened in 1868 by the Metropolitan Railway and the District Railway as part of the companies ' extension of the Inner Circle route eastwards from Gloucester Road to Westminster and deep level platforms opened in 1906 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway . A variety of underground and main line services have operated over the sub @-@ surface tracks , which have been modified several times to suit operational demands with the current arrangement being achieved in the 1960s . The deep @-@ level platforms have remained largely unaltered , although the installation of escalators in the 1970s to replace lifts improved interchanges between the two parts of the station . Parts of the sub @-@ surface station and the Exhibition Road pedestrian tunnel are Grade II listed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sub @-@ surface station = = = 
 The station was opened on 24 December 1868 by the Metropolitan Railway ( MR , later the Metropolitan line ) and the District Railway ( DR , later the District line ) . The MR had previously opened an extension from Praed Street ( now Paddington ) to Gloucester Road on 1 October 1868 and opened tracks to South Kensington to connect to the DR when the DR opened the first section of its line to Westminster . The original South Kensington station , designed by the MR 's engineer John Fowler , had two platforms although it was intended that this would be supplemented as DR services extended . 
 On 1 August 1870 , the DR opened additional tracks between Gloucester Road and South Kensington . On 10 July 1871 , the DR opened its own facilities at South Kensington . The enlarged station had two through platforms for each company and a bay platform for terminating MR trains from the west . The junction between the two companies ' tracks was also moved from the west side of the station to the east side . 
 On 1 February 1872 , the DR opened a northbound branch from its station at Earl 's Court to connect to the West London Extension Joint Railway ( WLEJR , now the West London Line ) at Addison Road ( now Kensington ( Olympia ) ) . From that date the Outer Circle service began running over the DR 's tracks . The service was run by the North London Railway ( NLR ) from its terminus at Broad Street ( now demolished ) in the City of London via the North London Line to Willesden Junction , then the West London Line to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House – at that time the eastern terminus of the DR. 
 From 1 August 1872 , the Middle Circle service also began operations through South Kensington , running from Moorgate along the MR 's tracks on the north side of the Inner Circle to Paddington , then over the Hammersmith & City Railway ( H & CR ) track to Latimer Road , then , via a now demolished link , on the WLEJR to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House . The service was operated jointly by the H & CR and the DR. 
 On 4 May 1885 , the DR opened a pedestrian subway running from the station beneath the length of Exhibition Road , giving sheltered access to the newly built museums for a toll of 1 penny . Although it had cost £ 42 @,@ 614 to construct ( approximately £ 4 @.@ 15 million today ) , it was closed on 10 November 1886 and afterwards was opened only occasionally for special museum events . In 1890 , the South Kensington and Paddington Subway ( SK & PS ) , a proposed cut @-@ and @-@ cover railway planned to run from South Kensington to Paddington station , offered to purchase the under @-@ used pedestrian subway for use as the first section of its tunnel . At 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) wide and 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) high the subway could have accommodated two tracks without difficulty , but the SK & PS 's controversial plan to excavate a trench across Hyde Park was opposed and the railway withdrew its private bill from Parliament in March 1891 . The DR continued to open the subway intermittently and charged a toll until 1908 , when it was opened permanently for free . On 30 June 1900 , the Middle Circle service was withdrawn between Earl 's Court and Mansion House , and , on 31 December 1908 , the Outer Circle service was also shortened to terminate at Earl 's Court . In 1907 , the current arcaded station entrance was opened to a design by George Sherrin . 
 In 1949 , the Metropolitan line @-@ operated Inner Circle route was given its own identity on the tube map as the Circle line . In June 1957 , the reversing bay track was taken out of use and the track bed was later filled to connect the two island platforms . The eastbound MR platform ( Number 1 ) and westbound DR platform ( Number 4 ) were taken out of use in January 1966 and March 1969 respectively . The tracks for these platforms were also removed and platform 4 was subsequently demolished in the early 1970s to allow escalators to be provided to the Piccadilly line . The widened island platform is now served by the District and Circle lines in both directions . Following the closure of platforms 1 and 4 , platform 3 was renumbered as 1 . The current arrangement has trains running in opposite directions to the original layout . During service disruption or engineering works , trains can also run Eastbound from Platform 1 . The arcaded station entrance and shops , the brick retaining walls to the sub @-@ surface platforms and the Exhibition Road pedestrian tunnel are Grade II listed structures . 
 = = = Deep @-@ level station = = = 
 By the beginning of the 20th century , the DR had been extended to Richmond , Ealing Broadway , Hounslow West and Wimbledon in the west and to New Cross Gate in the east . The southern section of the Inner Circle was suffering considerable congestion between South Kensington and Mansion House , between which stations the DR was running an average of 20 trains per hour with more in the peak periods . 
 To relieve the congestion , the DR planned an express deep @-@ level tube line starting from a connection to its sub @-@ surface tracks west of Gloucester Road and running to Mansion House . The tunnels were planned to run about 60 to 70 feet ( 18 – 21 m ) beneath the existing sub @-@ surface route with only one intermediate stop at Charing Cross ( now Embankment ) . Parliamentary approval was obtained in 1897 but no work was done . In 1898 , the DR took over the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) which had a route planned from South Kensington to Piccadilly Circus . The route was modified to join the DR deep @-@ level route at South Kensington . 
 Following the purchase of the DR by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London in 1902 , the planned DR and B & PCR lines were merged with a third proposed route from the Great Northern and Strand Railway . The DR deep @-@ level route was revised at its western end to continue to Earl 's Court and surface to the east of Barons Court . 
 The deep @-@ level platforms were opened on 15 December 1906 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR , now the Piccadilly line ) which ran between Finsbury Park and Hammersmith . The platforms are placed eastbound above westbound and were originally served by lifts from street level stopping at both platform levels . Eastbound GNP & BR trains and DR trains would have shared the same platform with the two routes separating at a junction immediately to the east of the station . Westbound trains would have had separate platforms at the lower level with the routes merging at a junction west of the station . Although construction of the section of the DR tube route east of South Kensington had been postponed , a partial , 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) long , section of the westbound DR platform was built along with the two for GNP & BR use . Though closed @-@ off from the rest of the station , it was linked to the lift lobby and was tiled to match the other platforms . Enlarged tunnel sections for the junctions were constructed with the original running tunnels and remain visible from passing trains . A new surface building on Pelham Street for the lifts was designed by Leslie Green with the GNP & BR 's distinctive ox @-@ blood red glazed terracotta façade . 
 The unused westbound tunnel was used during World War I to store art from the Victoria & Albert Museum and china from Buckingham Palace and , from 1927 to 1939 , was used as a signalling school . During World War II it contained equipment to detect bombs falling in the River Thames which might require the emergency floodgates on the under @-@ river tunnels to be closed . 
 In the early 1970s the lifts to the Piccadilly line platforms were replaced by escalators , with one pair being provided between the ticket hall and a new intermediate level , where it met a linking passageway to the Circle and District line platforms , and three being provided from there to a lower concourse between the levels of the two Piccadilly line platforms . Stairs up and down from the lower concourse connect to the platforms . The stairs and passage to the westbound platform are located in the disused DR westbound platform tunnel . With the introduction of escalators , the GNP & BR station building was taken out of use . 
 = = Future proposals = = 
 Many stations on the Circle line which were originally constructed in open cuttings have been subject to air @-@ rights developments where cuttings have been roofed over with buildings built above . South Kensington station and the adjacent shop premises occupy a site of approximately 0 @.@ 77 hectares ( 1 @.@ 9 acres ) and proposals for redevelopment of the station and the site have been made a number of times since 1989 without success . In July 2009 , architects John <unk> and Partners examined development options for Transport for London and proposed a mixed @-@ use scheme retaining the station 's existing entrances , arcade and adjacent shops with a new residential block above the ticket office and residential development along the Pelham Street and at the Thurloe Square end of the station . The ticket hall would be enlarged and the open air platforms would be retained . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in London fare zone 1 . On the District and Circle lines , the station is between Gloucester Road and Sloane Square , and on the Piccadilly line , it is between Gloucester Road and Knightsbridge . South Kensington is the easternmost interchange between these three lines . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally District line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 15 to 00 : 30 eastbound and 05 : 45 to 00 : 45 westbound ; they are supplemented by Circle line trains every 8 – 12 minutes from approximately 05 : 30 to 00 : 30 clockwise and 05 : 40 to 00 : 15 anticlockwise . Piccadilly line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 40 to 00 : 25 eastbound and 05 : 50 to 00 : 40 westbound . 
 On the Piccadilly line 1973 Stock is used . On the Circle line S Stock is used and on the District line D78 Stock . S Stock is being introduced to replace the D78 Stock by 2016 . 
 = = Connections = = 
 London Buses routes 14 , 49 , 70 , 74 , 345 , 360 , 414 , 430 and C1 and night routes N74 and N97 serve the station . 
 = = In literature = = 
 South Kensington is one of two tube stations ( the other being Sloane Square ) mentioned in the song " When you 're lying awake " from the operetta Iolanthe by Gilbert and Sullivan . 
 = Girlschool = 
 Girlschool are a British rock band that formed in the new wave of British heavy metal scene in 1978 and frequently associated with contemporaries Motörhead . They are the longest running all @-@ female rock band , still active after more than 35 years . Formed from a school band called Painted Lady , Girlschool enjoyed strong media exposure and commercial success in the UK in the early 1980s with three albums of ' punk @-@ tinged metal ' and a few singles , but lost their momentum in the following years . 
 In the 1990s and 2000s , they focused on shows and tours and did few studio albums . During their career , Girlschool travelled the world , playing in many rock and metal festivals and co @-@ headlining with or supporting important hard rock and heavy metal bands . They maintain a worldwide cult following and are an inspiration for many female rock musicians . Despite frequent changes of line @-@ up , original members Kim McAuliffe , Enid Williams and Denise Dufort are still in the band . The only original member no longer in the band , lead guitarist and singer Kelly Johnson , died of cancer in 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1975 – 1978 : Painted Lady = = = 
 In 1975 , school friends and neighbours from Wandsworth , South London , Kim McAuliffe ( rhythm guitar , vocals ) and Dinah Enid Williams ( bass , vocals ) formed an all @-@ girl rock cover band called Painted Lady , together with Tina Gayle on drums . Deirdre Cartwright joined the new band on lead guitar , Val Lloyd replaced Gayle on drums and they started playing the local pub scene . " The reason we were all girls was we couldn ’ t find any blokes who wanted to play with us ! This was the natural thing to do " , McAuliffe explained to Gary Graff in 1997 about the all @-@ female composition of the band . 
 Cartwright , who was older and more musically experienced than the other girls , left in 1977 to form the band Tour De Force and then followed different professional opportunities in the music business ; she is now a renowned jazz guitarist . Her place in the band was briefly taken by visiting American Kathy Valentine , who approached the band through an advertisement in the British music newspaper Melody Maker . When Valentine returned to the United States in 1978 to form the <unk> and later join The Go @-@ Go 's as bass player , Painted Lady broke up . However , McAuliffe and Williams were still willing to pursue a musical career to escape their day jobs in a bank and a bakery and reformed the band , recruiting lead guitarist Kelly Johnson and drummer Denise Dufort in April 1978 . The new line @-@ up changed their name to Girlschool , taking it from the B @-@ side of the hit single " Mull of Kintyre " ( 1977 ) by Paul McCartney & Wings and immediately hit the road , touring small venues in France , Ireland and Great Britain . 
 = = = 1978 – 1982 : N.W.O.B.H.M. = = = 
 In December 1978 , Girlschool released their first single , " Take It All Away " , on the independent record label City Records , owned by Phil Scott , a friend of the band . The single had some radio airplay and circulated in the underground scene , coming to the ear of Ian Kilmister , commonly known as Lemmy , leader of the British rock band Motörhead , who wanted to meet the band . Lemmy , together with Motörhead and Hawkwind manager Doug Smith , went to see the band performing live and offered them a support slot on Motörhead ’ s Overkill tour in the spring of 1979 . This was the start of an enduring relationship between the two bands that lasts to this day . After the tour and a few other shows supporting Welsh band Budgie , Doug Smith became the manager of Girlschool and obtained an audition with the British label Bronze Records , at the time home of Uriah Heep , Motörhead and Juicy Lucy . Bronze ’ s owner Gerry Bron himself attended the audition and was impressed by Girlschool 's stage presence and musicianship , offering them a contract with his label in December 1979 . 
 The British rock movement known as the new wave of British heavy metal ( frequently abbreviated in NWOBHM ) , which started in the late 1970s and broke in the mainstream in the early 1980s , was just exploding in the United Kingdom and the band gained the support of a strong label at exactly the right time to exploit the moment and form a solid fan base . 
 The band entered the recording studio with experienced producer Vic Maile in April 1980 . Vic Maile had been working as live sound engineer for many important acts , like The Who , Led Zeppelin , The Kinks and Jimi Hendrix , producing also the first two seminal albums of Dr. Feelgood and a few punk bands in the late 70s . He captured the raw but powerful sound of Girlschool in ten short songs , with lead vocals shared by Williams , McAuliffe and Johnson . Girlschool released their debut album , Demolition , in June 1980 , alongside the singles " Emergency " , " Nothing to Lose " and " Race with the Devil " . Demolition reached <unk> in the UK Album Chart in July 1980 . 
 In the same period , albums and singles from Judas Priest , Saxon , Def Leppard , Iron Maiden , Motörhead and other bands of the NWOBHM reached high positions in the UK charts , while the same bands did tours and concerts all over Europe . Girlschool participated in this frenzied touring activity , travelling in Great Britain and visiting Europe both as headliner act and as support to label mates Uriah Heep and Motörhead . On 20 August , Girlschool and Motörhead were filmed performing live at the Nottingham Theatre Royal for the <unk> programme , broadcast by the ATV station on 4 April 1981 . In this period , the band was subjected to intense media coverage by music magazines , radio and TV , interested in the novelty of a successful British all @-@ female metal band . The barrage of interviews and promotion did not stop the production of songs and the girls released the new single " Yeah Right " in November 1980 . 
 In December 1980 , Girlschool officially started recording the follow @-@ up to Demolition , again with producer Vic Maile , who had meanwhile produced Motörhead ’ s classic album Ace of Spades . During the sessions , Maile suggested a studio recording team @-@ up with Motörhead , resulting in the release of the EP St. Valentine 's Day Massacre . The EP contains the cover of Johnny Kidd & The Pirates ’ song " Please Don ’ t Touch " and two self @-@ covers , with Motörhead performing Girlschool 's " Emergency " , and Girlschool playing Motörhead 's " Bomber " . Dufort played drums on all songs , because Motörhead 's drummer Phil " <unk> Animal " Taylor was recovering from a neck injury . She also played the drums during the BBC One Top of the Pops TV show of 19 February 1981 , where the two bands performed " Please Don ’ t Touch " under the moniker <unk> . The EP reached No.5 in the UK Single Chart in February 1981 and was certified silver in December 1981 , the best sale performance for both bands at the time . 
 The album Hit and Run was released in April 1981 , soon followed by the eponymous single . Both releases were very successful in the UK , with the album reaching position No.5 and the single position <unk> in the respective charts . The album charted also in New Zealand and in Canada , where it went gold . Hit and Run was not released in the USA until 1982 , with a different track listing including songs from Demolition . The success of their second album made Girlschool a rising attraction in the boiling British hard rock and heavy metal scene , ensuring headliner slots in medium @-@ sized arenas in their sold @-@ out UK tour or guest slots in stadium size concerts of major attractions like Black Sabbath and Rush . No dates in the USA were arranged , but Girlschool visited Canada in July . Their 1981 tour culminated on 28 August , headlining the Friday night of the three @-@ day Reading Festival . The Friday Rock Show on BBC Radio 1 would later broadcast the Reading set , but the recording has not received an official release . 
 At the beginning of 1982 , Girlschool did a European tour and , at the last Danish date in Copenhagen with supporting act Mercyful Fate , McAuliffe received a potentially @-@ fatal electric shock from her microphone . She recovered fast enough to complete a Japanese tour , to do other European shows supporting Rainbow on their Difficult to Cure tour and to start working on new material for the next album . However , the gruelling schedule of recordings , promotional work and concerts had started to take its toll on the group , with bassist Enid Williams the first to give up , right after the release of Wildlife in March 1982 , an EP designed to launch the upcoming album . On the recommendation of Lemmy , Williams was replaced by Ghislaine ' Gil ' Weston , former bassist of the punk band The <unk> . 
 Girlschool ’ s third album Screaming Blue Murder was recorded in February and March 1982 under the direction of Nigel Gray , the successful producer of The Police and The Professionals . The album had a worldwide release in June 1982 but , despite the strong promotion , it reached only No.27 in the UK Album Chart . Critics generally considered Screaming Blue Murder a weaker offering in comparison with the preceding two albums . 
 Girlschool remained anyway a strong live attraction and their 1982 world tour led the band for the first time in the USA to play in stadiums , supporting Iron Maiden and Scorpions . NWOBHM acts like Judas Priest and Def Leppard started to be very popular in America and the girls and their record label had no intention to fall back in the conquest of that large market . 
 = = = 1983 – 1985 : American sirens = = = 
 Back in England , the continuous succession of recording sessions , gigs and promotional work started again , but the strain of this routine was wearing out Kelly Johnson , who was also tired of the music the band had been playing for four years without a break . The other members struggled to convince her to stay and the chance to record with British celebrities Noddy Holder and Jim Lea as producers persuaded the guitarist to carry on with Girlschool . Holder and Lea , who had returned in those years to great success and popularity in Great Britain with the 70s rock band Slade , were hired to produce only a single , with the following album already scheduled to be recorded in Los Angeles with Quiet Riot producer Spencer <unk> . However , the good chemistry found with the two Slade members led the band to decide to record not a single , but their whole fourth studio album in North London with Lea and Holder , giving up the trip to the USA . This time the group changed sensibly both their appearance and their musical style in order to appeal to a large American audience , which Bronze considered more oriented toward AOR and glam rock than to the ' biker metal ' Girlschool had produced before . Play Dirty , released in October 1983 , is an album with a very polished sound , filled with keyboards , choruses and melodies , but it lacks much of the aggression and power of the preceding works . The album contains covers of the Slade songs " High & Dry " and " Burning in the Heat " and of T.Rex ’ s " 20th Century Boy " , which was also released as a single . Play Dirty failed to enter the top 50 chart in the UK and had a lukewarm reception by fans and critics at home . A struggle between Bronze and PolyGram for the worldwide contract of the band resulted also in poor promotion for the album in the USA . Moreover , a disastrous performance at Wembley Arena supporting ZZ Top did not help Girlschool 's already degraded image in Great Britain . 
 Girlschool embarked in a long US tour to promote the album , sometimes as support to Quiet Riot and Blue Öyster Cult , but more often as headliner in small venues after uncomfortable travels . Johnson , unable to tolerate the unhealthy life on the road , quit the band before completing the US tour , hurting the promotion of the album in America . She went to live in Los Angeles with Vicki Blue , former bassist of The Runaways . With the departure of Kelly Johnson , who was often considered the visual and musical focal point of the band , the almost bankrupt Bronze Records failed to extend the band 's recording contract for a follow @-@ up album . 
 At the beginning of 1984 , Girlschool were in need of a new lead guitar player and singer , of a new recording contract and chart success but , despite the difficult situation , the band did not give up . The search for new members ended with the arrival of guitarist Cris Bonacci and singer and keyboard player Jackie Bodimead , both from the all @-@ female hard rock band She . She were playing in London clubs at the time , trying to get a record contract and attract the attention of the British music press . 
 The new <unk> , now a five @-@ piece group , signed with the PolyGram American subsidiary Mercury Records , once home of the American all @-@ girls rock band The Runaways . The label saw in the band an opportunity to produce a rival for chart @-@ winning female @-@ fronted bands like Heart and Lita Ford and pushed the music of the band even more towards FM friendly American hard rock . The band was paired with producer Nick Tauber , who had produced the first albums of Thin Lizzy and the most successful albums of Toyah and Marillion , contributing also to the launch of the British glam metal act Girl . The resulting album Running Wild , sported ten keyboard @-@ laden tracks much different from Girlschool ’ s most successful music . The record label decided to release the album only in the USA in February 1985 , but actually gave little support to its marketing . The review of the magazine Kerrang ! reflects the opinions of Dufort and McAuliffe , which described years later the album as rubbish or even worse . Running Wild had insignificant sales on the US market , not representing the breakthrough the band and the label had hoped for . A live performance of Girlschool as a quintet at Camden Palace in London was taped for the VHS Play Dirty Live , which was released in 1985 and reissued on DVD with the title Live from London in 2005 . 
 The band did some shows supporting the glam rock band Hanoi Rocks in Great Britain , before joining Deep Purple 's comeback world tour , where <unk> played in a supporting role all over the USA . A tour of India and the Far East completed their live activities for 1985 . Vocal duties were shared on stage between McAuliffe and Bodimead , who also played keyboards . At the end of the tour , Jackie Bodimead left the band to pursue a solo career . 
 = = = 1986 – 1990 : ' back to square one ' = = = 
 After the bad commercial results of Running Wild , Mercury broke the contract with Girlschool , leaving the band without financial backup and with a career in dire straits . " Back to square one again " , McAuliffe said at the time . The band decided to go back to their roots , remaining a quartet with only McAuliffe on vocals and going on a UK tour in November – December 1985 supporting Blue Öyster Cult ; their immediate goal was to play as much as they could and regain some of their fan base . In early 1986 , thanks again to Lemmy ’ s suggestion , they eventually signed for Doug Smith ’ s new label GWR Records , which also included in their roster Motörhead . The girls immediately started working on a new album with their old producer Vic Maile at Jackson ’ s Studio in Rickmansworth . The first output of their new work was a team @-@ up with British glam rock singer Gary Glitter for the cover of his 1973 hit " I 'm the Leader of the Gang ( I Am ) " , which was released as a single in April 1986 . The album Nightmare at Maple Cross , released in July of the same year , marked for the band the return to the sound of Hit and Run and to their trademark abrasive lyrics . The album received fairly good reviews , but it did not enter the British charts and was released in North America only a year later . The following European tour saw the girls supporting the Scottish hard rock band Nazareth . 
 In January 1987 , after five years with the group , bassist Gil Weston @-@ Jones left Girlschool to spend more time with her American husband . Her place was quickly taken by Tracey Lamb , who had been the bass player of the all @-@ female NWOBHM band Rock Goddess and a band mate of Cris Bonacci in She . Girlschool spent the rest of the year promoting the album with a US tour and appearances in various TV shows across Europe , followed by a long European tour supporting usual label mates Motörhead . 
 At the beginning of 1988 , the band started rehearsing material for a new album with producer André <unk> , who had worked on all the Monty Python ’ s records . The album Take a Bite was published by GWR in October 1988 and follows in the steps of Nightmare at Maple Cross , presenting powerful and melodic metal songs , tinged with the humour typical of the band . To promote the album , Girlschool did a UK tour with Gary Glitter , followed by a North American tour . In 1989 , they travelled across Europe with Dio and to the Soviet Union with Black Sabbath , till the end of the year . After their return from Russia , GWR did not renew their contract and the band practically broke up . Musical tastes were changing worldwide in favour of grunge and more extreme metal genres , compelling most acts originated from the new wave of British heavy metal to disband or to reduce their activities , and the same thing happened to Girlschool . 
 = = = 1990 – 1991 : She @-@ Devils and Strange Girls = = = 
 Even if not officially disbanded , Girlschool had become " not a full @-@ time thing anymore " for the members of the group . In this period , Cris Bonacci joined British singer Toyah Willcox , for the promotion of the album Ophelia 's Shadow . A brief tour of Spain was Girlschool ’ s only activity of 1990 , but in December , McAuliffe , Bonacci , Dufort and returning bass player Enid Williams , teamed up with Toyah Willcox under the name She @-@ Devils for the first edition of the Women in Music festival at Shaw Theatre in London , performing both Girlschool and Toyah ’ s songs . A few months later , the same musicians reunited again under the new name Strange Girls , with Lydie <unk> replacing Dufort on drums . Strange Girls toured clubs in Great Britain in 1991 and 1992 and supported The Beach Boys in their German dates in the summer of 1991 . The band wrote a few songs and produced a demo , but the only published track from this period is the song " Lust for Love " , which can be found on Toyah ’ s album Take the Leap ! ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = 1992 – 2002 : living on tour = = = 
 Girlschool went back in action in 1992 , recruiting Jackie Carrera on bass and recording Girlschool , their first self @-@ produced album , which was distributed worldwide by the British indie label Communiqué Records . The lower visibility of the album distributed by an indie label marked the definitive transition to cult status for the band , renouncing to many expectations of big sales . Girlschool were now the managers of themselves , relying on their solid live show and on their reputation with promoters and other artists to get gigs and work . As stated in an interview to the British TV show Raw Power , Girlschool would " play in every single toilet that we can find ! " 
 After a few European dates , returning bassist Tracey Lamb replaced Carrera before a new tour in the United States . But more line @-@ up changes were in store for the band because , at the end of 1992 , Cris Bonacci left the band to become a touring musician and then a producer . In 1993 , her place as lead guitarist was taken back by Kelly Johnson , who returned after nine years to England from LA , where she had played in a band with Kathy Valentine and written and produced her own music . The plethora of compilations of old Girlschool material that had started to be released from 1989 kept the band alive on the CD market and guaranteed enough visibility to get a good number of gigs every year in every part of the world , often supporting other NWOBHM acts like Motörhead or Saxon . In this period , the girls were also present at rock festivals all over Europe , both as Girlschool or separately in other outfits . In 1995 , Communiqué Records released Girlschool Live , a live album documenting the intense live shows of the band in that period and which included the new tracks " Knife " and " Little Green Men " . Girlschool continued their live activity in the 1990s , culminating with a participation to the Wacken Open Air festival on Friday , 6 August 1999 . 
 In all this time the band had been writing new songs and , in September 1998 , they began to record a new album , but touring commitments and new line @-@ up changes prevented Girlschool to complete it . In fact , Johnson quit amicably Girlschool in 1999 , followed by Lamb in 2000 . They were replaced by new lead guitarist Jackie ' Jax ' Chambers and by Enid Williams , who finally rejoined the group after eighteen years . Johnson , who had been diagnosed with cancer , and Lamb remained anyway strictly associated with the other band members . 
 21st Anniversary : Not That Innocent was finally released at the beginning of 2002 and co @-@ produced by Girlschool and Tim Hamill . The album contains tracks recorded three years earlier by the previous line @-@ up , with the addition of the songs " Coming Your Way " and " Innocent " recorded by the current one . The influence of the American years spent by Johnson in Los Angeles is clearly audible in the music and in the vocal tracks of the album , which features Girlschool ’ s first semi @-@ acoustic ballad " A Love Too Far " . 
 = = = 2003 – present : recent activities = = = 
 In 2003 , the band was again in a recording studio for The Second Wave : 25 Years of NWOBHM , a split album conceived by the label Communiqué , comprising five songs each for Oliver / Dawson Saxon , Tygers of Pan Tang and Girlschool . A tour of the three aforementioned bands could not be organized and , in October 2004 , Girlschool toured supporting the album with Tygers of Pan Tang and Paul Di 'Anno . 
 Preceded by the publication of the re @-@ mastered editions of their first four albums , Girlschool released the studio album Believe in July 2004 . The wish to explore new territories is obvious in some tracks of the album , which is the first one entirely composed by the new line @-@ up at Chambers ’ home studio . The changed line @-@ up brought a new balance in the band , with Chambers involved in the composition of all songs . Moreover , the chance to use again two lead singers led to improvements in the vocal and choral parts . Unfortunately , the album was poorly distributed and remained unknown to large parts of its potential audience . In 2005 , the band re @-@ released Believe in a new package with a DVD containing footage taken from concerts of the 2000s and sold it through their official website . A US and European tour followed Believe first release , but the project for releasing in 2004 a live DVD tentatively titled Girlschool Live at the Garage never materialized . In June 2005 , Girlschool did a UK tour with Vixen and another one in November – December with old pals Motörhead , celebrating Lemmy 's band 30th anniversary . During the same year , they were also on stage at summer festivals in the Netherlands and England and opened for Alice Cooper in Spain . 
 Rock and metal festivals have become a constant for the band , that performed both in large open air meetings in Germany ( Headbangers Open Air 2006 , Bang Your Head ! ! ! 2007 , Wacken Open Air 2008 and Wacken Rocks 2009 ) , France ( Hellfest Summer Open Air 2009 ) , England ( Hard Rock Hell 2007 and 2009 , Bloodstock Open Air 2009 ) and the USA ( Power Box Festival 2007 ) and in smaller settings , like the Rock of Ages Fest in England in 2007 and the Metal Female Voices Fest in Belgium in 2008 . Girlschool were opening act for Heaven & Hell in 2007 , for Dio in 2008 and for Hawkwind and Motörhead in 2009 . 
 On 15 July 2007 , Kelly Johnson died of spinal cancer , after six years of painful therapy and treatment of her illness . At Kelly ’ s memorial , Tracey Lamb read the eulogy she had written for her . The band performed a tribute gig on 20 August 2007 at the Soho Revue Bar in London , with many of Johnson ’ s friends and former Girlschool ’ s members and a concert for Cancer Research UK at Rock of Ages Fest in Tamworth on 8 September 2007 . 
 The new album Legacy , released in October 2008 , celebrates both the departed guitarist and the 30th anniversary of Girlschool , making them the so far longest running female rock band in the world . The recording was self @-@ produced with the assistance of Tim Hamill and the compositions are more individual , revealing a large array of influences , going from NWOBHM , to punk , to West Coast alternative rock . To emphasize the <unk> mood , the album features many guest musicians , with members of Heaven & Hell , Twisted Sister and Motörhead supplying vocals and guitars in many tracks . Kelly Johnson ’ s ' ghost ' presence permeates the album and the song " Legend " is especially dedicated to her . The album received excellent reviews and the German label SPV / <unk> guaranteed the worldwide distribution . Girlschool performed a special show celebrating their 30th anniversary on 16 December at the Astoria 2 in London . 
 Girlschool were among the many female singers performing on veteran German hard rock singer Doro Pesch ’ s single " Celebrate " , released in 2008 . Jackie Chambers and Enid Williams were also present on stage at Doro ’ s 25th anniversary celebration concert on 13 December 2008 in Düsseldorf . 
 At the beginning of 2010 , Girlschool contributed to the release of the cover of their single " Emergency " by Cornish youth music charity Livewire , in order to raise funds for the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . The band went on tour in Europe with the Canadian metal band Anvil in 2010 . The band spent time in studio re @-@ recording their classic 1981 album Hit and Run , during 2011 . The new version of the LP , titled Hit and Run – Revisited , was released on 26 September 2011 to celebrate the original album 's 30th anniversary . 
 Girlschool continued to tour Europe and South America in 2011 @-@ 12 and returned in Japan in 2013 . In early 2015 , they recorded a new album titled Guilty as Sin with producer Chris Tsangarides , which was released on 13 November 2015 . 
 = = Music and style = = 
 Revolver magazine editor Christopher Scapelliti aptly described Girlschool 's music as a " punk @-@ metal mix tough , but poppy enough for radio " . The influences of classic hard rock and heavy metal are present in the musical background of all the original band members and they are particularly evident in the clean and sometimes bluesy solo guitar work of Kelly Johnson . Artists like Led Zeppelin , Black Sabbath , David Bowie , T. Rex , Suzi Quatro have been influential on the Girlschool members . 
 On the other end , punk rock had a direct influence in the birth of New wave and new wave of British heavy metal and that music was still very popular when the band was born . Moreover , both Denise Dufort and Gil Weston had played in punk bands before joining Girlschool . " We 're both too heavy to be New Wave and too punk to be a heavy metal band " , McAuliffe explained to <unk> Millar of Sounds in 1980 . The raw and almost live recording sound of their first two Vic Maile produced albums represents perfectly the core music of the band in the years from 1979 to 1982 , which were the most successful for Girlschool . The combination of metal and punk was a large part of the sound which also propelled Motörhead to notoriety and chart success in the early 80s in the United Kingdom . This sound , the tours and recordings made together with Lemmy ’ s band , the girls ’ denim and leather look , as much as their rowdy and alcohol driven off @-@ stage behaviour soon gained Girlschool the moniker of ' sisters of Motörhead ' , which they are often still identified with today . Their close association with Motörhead at the beginning of Girlschool 's career was anyway a useful springboard for their early success . 
 The mounting pressure to appeal to a mainstream audience , the quick change of tastes in British rock fans with the decline of the NWOBHM phenomenon and the chance to have a breakthrough in the US market prompted Girlschool to change their music , starting with the album Screaming Blue Murder in 1982 . Their sound , following the success of Def Leppard 's album Pyromania , became more polished with the introduction of keyboards on Play Dirty and veered toward hard rock and glam metal , losing the raw edge of their early works . " We were signed to an American label ( ... ) there was a certain amount of pressure exerted on us to sound more American " was McAuliffe explanation , speaking about the tame sound of the album Running Wild . The band appearance also changed to a more feminine and sophisticated style , imitating the successful American glam metal bands of the time and generally following the direction of the market . However , the failed attempt to create a niche for Girlschool in the USA and the rapidly changing record market behaviour made the band change their mind and go back to their original sound , which they retain to this day . Girlschool 's members themselves described their music in different ways , from " slapstick rock " to " raucous ( ... ) heavy metal rock ' n ' roll " , and , even acknowledging the common origin of their music in the NWOBHM , they sometimes found it difficult to associate their songs to a single genre or subgenre of rock music . 
 Just like most punk songs , Girlschool ’ s lyrics usually have short and direct texts , often reflecting the wild rock ' n ' roll lifestyle and treating sex and romance as seen from a feminine point of view , with the use of reverse sexism and tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek sense of humour . Some of their songs deal also with more serious matters , such as exploitation and abuse of women , murder , addiction , the destruction of the environment , social and political issues . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The fact of being a band composed of girls , beside the obvious marketing gimmick based on sexuality , has always been perceived as a handicap in the sexist and male @-@ dominated heavy metal scene , especially in the early 1980s , when metal was rapidly taking the place of punk music in the tastes of many young males in Great Britain . However , Girlschool 's good musicianship and their aggressive but fun @-@ loving attitude quickly won the NWOBHM audience , which treated them with respect , forming a loyal fan base . In Kelly Johnson 's word , Girlschool were so well accepted because " most of the audience is headbangers and they spend most of the time banging their heads and hardly look at us " . 
 In 1980 , Girlschool 's fondest fans formed a club called ' The <unk> Army ' , which followed and supported the band during every tour in Great Britain and Europe . The fan club did not survive the decline of the band and almost ceased its activities by the end of 1982 . 
 British specialized press took notice of the band and especially weekly magazines like Sounds and later Kerrang ! dedicated covers to Girlschool and had frequent articles for either their stage performances or for their off @-@ stage drinking bouts and ' no @-@ nonsense attitude ' , during their period of maximum media exposition and chart success . In 1980 , Sounds voted the band second ' Best Newcomer ' and Kelly Johnson third ' Best Female Vocalist ' . Two years later , Kerrang ! still voted Kelly Johnson second ' Best Female Vocalist ' and best ' Female Pin @-@ up ' . In that period , British radio stations gladly broadcast Girlschool 's singles and the band was also guest of music TV shows , culminating with a performance at Top of the Pops on April 1981 to promote the single " Hit and Run " . 
 On the contrary , Girlschool 's change of musical style in 1984 and their sudden predilection for the US market were not well received by the British press and by their fans at home . The change of attitude and image , exemplified by the music video for " Running Wild " on rotation on MTV , which showed the girls playing with heavy make @-@ up , combed hair and fancy costumes , imitating a trendy American glam outfit , alienated the love of British fans , whose perception of the band was still that of roughneck companions to Motörhead , instead of competitors of Mötley Crüe and Ratt . In the time span of two years , Girlschool passed from headliner act to having serious difficulty to find a gig in the UK : " Nobody seems to want us in Britain anymore " , confessed McAuliffe to journalist Malcolm Dome in 1984 . The return of Girlschool to the sound of their beginnings came too late to win back the large fan base of their heyday and the band fell to cult status already in the late 1980s . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Pete Makowski in an article of the August 1980 edition of Sounds defined Girlschool " the leading pioneers in the battle against sexism " . However , even if Enid Williams ' showed interest in feminism , the band never openly expressed opinions about female discrimination , happy of being appreciated simply as musicians instead of ' female musicians ' . Nonetheless , the simple fact of being a successful all @-@ female group in the macho heavy metal scene was a statement of sexual equality , as many reviewers remarked , arriving as far as to associate Girlschool with the American feminist Riot Grrrl movement . 
 Reviewers and critics have also often associated the production of recent all @-@ female metal acts to the sound and music of Girlschool , identifying them as a band that , just like The Runaways before them , helped in paving the way to the presence of women in rock music . However , Williams remembered in 2004 how , in her experience , Girlschool were more inspirational for young male musicians than for female ones in starting rock bands . Moreover , important female metal bands of the 2000s , such as Crucified Barbara and Drain STH , denied even of knowing the music of Girlschool . Only the American all @-@ female rock band The Donnas publicly acknowledged the influence of Girlschool on their music . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 Kim McAuliffe – rhythm guitar , lead and backing vocals ( 1978 - present ) 
 Enid Williams – bass guitar , lead and backing vocals ( 1978 - 1982 , 1990 - 1991 , 2000 - present ) 
 Jackie Chambers – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 2000 - present ) 
 Denise Dufort – drums ( 1978 - present ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Demolition ( 1980 ) 
 Hit and Run ( 1981 ) 
 Screaming Blue Murder ( 1982 ) 
 Play Dirty ( 1983 ) 
 Running Wild ( 1985 ) 
 Nightmare at Maple Cross ( 1986 ) 
 Take a Bite ( 1988 ) 
 Girlschool ( 1992 ) 
 21st Anniversary : Not That Innocent ( 2002 ) 
 Believe ( 2004 ) 
 Legacy ( 2008 ) 
 Hit and Run – Revisited ( 2011 ) 
 Guilty as Sin ( 2015 ) 
 = = Videography = = 
 Play Dirty Live ( 1985 ) 
 Girlschool - Live from London ( 2005 ) 
 Around the World ( 2008 ) 
 = Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games = 
 Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games ( マリオ & ソニック AT <unk> , Mario to Sonikku <unk> Pekin <unk> , lit . " Mario & Sonic at the Beijing Olympics " ) is a crossover sports and party game developed by the Sega Sports R & D Department of Sega Japan . It was published by Nintendo for Japan and by Sega for North America , Europe and all other regions . The game is officially licensed by the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) through exclusive licensee International Sports Multimedia ( ISM ) . The game is the first official crossover title to feature characters from both Mario and Sonic the Hedgehog 's respective series . It was released on the Wii in November 2007 and the Nintendo DS handheld in January 2008 , and is the first official video game of the 2008 Summer Olympic Games . 
 Mario & Sonic on the Wii and DS is a collection of twenty @-@ four events based on the Olympic Games . Players can assume the role of a Nintendo or Sega character while competing against the others in these events . Players use the Wii Remote to mimic actions performed in real life sports , such as swinging a paddle . The DS version uses the stylus and button controls . Both games closely follow rules and regulations of the specific sports . Sega adopted the IOC 's mission of promoting a sporting spirit and its desire to interest young people in the Olympics by using its characters . Due to this atmosphere of competitive sportsmanship , Sega received approval by Nintendo to include Mario in the game with Sonic . Sonic the Hedgehog is the protagonist of the video game series released by Sega in order to provide the company with a mascot to rival Nintendo 's flagship character Mario in the early 1990s . 
 Overall , critics praised the multiplayer interaction of the Wii game and variety of events of both versions . However , reviewers criticized the Wii version for its lack of simplicity and its DS counterpart for not offering the same interaction between players . The Wii title was awarded the " Best Wii game of 2007 " at the Games Convention in Leipzig . Mario & Sonic sold over ten million units and started a series of related sport video games to coincide with upcoming Olympic events . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games is a collection of twenty @-@ four events based on the Olympic Games . On the Wii , the events consist of using the motion sensor capabilities of the Wii Remote and Nunchuk attachment to control the actions of the on @-@ screen character . The player moves the remote in a manner similar to the method the separate games are played in real life ; for example , swinging the Wii Remote to replicate hammer throw or pulling back the remote and tilting the Nunchuk like a bow and arrow . While the Nunchuck is required for archery , it is optional for most of the events . There are also events that are more physically demanding , such as the five running events which require rapid drumming of the controller . Some aspects of the gameplay are computer controlled . For example , in table tennis the player movement is controlled by the Wii , while the swinging of the racket is controlled by the player . The DS game is the same in design , but due to lack of motion controls , its events are much less physically demanding than those on the Wii . For example , instead of drumming the controller , players have to quickly stroke the touchscreen . 
 Mario & Sonic brings together the two title characters and fourteen more from both franchises to participate in environments based on the official venues of the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . These environments are stylized to fit the futuristic and cartoon @-@ like art styles of the Sonic and Mario franchises respectively . Each playable character has his or her own statistics which can serve as an advantage or disadvantage depending on the event . The characters are divided into four categories : all @-@ around , speed , power , and skill . The Wii version has additional in @-@ game characters taken from the console 's Mii Channel , which allows the user to create a Mii , a customized avatar , that can be imported into games that support the feature . Both games have non @-@ playable characters who serve as referees for particular events . 
 Both versions of Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games have three similar modes of gameplay : Circuit mode , Single Match , and Mission mode . Circuit mode is where players compete for the highest overall score in a pre @-@ determined series of events or design their own circuit . In the Single Match , players can choose to compete in each event individually . Mission mode is a single @-@ player option where each of the competitors has six character @-@ specific missions to complete , although the characters ' statistics are not as balanced as in the main game , making missions more difficult . The Wii version 's Circuit and Single Match can have an additional one to three players competing simultaneously while its DS counterpart has an extra option dedicated to multiplayer called Versus Play . Versus supports up to four people to use the wireless capabilities of the Nintendo DS to play events . DS Download Play is possible for those without an individual copy of the game , however the number of sports available is limited to six events and circuit mode is not available . 
 Both versions feature a gallery mode where brief facts about the Olympics can be found . There are five categories of Olympics @-@ related trivia organized by history and athletes , with corresponding minigames that will unlock the answer to trivia questions once completed . Classic music from both series is available in the gallery once all levels in a category are cleared . The two versions also have leaderboards that uses the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection to display the best times and scores in each event . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games features authentic Olympic events for the single match and circuit modes . The events closely follow rules and regulations of the specific sports . The types of Wii events are classified as athletics , gymnastics , shooting , archery , rowing , aquatics , fencing , and table tennis . Similar events have varying gameplay aspects ; for example , getting a starting boost in the 100 m dash is more important than in the longer races , since the initial short burst of greater speed would play less of a role in winning the longer distance runs . In relay events , such as the 4 × 100 metres relay and 4 × 100 metres aquatics relay , players can assemble teams comprising any four characters . 
 Besides these regular events , there are alternate versions of Olympic events called " Dream Events " . Unlike the regular events , the gameplay in Dream Events is exaggerated . Taking place in locations and using objects from older games of the Mario and Sonic series , Dream Events allow players to use the special abilities of characters and display dramatic moments in slow motion . 
 Although the Wii and DS versions of the game feature mostly the same events , each version has events that are not found in the other . The relay races and rowing are exclusive to the Wii version . In contrast , the DS version has cycling and five Dream Events — canoeing , boxing , basketball , long jump , and skeet shooting — not featured on the Wii version . 
 = = Development = = 
 After Sega transited from hardware to third @-@ party development in 2001 , Nintendo and Sega developed a closer relationship and worked together on F @-@ Zero GX — the first significant video game collaboration between the two . The idea for a crossover title between Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog and Nintendo 's Mario characters has been casually discussed between the two companies ; the mascots ' creators Yuji Naka and Shigeru Miyamoto , respectively , had their private discussions revealed in 2005 . Sonic the Hedgehog is the protagonist of the video game series released by Sega in order to provide the company with a mascot to rival Nintendo 's flagship character Mario in the early 1990s . Despite the discussions , the idea was not acted on as it lacked a setting that would give the game " an exclamation mark " . The idea of an Olympic setting for the mascots originated after Sega was awarded the Beijing 2008 Olympic license approximately a year later . The developer adopted the IOC 's mission to promote a sporting spirit and wanted to interest young people in the Olympics with its newly acquired license . The corporation decided to base the sports game around its characters that " young people love and are very iconic " instead of creating a more realistic simulation . Sega then requested Nintendo for permission to include Mario in the game , setting up the first matchup between their mascots . Nintendo approved and partnered with Sega in @-@ house to add another layer of quality control to the development . Both companies felt that the competitive sportsmanship of the Olympic Games provided an ideal choice as a setting for the once @-@ rival mascots . 
 Mario & Sonic was officially announced with a joint press release by Sega and Nintendo on March 28 , 2007 and premiered at E3 2007 . In another showing of the collaboration between the two companies , the game was predominantly developed by the Sega Sports R & D Department of Sega Japan under the supervision of Shigeru Miyamoto . He served as senior producer . Sega 's Osamu Ohashi and Nintendo 's Hiroshi Sato served as producers , <unk> Kasahara as director , and <unk> Nakagawa as composer . <unk> and according to gaming site IGN , TOSE , a developer known to avoid crediting itself in its works , helped to develop Mario & Sonic . The game is officially licensed by the IOC through exclusive licensee ISM and is the first official video game of the 2008 Summer Olympic Games . The president of Sega Europe stated that they originally planned a number of events , including judo , to fully epitomize the Olympics . However , the figure for the final product was reduced and judo was omitted . The development of the game was swifter than planned ; in October 2007 , Sega announced that Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games ' scheduled release date for the Wii has been advanced by two weeks and the game had gone gold . It was released in 2007 in North America on November 6 , in Australasia and Japan on November 22 , in Europe on November 23 , and in Korea on May 29 , 2008 . The DS version followed in 2008 in Japan on January 17 , in North America on January 22 , in Australasia on February 7 , in Europe on February 8 , and in South Korea on June 26 . Both versions were published by Nintendo for Japan ( where it is known as Mario & Sonic at the Beijing Olympics ( マリオ & ソニック AT <unk> ) ) and by Sega for North America , Europe and all other regions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games was a commercial success ; in the first few months after its release , the game was on four separate occasions the top @-@ selling game in the United Kingdom all @-@ formats chart . It accumulated seven weeks as the number @-@ one seller , including the first two weeks after its release . The Wii version sold a half @-@ million units in the UK during those seven weeks . By June 2008 , both Wii and DS versions reached combined sales of 1 @.@ 2 million copies in the UK , prompting Sega to create plans on re @-@ marketing the game there . The game went on to sell over two million units combined in the country . According to the NPD Group , the Wii game was one of the top @-@ ten best @-@ sellers for the month of December 2007 in the United States , selling 613 @,@ 000 units . Electronic Entertainment Design and Research analyst Jesse Divnich argued the game is a fitting example of brand awareness ' role in determining Wii game sales . The Wii is an exception to the correlation that higher quality games lead to better sales as seen on the Xbox 360 and Sony 's PlayStation 3 . Divnich added " To the casual and social gamer , it didn 't matter that the game received sub @-@ 70 Metacritic scores , " the recognizable " Mario " and " Sonic " brand names participating in a recognizable action , " The Olympic Games , " contributed to the game 's US sales . 
 As of December 28 , 2008 , 594 @,@ 157 units of the Wii version and as of December 27 , 2009 , 383 @,@ 655 copies of the Nintendo DS version has been sold in Japan . The Nintendo DS version is the twenty @-@ seventh best @-@ selling game of Japan for 2008 . In the same year for Australia , it is the eighth best @-@ selling game while the Wii version is number four . In July 2008 , Simon Jeffrey , president of Sega of America , announced that Sega has sold approximately 10 million units worldwide combined of Mario & Sonic and showed interest in again collaborating with Nintendo to produce another game featuring the two companies ' mascots . The game is listed in the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition 2010 book as the " Best @-@ selling gaming character cross @-@ over " with 7 @.@ 09 million on Wii and 4 @.@ 22 million copies on DS sold . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Although the Wii version of Mario and Sonic was awarded the " Best Wii game of 2007 " at the Games Convention in Leipzig , it received mixed reactions from game critics ; the DS version had a similar reception . A common complaint was that Sega and Nintendo failed to set the first matchup between their mascots in the genre that made them famous — platform games . Instead , the two companies threw Mario and Sonic into an Olympic @-@ themed party video game , a move which Tae Kim of GamePro criticized as " a marketing tool " to popularize the XXIX Olympic Games . Although the Wii version of the game was praised for being an entertaining multiplayer experience , it was criticized for shallow gameplay and complex rules and instructions . GameTrailers concluded that Mario & Sonic 's lack of " polish and simplicity " leaves the improbable grouping of mascots as its main attraction when compared to other party video games released for the platform . 
 GameSpot 's Aaron Thomas rated the Wii version 's motion control scheme as " uninteresting and occasionally frustrating " . X @-@ Play 's Morgan Webb agreed , calling the controls " non @-@ intuitive " and commenting that the minigames required players to " wave their <unk> frantically while pressing several buttons at the same time " . Dan Hsu of Electronic Gaming Monthly mentioned that the controls were complicated for a game that should be a " pure pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play party game " . Tae Kim said the events were " short and fairly shallow " and mostly required players to move the " Wii Remote and <unk> in specific ways — rapidly up and down for running events , for example " . Mark Bozon of IGN called Mario & Sonic a success due to the entertainment value derived from the slight variety of competitions offered in the game . However , he and several other critics felt that events within the same classification were similar ; Bozon noted that diversity was lacking as " five or six [ events felt ] nearly identical " , and Thomas found the gameplay of several events to be overly similar to one another despite the reviewer praising the game for its number of events . Both reviewers favored the more complex objectives found in the fantasy events of the game , which shared attributes with that of the Mario sport games and archery . 
 On the Nintendo DS , Mario & Sonic was regarded as virtually the same game in design as its Wii counterpart ; however , opinions on its control scheme varied greatly . GameSpy 's Gerald Villoria thought the tradeoffs between both versions made them equally enjoyable . Andrew Fitch of 1UP.com assured readers in his review that the less physically demanding gameplay of the DS version made the game accessible for extended periods of time . Fitch further stated that in nearly " every case , events [ were ] far more enjoyable on the DS " due to the requirement of the human body 's finer motor skill abilities to control the characters . However , Eurogamer 's Ellie Gibson noted that the lack of physical demand reduced the players ' engrossment with the game . Craig Harris of IGN had a similar opinion , stating , " Rapidly drumming the controllers is far more challenging than quickly stroking the touchscreen . " Harris felt the DS version lost some relevance to its marginally superior Wii counterpart since had a similar design and released almost three months afterwards . 
 Most publications agreed that the Wii counterpart of Mario & Sonic had clean textures and well @-@ done animations ; N @-@ Europe 's <unk> Hockley thought that each character was pleasingly rendered , and Thomas added that the graphics were " crisp and colorful " . Mark Bozon preferred the remixed Nintendo and Sega music and thought the general Olympic @-@ related music " [ could ] be a bit generic " . GameDaily 's Robert Workman called the background music " mostly forgettable " . Echoing this sentiment for the DS version , Emily <unk> of GamePro thought " most of the music [ wasn 't ] too interesting " . Compared to the Wii version , the DS version 's visuals are of the same style and its graphics are nearly on the same level . Due to the inability to compete against other players online , Harris regarded Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games ' limited use of the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection on the DS as a " missed opportunity " . Many reviewers , including Gibson and Pro @-@ G 's James Orry , found the uploading of best times and scores to be a cumbersome process . Although the home console version also has online rankings , it lacks direct competition between players . Disappointed with the aforementioned aspect , Bozon rationalized that the leaderboards " certainly [ made ] sense for a game like this " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Sonic at the Olympic Games is a Sonic @-@ themed sports game for mobile phones released in June 2008 . Developed by AirPlay and published by Sega , the game features five events based on the Olympic Games starring Sonic , Tails , Knuckles and Amy . Players control one character from a two @-@ dimensional prospective through one @-@ button commands . The commercial success of Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games started a series of Mario & Sonic sport video games to coincide with upcoming Summer and Winter Olympic Games . Sean Ratcliffe , vice president of marketing at Sega of America said , " I think the key factor that decides the ongoing building of this franchise is basically success . Is the game successful ? Are consumers happy with it ? " 
 Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Winter Games is based on the 2010 Winter Olympics and released on the Wii and the Nintendo DS in October 2009 , sold 6 @.@ 53 million copies in the US and Europe by March 31 , 2010 . Mario & Sonic at the London 2012 Olympic Games is based on the 2012 Summer Olympics and was released on the Wii in November 2011 and the Nintendo 3DS in February 2012 . The Wii and the 3DS games sold 3 @.@ 28 million copies in the US and Europe by March 31 , 2012 . Video games based on the Summer and Winter Games continue to be released . 
 = New England Quarter = 
 The New England Quarter is a mixed @-@ use development in the city of Brighton and Hove , England . It was built between 2004 and 2008 on the largest brownfield site in the city , adjacent to Brighton railway station . Most parts of the scheme have been finished , but other sections are still being built and one major aspect of the original plan was refused planning permission . 
 The site , a steeply sloping hillside between a main railway line and one of Brighton 's main roads , had been the home of a railway locomotive works and goods yard for more than a century . High @-@ density housing was built at the same time and surrounded the railway buildings . From the 1960s , the area fell into decline : the works and goods yard were closed and demolished , and most of the housing was cleared . This left large areas of derelict land which attracted small @-@ scale redevelopment and transient commercial enterprises . Proposals for redevelopment were made from the 1980s onwards ; in 2001 a master plan was granted planning permission by Brighton and Hove City Council . Site clearance work followed , and construction began in 2004 . 
 The New England Quarter consists of separately planned areas ( called " Blocks " in the master plan ) connected by new or altered road infrastructure and pedestrian links . Land use includes private and council housing of various styles and configurations , office and retail space , a college , a hotel , public space and community facilities . Some of the residential development aims to meet high environmental and sustainability standards , and green space is being provided on former railway land . 
 The scheme has attracted criticism from various sources , and certain aspects and proposals have been particularly controversial . A planned 42 @-@ storey hotel and residential building on one block — which was not in the original plan and for which planning permission was later denied — was opposed by many local people and politicians , and was eventually rejected by a government minister on appeal . The decision to allow a large supermarket branch to be built in the middle of the development was also unpopular . A campaign group was formed to co @-@ ordinate and raise the awareness of people 's concerns . 
 = = Location = = 
 The New England Quarter is in a central location in Brighton , the main urban centre in the city of Brighton and Hove . It is immediately east of the railway station and approximately ¾ mile north of the seafront . It covers a broadly rectangular area of 8 @.@ 7 hectares ( 21 acres ) , bounded by : 
 To the north : New England Road , leading to the Seven Dials area 
 To the east : The A23 London Road 
 To the south : Trafalgar Street , leading downhill from the station towards St Peter 's Church , and forming the northern boundary of the North Laine area 
 To the west : the railway station and its associated trackwork and sidings 
 ( Some sources measure the site differently , and accordingly define it as smaller or larger than the size given in the master plan . ) 
 = = History = = 
 The completion of the Brighton Main Line from London to Brighton in 1841 encouraged high @-@ density housing development on the hill west of London Road . Between this area and the railway line and station stood Brighton 's steam locomotive works and the lower part of the station goods yard . The first locomotive was produced here in 1852 . By 1896 , the works employed more than 2 @,@ 200 people in the manufacture and maintenance of locomotives for the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway . The works and its associated buildings were situated on an artificial plateau dug into the side of the chalk slopes , with the railway line on top , the works at a lower level and the lower goods yard beneath , 9 metres ( 30 ft ) below track level . ( The works had been extended on a pier across the lower goods yard at one point . ) Production lasted until 1957 , after which the buildings survived for some time before being cleared in 1966 to make way for the largest car park on what was then British Rail 's Southern Region . The lower goods yard section towards Trafalgar Street was no longer used by British Rail after the early 1970s , although it did not finally close until 1980 . Part of the land was incorporated into the car park , and the rest saw a mixture of uncoordinated uses , such as small office blocks and used car dealerships . Many of the houses adjoining the goods yard were demolished in 1962 and 1968 , and some tower blocks were built nearby . Further north , a large multi @-@ storey car park was built in 1976 close to St Bartholomew 's Church . 
 Various proposals were put forward for more effective use of the land . The first was in 1989 , when a mixed @-@ use development , centred on a new pedestrianised square outside St Bartholomew 's Church , was planned . It would have included a supermarket , offices , houses and other shops , and a relief road designed to take traffic away from the congested London Road . The Environmental Services Department of what was then Brighton Borough Council produced a planning brief for the site in October 1993 , stating a desire to " recreate in the area west of London Road a vital , urban , mixed use townscape which links a regenerated and environmentally enhanced London Road shopping centre with North Laine and the station " . The desire to use the site to its full potential was increased when city status was awarded to Brighton and Hove in 2000 ; it was the largest brownfield site in the city . 
 = = Development of the scheme = = 
 URBED ( the Urban and Economic Development Group ) , a not @-@ for @-@ profit urban regeneration consultancy , designed and developed the master plan for the scheme on behalf of the New England Consortium . This is a group of companies and interested parties which together have the overall responsibility for the scheme , including Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd , J. Sainsbury Developments Ltd and Quintain Estates and Development ( QED ) . The land was originally owned by British Rail , but passed to Railtrack when the railway system was privatised in the mid @-@ 1990s . It was sold to the New England Consortium in 1997 . An initial planning application , including a new Sainsbury 's supermarket , was rejected by the council in November 1997 ; the rejection was subsequently upheld on appeal in September 1998 . URBED were then asked to develop a new master plan for the site . This design statement was published in July 2001 , and was granted planning permission by Brighton & Hove City Council at the end of 2002 . Construction work on the site began on 19 July 2004 . 
 = = Overview of the scheme = = 
 The scheme is a mixed @-@ use development , consisting of a wide range of residential , commercial , educational and community buildings , transport @-@ related infrastructure and public space . The land has been divided into a series of " blocks " , identified by letters , to which different types of development have been allocated . ( Letters H , I and N are not used . ) 
 = = Residential areas = = 
 When the scheme is complete , at least 355 new homes will be available , consisting of a mixture of standard houses , apartments and townhouses , and able to support a population of approximately 1 @,@ 000 people . 
 In 2005 , a joint venture was formed between housebuilder Crest Nicholson and environmental project and design group BioRegional Quintain Ltd to acquire part of the site ( Blocks E and F ) and provide 172 of the new homes , including the affordable housing stock as mentioned above . The homes will be a mixture of one- , two- and three @-@ bedroom flats and " eco @-@ studios " , contained within one six @-@ storey and one ten @-@ storey tower . This section of the development will also incorporate 925 square metres ( 9 @,@ 960 sq ft ) of community space , to include a community centre , and 1 @,@ 134 square metres ( 12 @,@ 210 sq ft ) of floorspace for commercial use . 
 The Southern Counties division of major British housebuilder Barratt Developments was responsible for building City Point , the other section of the private housing development . This covers Blocks A , B , C and D , to the south of the Crest Nicholson / <unk> development . 
 = = = Block A = = = 
 This covers an area of 4 @,@ 484 square metres ( 48 @,@ 270 sq ft ) and is bounded by the now partly pedestrianised New England Street ( the former course of which it partially encroaches upon ) , Cheapside , a new pedestrian right of way ( <unk> Way ) and Blocks B and C. The Harvest Forestry , a low @-@ rise building with small dome @-@ shaped turrets at each corner , previously stood here . The block has been designated a high @-@ density , urban housing area , consisting of eight three @-@ storey townhouses , each with four bedrooms , fronting New England Street ; nine townhouses with roof gardens and small rear gardens — also with four bedrooms , and fronting the new pedestrian route ; and two apartment blocks with 21 two @-@ bedroom flats . The apartment block fronting the new Ann Square ( facing north ) has retail units at street level ( total area 245 square metres ( 2 @,@ 640 sq ft ) ) . The housing has 17 allocated parking spaces . 
 = = = Block B = = = 
 Covering 3 @,@ 953 square metres ( 42 @,@ 550 sq ft ) , this block lies west of Block A and adjoins Fleet Street , part of the new main road through the New England Quarter . It contains a very high density of housing : 119 residential units per hectare ( current government planning policy stipulates a minimum of 30 residential units per hectare , but no maximum density is advised ) . A retail unit and 47 residential units , none with allocated parking , make up the block . There are nine four @-@ bedroom townhouses , 17 two @-@ bedroom flats , 13 three @-@ bedroom flats and eight two @-@ bedroom duplexes . A single unit of 124 square metres ( 1 @,@ 330 sq ft ) was designated for use as a shop or café ; it is occupied by a fast food restaurant . The apartment blocks in Block B are four and five storeys in height . The central area enclosed by the block has been developed as a courtyard . 
 = = = Block C = = = 
 The residential element of this large ( 6 @,@ 432 square metres ( 69 @,@ 230 sq ft ) ) , complex block consists of 94 units , comprising four one @-@ bedroom flats , 54 two @-@ bedroom flats and 36 three @-@ bedroom flats . These are all situated above the Sainsbury 's supermarket , which forms a major component of the block . The flats are arranged across two apartment blocks , connected by a pedestrian route and sharing two courtyards . No parking is allocated to any of the flats . The blocks are each four storeys in height , on top of the height of the supermarket . 
