 = = = Block D = = = 
 This is another mixed @-@ use block , with a training centre at street level . The residential element within the 3 @,@ 953 square metres ( 42 @,@ 550 sq ft ) area consists of 56 units : eight one @-@ bedroom flats , two one @-@ bedroom duplexes , 34 two @-@ bedroom flats and 12 three @-@ bedroom flats . Most of the building is five storeys high ( the lowest floor being the training centre , with four residential floors above ) , but a further three storeys are incorporated within a tower in one corner . Again , no parking is allocated to this block . 
 = = = Blocks E and F = = = 
 These blocks are being developed by Crest Nicholson BioRegional Quintain LLP as an environmentally friendly set of " eco @-@ apartments " called One Brighton . Construction started in autumn 2007 . It consists of 172 apartments ( 369 beds in total ) , commercial space and a community facility . The scheme has been conceived to enable people living and working there to lead sustainable lifestyles . Of these blocks ' housing stock , 30 % has been classified by the developers as affordable housing , which will be managed by an independent housing association . 
 = = = Block G = = = 
 This will consist of three terraces of housing on top of a retaining wall alongside Stroudley Road . The ground area is 2 @,@ 092 square metres ( 22 @,@ 520 sq ft ) , of which 883 square metres ( 9 @,@ 500 sq ft ) will be allocated to B1 @-@ category office and utility space . The residential elements of the development are to be three storeys high , with balconies overlooking the " green corridor " immediately to the east . No off @-@ street car parking has been planned for this block , but some on @-@ street parking may be provided . 
 = = Commercial areas = = 
 A 4 @,@ 180 square metres ( 45 @,@ 000 sq ft ) Sainsbury 's supermarket ( total " sales area " accessible to the public : 2 @,@ 323 square metres ( 25 @,@ 000 sq ft ) ) forms a major component both of Block C and of the New England Quarter itself . It extends across the east @-@ west space of the block ; as a result of the steeply sloping land at this point , the store frontage faces the newly built Ann Square and the newly pedestrianised New England Street , while the rear is at basement ( sub @-@ ground floor ) level . A car park with 194 spaces for shoppers has been created beneath the store , and is linked to it by <unk> . The service area and loading bay extend beneath the new road between Blocks C and D , and into the ground beneath Block D. The new store opened on 1 March 2007 . It replaced a smaller outlet in London Road , which had opened in 1974 and which had seen little refurbishment since the original planning application for a Sainsbury 's on the New England Quarter site was put through in 1997 . 
 In November 2005 , Block K was granted planning permission for a four @-@ storey office development ( B1 @-@ category ) , in addition to the hotel and public open space therein . The amount of office space had been reduced , in favour of more hotel space , since the date when outline planning permission was granted for the New England Quarter development as a whole ( September 2003 ) . 2 @,@ 793 square metres ( 30 @,@ 060 sq ft ) of office space will be provided , although the original master plan had indicated 3 @,@ 159 square metres ( 34 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . Blocks A and Block B have also been provided with a small amount of space for retail use . 
 = = Hotels = = 
 Block J , which has a ground area of 3 @,@ 707 square metres ( 39 @,@ 900 sq ft ) , has been granted planning permission for a luxury ( four @-@ star ) hotel , with around 250 beds and a range of facilities including a restaurant , swimming pool and conference venue , taking the total floor space to 21 @,@ 367 square metres ( 229 @,@ 990 sq ft ) spread across five or six storeys . The URBED master plan states that " no associated parking [ has been provided ] as it is anticipated that most guests will arrive by train " , as the station is immediately adjacent . 
 Controversy arose over a proposal — raised after the master plan was approved in principle — to build a 42 @-@ storey tower incorporating a large number of residential units and other facilities in addition to the already @-@ approved hotel . The skyscraper was proposed by the Beetham Organization , a British property investment company , and would have been similar in scale and appearance to other recently built " Beetham Towers " in Liverpool , Manchester and Birmingham . Architects Allies and Morrison drew up the design . 
 There was much criticism of the design , its height and the proposed location , both from local councillors ( of all parties ) and from people in the local community . Planning permission was denied in April 2005 , but the Beetham Organization lodged an appeal and a public inquiry was held in November 2006 . Ruth Kelly , the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government , was responsible for deciding whether to overrule the council 's decision and approve the tower . A final decision on the site was initially expected in February 2007 , but the inquiry eventually continued until 17 May 2007 , when the decision to refuse planning permission was upheld . As well as agreeing with the council 's original argument that the tower would not fit into the local area and would have a harmful effect on surrounding conservation areas ( such as the North Laine and St Bartholomew 's Church ) , Kelly stated that the proposal would give insufficient benefit in terms of regeneration of the area , and did not offer enough outdoor leisure and recreation space . The future of the Block J site is undecided as a result of this ; however , within four days of the decision , the Beetham Organization announced that it intended to submit plans for an alternative scheme , which it would develop in consultation with the city council . 
 Block K was acquired by the <unk> Doyle Hotel Group PLC , which operated hotels under the " <unk> Inn " brand until it sold its portfolio in 2007 . It houses a three @-@ star hotel , built over five and six storeys , as well as offices and public space . It has a floor area of 10 @,@ 518 square metres ( 113 @,@ 210 sq ft ) , and there are 234 bedrooms , various meeting rooms and similar facilities . The hotel was built by Northern Irish construction group McAleer & <unk> . It opened in late 2007 . 
 = = Education and community = = 
 The Black and Minority Ethnic Community Partnership , a grant @-@ aided registered charity , leases the ground and first floors of Block D from Sainsbury 's . The space is used as a community training and resource centre . 
 Block F will be mostly allocated to community use . This area originally had a collection of old buildings which had originally been part of the locomotive works . Subsequently , they had been put to various uses , such as a camping goods shop and a furniture outlet . A third building , behind these shops , was believed to have been used as a " clocking @-@ on " point for employees at the works , who would go there to register their presence each day before starting work . By 2002 , it consisted mostly of a series of staircases , bridges and ramps , and was in poor condition . 
 Blocks L and M ( total ground space 5 @,@ 509 square metres ( 59 @,@ 300 sq ft ) ) consist of accommodation for Study Group International , housing Bellerbys College , a preparatory college for foreign students intending to go to British universities ; Embassy CES , a language school ; Study Group head offices ; and residential accommodation for students . The buildings contain four floors of teaching space , including 62 classrooms , a library and a bookshop ( total area 4 @,@ 336 square metres ( 46 @,@ 670 sq ft ) ) ; five floors of accommodation ( 7 @,@ 046 square metres ( 75 @,@ 840 sq ft ) ) for approximately 375 students ; a canteen and catering area ( 701 square metres ( 7 @,@ 550 sq ft ) ) ; and offices and college administration space ( 1 @,@ 965 square metres ( 21 @,@ 150 sq ft ) ) . There are 60 car parking spaces available beneath Block L for staff . The two blocks are connected by an enclosed glass walkway . An early version of the master plan showed three separate buildings on the site ; the third , " Block N " , was incorporated within the Block M building instead at the request of the college . 
 = = Car parking = = 
 Blocks O – R of the development make up Brighton station car park . This has two decks , a ground area of 8 @,@ 884 square metres ( 95 @,@ 630 sq ft ) and 600 spaces , of which 26 are for disabled drivers . A pick @-@ up and drop @-@ off point with motorcycle parking and a turning circle is situated between the car park and the side entrance to the station . This was the first part of the New England Quarter to be completed ; most of the work was undertaken by the <unk> Construction Group , based in nearby <unk> . There was a contractual obligation to provide 600 spaces , although the form which this had to take was not specified and various proposals were considered , including a taller multi @-@ storey structure with more floors and a much smaller ground area . During the construction works , a temporary car park was provided on land nearby . 
 There is relatively little parking elsewhere on the site , other than the 190 @-@ space facility at the Sainsbury 's supermarket ; this is partly mitigated by the retention of the London Road multi @-@ storey car park , located between Block C and the A23 London Road itself . The residential areas in particular have very few dedicated parking spaces . Block K will have 27 spaces to be shared between the hotel and the office building ; nine of these will be for disabled drivers . The master plan proposed 34 ( including five on @-@ street spaces ) , all of which were allocated to the office building . 
 = = Changes to the road layout = = 
 Significant alterations have been made to the underlying road network in the area . Some roads have been downgraded , others are now expected to handle more traffic , and several new routes have been built . New pedestrian links and cycle paths have also been created . 
 The largest change has been the downgrading of the former through route of New England Street in favour of a new north – south road , Fleet Street , which diverges to the west . This has allowed a large part of New England Street to be narrowed , pedestrianised and provided with cycle lanes . In contrast , Cheapside is expected to take a much higher volume of traffic , as it becomes the main east @-@ west route in the New England Quarter , taking traffic between London Road and Fleet Street , the main north – south road . Two new roads , Stroudley Road and Billinton Road , have been built to the west of the new Fleet Street , between there and the railway line . These give access to the car park , Bellerbys College and a new pick @-@ up and drop @-@ off point immediately outside the side entrance to the station . Two new pedestrianised squares — Ann Square and New England Square — have also been created within the core site . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Some bus routes serve the New England Quarter . There are stops at various locations on Cheapside , Fleet Street and New England Street . As of September 2012 , the following services operate : 
 Route 21 , operated by Brighton & Hove Buses , runs every 20 minutes ( hourly on Sundays ) from Brighton Marina via Whitehawk to the rear entrance of Brighton station in Stroudley Road . 
 Route 37B , operated by Compass Travel , runs hourly from the Bristol Estate near Kemptown to the Meadowview area of <unk> . 
 Route 38 , operated by Brighton & Hove Buses , runs every 30 minutes from Meadowview to the rear entrance of Brighton station . 
 The area is close to many other bus routes , both from outside the front entrance of Brighton station and along London Road . There is a direct pedestrian and vehicular route along Stroudley Road to the rear entrance of Brighton station . 
 = = Environmental issues = = 
 Part of the site , below and to the east of Block G , consists of a stretch of disused railway track which has for some time been designated a Site of Special Nature Conservation Importance ( SNCI ) . This is defined as a " locally important site of nature conservation adopted by local authorities for planning purposes " . This will be maintained and improved to create a " green corridor " called the Greenway , which will run from the embankment overlooking New England Road , at the northernmost point of the site ( beyond Blocks L and M ) , through to the station . The northern section , which is already partly wooded and home to a variety of wildlife , will be maintained in this condition . 
 The housing developed by the Crest Nicholson / BioRegional Quintain joint venture is intended to encourage environmentally friendly , sustainable lifestyles , based on lessons learnt from the award @-@ winning <unk> development in Wallington , south London . This was developed by the Peabody Trust in partnership with BioRegional Development Group . Proposals include " green lifestyle " packs and information for residents , solar panels , a communal wood @-@ burning boiler to heat the apartments and provide hot water , solar @-@ powered recharging point for electric cars , roof @-@ mounted wind turbines , a community allotment / garden irrigated by rainwater from the roof , a car club , and a high proportion of recycled materials used in construction . 
 = = Criticism and controversy = = 
 Various groups have expressed reservations about , and criticisms of , parts of the New England Quarter development or the scheme as a whole . Two aspects have been particularly controversial : the planning application for a 42 @-@ storey tower on the Block J site , which was refused but has been appealed against ; and the Sainsbury 's supermarket . 
 = = = BUDD = = = 
 Brighton Urban Design & Development ( BUDD ) is a campaign group which was set up in February 1997 in response to the original planning application for a Sainsbury 's superstore and car park on what is now the New England Quarter site . Although initially created to oppose and protest against these original plans , it has subsequently developed into an all @-@ encompassing point of contact for all issues relating to the New England Quarter , and its stated aim is now to " stimulate , encourage and initiate sustainable urban design and development through an inclusive participatory process , to combat social exclusion and to generate schemes that integrate social , cultural and environmental benefits to Brighton and Hove . " In 1999 , Brighton & Hove Council awarded the group a grant which enabled it to register as an industrial and provident society , noting that it was providing a significant community benefit by " providing a process for disparate communities of interest to develop their views and become involved in the planning and decision @-@ making process " . 
 BUDD held a public meeting was on 24 July 1997 , at which 99 % of the approximately 300 people who attended voted against the original planning application , which had been submitted in May following several months of preparation . A 4 @,@ 317 @-@ name petition to the same effect was submitted to the council three months later . Marches and rallies also took place . 
 After the new master plan was submitted and approved , further action was taken by protestors ; this was focused on the Harvest Forestry building at the corner of New England Street and Cheapside , which was squatted for a time . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> , a weekly anarchist newsletter , has frequently been critical of the plans for the New England Quarter site , and has regularly advertised BUDD 's public meetings , protest events and similar . In April 2002 , a demonstration was organised outside the Sainsbury 's store in London Road . 
 = = = Block J proposals = = = 
 The original master plan granted outline planning permission for a 250 @-@ bed hotel of five to six storeys in height . However , property development and investment company The Beetham Organization Ltd , which has in recent years built several high @-@ profile hotels , offices and other buildings in prominent city @-@ centre locations in Britain , bought Block J in November 2004 and submitted a revised planning application ( <unk> / <unk> / FP ) early in 2005 . This sought approval for a mixed @-@ use development comprising one 42 @-@ storey building with 146 residential units ( C3 @-@ category ) and a hotel with ancillary facilities including a restaurant , cafés , conference facilities and a health and fitness centre ; one six @-@ storey building with retail units ( <unk> and A3 @-@ category ) and a further 25 residential units ; and a pedestrianised public square . The application was rejected on 20 separate counts , including the negative visual impact on surrounding listed buildings such as the railway station and St Bartholomew 's Church ; the reduction in quality of surrounding public spaces ; the lack of provision of outdoor recreation space ; negative effect on the surrounding microclimate , and loss of sunlight to nearby buildings ; and the failure to consider fully the impact on transport . The reasons for the rejection were supported by various people and groups within the city , such as The Regency Society , which is involved with planning and conservation matters in Brighton and Hove . 
 = = = The design statement = = = 
 Overview 
 Part 1 ( Analysis ) ; Part 2 ( Masterplan ) 
 Part 3 ( Public Realm ) ; Part 4 ( The Core Site ) ; Part 5 ( Site Briefs ) 
 = Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Sac & Fox Nation = 
 Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Sac & Fox Nation , 508 U.S. 114 ( 1993 ) , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that absent explicit congressional direction to the contrary , it must be presumed that a State does not have jurisdiction to tax tribal members who live and work in Indian country , whether the particular territory consists of a formal or informal reservation , allotted lands , or dependent Indian communities . 
 The Sac and Fox Nation is an Indian ( Native American ) tribe that governs itself under the Indian Self @-@ Determination Act and imposes taxes based on that authority . The State of Oklahoma sought to impose income and motor vehicle taxes on tribal members . The tribe brought suit to prevent the state from imposing those taxes . 
 Both the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court held that Oklahoma , without a clear authorization from Congress , was prohibited from imposing taxes on tribal members in Indian country . This case , together with several other cases , are known as the " Oklahoma tax cases " in Native American case law . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The Sac and Fox Nation is an Indian tribe originally from the Great Lakes area . Following a series of treaties with the United States , in 1867 they moved to the Sac and Fox reservation of 480 @,@ 000 acres ( 190 @,@ 000 ha ) in Indian Territory ( in what is now Pottawatomie County in the State of Oklahoma ) . In 1887 , Congress passed the Dawes Act which broke up the reservation and allotted land to the tribal members . In implementing this law , the United States entered into another treaty with the tribe in 1891 , in which the tribe retained 800 acres ( 320 ha ) as a tribal headquarters and tribal members were allotted 160 acres ( 65 ha ) of land from the former reservation . 
 The Sac and Fox Nation governs itself under the authority of the Indian Self @-@ Determination Act and has its own tax commission . The tribe imposes a tax on earnings of any person working within tribal jurisdiction , regardless of whether that person is a tribal member . The tribe also provides for a motor vehicle tax and registration of any vehicle that are owned by a tribal member and <unk> within tribal jurisdiction . The State of Oklahoma , through the Oklahoma Tax Commission , also administers income and motor vehicle taxes . The state considers that all income earned in the state is taxable , including on tribal land , and issues tax assessments against those who are delinquent . Oklahoma contends that anyone within the state had to register their vehicles with the state , while the Sac and Fox Nation required tribal members residing in tribal jurisdiction to register the vehicle with the tribe . The state viewed those members to be delinquent in their vehicle taxes , but made no effort to collect until the vehicle was sold to a new owner . At that time , Oklahoma would require that the delinquent taxes and penalties be paid in order to register the vehicle . 
 = = = Lower courts = = = 
 The Sac and Fox Nation then filed a lawsuit against the Oklahoma Tax Commission in U.S. District Court seeking a permanent injunction prohibiting the state from taxing income earned within tribal jurisdiction or of those who reside within the tribe 's jurisdiction , and from vehicle taxes on vehicles that were lawfully registered with the tribe . Both the Sac and Fox Nation and Oklahoma made motions for summary judgment and the district court , without determining reservation boundaries , held that while the state could collect income tax on non @-@ tribal members , they could not collect income taxes from tribal members employed by the tribe on trust land . The district court also held that the state could not collect vehicle taxes for periods that the vehicle was properly registered with the tribe . Both sides appealed to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals . 
 The Tenth Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the district court . First the court noted that the reservation boundaries were not relevant to the case , the issue instead being tribal immunity from state jurisdiction . The court noted the prior Supreme Court decision in Okla . Tax Comm 'n v. Citizen Band , Potawatomi Indian Tribe of <unk> and stated that " It appears as though the State of Oklahoma persists in fighting a battle it has already lost . " Since Oklahoman could provide no Congressional authority for collecting taxes from Sac and Fox tribal members it was clear that the state had exceeded its authority . On the income tax for non @-@ tribal employees , the Sac and Fox Nation asserted that the Commerce Clause and treaty language granted it exclusive taxing authority on tribal land . The appellate court was not persuaded and ruled that the state could impose an income tax on non @-@ tribal members . 
 On the issue of tribal motor vehicle taxes and registration , the Tenth Circuit Court did not make a distinction between tribal and non @-@ tribal members . The court held that the tribe could require the registration of vehicles on tribal land , regardless of whether the owner was a tribal member or not . The court noted that both Moe v. Salish and Kootenai Tribes and Washington v. Confederated Tribes of the Colville Indian Reservation prohibit such state taxation on tribal members . The state could enforce its vehicle tax on non @-@ tribal members . 
 Both parties appealed to the Supreme Court , which , after noting a Wisconsin Supreme Court decision in the same area , granted certiorari and agreed to hear the case . 
 = = Opinion of the court = = 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 David Allen Miley argued the case for Oklahoma . Edwin Kneedler argued the case for the United States as amicus curiae on behalf of the tribe , with Solicitor General Ken Starr . G. William Rice argued the case for the Sac and Fox Nation . Amicus curiae briefs in support of Oklahoma were filed by Arizona , Minnesota , North Dakota and Wisconsin . Briefs in support of the tribe were filed by Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation , Cheyenne @-@ Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma , Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma and Navajo Nation . 
 The state argued that the case law cited by the Tenth Circuit only dealt with established Indian reservations and that the appellate court erred since the Sac and Fox reservation had been disestablished in the 1890s . The Tax Commission 's position was that there were no more reservations in Oklahoma . Oklahoma stated that without determining reservation boundaries , if any , the lower court would be unable to properly apply tribal immunity . The state also argued that the vehicle tax and registration fees were more akin to a sales tax and a use fee than an excise tax . 
 = = = Opinion = = = 
 Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor delivered the opinion of a unanimous court . O 'Connor stated that Oklahoma 's argument that a tribal member must live on a reservation to be exempt from state taxes was incorrect . All that is required is that the member live in " Indian country " , which Congress has defined to " include formal and informal reservations , dependent Indian communities , and Indian allotments , whether restricted or held in trust by the United States . " O 'Connor noted that the Tenth Circuit should have determined the residence of the tribal members as inside or outside of Indian country , not if they were within the reservation . She noted that in Potawatomi case , Oklahoma made exactly the same argument which was also rejected by the court . 
 O 'Connor also rejected the state 's argument that the motor vehicle tax was not an excise tax and that the registration fee was a use fee . She stated that the tax strongly resembled the taxes prohibited by Colville and Moe , and noted that if the registration fee was a use fee , then non @-@ residents of Oklahoma would not be exempt . The court upheld the decision of the Tenth Circuit Court . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 This case , together with two other involving the Oklahoma Tax Commission have defined tribal sovereignty in a clearer manner . The case has been cited in numerous lower court opinions , as well as the Supreme Courts own opinions , as limiting the ability of state governments to act in Indian country . Sac and Fox , together with Potawatomi and Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Chickasaw Nation , have become known as the " Oklahoma tax cases " . The decision is also unique in that it uses a federal criminal jurisdiction statute as the basis for civil jurisdiction . 
 = How About a Friendly Shrink ? = 
 " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " is the thirteenth episode of the sixth season of the American comedy @-@ drama series , Desperate Housewives , and the 124th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on ABC in the United States on January 17 , 2010 . In the episode , Tom tries to convince Lynette to seek marriage counseling , Gabrielle clashes with Susan about their children 's intelligence , and Bree tries to care for an increasingly irritable Orson . 
 The episode was written by Jason Ganzel and directed by Lonny Price . " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " marked the return of Katherine Mayfair , portrayed by Dana Delany , who had been not appeared since the episode " Boom Crunch " . It also featured Jane Leeves , who previously starred as Daphne Moon on the American NBC sitcom Frasier , in a guest appearance as Tom and Lynette 's therapist , Dr. Graham . 
 " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " received generally mixed reviews . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 11 @.@ 2 million viewers . It was the lowest rating for an individual Desperate Housewives in the series ' history , a distinction it held only two weeks until the subsequent episode , " The Glamorous Life " , drew even poorer ratings . The viewership for " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " suffered due to competition from the 67th Golden Globe Awards on NBC and the two @-@ hour eighth season premiere of 24 on Fox . 
 The title of this episode is taken from a line in the song " Country House " which was written for , but never included in , the Stephen Sondheim musical " Follies " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When he learns that Bob ( Tuc Watkins ) and Lee ( Kevin Rahm ) are seeing a counselor , Tom ( Doug Savant ) suggests going to one with Lynette ( Felicity Huffman ) , but she insists therapy is for " losers " . Tom starts seeing a therapist on his own and keeping a " feelings " journal , which he will not let Lynette read . Angrily , she visits the therapist , Dr. Graham ( Jane Leeves ) , to defend herself from what she 's sure is Tom 's <unk> . She admits she gets mad when she is not in control . When Dr. Graham equates this to the lack of control Lynette felt in losing her baby , Lynette reluctantly sits down on the couch . Later , when Tom returns from work , Lynette informs him they will be going to therapy together . 
 Using a wheelchair , Orson ( Kyle MacLachlan ) continues to order Bree ( Marcia Cross ) around at his whim and refuses to let her give him a bath . When Orson refuses to say please while Bree brings him breakfast , she places the waffles on a shelf he cannot reach . When the physical therapist arrives , he pretends to be starving and abused . The therapist tells Bree she must be more patient , or she will be reported . Later , when Orson still refuses to be bathed , Bree takes him outside and sprays him with the garden hose until he begs her to stop . He breaks down and admits he is miserable at the prospective of a life in which he needs to ask for help in everything . Bree finally understands , and asks Orson for forgiveness . 
 The Oakridge students are placed into learning groups named after animals . Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) initially suspects her daughter Juanita ( Madison De La Garza ) , who is in the Leopards , is among the slow group , whereas Susan ( Teri Hatcher ) is pleased that her son M.J. ( Mason Vale Cotton ) is in the Giraffes , which she believes are advanced . This leads to competitive behavior between the two ladies . Eventually , by taking pictures of different students ' homework and studying them , Gabrielle realizes the Leopards are actually advanced and the Giraffes are slow . When Susan realizes this , she confronts a teacher in public , and the secret code of the animal groups becomes widespread . While Susan and Gabrielle wait to talk to the principal , they both admit they got carried away and confess fears that they are letting their kids down . 
 Angie ( Drea de Matteo ) takes an instant dislike to her son Danny 's ( Beau Mirchoff ) new girlfriend , Ana ( Maiara Walsh ) , who she fears is too fun @-@ loving and not serious enough . However , Danny feels comfortable talking to Ana , who seems to understand what he has been through . Ana assures Angie she is not going anywhere . Meanwhile , Katherine ( Dana Delany ) speaks to her psychiatrist at a mental clinic . She says the medicine is working , but she now realizes the person she has become and how much she has hurt her neighbors and friends . Karen ( Kathryn Joosten ) visits her and asks her to come back to Wisteria Lane , but Katherine says she will not come back because she does not feel she will be forgiven . Later , Karen returns with Bree , Lynette , Gabrielle and Susan , who comfort Katherine and say they will try to forgive her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " was written by Jason Ganzel and directed by Lonny Price . It first aired on January 17 , 2010 in the United States on ABC . The episode marked the return of Katherine Mayfair , who had been absent since the episode " Boom Crunch " , in which she suffered a nervous breakdown . Jane Leeves , who previously starred as Daphne Moon on the American NBC sitcom Frasier , made a guest appearance as Tom and Lynette 's therapist , Dr. Graham . She is slated to appear in at least one more episode . 
 Leeves is the third former star of Frasier to make a guest appearance in Desperate Housewives . Harriet Sansom Harris , who played talent agent Bebe Glazer on the sitcom , played recurring character Felicia Tilman in the first , second and seventh season of Desperate Housewives . Peri Gilpin , who played Roz Doyle in Frasier , has also appeared in the show , and Joe Keenan , former show runner on Frasier , serves as a consulting producer for Desperate Housewives . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on January 17 , 2010 , " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " was seen by 11 @.@ 2 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . At the time , it was the lowest rating for an individual Desperate Housewives in the series ' history . However , it held that distinction only two weeks before " The Glamorous Life " , and the subsequent episode " Lovely " , received even lower ratings . The viewership for " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " suffered due to competition from the 67th Golden Globe Awards on NBC ( which drew 16 @.@ 9 million viewers ) and the two @-@ hour seventh season premiere of 24 on Fox ( which drew 11 @.@ 4 million viewers ) . " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " received a 3 @.@ 7 rating / 9 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . The overall rating was a 21 percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " You Gotta Get a Gimmick " . 
 " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " received generally mixed reviews . Gerrick Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times praised the episode and was particularly excited by the guest appearance by Jane Leeves . She called the subplot between Gaby and Susan was " cute , but honest " , but felt the Orson and Katherine characters have " run their course " . Entertainment Weekly writer Tanner Stransky declared the reappearance of Katherine Mayfair was the only interesting element of the episode , and that it was touching to see her realize the damage she had done . Stransky wrote , " The rest of the story lines from last night just kind of sat there rather limply , " and said the Orson and Bree story , and Tom and Lynette 's therapy , " just seemed so dumpy for this once @-@ sexy show " . 
 <unk> Welker of MSNBC complimented the Katherine homecoming , and said the best line of the episode was Karen McCluskey 's response when Katherine rejected visitors : " Who says I 'm visiting ? Maybe I 'm bonkers too . " Welker , however , was critical of the subplot between Gaby and Susan , who she said were " stuck in storylines @-@ that @-@ don ’ t @-@ matter territory . " Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV felt the episode did little to advance the overall plot of the series , but included some strong scenes and good jokes . Diaz called the Orson and Bree subplot " heartbreaking " , and said he was able to empathize with Katherine for the first time in many episodes . Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad called Orson particularly unlikeable in the episode , but declared the Lynette and Tom subplot " fun and touching at the same time " , and said the Ana character showed new depths that had not been shown before . 
 = Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn = 
 Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn is a military science fiction web series set in the universe of the Halo franchise . Forward Unto Dawn consists of five 15 @-@ minute episodes released weekly starting on October 5 , 2012 , and was later released as a single film on DVD and Blu @-@ ray and was later put on Netflix in 2013 . The series was produced as a marketing effort for the video game Halo 4 intended to widen the audience of the Halo series and as a stepping stone to a potential Halo film . It was written by Aaron Helbing and Todd Helbing , and directed by Stewart Hendler . Forward Unto Dawn was shot in Vancouver over 25 days in May 2012 on a budget just under USD $ 10 million . It has just under 500 shots with computer generated imagery , approximately a quarter of what a feature film would have , but the visual effects received praise from reviewers . 
 A coming @-@ of @-@ age story , Forward Unto Dawn follows a cadet , Thomas Lasky , at a twenty @-@ sixth century military training academy as it is attacked by the Covenant , a religious alliance of aliens . Lasky is unsure of his future within the military but feels pressured to follow in the footsteps of his mother and brother . Lasky and his surviving squad mates are rescued by the Master Chief and , after the death of his romantic interest , Chyler Silva , Lasky is inspired by the Chief to take initiative and aids him in saving the remaining cadets . 
 Forward Unto Dawn received a Streamy Award and several of the crew received awards for their work editing , producing and filming of it . The series also won a Motion Picture Sound Editors Golden Reel Award for sound editing . Reviewers were impressed by the special effects and action @-@ packed second act , but found that the plot was too slow in the first half and most of the characters were under @-@ developed . The series was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for main title design . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the success of previous live @-@ action promotional shorts , Landfall and The Life , 343 Industries , the studio in charge of development for the Halo franchise , wanted to use a live action series to appeal to an audience of people unfamiliar with the Halo games . The director of franchise business management at 343 Industries , Matt <unk> , explained the intended audience by saying that , " You see something that looks like a video game , you 're going to get the same crowd you always get . " The live @-@ action format was also chosen for its ability to better develop characters ; the series is used to introduce the character Thomas Lasky to the Halo universe before his role in the video game Halo 4 . The developers wanted a protagonist with more emotion than Master Chief ( whose face is never seen ) , to not only convey an understanding of the universe , but to better engage unfamiliar viewers . 
 Microsoft considers the series " the next step " between advertising material and a full @-@ length film after the failure of a previous effort , and aimed to produce a standalone series that could be enjoyed without necessarily playing the games . The budget for the series was almost USD $ 10 million , Microsoft 's largest investment in a live @-@ action promotion . Director Stewart Hendler said " We 're either the best @-@ funded web series of all time , a sort of mid @-@ road healthy TV pilot , or a super @-@ low @-@ budget movie . " When the idea of directing a video game based web series was pitched to Hendler he declined , saying he was not interested in video game adaptions unless the subject was Halo . Hendler was already a fan of the series , having read the novels and played the games . 
 Potential writers were interviewed by 343 Industries , and some were selected to write a draft of a script . Aaron and Todd Helbing wrote a pitch set on Harvest , the first planet to be attacked by the Covenant ( see Halo : Contact Harvest ) . Although 343 Industries decided not to use it , the Helbing brothers ' script was the most complete and demonstrated the best understanding of the Halo universe so they were chosen to write Forward Unto Dawn . The final plot was developed by 343 Industries , Frank O 'Connor , and the <unk> with the intention of introducing a new character to tie @-@ in to Halo 4 , which their Harvest script did not , and to explore " the least @-@ well @-@ known part of the Halo universe " . In addition to providing input on the script , 343 Industries had a representative on set at all times to ensure that the series did not break canon . 
 = = = Shooting and special effects = = = 
 The series was shot over twenty @-@ five days in May 2012 in the forests around Vancouver , at Simon Fraser University and at additional stages in Burnaby . The Herzog and Company production team was in Vancouver for three months with set design by Legacy Effects , the same company that worked on the previous shorts . 
 The Warthog ( a <unk> off @-@ road vehicle with a mounted minigun ) that appears in Forward Unto Dawn is the same one that was produced by Weta Workshop and used in Landfall . Stunt driver Johnathon <unk> found that the prop " handles the roads extremely well for something that size and that height " , and the four @-@ wheel steering was an advantage for drifting . Many chase shots were made using a Mercedes @-@ Benz ML 55 pursuit vehicle with a camera boom mounted to the roof . Another rig involved towing the Warthog on a low trailer so that cameras could focus on an actor while the vehicle was being " driven " . 
 The visual effects supervisor , John Sullivan , hired Arc Productions to create just under 500 shots with computer generated imagery , between a quarter and a third of what a blockbuster film would feature . The Covenant that appear are all completely computer generated , as is the academy 's space elevator , weapons ' muzzle flashes and a few shots of Master Chief . Hendler felt that the visual effects were the area that needed particular focus and spent a much larger percentage of the budget on the Master Chief costume and computer generated imagery than is normal for a production . 
 One scene involves a Covenant Elite stalking the cadets in the armoury . The geometry of the Elite already exists for the Halo video games but it couldn 't be directly transferable to the Mental Ray renderer so it had to be re @-@ <unk> in ZBrush and Maya . The outdoor attack on the academy was filmed at Simon Fraser University and required photogrammetric reconstruction and laser measurement to add the aliens and weapons lighting effects in a convincing manner . A later scene in the forest was too complex to use the same techniques , lacking the geometric shapes of the university campus . Instead , Arc visual effects supervisor Terry Bradley scattered LEDs on the set . By measuring the distance between LEDs the studio could model the area with software , and then used SketchUp and Maya to add the weapons fire . The shattering of the pink " needles " fired by the Covenant was rendered in Houdini as the shots hit concrete and Master Chief 's armour . 
 The opening sequences of each episode show Cortana , an artificial intelligence , aboard the spaceship Forward Unto Dawn as she malfunctions . The five sequences were entirely computer generated by <unk> , the animation team of Blacklist , a production company . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Forward Unto Dawn takes place on a fictional planet , <unk> @-@ IV , one of many that humans have colonized outside of the solar system . The protagonist , Thomas Lasky , is aboard a spaceship named Infinity in 2557 . Forward Unto Dawn portrays his memory of the events on <unk> @-@ IV in 2526 , when he is a cadet at the Corbulo Academy , a training facility for the children of high @-@ ranking UNSC officers . The UNSC is training the cadets for war with insurrectionists on various colony planets . 
 A Covenant army attacks the academy causing confusion and panic . Although not made clear in Forward Unto Dawn , the Covenant are a theocratic collection of alien species that are religiously offended by Humanity and seek to eradicate it . The events portrayed in Forward Unto Dawn are some of the earliest encounters with the Covenant , and the characters other than Master Chief were unaware of their existence . 
 = = Casting and characters = = 
 The production team was responsible for casting , but Microsoft maintained a final say . The decision to use Alex <unk> instead of Steve Downes , the previous voice artist of Master Chief , was approved by Microsoft . The actors playing the cadets attended a boot camp before shooting to raise their fitness and accustom them to assault courses and rifle drills in their armour costumes . Cast members drove themselves to overexertion in the training , causing some to vomit , which they saw as a bonding experience . 
 Tom Green plays the protagonist Thomas Lasky , a cadet at Corbulo Academy and Ty Olsson plays the adult rendition . Lasky is " ambivalent about his role in the military " , considering diplomacy a better option to warfare . Lasky is from a military family ; his mother is a colonel and his brother <unk> ( played by Max Carver ) was an ODST ( Orbital Drop Shock Troopers - a special forces unit in the Halo universe ) , but Thomas is uninterested in becoming an officer . Green portrayed Lasky as a " regular teenager " , unsure of his future . As research for the role , Green was required to watch the previous shorts and read the " Halo encyclopedia " that 343 Industries uses to preserve the Halo canon . Executive producer Josh Feldman considers Lasky an important character in the Halo universe beyond just Forward Unto Dawn and Halo 4 . 
 Daniel Cudmore was cast to play the role of Master Chief largely due to his height and physique . The director , Stewart Hendler , wanted to contrast the size of Master Chief to that of the teenage cadets ; Cudmore is 203 centimetres ( 6 ' 8 " ) tall whereas the actors playing the cadets were deliberately chosen to be " short , scrawny freshmen " . In order to accurately portray Master Chief , Cudmore watched the Landfall shorts by Neill Blomkamp and read the Halo novels for the history of the character , having already played the games . Cudmore expressed interest in the history of Master Chief , the character 's view on war and his role as a soldier , as he was only required to portray a utilitarian character in the series . Cudmore thinks the character is torn between aiding the cadets and completing his mission , but Master Chief 's confidence and actions inspire the cadets . 
 Legacy Effects took a body scan of Cudmore , then overlaid a 3D model provided by Microsoft and edited it to get proportions correct . A prototype was 3D printed and then used to make moulds for the final suit . The majority of the suit is rubber over a foam bodysuit , similar to a wetsuit , with a fibreglass helmet . Cudmore compared wearing it to walking through water , although he had to perform stunts in the suit as it was made only for his body . Cudmore repeatedly watched the video of his movements immediately after they were shot to ensure that they were deliberate but without appearing robotic , " trying to make his movements a little larger than life , but still with a sense of humanity to them . " Both Hendler and Frank O 'Connor praised Cudmore , not just for his physique but for moving in a fluid manner in the cumbersome suit . 
 Anna Popplewell plays Chyler Silva , a cadet who , contrary to Lasky 's beliefs , is a full supporter of the war against the insurrectionists . Popplewell portrays Silva as a competent cadet who has been hardened by her childhood surrounded by <unk> violence . She had a romantic connection with Lasky that was interrupted by the Covenant attack . Popplewell was new to the Halo series when cast for the role but thinks that the characters and aesthetic of the series have the potential to draw in a new audience . 
 Other characters include cadets April <unk> , a senior cadet and squad leader , played by <unk> Brewster , <unk> Chen , played by Osric Chau , who is the only cadet without a military family and has gained entry to the academy through his own achievements , <unk> <unk> played by Kat de <unk> , Walter Vickers played by Iain Belcher and Michael Sullivan , played by Masam Holden . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Release = = 
 On April 30 , 2012 , Microsoft Studios announced that Forward Unto Dawn would play on Machinima Prime and Halo Waypoint ( a marketing website for the Halo series ) during the weeks leading up to the release of Halo 4 . The series ' first episode attracted five million views on YouTube within two weeks and , as of March 2013 , has eleven million views . The second episode attracted three million views within two weeks and six million views by March 2013 ; however , these statistics do not include views on Halo Waypoint . 
 The series consists of five 15 @-@ minute shorts , the first released on October 5 , 2012 , with subsequent episodes released weekly . A 90 @-@ minute extended version is included with the Limited Edition version of Halo 4 , and became available on Blu @-@ ray , DVD , Xbox Video , iTunes and video on demand services on December 4 , 2012 . The Blu @-@ ray and DVD versions contain bonus features including audio commentary from Stewart Hendler and 343 Industries , a live @-@ action Red vs. Blue PSA entitled Sleeper , as well as vignettes and making @-@ of documentaries . On January 18 , 2013 , Content Media Corporation announced that they had international distribution rights for Forward Unto Dawn for television . 
 McFarlane Toys produced 500 units of a collectible statue to tie @-@ in with Forward Unto Dawn in December 2012 . The statue is a thirty @-@ six centimetre ( 14 " ) tall model of Master Chief fighting a Hunter , as depicted in Forward Unto Dawn . On November 6 , 2012 , to coincide with the release of Halo 4 , Mega Bloks released a model of the UNSC spaceship , Forward Unto Dawn . The model is approximately one metre ( 3 ' ) long and has scenes from both the video game and the web series . 
 = = Critical reaction = = 
 Reviewers were divided on what standard to expect of the series and what to compare it to ; the budget was beyond that of other web series but not on par with a film . 
 IGN reviewer Jesse Schedeen considered the cadets other than Lasky and Silva to be " ready @-@ made cannon fodder , " having received minimal development . This detracted from the quality of the third episode , as a betrayal by cadet <unk> had little impact due to her shallow development . However , Schedeen did appreciate Green 's acting in the last episode , noting that " [ Silva 's ] death scene was handled very well , particularly as it forced Tom Green to shed his calm exterior and react much more emotionally . " In his later review of the Blu @-@ ray , Schedeen complimented the audio and video quality , as well as the inclusion of many vignettes , documentary featurettes and commentaries . 
 James Plath of Movie Metropolis also found the characters lacking in the first half , but noted that in the second half , the characters of Lasky and Silva " actually move beyond the clichés and pick up a personality along the way " . Plath was impressed by the soundtrack , thinking it " worthy of any big @-@ screen action flick " and also complimented the special effects saying " the CGI work is enhanced by high definition , not exposed by it . " Overall however , he thought that despite the action being exciting , the " pedestrian " first half and " only adequate acting " would prevent Forward Unto Dawn appealing to an audience beyond existing gamers . 
 Official Xbox Magazine 's reviewer , Edwin Evans , appreciated the direction of the series ; " Stewart Hendler 's well @-@ judged editing keeps the script from sinking under the weight of its own melodrama , and his close @-@ ups never overstay their welcome , hiding the weaknesses of the inexperienced ( but talented ) cast . " He also echoed Plath 's thoughts on the slow first half and exciting second half . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Journey to Regionals = 
 " Journey to Regionals " is the twenty @-@ second episode and first season finale of the American television series Glee . The episode was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk , and premiered on the Fox network on June 8 , 2010 . In " Journey to Regionals " , New Directions performs at Regionals in front of celebrity judges Josh Groban , Olivia Newton @-@ John , Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) and Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) . Club member Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) gives birth to her daughter , Beth , whom rival glee club coach Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) adopts . Co @-@ captains Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) reunite , and director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) professes his love for guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . Although New Directions comes in last in the competition , Sue persuades Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) not to disband the club for another year . 
 The episode features cover versions of nine songs , seven of which are included on the EP Glee : The Music , Journey to Regionals , released on June 8 , 2010 . The album charted at number one in America , setting the record for the shortest span between first weeks at the top of the Billboard 200 with different releases , charting only three weeks after the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers also reached number one . While " Journey to Regionals " is the first episode of Glee to have none of its musical performances released as singles , all six EP tracks charted on the Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 " Journey to Regionals " was watched by 10 @.@ 92 million American viewers and attained the highest finale rating for a new show in the 2009 – 2010 television season . The episode was the most @-@ watched scripted show of the week of broadcast in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , and received generally positive reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club deemed it among the best of the entire season , and Time 's James <unk> felt that the episode was a return to Glee 's roots , justifying its renewal for a second season . In contrast , Brett Berk of Vanity Fair felt that " Journey to Regionals " was a mediocre episode , while Jean Bentley of MTV found it uneven , representative of the season as a whole . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with a flashback of the night Quinn Fabray lost her virginity to Noah Puckerman when they had sex in her bed , unbeknownst to her then boyfriend , Finn Hudson . 
 When cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) announces that she will be one of the judges at Regionals , along with Josh Groban , Olivia Newton @-@ John , and local news anchor Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) , the glee club members worry that New Directions will soon be disbanded . Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) stands by his requirement that glee club must place at Regionals to continue , despite director Will Schuester 's ( Matthew Morrison ) protestation that Sue is attempting to sabotage them . Will turns to guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) , who reveals that she has begun dating her dentist , Carl Howell . 
 Rachel ( Lea Michele ) kisses Finn ( Cory Monteith ) when he encourages her to be more optimistic . At Regionals , Aural Intensity is first to perform , singing a mash @-@ up of " Magic " by Olivia Newton @-@ John and " You Raise Me Up " by Josh Groban . Will gives New Directions a pep talk , and Finn professes his love for Rachel just before going on stage . The club pays tribute to Journey , performing " Faithfully " , a mash @-@ up of " Any Way You Want It " and " Lovin ' , Touchin ' , Squeezin ' " , and " Don 't Stop Believin ' " . 
 Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) mother , Judy Fabray ( Charlotte Ross ) , comes to watch Quinn perform . She tells Quinn that she kicked her father out of the house after she found out he was having an affair and invites Quinn to come back home . Quinn informs her that her water has broken , and is rushed to the hospital , where she gives birth to a girl . While the other New Directions members accompany Quinn to the hospital , Rachel stays at Regionals to watch Vocal Adrenaline 's performance of " Bohemian Rhapsody " . She asks their coach , her biological mother Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) , to help coach New Directions , but Shelby tells Rachel that she 's tired of coaching glee clubs , and is stepping down as Vocal Adrenaline 's coach to settle down and start a family . Shelby adopts Quinn 's baby , whom she names Beth at Puck 's ( Mark Salling ) request . 
 During the pre @-@ vote discussion , the other celebrity judges insult Sue for her lack of fame . Aural Intensity is named runner @-@ up , and Vocal Adrenaline wins , with New Directions coming in last . Emma argues with Figgins about the club 's future , but he remains intent on disbanding it , since it failed to place . Will has accepted their loss , and professes his love for Emma and kisses her . Sue overhears New Directions ' performance of " To Sir With Love " in appreciation of all that Will has done to help them grow . It is revealed that Sue voted for New Directions to win , and has agreed to end her blackmail of Principal Figgins in exchange for giving New Directions at least one more year to prove themselves and win Regionals . She explains to Will that she may not like him , but she respects his work with the students . Will tells the club of its extension , and performs Israel Kamakawiwoʻole 's version of " Over the Rainbow " with Puck in celebration . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Journey to Regionals " was filmed in April 2010 , with fans of Glee invited through Facebook and Twitter to attend the filming of Regionals at the Saban Theatre in Beverly Hills , California . In the episode , both Josh Groban and Olivia Newton @-@ John reprise their roles from earlier in the season , appearing as themselves to judge the Ohio Regionals round of show choir competition alongside Sue and Rod Remington . Series creator Ryan Murphy explained : " The theme of Regionals is celebrity judges . Sue is now a nationwide celebrity . And Olivia and Josh only like choirs that sing their songs , so that 's funny . They wanted to do something that played against what people think about them ... to play against type . So we gave them an opportunity . And it 's funny to have Sue as a judge when she doesn ’ t really know about [ music ] , and she has it out for that darn Glee club . " 
 Other recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club members Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) , Principal Figgins , Vocal Adrenaline lead singer Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) , Vocal Adrenaline coach and Rachel 's birth mother Shelby Corcoran , and Quinn 's mother Judy Fabray . Emma 's new love interest does not appear in the episode , but will become a major character from early in the show 's second season , played by John Stamos . Will and Emma 's kiss in " Journey to Regionals " was unscripted . Falchuk chose not to inform Mays that it was planned to ensure authenticity in her reaction . 
 Glee : The Music , Journey to Regionals , an EP containing songs from the episode , was released on June 8 , 2010 . It features cover versions of Journey 's " Faithfully " and " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , as well as a mash @-@ up of " Any Way You Want It " and " Lovin ' Touchin ' Squeezin ' " . " Bohemian Rhapsody " by Queen is also on the EP , as is " To Sir With Love " by Lulu and Judy Garland 's " Over the Rainbow " as reinvented by Israel Kamakawiwoʻole . The EP debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 selling 158 @,@ 000 copies , and at number two on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 14 @,@ 000 copies . It entered the Irish Albums Chart at number 14 , climbing to number 1 in its second week of release , becoming the fourth Glee cast release to top the Irish charts . In America , Journey to Regionals was the cast 's third number one album , charting only three weeks after Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers , and beating its own record for shortest span between first weeks at the top position with different releases , previously held with Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna and Volume 3 Showstoppers . 
 " Journey to Regionals " is the first episode of Glee to have none of its musical performances released as singles . Despite this , all six EP tracks charted on the Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 , the highest @-@ charting being " Faithfully " at number 36 in the US , and " Over the Rainbow " at number 31 in Canada . A mash @-@ up of Newton @-@ John 's " Magic " and Groban 's " You Raise Me Up " is also used in the episode , but does not feature on the EP . Groff was injured during the filming of " Bohemian Rhapsody " , receiving a five inch scar during the staging of the performance . Glee 's costume designer Lou Eyrich took inspiration from 1960s girl groups for the outfits worn by the show choirs , selecting black and fuchsia sequined dresses for Vocal Adrenaline , and Betsey Johnson 's " Goldie " brocade halter dress for New Directions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Journey to Regionals " was watched by 10 @.@ 92 million American viewers , and tied with the 2010 NBA Finals to lead in the 18 – 49 demographic in its timeslot , attaining a 4 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating . The series ' 18 – 49 viewership was up 18 percent on the previous episode , giving Glee the highest finale rating for a new show in the 2009 – 2010 television season . " Journey to Regionals " was the fourth most @-@ watched show of the week in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , the highest scripted show , and the sixth most @-@ watched program amongst all viewers . In the UK , the episode was broadcast on Monday 14 June 2010 , and was watched by 2 @.@ 354 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 952 million on E4 , and 402 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly called it " just about perfect " , writing : " this was one of those high @-@ energy episodes that narrowed its song focus [ ... ] and found a just @-@ right mix of cynicism and optimism , of banal reality and glam performance . " Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal commented : " It 's been a long premiere season of ups and downs , and this last show is a warm embrace that — let ’ s face it — you just don 't want to let go . " The Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson deemed the episode " awesome " , observing : " While it was light on the usual humor , it was heavy on emotion , and I think that 's ideal for a season finale . Glee ended its freshman season with a real wallop that took a couple of unexpected turns before pulling nicely into a satisfying finish . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " A- " , deeming it among the best of the entire season . He felt that : " On its own , ' Journey to Regionals ' is a fantastic episode of Glee . As a capper to the season , it mostly works . " While VanDerWerff had some issues with the episode , including Shelby 's sudden decision to adopt Beth , he summarized that : " for once in this back nine , the good stuff absolutely overwhelms the stupid stuff . " Jessica Derschowitz of CBS News felt that : " Glee wrapped up on a high note , leaving some of the season 's less @-@ appealing plotlines behind and heading towards the promise of more performances and more amazing Sue Sylvester one @-@ liners next season . " 
 Time 's James Poniewozik wrote that with " Journey to Regionals " , Glee " returned to its roots , balancing its weirdness , snark and bombast with intimate stories of small @-@ town high school life . And it , too , by showing what it can be at its best , made its case for staying around another year . " IGN 's Eric Goldman rated " Journey to Regionals " 8 @.@ 5 / 10 , signifying a " great " episode . He felt that while it did not match the standards of the mid – season finale episode " Sectionals " , it was " still a very satisfying wrap up to the first year of Glee . " Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times noted that he " went into the finale peeved at how incredibly messy last week 's episode was " , but overall he deemed the finale a success . Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk found " Journey to Regionals " a fulfilling , albeit " pretty mediocre " episode , describing it as having " a sense of narrative cohesion that went beyond the writers ’ usual throwing @-@ flatware @-@ down @-@ the @-@ <unk> modality " . Jean Bentley of MTV found the episode representative of the first season as a whole , explaining : " Much like the entire first year of the show , the uneven episode started out with a promising , action @-@ packed plot , impressed with a couple of flashy musical numbers , then got too cheesy for its own good and petered out with an overly sentimental song . " Fellow MTV writer Aly Semigran noted : " I was hoping for a little more excitement from the episode , though it all did feel very full circle for so many of our characters we 've come to know and love . Here 's to hoping Glee can get back its stellar momentum in season two . " 
 = Black Tie ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Black Tie " is the twelfth episode of the first season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was directed by Don Scardino , and written by Kay Cannon and series creator Tina Fey . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on February 1 , 2007 . Guest stars in this episode include Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Will Forte , April Lee Hernández , Paul Reubens , and Isabella Rossellini . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) attends a foreign prince 's ( Reubens ) birthday party with her boss Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) and meets Jack 's ex @-@ wife ( Rossellini ) . At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tries to convince Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) to cheat on his wife at a wild party while NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) encourages him not to . 
 " Black Tie " received generally positive reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) is invited by her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , to accompany him to a birthday party for his friend , Prince Gerhardt Habsburg ( Loosely based on the Habsburg monarch Carlos II ) , in which she accepts . Liz fears the invitation is a date , but Jack denies this when asked . Later , Liz runs into her friend Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) at the party . While the two talk , Prince Gerhardt ( Paul Reubens ) makes his entrance . He has a physical disability with many disfigurements and illnesses due to " centuries of inbreeding . " Meanwhile , Jack is shocked to see his ex @-@ wife Bianca ( Isabella Rossellini ) enter the room . When she comes over to say hello , Jack introduces Liz as his live @-@ in girlfriend . She likes Liz and tells Jack not to let her get away . 
 At the same time , Prince Gerhardt spots Jenna and sends his messenger , Tomas ( Will Forte ) , over to invite her to dine with him . Eager to become a modern @-@ day Grace Kelly , she talks herself into doing it , despite his problems . Later , Bianca tells Liz that she dislikes the idea that Liz can make Jack truly happy . Liz tells Jack that Bianca is still not over him and to prove it , she goes to her and tells her the two are engaged . At hearing this , Bianca reacts violently and attacks Liz . Later , Prince Gerhardt decides he can now die happy , after he and Jenna discussed their relationship , and drinks some champagne , which he cannot digest . He dies because " he cannot metabolize the grapes . " As a result , the party comes to a conclusion . Jack walks Liz up to her apartment . Before he leaves , he leans in to take off the necklace he lent her , which she mistakes for an attempted kiss . Jack acts semi @-@ repulsed by the idea , and tells Liz to give it up . 
 Finally , at the 30 Rock studios , after overhearing Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) impersonating Elmo from Sesame Street while Pete was encouraging his son to do better with his potty training , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) compares Pete 's relationship with his wife to that of Samson and Delilah . While working late at night in his office , Tracy enters with Grizz ( Grizz Chapman ) and Dot Com ( Kevin Brown ) and a couple of other people , which turns into a party . Pete is still working , while Tracy 's entourage enjoy themselves . Tracy encourages Pete to loosen up , and asks one of the women , Vicki ( April Lee Hernández ) , to look after him . Pete finally loosens up and begins to give in to Vicki 's temptations , but NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) sets him straight , telling him to recall the day that he got married . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Black Tie " was directed by Don Scardino , and written by Kay Cannon and series creator Tina Fey . This was Cannon and Fey 's first script collaboration , later co @-@ writing the episodes " Somebody to Love " , " Christmas Special " , and " Lee Marvin vs. Derek Jeter " , for season two , season three , and season four , respectively . " Black Tie " originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 1 , 2007 as the twelfth episode of the show 's first season and overall of the series . 
 This episode featured guest appearances by actors Paul Reubens and Isabella Rossellini . Fey wrote the role of Prince Gerhardt <unk> specifically for Reubens , and he did not have to audition . Fey , in regards to Reubens , said : " We were thrilled beyond belief to get him to do [ the role ] . " Kevin <unk> , the show 's prop master , built Gerhardt 's wheelchair and puppet legs . Fey said that <unk> " really outdid himself " , and noted that Reubens was kneeling in the wheelchair in the seat built over the top of him . In addition , Reubens wore prosthetic teeth and a wig to accommodate his character 's look . According to Fey , in the DVD commentary for this episode , the show shot an alternate ending — at Reubens 's request — in which Gerhardt does not die , " but ultimately it felt better stakes for the story if he 'd die " , in which Will Forte 's character says , " The Habsburg line has ended . You can pick up your gift bags at the coat check . " In " Black Tie " , Rosellini played Bianca , the ex @-@ wife of Alec Baldwin 's character , Jack Donaghy . Rosellini would make a second appearance in the February 8 , 2007 , episode " Up All Night " . Comedian actor Will Forte , who played Tomas , the messenger of Prince Gerhardt , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . Forte would later return to 30 Rock as Paul , a love interest of Jenna Maroney 's . 
 In the beginning of the episode , Liz and Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) are exchanging Yo Mamma Jokes . According to Fey , Liz 's joke , " What 's the difference between your mama and a washing machine ? When I drop a load in the washing machine , it doesn 't follow me around for a week " , was " pretty dirty " , and was surprised that the show was able to get away with the joke . It has since been censored in syndication . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Black Tie " was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 share in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 9 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was an increase from the previous episode , " The Head and the Hair " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 0 million American viewers . Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from television critics . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning called it a " fantastic episode " and rated it 8 out of 10 . He enjoyed all the subplots , and the performances by Paul Reubens and Isabella Rossellini . Julia Ward of AOL 's TV Squad wrote that Reubens and Rossellini were " pretty inspired choices " , and said that " Tracy as the devil , Kenneth as the angel " gag — in which Tracy was encouraging Pete to cheat on his wife while Kenneth told him not to — was also " inspired " . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich was favorable to the guest appearances of Reubens , Rossellini , and Will Forte , but said that Reubens 's role " served up a memorable majesty on a very strong , very laugh @-@ out @-@ loud funny installment " of this episode . Mitovich was impressed with how " Black Tie " handled Liz 's " date " with Jack , citing that lesser shows would have " gone there " in the final scene , " and really jacked up the ' tension ' between its two leads , but Tina Fey and her crack writing staff didn 't . They kept it 99 @.@ 44 percent light , meaning we now won 't ... be wondering , ' What if ... ? ' " In regards to the episode itself , Mitovich said it was an " awesome episode , an immeasurably enjoyable , laugh @-@ inducing series . " Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer contributor Melanie McFarland said that Reubens was " perfectly cast as such a freak " , though in regards to Rossellini 's appearance " [ s ] he glides in playing the class act we 're used to , but when Rossellini dissolves into a shocking mess , she yields one of the series ' most absurd scenes yet . " It was rated the 28th greatest TV episode of all time on TV Guide 's list . 
 = Insomniac Games = 
 Insomniac Games , Inc. is an American video game developer whose corporate headquarters is located in Burbank , California . It was founded in 1994 by Ted Price as " Xtreme Software " , and was renamed " Insomniac Games " a year later . It has released titles for the PlayStation , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One video game consoles . 
 The company 's first project was Disruptor , for the first PlayStation console , whose poor sales almost led to the company 's bankruptcy . Insomniac 's next project was Spyro the Dragon , a successful video game that spawned two sequels within two years . Insomniac then developed a new franchise , Ratchet & Clank , for the PlayStation 2 . The company also developed the Resistance series for the PlayStation 3 , and released its first multi @-@ platform game , Fuse in 2013 . The company also worked with Microsoft Studios on 2014 's Sunset Overdrive . The company 's current projects include an underwater Metroidvania game called Song of the Deep , an Oculus Rift action @-@ adventure game titled Edge of Nowhere , and an as @-@ yet untitled Spider @-@ Man game for the PlayStation 4 . 
 Insomniac Games has received recognition from critics as an acclaimed video game developer . It was named the twentieth @-@ best video game developer by IGN , and the best place to work in America by the Society for Human Resource Management . Some employees who left Insomniac Games have founded their own independent companies , such as High Impact Games . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Insomniac Games was founded by Ted Price , who was determined to work in the video game industry since the release of Atari 2600 in 1977 when he was nine years old . The studio was officially established in February 28 , 1994 by Price . 
 Price was later joined by Alex Hastings , his fellow graduate and an expert in computer coding and programming . Hastings joined the studio in June 1994 . Hastings ' brother Brian Hastings joined Insomniac shortly afterwards . The studio was named " Xtreme Software " for a year but in 1995 it was forced to rename itself by another company with the same name . The studio shortlisted " The Resistance Incorporated " , " Ragnarok " , " Black Sun Software " , " Ice Nine " and " Moon Turtle " before choosing the name " Insomniac Games " . According to Price , the company chose this name because " it suddenly makes sense " , even though it was not their first choice . 
 Shortly after the company 's establishment , it began developing its first project . The team took inspirations from the popular Doom , and hoped to capitalize upon the industry 's excitement for a first @-@ person shooter . The team still lacked experience and considered developing a " Doom clone " . The game was developed for the Panasonic 3DO because its developer kit can be purchased inexpensively , and the team had high hopes for the console . Using a time frame of one month , the team developed a functional gameplay demo for the game . It was pitched to various publishers and was later shown to Mark Cerny , an executive producer from Universal Interactive Studios , who was impressed by the team 's efforts . Universal later published the game and helped with funding and marketing . Universal also helped the game 's development and cutscenes , and hired actors to film real @-@ time sequences . Catherine Hardwicke was hired to lead production design , and inspirations were taken from Warhawk . 
 Cerny also gave input and feedback on the game 's level @-@ design . However , the 3DO did not perform as they had expected , and Universal suggested that the team should switched to Sony Computer Entertainment 's PlayStation to increase sales of the game . The game originally ran on a custom engine developed by Alex Hastings , and was upgraded and converted for the PlayStation within a month . The debut title was called Disruptor , and was released worldwide in November 1996 . 
 Disruptor was released to positive critical reception , and was named " Dark Horse of the Year " by various gaming publications . John Romero , founder of Doom developer id Software praised the game. <unk> Software considered Disruptor a lesson about video game development . According to Price , it was " the best game that nobody ever heard of " . With little marketing and advertisement , the game was a commercial failure for Insomniac and the company almost went bankrupt . Sales of Disruptor failed to meet the team 's expectations . Despite the game 's poor performance , Universal continued to partner with Insomniac for its next game . The team 's morale was low ; they decided to develop something new instead of a sequel to Disruptor . 
 At that time , the demography for the PlayStation shifted as more teenagers and children started to use the console to play video games . As a result , the team decided not to make another violent game like Disruptor and instead develop a family @-@ friendly game that would be suitable for every member of a family , regardless of their age . The family game market was dominated by Sony 's competitor Nintendo with games like Super Mario 64 , while the PlayStation has no similar exclusives . Cerny later pushed Insomniac Games to develop a game with a mascot and mass appeal . An environment artist of Disruptor , Craig Stitt proposed that the game 's theme and story should revolve around an anthropomorphic dragon . At the same time , Alex Hastings began developing an engine that specialized in games with panoramic view , which is suitable for open world games . The engine allowed more gameplay features including the ability for the dragon to glide through air . Spyro the Dragon was released in late 1998 . 
 The game received critical acclaim upon launch and received awards from publications . Sales of the game was relatively low initially , but climbed after Christmas that year , and overall sales of the game exceeded two million . The team was expanded to 13 staff members . Because of Spyro the Dragon 's success , the studio was requested to develop a sequel for it . The development of Spyro 2 : Ripto 's Rage ! began shortly after the launch of Spyro The Dragon . The team considered developing the sequel a challenge for them ; they had to develop new ideas to " revolutionize " the franchise within a short time . The team brainstormed ideas but later chose to expand a mini @-@ game from the original Spyro the Dragon , which they thought had offered a different experience from Spyro . The team also designed a mature story and advanced cinematics for the game . It met its target release window , and was released in late 1999 . Alex Hastings was worried about the release because the game 's development cycle was rushed and truncated . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 The studio was asked to develop the third installment in the Spyro the Dragon series upon the release of Ripto 's Rage ! . To make the game more varied than its predecessors , the team introduced more special moves for Spyro The Dragon and more playable characters . The dragon 's personality was also made more approachable for players . The company struggled to create new ideas for the sequel . During the game 's development , the team expanded to about 20 to 25 people . Brian <unk> , who would later become Insomniac 's games ' director , also joined the studio at that time . Spyro : Year of the Dragon was released worldwide in late 2000 . After releasing three games in three years , the team decided to move on for a new project that had new original characters . Year of the Dragon is the last Insomniac Games @-@ developed Spyro game . Universal retained the intellectual property rights to the Spyro series , even though Insomniac created it . This was also the end of Insomniac games ' partnership with Universal as the team at Insomniac started to work directly to develop games for the PlayStation consoles . 
 In 2000 , Sony released its successor to PlayStation , the PlayStation 2 . Insomniac 's ideas for its first PlayStation 2 project included Monster Knight , a concept that was designed in 1999 but the game did not get beyond its planning stage . The canceled project was revealed 13 years after the game 's conception . The second title was Girl With A Stick , which took inspirations from The Legend of Zelda and Tomb Raider . It was intended as a serious game , and to prove Insomniac 's ability to create games other than platformers . Insomniac spent six months on the project , developing several prototypes and a functional demo . However , most staff members , beside Price , were not passionate about the project , and thought it was " one @-@ dimensional " . Sony also thought the game would not find a market , and recommended Insomniac to " play to [ their ] strengths " . As a result , Girl With A Stick was scrapped . According to Price , Girl with A Stick is a lesson for Insomniac and its first failure . 
 A few weeks after the cancellation of Girl with a Stick , Brian Hastings proposed that the company should work on a space adventure game with a science fiction theme . The game originally revolved around a reptilian alien with weapons traveling across planets . The reptile character later evolved into a cavemen , and eventually became a fictional creature called a Lombax . They later named the creature Ratchet . They designed an android companion called Clank for Ratchet . Inspirations for the game were drawn from manga , Conker 's Bad Fur Day and from Spyro the Dragon . To differentiate the project from Insomniac 's previous projects , they made the game more complex and included shooting and role @-@ playing gameplay elements . The team was excited about this project ; however , the company was unable to develop a demo for the game because it did not have a suitable engine . As a result , they developed Art Nuevo de Flash Gordon , a Metropolis diorama , for Sony , which decided to help the Ratchet game 's funding and publishing . Jason Rubin , on behalf of Naughty Dog , lent Insomniac the engine used in Jak and Daxter : The Precursor Legacy . The game 's title was Ratchet & Clank ; it was originally to be a launch title for the PlayStation 2 but it was delayed by two years and was released in November 2002 . It was a critical success . 
 Five months before the launch of Ratchet & Clank , Sony approved the development of its sequel . Insomniac hoped to bring new elements to the franchise ; it received feedback from players and improved some features of Ratchet and Clank . About a year later , Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando was released , at which time Insomniac had finished the prototype of their next game , Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal , which introduced a multiplayer mode and expanded upon Going Commando 's arenas . Alex Hastings continued to optimize the engine and increase its processing power to fine @-@ tune the game . The sales of Up Your Arsenal were considerably higher than those of its predecessors ; it was the highest @-@ rated game in the franchise 's history . 
 Insomniac released three Ratchet & Clank game within three years . As of 2015 , Insomniac intends to change the direction of the franchise after Up Your Arsenal . Hastings hoped the company 's next game would have a darker tone than its predecessors . As a result , the plot switched its focus to Ratchet . The developers were inspired by Running Man and Battle Royale ; they developed an action game with no platform elements . While the gameplay of the fourth game in the series is similar to that of its predecessors , Clank 's role was significantly diminished and the character 's name was removed from the game 's title . Ratchet : Deadlocked was released in 2005 . 
 While Insomniac was handling the development of the Ratchet & Clank franchise , the team wanted to work on something else . With the launch of the PlayStation 3 , the team thought users of the new console would be more mature than those of its predecessors and wanted to develop a game to cater for them . They also thought the studio should not specialize in one genre . This new project was part of Insomniac 's expansion ; the company wanted to have multiple projects in parallel development . This project began development after the completion of Deadlocked . The team agreed to develop something different for a different platform . Inspired by Starship Troopers , Resistance : Fall of Man was Insomniac 's first first @-@ person shooter after Disruptor . To make the game stand @-@ out , they experimented with turning it into a squad @-@ based shooter and introducing giant lizard enemies which were later scrapped . Sony recommended Insomniac to change its lizard antagonist because they were not fun to play with . Furthermore , the team <unk> about the game 's setting . 
 Cerny wanted to set the game — proposed as a " space opera " game — during World War I , but this was later changed to World War II because the developers wanted to introduced extreme weaponry to the game . It was then shifted to the 1950s because the team considered the market for World War II shooter was over @-@ saturated at that time . Fall of Man was a launch title for the PlayStation 3 ; the team said developing a new game for the console was a challenge because they had to work quickly to meet its target release window . The game is a financial and critical success , despite causing controversy over the use of Manchester Cathedral . The development of the sequel soon began ; the team wanted to drastically change the game , leading to internal debate between staff members . The sequel , Resistance 2 , was released in 2008 . 
 Meanwhile , development of the Ratchet and Clank franchise continued . The team decided to rewrite the characters when the franchise shifted to the PlayStation 3 . They introduced the Future series , which includes Ratchet & Clank : Tools of Destruction ( 2007 ) , Quest For Booty ( 2008 ) and A Crack in Time ( 2009 ) . In 2008 , the company established a new studio of 25 to 30 developers , led by Chad <unk> and Shaun McCabe , in North Carolina . The new studio was responsible for some of Insomniac 's Ratchet & Clank games . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Both the Resistance franchise and the Ratchet & Clank franchise continued into the 2010s . The team in North Carolina developed Ratchet & Clank : All 4 One , which received mixed reviews . The North Carolina team continued to develop the next game in the series , Ratchet & Clank : Full Frontal Assault , which expanded upon levels from previous games in the series and has a structure similar to that of a tower defense game . 
 Meanwhile , the company developed Resistance 3 — the sequel to Resistance 2 — which was designed to be similar to Fall of Man . The team at Insomniac reviewed players ' feedback regarding the negative aspects of Resistance 2 , re @-@ introduced some mechanics from Fall of Man , and focused on narrative . They considered such an approach can differentiate a franchise from other first @-@ person shooters . Resistance 3 was regarded by the team as the best game in the series , but it sold poorly and was a financial failure . According to Price , the team was disappointed but were still proud of the project . In early 2012 , Price announced that the company would not be involved in any future Resistance projects . Sony retained the intellectual property rights to the franchise . 
 Insomniac had exclusively developed games for the PlayStation consoles ; this changed in 2010 when Insomniac announced it had partnered with Electronic Arts via EA Partners to develop a multi @-@ platform game for PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Studios ' Xbox 360 console . The company hoped to reach a wider audience , while keeping the rights to its IP and retain full control of its franchises . The company revealed nothing about the game . The company established a new subsidiary called Insomniac Click , which focused on casual games and games for Facebook . Its first game was not set in any of Insomniac 's existing franchises . Insomniac again partnered with Electronic Arts , which owned the popular casual game developer <unk> , to help the game to reach a broad audience . Outernauts was announced shortly after ; it was released in July 2012 for browsers and mobile platforms . Click was later re @-@ incorporated into Insomniac , and the browser version of Outernauts was canceled . 
 The EA Partners game was later officially revealed at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011 as <unk> . This game was pitched by Ratchet & Clank director Brian <unk> and it has a direction similar to that of the Ratchet & Clank series . The team thought <unk> would appeal to teenagers . After several play @-@ testing sessions , they realized their game was too simple for teenagers . The company developed many weapons for the game , none of which related to the game 's story . The developers retooled the game and changed it to attract older players and make weapons an important part of the game . The game focuses on a co @-@ operative campaign , which the company thought was a popular trend at that time . It was later renamed Fuse and was released worldwide on May 2013 . Fuse was one of the lowest @-@ rated games developed by Insomniac , and was another commercial failure , debuting in 37th place in UK in its first week of release . Fuse was considered a learning lesson for Insomniac to understand the type of game they are good at making . The reception to Fuse showed the company it should develop " colorful , playful experience that 's loaded with unusual , sometimes silly weapons " . Also in 2013 , the last Ratchet & Clank Future game , Ratchet & Clank : Into the Nexus , was released . 
 Running parallel development with Fuse , and beginning began soon after the completion of Resistance 3 , Insomniac Games began development of Sunset Overdrive . The game was inspired by Hyena Men of Kenya , Tank Girl , I Am Legend , The Young One , Halloween masks from the 1960s , and Lego . Sunset Overdrive was created by Marcus Smith and Drew Murray ; their first pitch to Insomniac 's head was rejected as being too confusing . They were given one week to re @-@ pitch the title , and they persuaded studio heads to begin the game 's development . The game was later pitched to various publishers , which rejected them because Insomniac demanded to retain ownership of the IP . The project was later pitched to Microsoft Studios , which was eager to work with Insomniac . Microsoft allowed Insomniac to own the rights to the game . Sunset Overdrive was made exclusive to Microsoft 's Xbox One console ; it was released on the 20th anniversary of Insomniac , in 2014 . 
 Insomniac announced Slow Down , Bull , a part @-@ commercial and part @-@ charity project for release on Microsoft Windows ; it is the company 's first game for Windows . Insomniac released a remake of Ratchet & Clank for the PlayStation 4 in 2016 . In January 2016 , Insomniac announced their next game , Song of the Deep , a water @-@ based video game inspired by Metroid and Castlevania : Symphony of the Night . The game will be published by retailer GameStop . 
 During E3 2015 , the company announced Edge of Nowhere , a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure game for the virtual reality hardware Oculus Rift . In April 2016 , the company announced two new virtual reality titles : Feral Rites , a hack and slash game , and The Unspoken , a fantasy multiplayer game , exclusively for the Rift . According to Price , the company began focusing on virtual reality projects as the team is enthusiastic about the technology , and that it allows the company to develop an expertise in creating VR game . The studio signed exclusive deal with Oculus VR as Insomniac believed that both companies shared the same passion to " [ bring ] games to life " , and that they allowed Insomniac to retain the rights of their intellectual properties . Price compared the agreement to their previous first @-@ party deals , and added that having the opportunity to develop games for the first generation of VR platform is something the team could not reject . Despite the new direction , Price added that they will not give up on making console triple AAA video games . At E3 2016 , Insomniac announced their next AAA title , a Spider @-@ Man video game developed exclusively for the PlayStation 4 in conjunction with Marvel Entertainment . Bryan <unk> , producer of Sunset Overdrive , <unk> be the game 's creative director . 
 = = Games developed = = 
 = = = Spyro ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Insomniac is the creator of the Spyro series and developed the first three games , Spyro the Dragon ( 1998 ) , Ripto 's Rage ( 1999 ) and Year of the Dragon ( 2000 ) for the first PlayStation console . It is a series of platform games that follow Spyro the Dragon as he progresses through a medieval @-@ styled world . The dragon can glide , charge and exhale fire . The original trilogy has collectively sold 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . The series continued after Insomniac ceased developing further Spyro games . Universal outsourced the game development ; two subseries , The Legend of Spyro and Skylanders , were then developed . Activision Blizzard is now the owner of the franchise . 
 = = = Ratchet & Clank ( 2002 – present ) = = = 
 Ratchet & Clank is a series of action @-@ adventure games with platform elements . Players mostly take control of Ratchet as he progresses through various planets in order to save the galaxy . Clank is also playable in several segments of these games . The series is divided into 2 parts ; the original series for the PlayStation 2 ( Ratchet & Clank ( 2002 ) , Going Commando ( 2003 ) , Up Your Arsenal ( 2004 ) and Ratchet : Deadlocked ( 2005 ) ) and the Future series for the PlayStation 3 ( Tools of Destruction ( 2007 ) , Quest for Booty ( 2008 ) , A Crack in Time ( 2009 ) and Into the Nexus ( 2013 ) ) . The first three titles in the series were remastered and packaged in the Ratchet & Clank Collection for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita , with Ratchet & Clank ( 2016 ) being the latest release on the PlayStation 4 . A Ratchet & Clank animated film , with screenplay and additional marketing by Insomniac , was released in 2016 as well , to coincide with the release of the video game remake . 
 = = = Resistance ( 2006 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Resistance is a series of first @-@ person shooter games set circa 1950 an alternate history . An alien race called the Chimera have invaded and conquered Earth , and has turned humans into monstrous supersoldiers . Players play as Nathan Hale in Resistance : Fall of Man ( 2006 ) and Resistance 2 ( 2008 ) , and as Joseph Capelli in Resistance 3 ( 2011 ) . All three games were released exclusively for the PlayStation 3 system . The series also includes the handheld games Resistance : Retribution , developed by SCE Bend Studio for the PlayStation Portable , and Resistance : Burning Skies , developed by Nihilistic Software for the PlayStation Vita . 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Other notable games developed by Insomniac include Disruptor ( 1996 ) , Outernauts ( 2012 ) , Fuse ( 2013 ) and Sunset Overdrive ( 2014 ) . The company has canceled several games , including Monster Knight , Girl with a Stick for the PlayStation 2 , and 1080 Pinball — a pinball simulation downloadable game — which began development in 2007 . Insomniac is currently developing an exclusive game for Oculus Rift , named Edge of Nowhere , as well as a game based on Spider @-@ Man for the PlayStation 4 . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Insomniac Games focuses on maintaining its independence . Despite working solely for Sony Computer Entertainment for decades , it has never been part of SCE Worldwide Studios . The studio partnered with Sony because Sony helped market Insomniac 's games . The company 's team found being controlled by publishers frustrating . According to Price , working with Sony is an " autonomous " process ; Sony can provide input into the development of games but Insomniac has complete control of them . Insomniac later decided to produce games for platforms other than Sony 's PlayStation series so it can own the rights to its franchises and establish its own brand identity . 
 When developing its next game , Insomniac usually works on games it considers itself good at making ; these focus on storytelling , creative weapons , and third @-@ person gameplay . The company also recognizes the importance of developing new intellectual properties . The developers thought they were lucky to have the opportunity to develop them . 
 Internally , the company 's developers are given much creative freedom . <unk> staff members can comment on the games ' designs . Price considered game design a kind of social design , in which the team solve problems together . Price said trust is an essential part of a game 's development , and that honest communications between staff members can ensure the correct direction of games . Price also said admitting mistakes can help maximize creativity , and that the company 's leaders should be approachable by staff members . 
 = = Related companies = = 
 The company has a close relationship with video game developer Naughty Dog , which was located in the same building and are still both located in Los Angeles County ( Naughty Dog in Santa Monica and Insomniac in Burbank ) . As a result , they often share technology with each other . Some employees left Insomniac Games to form High Impact Games , which later collaborated with Insomniac on Ratchet & Clank projects , Jak and Daxter : The Lost Frontier , and Disney Princess : My Fairytale Adventure . Nathan Fouts , an ex @-@ Insomniac employee , founded his own studio and developed Weapon of Choice . <unk> was designed by Ryan Koons , who used to be an employee of Insomniac . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 IGN named Insomniac Games the 20th best video game developer of all time . The Society for Human Resource Management called it one of the best places to work in America . It was listed by Fortune as the 69th best place to work for Millennials . 
 = Stropharia caerulea = 
 Stropharia caerulea , commonly known as the blue roundhead , is an inedible species of agaric fungus in the family Strophariaceae . It is a common species found in Europe and North America , where it grows as a <unk> in meadows , roadsides , hedgerows , gardens , and woodchip mulch . S. caerulea was officially described to science in 1979 , although it was known to be a distinct species for about two centuries before that . The taxon Stropharia cyanea , as defined by Risto Tuomikoski in 1953 , and used by several later authors , is a synonym of S. caerulea . 
 The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) of Stropharia caerulea feature a greenish @-@ blue cap sparsely covered in white flecks of veil at the margin , and a sticky , glutinous surface texture . Gills on the cap underside have an adnate or sinuate attachment to the stipe . They are initially pale purplish @-@ brown , becoming darker brown in age as the spores mature . The greenish stipe is covered in white scales up to a thin , transient ring . It is similar in appearance to its less common relative Stropharia aeruginosa , but that species has a more robust ring on its stipe , more scales on the cap , and darker gills with white edges . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1953 , the Finnish scientist Risto Tuomikoski observed that the well @-@ known Stropharia aeruginosa had a lookalike species that was characterized by a brown spore print , an indistinct , temporary ring on the stipe , and <unk> lining the gill edges . Tuomikoski called this lookalike Stropharia cyanea , a name he based on James Bolton 's 1820 taxon Agaricus cyaneus . Later researchers confirmed the existence and widespread European distribution of this taxon . Tuomikoski 's use of the name S. cyanea , however , was incorrect as Bolton 's type refers to the purple @-@ brown spored species S. aeruginosa . Despite this , the misapplied name S. cyanea has persisted in some contemporary field guides . 
 Stropharia caerulea was first mentioned in the scientific literature by James Bolton in 1788 , under the name Agaricus <unk> . This usage is not considered valid according to nomenclatural rules , because it was used by Christian Hendrik Persoon to refer to another species in his 1801 Synopsis methodica fungorum , which is a sanctioned work . Stropharia caerulea was officially described by mycologist Hanns Kreisel in 1979 from collections made near <unk> , Germany . Machiel Noordeloos transferred the species to Psilocybe in 1995 , but today this genus is mostly reserved for species that contain the psychoactive compounds psilocybin and psilocin . Although psilocybin had once been reported from S. caerulea , subsequent analyses have not revealed any traces of the substance in the fruit bodies . 
 The specific epithet caerulea is Latin for " blue " . The mushroom is commonly known as the blue roundhead . French mycologist Régis Courtecuisse has called the mushroom " verdigris agaric " , but numerous other authors use this name to refer instead to Stropharia aeruginosa . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruitbodies have conical to flattened caps measuring 2 – 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . They usually have a low , broad umbo . The colour of the cap depends on its age , ranging from pale blue @-@ green to yellowish @-@ bluish green . There is often a whitish zone around the margin , which invariably has bluish @-@ green tints . When moist , the cap is sticky with a cuticle that may be readily peeled ; dry caps are smooth and shiny . Gills are initially pale purplish @-@ brown , becoming darker brown in age as the spores mature . They have an adnate or sinuate attachment to the stipe . The stipe has a short @-@ lived annular ( ring ) zone ; above this zone the stipe is smooth , while below it is fibrous and scaly . The flesh is colourless , although it may have tinges of blue in the cap and stipe , and lacks any distinctive odour or flavour . Stropharia cyanea fruit bodies are not edible . 
 The spore print is brown . Spores typically measure 8 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 0 by 4 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 5 µm , and have an ellipsoid to oblong to ovoid shape , depending on the viewing angle . Basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are narrowly club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and have dimensions of 24 – 40 by 7 – 12 µm . The <unk> ( found on the gill edge ) are club @-@ shaped , measuring 30 – 55 by 4 – 40 µm , with a neck that is 2 – 5 µm wide . <unk> ( on the gill face ) are 40 – 60 by 5 – 18 µm with a 2 – 4 µm @-@ wide neck . Clamp connections are abundant in all tissues of S. caerulea . The fungus produces acanthocytes , which are spiny cells produced on short branches on the mycelium . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 There are a few greenish Stropharia with which S. caerulea might be confused . Stropharia <unk> is an uncommon species that grows in meadows . It has a more slender form than S. caerulea , a soft , spongy stipe , and flesh with an odour similar to fresh pepper . Microscopically , it has a dense palisade of slender , capitate ( with a spherical tip ) non @-@ staining cheilocystidia on the gill edge . This gives the gills of young , fresh fruit bodies a whitish edge , a feature that is absent from S. caerulea . Another lookalike , S. aeruginosa , is less common than S. caerulea . It is distinguished from the latter by the well @-@ developed ring zone on its stipe , darker gills with white edges , and more numerous whitish scales around the cap margin . Additionally , S. aeruginosa has more stable colours than S. caerulea , the colouration of which tends to quickly wash out . However , collections of Stropharia often show characteristics that are intermediate between two or more species , making them difficult to identify accurately . 
 = = Habitat , distribution , and ecology = = 
 Stropharia caerulea is a saprophytic fungus that fruits singly or in groups . It grows in or on meadows , roadsides , hedgerows , gardens , and woodchip mulch . In Europe it is often found in beech woods in alkaline soil . It is a common species found throughout Europe , where it fruits from July to November . Although also found in North America , generally fruiting from August to October , the full extent of its distribution there is unknown . 
 Fruitbodies of Stropharia caerulea form mycelial cords – rootlike structures consisting of a dense mass of hyphae – which create extensive underground networks that move nutrients and allow the fungus to " forage " for resources . These cords are often associated with stems and rhizomes of the common nettle ( <unk> dioica ) . These mycelial systems ' development and the species 's interactions with other cord @-@ forming wood decomposer basidiomycetes have been investigated . The mycelia of Stropharia caerulea form a fractal structure characterized by a dense , relatively slowly extending front , a formation associated with finding relatively homogeneously distributed nutrients – equivalent to short @-@ range foraging . An increase in the supply of soil nitrogen or phosphorus increases the fractal branching of the mycelia , allowing increased uptake of nutrients . 
 = Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD ( Japanese : ファイナルファンタジー零式 HD , Hepburn : Fainaru Fantajī Reishiki HD ) is an action role @-@ playing game developed by Square Enix and HexaDrive , and published by Square Enix for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , and later for Microsoft Windows via Steam . It was released worldwide in March 2015 , while the Steam port was released in August 2015 . Type @-@ 0 HD is a high @-@ definition remaster of the Japan @-@ exclusive PlayStation Portable game Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , a spin @-@ off from the main Final Fantasy series and part of the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries , a set of games sharing a common mythos . The story focuses on Class Zero , a group of fourteen students from the Dominion of Rubrum who must fight the neighboring Militesi Empire when they launch an assault on the other Crystal States of Orience . In doing so , the group become entangled in both the efforts to push back and defeat the forces of Militesi , and the secret behind the war and the existence of the crystals . 
 After Type @-@ 0 received a 2011 Japan @-@ only release on PSP , Type @-@ 0 HD began development in mid @-@ 2012 as part of a move to promote the next generation of gaming consoles , and gave the opportunity for multiple changes to refine the experience for players . Outside of updated graphics and an expanded color palette , Type @-@ 0 HD is largely identical to the original PSP version , although the original 's multiplayer functionality was dropped , and additional difficulty levels were implemented . Type @-@ 0 HD reached high positions in international sales charts , and has sold over one million copies worldwide as of October 2015 . It received praise for its story and battle system , while criticisms have focused on its HD upgrade and localization . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD is an action role @-@ playing video game that utilizes a real @-@ time battle system similar to Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . The player controls Class Zero , an elite fighting force of fourteen students from Rubrum 's Akademeia . Outside mission environments and Akademeia ( Class Zero 's home base ) , Class Zero navigates Orience through a scaled @-@ down world map . The world can be navigated on foot , using chocobos ( recurring galliform birds in the Final Fantasy series ) or via an airship . Type @-@ 0 HD is split into missions with free periods in between . During these free periods between missions , players can explore Akademeia , breed chocobos for personal use , and complete side quests for characters in Akademeia and liberated towns . 
 During missions , three members of Class Zero can be selected for missions while the others are kept in reserve in case a player character dies . The lead character can be swapped at any time , with the other two being controlled by the game 's artificial intelligence . During certain story missions , players take part in real @-@ time strategy battles on the world map . During combat missions , players gain experience points and increase their experience level as they defeat enemies , as well as obtaining Phantoma from defeated enemies , used to upgrade the characters ' magic skills . Each character has access to summoned monsters called Eidolons ( War Gods ( <unk> , <unk> ) in the original Japanese ) , which are summoned for limited periods at the cost of a character 's total health . 
 While the core gameplay remains the same , multiple adjustments were made to existing systems . The HD version features four difficulty levels as opposed to the original 's three , including an " easy " option . The original game 's multiplayer elements were removed during optimization for consoles , and types of magic and accessories previously only available in multiplayer were incorporated into the single @-@ player campaign . A feature unique to Type @-@ 0 HD is the support personnel ( SP ) system : when activated , AI @-@ controlled support characters take the place of normal party members . SP points earned in battle can be used to purchase special items . Additional character costumes made included through the original 's demos and downloadable content were included in Type @-@ 0 HD as unlockables , along with costumes unique to the HD version . 
 = = Development = = 
 During the production of Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , the development team explored the possibility of a high @-@ definition port of the game . The idea never went beyond experimentation as the team was focused on keeping the game as a portable experience . The team also experimented with a sequel on eighth generation consoles , but production was halted when the development team were transferred to Final Fantasy XV . After some time working on XV , original director Hajime Tabata decided to develop Type @-@ 0 HD for eighth @-@ generation consoles . The game began development in mid @-@ 2012 , around the same time XV was shifted onto PlayStation 4 ( PS4 ) and Xbox One . Tabata came on board in July of that year as director and producer , though his involvement was fairly minor due to his directing duties for XV . The main development was handled by HexaDrive , who had previously collaborated successfully with Square Enix on The 3rd Birthday , and had developed the high @-@ definition remasters of Ōkami and The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker . The remaster was intended as an incentive for Final Fantasy players in both Japan and the west to purchase eighth generation consoles before XV 's release . The original plan was for a port to both the seventh generation PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles , and eighth generation consoles . After the PS4 proved popular at the 2013 Tokyo Game Show , and as Tabata had no development experience with seventh generation console hardware , the team focused on the eighth generation versions . According to art director Yusuke Naora , moving from the PlayStation Portable to eighth @-@ generation hardware proved hard for the team . Despite early claims , no version of Type @-@ 0 HD was developed for the PlayStation Vita . According to Tabata , this was due to difficulties in porting between console and Vita development environments , and his wish for a playing experience he could only envision on home consoles . 
 HexaDrive handled the 2D screen displays , world map features and lip synching , while Square Enix handled the 3D graphics , such as character models in cutscenes . Lighting effects and in @-@ game assets were improved and updated for HD consoles using the DirectX 11 technology utilized for XV . Alongside this , a large proportion of the upgrade was done using HexaDrive 's in @-@ house engine HexaDrive Engine 2 @.@ 0 . While originally meant to have a cursory role compared to the DirectX 11 elements , it ended up being used far more than anticipated . The resolution was increased from the original game 's <unk> pixels to the 1920x1080 required . Despite all these changes , the team took care that the lighting and shadow effects remained faithful to the look of the original , as updating too much of the game 's visual style would fundamentally alter the experience . Due to scheduling , there was sometimes pressure on the HexaDrive team and they experienced difficulties with the hardware as it was their first time developing for eighth @-@ generation consoles . Updating the lighting effects alone took a whole year of development to finish . While updating the characters ' appearance , the team were forced to focus on the main characters due to production deadlines , consequently doing less work on NPCs such as Kurasame . For the main characters ' gameplay models , the team adapted the models used in the original cutscenes , as they were more detailed than the original gameplay models due to a higher polygon count . Tabata wanted the main characters to remain as true as possible to their original appearances , but due to the cutscene models appearing older than the original gameplay models , they needed adjusting so they better reflected the original models . The team also adjusted the characters ' appearances slightly to make them more " charming " . Visual optimization was still going on during the game 's reveal , with the team needing to create special screenshots of Type @-@ 0 's characters operating inside the production environments of XV . Ultimately , these visuals gave the team a guide for what the final game should look like , reducing the amount of trial and error . 
 No new gameplay content was added to Type @-@ 0 HD . The team instead focused on upgrading the graphics , adjusting existing gameplay for home consoles , and including a lower difficulty level . The latter was due to complaints from players that the original game was too difficult . While carrying over the original 's multiplayer functions was considered , it would have lengthened the estimated development time by another year . Since Tabata 's priority was to bring the game to fans worldwide , the multiplayer and associated elements were either removed or incorporated into the single @-@ player campaign . Tabata also decided against creation of a demo or an international version for this reason . As a substitute for the multiplayer , the team strengthened and improved the original single @-@ player Academy Assistance function . As with the original , the team used the names of developers from both the core team and other Square Enix departments for the NPCs . While the main story remained unchanged , a secret cutscene teasing future Type games was commissioned . Created by Square Enix 's CGI movie subsidiary Visual Works , it was based on some of Tabata 's early ideas for Type @-@ 0 . A small piece of the cutscene was shown privately to attendees of Square Enix 's 25th anniversary commemoration event for the Final Fantasy series . Hiroki Chiba , writer for Type @-@ 0 , returned to write the scene . In the cutscene , a fatally @-@ wounded samurai warrior resembling main protagonist Ace is saved from death by a fire spirit . 
 At Tabata 's suggestion , Naora expanded the color palette to increase the game 's realism and tie in with XV 's art style . The original idea was to change the original red hue to a golden one to match the redone logo , but the graphics looked too dark on the large screen even with the adjustment , so blue tones were added to brighten up the scenery . Additional bass sounds were added to the sound effects , as the original platform 's speaker system had previously limited the range and strength of sounds . The original camera behavior needed to be developed from scratch , as the camera angles used in the original looked out of place on the large screen . During the run @-@ up to release , the team made modifications to the camera after receiving negative comments during demonstrations , addressing scenery collisions and the visibility of player and enemy characters during active gameplay . Because of these modifications , character speed and movement could be increased and improved . By December 2014 , the game was in its final stages of development and undergoing debugging . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original soundtrack for Type @-@ 0 by Takeharu Ishimoto , who also composed the music for Before Crisis , Crisis Core and The World Ends with You . Ishimoto rearranged , remixed and re @-@ recorded the soundtrack for Type @-@ 0 HD . This was due to the original soundtrack was composed within the limits of PSP hardware , making it unsuitable for the new console release . Because of a restricted budget , he did the bulk of the work himself . One of the changes he made was making the choral sound more prominent . In addition , he composed a new battle theme and recorded an English version of " Colorful - Falling in Love " , the track for Type @-@ 0 's alternate ending . The lyrics were translated by <unk> , a singer who had worked on The World Ends with You . The English version was made for the overseas version of the game , but was included in the remastered soundtrack 's commercial release . Type @-@ 0 's original theme song , " Zero " by Japanese rock band Bump of Chicken , was used again for Type @-@ 0 HD . While a translated version was considered for the localization , the team , with permission from the band , decided to use the original song and add subtitles for the song lyrics . 
 For the additional ending and credits of Type @-@ 0 HD , a new song titled " Utakata " ( <unk> , lit . " <unk> " ) was commissioned by Tabata . Ishimoto created five different songs , with " Utakata " being Tabata 's final choice . As Tabata wanted the song to have a Japanese style , Ishimoto wrote the lyrics in archaic Japanese , though he originally wanted to write the lyrics in English . It was created and recorded by a four @-@ person team : Ishimoto composed the music , while singer Chris Ito wrote and sang the lyrics . The other two , T $ <unk> $ HI and <unk> , were former members of alternate rock band Pay Money to My Pain and performed on bass guitar , and drums respectively . The song was first heard in the final Japanese trailer for Type @-@ 0 HD . 
 A commercial Blu @-@ ray release for Type @-@ 0 HD 's soundtrack , Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 HD Original Soundtrack , was released on March 25 , 2015 . It includes the entire soundtrack , the newly composed tracks , tracks from Final Fantasy Agito and ten bonus MP3 tracks selected by Ishimoto from his previous work as a " Best of Collection " . The Blu @-@ ray album reached # 189 in the Oricon charts , and remained in the charts for one week . The album , and music in general , have received positive comments from music critics and reviewers of the game . 
 = = Release = = 
 Type @-@ 0 HD was released on March 17 , 19 and 20 , 2015 for North America , Japan and Europe respectively . It came with both English and Japanese voice tracks for all regions . The game included a demo of Final Fantasy XV , titled Final Fantasy XV : Episode <unk> . The demo was only available in limited quantities : it was exclusive to physical first @-@ print editions , and came with the digital edition for two months after release . The collector 's edition , available through Square Enix 's online store and at Amazon.com , came with a special CD featuring tracks from Type @-@ 0 and Agito , a calendar featuring official artwork , a Vermillion Peristylium ID card , a set of five cards modeled after those used by Ace in battle , and a cadet scarf . Limited editions of the game were produced for North America and Europe , for sale at selected high street and online stores . A PlayStation 4 hardware bundle was also produced for Japan , featuring a copy of the game and download code for the XV demo along with a console themed after the game . A port to Microsoft Windows via Valve Corporation 's Steam platform was developed . This port was created in response to fan demands for a PC version . In contrast to the console version , the PC port allowed graphic adjustments , and included fixes for camera control and motion blur issues raised by players and reviewers after release . The port was released on August 18 , 2015 . As part of the promotion for the port , Final Fantasy @-@ themed pre @-@ order gifts for use in Dota 2 were created . 
 It was the first Final Fantasy title to be rated M for Mature by the Entertainment Software Rating Board for its North American release . For the western release , a collector 's edition similar to that released in Japan was created , which included the card replicas and soundtrack selection . In addition , it included an English translation of the game 's prequel manga , a steelbook holding the game disc and soundtrack selection featuring the logo and kanji artwork , and an 80 @-@ page artbook with a forward written by Tabata . The winners of a separate special sweepstake received a themed PS4 or Xbox One , along with promotional artwork posters specific to each console , a Play Arts Kai mini @-@ figurine of Ace , and a gold Vermillion Bird pin . Runners @-@ up received individual pieces from the sweepstake excluding the consoles . To promote Type @-@ 0 HD in North America , a trailer for the game was shown in cinemas prior to some of the season 's big film releases , such as The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 1 . A shortened version of the trailer was released online . To further promote the game upon release , Square Enix offered the Japanese thriller Battle Royale as a free rental for Xbox One in the weekend following the game 's release . After its initial release , a patch was released to fix issues similar to those fixed in the PC port . At release , the PC version suffered from graphics problems , crashes , and had its graphics locked . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 An international version was reported to be in the works by Tabata in the Ultimania guide for Type @-@ 0 . He later commented that the main reasons for the original version not coming west was the flagging PSP market and the uncertainty of the Vita , making a port impractical . The name Type @-@ 0 was originally trademarked by Square Enix in Europe on December 29 , 2010 along with a logo . In an interview with GameSpot in November 2012 , Tabata stated that Square Enix was " taking a clean slate in terms of [ their ] plans . " , stating that if there was demand , a western release would be considered . In the same month , an alleged voice actor for the game said that English voice recording for the game was completed in late 2011 . In 2014 , Orion Acaba , the English voice actor for Nine , revealed that the voice recording eventually used in Type @-@ 0 HD was completed in 2012 . According to another English voice actor , Cristina Vee , the game was codenamed Yellow P during the recording process . 
 During an interview with USGamer in September 2013 , Tabata , commenting on both Type @-@ 0 and its prequel Agito , was hopeful for a western release : he said that the planned western release of Agito and the reaction of the fan community to both games had become a deciding factor , and that while the project had not been officially green @-@ lit , it was in its final stages of preparation . He also clarified at the time that the game would not make the transition onto mobile devices or the PS3 as an HD Remaster . A localization was officially decided upon in early 2014 , when a survey taken by Square Enix Europe found that a large number of fans wanted the game to be released overseas . The localization was announced when Type @-@ 0 HD was officially announced by Square Enix at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2014 . An official English version for the Vita was momentarily announced by the official " PlayStation Blog " , but was clarified as " erroneous " less than an hour later . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 IGN 's Meghan Sullivan found the portrayal of the cadets ' involvement in the war " incredibly moving " and was intrigued by the story 's focus on war , but found the need to understand Orience 's lore and mythology made the ending convoluted . Becky Cunningham of GamesRadar was fascinated by the game 's setting and the questions it posed about morality and memory , finding the story worth experiencing . Alexa Ray Corriea , writing for GameSpot , generally enjoyed the story despite noting the main plot becoming complicated quickly , but stated that the ending introduced too many new story elements for comfort . Michael Damiani of GameTrailers found the overall story enjoyable , but gaps in story and character development , along with the need to replay the game to get the full story , " [ leaves ] you full of questions and doubt from beginning to end . " Eurogamer 's Chris Schilling was similarly critical of the need to understand terms unfamiliar to series newcomers . He also disliked the length of cutscenes , and the jarring change from grim imagery to lighter subjects like chocobo breeding . Tom Sykes of Official Xbox Magazine said that the setting and story 's superficial similarities to the later Harry Potter books improved the story after the confusing opening . Game Informer 's Matt Miller stated that the story started strongly , but was made less enjoyable when it began focusing on the game 's overarching narrative and said the abundance of characters had a negative impact on their characterization . RPGFan 's Stephen Meyerink , despite saying the game had " goofy faces and silly moments " , found the story and themes engaging . Samuel Roberts of PC Gamer was less positive , feeling that the story and characters reminded him too much of poor @-@ quality anime series . 
 Sullivan generally enjoyed the combat , saying she " felt powerful because the combat was always super fast paced . " and calling it the game 's best feature , while finding the real @-@ time strategy segments an unpleasant hangover from the game 's original form . Cunningham found it enjoyable mastering each of Class Zero 's fighting styles despite difficulty spikes , but noted some gameplay elements such as stopping to use certain items detracted from her enjoyment of combat . Famitsu echoed many of its points of praise for the original , generally saying that both veterans of the original and newcomers would finding it " equally enjoyable " , and were pleased with the change from a portable platform to home consoles . Sykes said the game " excels in its combat , which is fast @-@ paced , complex , and tough . " Damiani found the battles " a welcomed change " compared to previous Final Fantasy titles , he disliked other aspects such as the lock @-@ on mechanic . Miller enjoyed exploring the characters ' battle abilities , but found the high @-@ speed detracted from the experience and considered the real @-@ time strategy elements , boss fights and other systems poorly developed . Schilling also found the combat mechanics " sharp and satisfying " , generally praising the combat mechanics . He was critical of the lengthy tutorials at the beginning of the game , and disappointed that the gameplay segments between missions did not impact the characters ' combat ability as in the Persona series . Meyerink generally enjoyed the combat and various side activities , while faulting the game for inadequate introduction of gameplay elements . Corriea called the combat " marvellous " , saying it handled it and the customization options better than many other games in its genre . Roberts enjoyed the combat , but found the RPG gameplay outside it to be far weaker . The limited optional gameplay segments between combat segments , offering opportunities for character development and side @-@ quests , were also generally praised . A point of criticism shared by western reviewers with the original version was the camera control . Famitsu , in contrast , again praised the camera movement . 
 Corriea was mixed about the game 's HD upgrade , stating that while the background were " gorgeous " and the main characters moved fluidly and expressed emotion properly , NPCs or characters unimportant to the stories did not receive the same attention as the main cast . Schilling was disappointed with the result , frequently citing scenery and character behavior that looked out of place on the big screen . Miller said that the game 's visuals were " dominated by muddy textures and frequent loading . " , while he negatively noted the removal of the original 's multiplayer . Damiani praised the upgrades for the main characters , but noted multiple inconsistencies in both the environments and cutscenes . Famitsu found the graphics " dramatically beautiful " , but found it strange seeing the original environments on a large screen . Meyerink said that , while not hard on the eyes , the upgrades were well below what he expected . Sullivan praised the lighting and shading effects , but shared Corriea 's criticism of NPCs and noted low @-@ quality environmental textures , saying she was " so bored by most environments that [ she ] stopped caring about them halfway through the story . " The localized dialogue also received mixed to negative reactions , with multiple reviewers faulting the English voice actors ' performances . Opinions on the PC port were mixed : Meyerink marked it as an improvement of the ports of the XIII games while acknowledging issues with the graphics and controls , while Roberts was not impressed by its performance . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In Japan , Type @-@ 0 HD reached the top of the sales charts in its debut week , selling 93 @,@ 000 : the PS4 version accounted for roughly 92 @,@ 000 , while the Xbox One version sold roughly 1 @,@ 000 . Type @-@ 0 HD , together with Resident Evil : Revelations 2 , provoked a rise in sales for the PS4 while other console sales remained consistent , but it ultimately performed poorly , selling through only 59 @.@ 59 % of its shipment . It had sold over 128 @,@ 000 units in Japan by August 2015 , being the 26th best @-@ selling video game during that period . 
 In Western territories , demand was notably higher due to the original version not being released outside Japan . In the UK , Type @-@ 0 HD reached second place in the gaming charts behind Battlefield <unk> , while it reached tenth place in the North American charts for March . As of October 2015 , Type @-@ 0 HD had sold over one million copies worldwide , making a solid contribution to Square Enix 's fiscal income for the year and the company 's catalog of eighth @-@ generation console games . 
 = The Hurt Locker = 
 The Hurt Locker is a 2008 American war film about an Iraq War Explosive Ordnance Disposal team who are being targeted by insurgents with booby traps , remote control detonations and ambushes . Directed by Kathryn Bigelow , it received critical acclaim and won six Academy Awards , including Best Picture . Bigelow won the award for Best Director ; as of 2016 , The Hurt Locker is the sole film by a female director to win in either category . It is also the lowest @-@ grossing Best Picture winner in history . 
 The Hurt Locker shows soldiers ' varying psychological reactions to the stress of combat , which though intolerable to some , is addictive to others . The story unfolds after a staff sergeant is killed by an insurgent trap and an apparently calm veteran is brought in to head the squad . His comrades suspect that their new team leader is being driven to take terrifying risks . Writer Mark Boal drew on his experience during embedded access to provide an authentic background for the production , although certain army procedures were portrayed with artistic licence . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Hurt Locker opens with a quotation from War Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning , a best @-@ selling 2002 book by Chris Hedges , a New York Times war correspondent and journalist : " The rush of battle is a potent and often lethal addiction , for war is a drug . " 
 Sergeant First Class William James ( Jeremy Renner ) , a battle @-@ tested veteran , arrives as a new team leader of a U.S. Army Explosive Ordnance Disposal ( EOD ) unit in the Iraq War , replacing Staff Sergeant Matthew Thompson ( Guy Pearce ) , who was killed by a radio @-@ controlled 155mm improvised explosive device ( IED ) in Baghdad . His team includes Sergeant J.T. Sanborn ( Anthony Mackie ) and Specialist Owen Eldridge ( Brian Geraghty ) . 
 James ' maverick methods and attitude lead Sanborn and Eldridge to consider him reckless , and tensions mount . When they are assigned to destroy some explosives in a remote desert area , James returns to the detonation site to pick up his gloves . Sanborn openly contemplates killing James by " accidentally " triggering the explosion , making Eldridge very uncomfortable , but Sanborn does nothing . 
 Returning to Camp Victory in their Humvee , the team encounters five armed men in traditional Arab garb standing near the men 's Ford Excursion , which has a flat tire . After a tense encounter , the men reveal themselves to be private military contractors and British mercenaries . They have captured two prisoners featured on the most @-@ wanted Iraqi playing cards . The entire group suddenly comes under fire , and when the prisoners attempt to escape in the confusion , the leader of the mercenaries ( Ralph Fiennes ) remembers the bounty for them is " dead or alive " and shoots them . Enemy snipers kill three of the mercenaries , including the leader . Sanborn and James borrow a Barrett .50 cal to dispatch three attackers , while Eldridge kills a fourth . 
 During a raid on a warehouse , James discovers the body of a young boy , in which a live bomb has been surgically implanted . James believes it to be " Beckham " ( Christopher Sayegh ) , an Iraqi youth he had previously befriended . During evacuation , Lieutenant Colonel John Cambridge ( Christian Camargo ) , the camp 's psychiatrist and a friend of Eldridge 's , is killed in an explosion ; Eldridge blames himself for the Colonel 's death . Later , James leaves the military compound seeking revenge for Beckham and breaks into the house of an Iraqi professor , but his search reveals nothing and he leaves . 
 Called to a petrol tanker detonation , James decides on his own to hunt for the insurgents responsible , guessing they are still in the immediate area . Sanborn protests , but when James heads out , he and Eldridge reluctantly follow . After they split up , insurgents capture Eldridge . James and Sanborn rescue him , but accidentally shoot him in the leg . The following morning , James is approached by Beckham , who James believed was dead . The young boy tries to play soccer with James and sell him more DVDs , but the soldier walks by without saying a word . Before being airlifted for surgery elsewhere , Eldridge angrily blames James for his injury . 
 James and Sanborn 's unit is called to another mission in their last two days of their rotation . An innocent Iraqi civilian man has had a bomb vest strapped to his chest . James tries to cut off the locks to remove the vest , but there are too many to undo in the time available before the bomb will detonate . He has to abandon the man , who is killed when the bomb explodes . Sanborn is left distraught by the man 's death . He confesses to James that he can no longer cope with the pressure , and he wants to return home and have a son . 
 After Bravo Company 's rotation ends , James returns home to his ex @-@ wife , Connie ( Evangeline Lilly ) and their infant son who both still live with him in his house . However , he is bored and disconnected from routine civilian life , with its ordinary tasks of shopping at the supermarket and family dinners . One night , James confesses to his son that there is only one thing that he knows he loves . Shortly thereafter , he starts another tour of duty serving with Delta Company , U.S. Army EOD unit as they are starting their 365 @-@ day rotation . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jeremy Renner as Sergeant First Class William James 
 Anthony Mackie as Sergeant J. T. Sanborn 
 Brian Geraghty as Specialist Owen Eldridge 
 Guy Pearce as Staff Sergeant Matthew Thompson 
 Christian Camargo as Lieutenant Colonel John Cambridge 
 David Morse as Colonel Reed 
 Ralph Fiennes as the leader of a Private Military Company unit 
 Evangeline Lilly as Connie James 
 Christopher Sayegh as Beckham 
 Malcolm Barrett as Sergeant Foster 
 Sam <unk> as Contractor Charlie 
 = = Production = = 
 The small budget film was independently produced and directed by Kathryn Bigelow and the screenplay was written by Mark Boal , a freelance writer who was embedded as a journalist in 2004 with a U.S. Army EOD team in Iraq . It stars Jeremy Renner , Anthony Mackie , and Brian Geraghty . 
 The film premiered at the Venice Film Festival in Italy during 2008 . After being shown at the Toronto International Film Festival , it was picked up for distribution in the United States by Summit Entertainment . In May 2009 , it was the Closing Night selection for Maryland Film Festival . The film was released in the United States on June 26 , 2009 but received a more widespread theatrical release on July 24 , 2009 . 
 Since the film was not released in the United States until 2009 , it was eligible for the Academy Awards only the following year , where it was nominated for nine Academy Awards . Although the film had not recovered its budget by the time of the ceremony , it won six Oscars , including Best Picture , Best Director for Bigelow ( the first woman to win this award ) , and Best Original Screenplay for Boal . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The Hurt Locker is based on accounts of Mark Boal , a freelance journalist who was embedded with an American bomb squad in the war in Iraq for two weeks in 2004 . The director Kathryn Bigelow was familiar with Boal 's work before his experiences , having adapted one of his Playboy articles as the short @-@ lived television series The Inside in 2002 . When Boal was embedded with the squad , he accompanied its members 10 to 15 times a day to watch their tasks , and kept in touch with Bigelow via email about his experiences . Boal used his experiences as the basis of a fictional drama based on real events . He said of the film 's goal , " The idea is that it 's the first movie about the Iraq War that purports to show the experience of the soldiers . We wanted to show the kinds of things that soldiers go through that you can 't see on CNN , and I don 't mean that in a censorship @-@ conspiracy way . I just mean the news doesn 't actually put photographers in with units that are this elite . " Bigelow was fascinated with exploring " the psychology behind the type of soldier who volunteers for this particular conflict and then , because of his or her aptitude , is chosen and given the opportunity to go into bomb disarmament and goes toward what everybody else is running from . " 
 While working with Boal in 2005 on the script , originally titled The Something Jacket , Bigelow began to do some preliminary , rough storyboards to get an idea of the specific location needed . Bomb disarmament protocol requires a containment area . She wanted to make the film as authentic as possible and " put the audience into the Humvee , into a boots @-@ on @-@ the @-@ ground experience . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 For the main characters , Bigelow made a point of casting relatively unknown actors : " it underscored the tension because with the lack of familiarity also comes a sense of unpredictability . " Renner 's character , Sergeant First Class William James , is a composite character , with qualities based on individuals whom screenwriter Boal knew when embedded with the bomb squad . Bigelow cast Renner based on his work in Dahmer , a film about Jeffrey Dahmer , the notorious serial killer whose victims were boys . To prepare for the film , Renner spent a week living and training at Fort Irwin , a U.S. military reservation in the Mojave Desert in California . He was taught to use C4 explosives , learned how to render safe improvised explosive devices , and how to wear a bomb suit . 
 Mackie plays Sergeant J.T. Sanborn . Describing the experience of filming in Jordan in the summer , he said , " It was so desperately hot , and we were so easily agitated . But that movie was like doing a play . We really looked out for each other , and it was a great experience . It made me believe in film . " 
 Several hundred thousand refugees of Iraq live in Jordan . Bigelow cast refugees who had theatrical backgrounds , such as <unk> <unk> . He plays the innocent man used as a suicide bomber at the film 's end . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was shot in Jordan , within miles of the Iraqi border , to achieve Bigelow 's goal of authenticity . Iraqi refugees were used for extras and the cast worked in the unmistakable heat of the Middle East . The filmmakers had scouted for locations in Morocco , but director Kathryn Bigelow felt its cities did not resemble Baghdad . In addition , she wanted to get as close to the war zone as possible . Some of the locations were less than three miles from the Iraq border . She had wanted to shoot in Iraq , but the production security team could not guarantee their safety from snipers . 
 Principal photography began in July 2007 in Jordan and Kuwait . Temperatures averaged 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) over the 44 days of shooting . Often four or more camera crews filmed simultaneously , which resulted in nearly 200 hours of footage . The producer Greg Shapiro spoke about security concerns of filming in Jordan , " It was interesting telling people we were going to make the movie in Jordan because the first question everybody asked was about the security situation here . " 
 Her choice to film in the Kingdom met some resistance . In discussion , Bigelow found that her cast and crew shared stereotypes of the region from American culture . “ Sadly people in America and Los Angeles have these perceptions , ” she said . “ But once you get off the plane you realise it 's like Manhattan without the trees , ” she continued . As Iraq dominates discourse in America and across the world , Bigelow believes filmmakers will continue to explore the conflict , making Jordan the natural place to film . 
 According to producer Tony Mark , the blood , sweat and heat captured on @-@ camera in the production was mirrored behind the scenes . 
 " It 's a tough , tough movie about a tough , tough subject " , Mark said in an interview , " There was a palpable tension throughout on the set . It was just like the onscreen story of three guys who fight with each other , but when the time comes to do the work , they come together to get the job done . " 
 Renner remembered , " I got food bugs . Then I got food poisoning : lost 15 lbs in three days " . In addition to the burden of the heat , the bomb suit he had to wear all day weighed 80 – 100 lb ( 36 – 45 kg ) . In a scene in which his character carries a dead Iraqi boy , Renner fell down some stairs and twisted his ankle , which delayed filming because he could not walk . At that point , " people wanted to quit . All the departments were struggling to get their job done , none of them were communicating " . A week later , filming resumed . 
 The producer Tony Mark recalled the armorer David <unk> 's finishing a 12 @-@ hour day . He found he had to stay up all night to make proper ammunition for a sniper rifle , as the supplies did not clear Jordanian customs in time for the scheduled shoot . Due to import restrictions on military props , the film 's special effects artist Richard <unk> used Chinese fireworks for gunpowder . One day , he was assembling a prop , and the heat and friction caused the fireworks to blow up in his face . Two days later , he returned to work . The film shoot had few of the normal Hollywood perks ; nobody on the set got an air @-@ conditioned trailer or a private bathroom . Renner said that great care was taken to ensure the film 's authenticity . According to Renner , shooting the film in the Middle East contributed to this . " There were two @-@ by @-@ fours with nails being dropped from two @-@ story buildings that hit me in the helmet , and they were throwing rocks .... We got shot at a few times while we were filming " , Renner said . " When you see it , you 're gonna feel like you 've been in war . " 
 " You can 't fake that amount of heat " , Mackie says , adding , " When you are on set and all of the extras are Iraqi refugees , it really informs the movie that you 're making . When you start hearing the stories from a true perspective ... of people who were actually there , it gives you a clear viewpoint of where you are as an artist and the story you would like to tell . It was a great experience to be there . " 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 For the film , Bigelow sought to immerse audiences " into something that was raw , immediate and visceral " . Impressed with cinematographer Barry Ackroyd 's work on United 93 and The Wind That Shakes the Barley , Bigelow invited him to work on her film . While the film was independently produced and filmed on a low budget , Bigelow used four Super 16 mm cameras to capture multiple perspectives , saying , 
 " That 's how we experience reality , by looking at the microcosm and the macrocosm simultaneously . The eye sees differently than the lens , but with multiple focal lengths and a muscular editorial style , the lens can give you that microcosm / macrocosm perspective , and that contributes to the feeling of total immersion . " 
 In staging the film 's action sequences , Bigelow did not want to lose a sense of the geography and used multiple cameras to allow her to " look at any particular set piece from every possible perspective . " 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 The Hurt Locker was edited by Chris Innis and Bob Murawski . The two editors worked with almost 200 hours of footage from the multiple hand @-@ held cameras in use during the shoot . Adding to the challenge , Boal 's screenplay had a non @-@ traditional , asymmetrical , episodic structure . There was no traditional " villain " , and tension was derived from the characters ' internal conflicts and the suspense from the explosives and snipers . 
 " This movie is kind of like a horror film where you 're unable to see the killer , " says Innis . " You know a bomb could go off at any minute , but you never know just when it 's going to happen , so the ideas of [ Alfred ] Hitchcock — about making your audience anxious — were influential for us when we did the editing . " 
 The raw footage was described as a " hodge @-@ podge of disconnected , nausea @-@ inducing motion that was constantly crossing the 180 @-@ degree line " . 
 Innis spent the first eight weeks editing the film on location in Jordan , before returning to Los Angeles , where she was joined by Murawski . The process took over eight months to complete . The goal was to edit a brutally realistic portrayal of the realities of war , using minimal special effects or technical enhancement . Innis stated that they " really wanted the film to retain that ' newsreel ' documentary quality ... Too many stage @-@ y effects would have been distracting . The editing in this film was all about restraint " . 
 Editing on location led to additional complications in post @-@ production . The production was unwilling to risk sending undeveloped film through high @-@ security airports where the cans could be opened , X @-@ rayed , or damaged . Accordingly , film was hand @-@ carried on a flight by a production assistant from Amman to London . After the Super 16mm film was transferred to <unk> at a lab in London , the video dailies were transported by plane back to the Middle East to be imported into the editing system . The whole journey would take anywhere from three days to a week and was described by Innis as the " modern @-@ day equivalent of shipping via donkey cart " . The low production budget and the lack of a developed film infrastructure in the area hampered the process , according to Innis . " We were working with grainy Super 16mm film , editing in standard definition . We tried doing FTP downloads , but at the time the facilities in Jordan simply couldn 't handle it . " The producer Tony Mark later negotiated the use of a local radio station late at night to receive low @-@ grade QuickTime clips over the Internet so the crew would not be shooting blindly . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Hurt Locker was met with nearly universal acclaim , with Renner 's performance receiving praise from critics . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 98 % , based on 254 reviews , with a weighted mean rating of 8 @.@ 5 / 10 . It was the second highest @-@ rated film of 2009 , behind Pixar 's Up . The critics ' consensus reads , " A well @-@ acted , intensely shot , action filled war epic , Kathryn Bigelow 's The Hurt Locker is thus far the best of the recent dramatizations of the Iraq War . " Metacritic , which assigns a normalized score , gave the film an average score of 94 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Roger Ebert of The Chicago Sun Times rated the film as the best film of 2009 , writing , " The Hurt Locker is a great film , an intelligent film , a film shot clearly so that we know exactly who everybody is and where they are and what they 're doing and why . " He applauded how the suspense was built , calling the film " spellbinding . " Ebert considered Renner " a leading contender for Academy Awards , " writing , " His performance is not built on complex speeches but on a visceral projection of who this man is and what he feels . He is not a hero in a conventional sense . " He eventually ranked it the second @-@ best film of the decade , behind only Synecdoche , New York . 
 Richard Corliss of Time magazine also spoke highly of Renner 's performance , calling it a highlight of the film . Corliss wrote , 
 " He 's ordinary , pudgy @-@ faced , quiet , and at first seems to lack the screen charisma to carry a film . That supposition vanishes in a few minutes , as Renner slowly reveals the strength , confidence and unpredictability of a young Russell Crowe . The merging of actor and character is one of the big things to love about this movie ... It 's a creepy marvel to watch James in action . He has the cool aplomb , analytical acumen and attention to detail of a great athlete , or a master psychopath , maybe both . " 
 Corliss praised the film 's " steely calm " tone , reflective of its main character . Corliss summarized , " The Hurt Locker is a near @-@ perfect movie about men in war , men at work . Through sturdy imagery and violent action , it says that even Hell needs heroes . " 
 A. O. Scott of The New York Times called The Hurt Locker the best American feature film yet made about the war in Iraq : 
 " You may emerge from The Hurt Locker shaken , exhilarated and drained , but you will also be thinking ... The movie is a viscerally exciting , adrenaline @-@ soaked tour de force of suspense and surprise , full of explosions and hectic scenes of combat , but it blows a hole in the condescending assumption that such effects are just empty spectacle or mindless noise . " 
 Scott noticed that the film reserved criticism of the war but wrote of how the director handled the film 's limits , " Ms. Bigelow , practicing a kind of hyperbolic realism , distills the psychological essence and moral complications of modern warfare into a series of brilliant , agonizing set pieces . " He also applauded the convergence of the characters in the film , saying that it " focuses on three men whose contrasting temperaments knit this episodic exploration of peril and bravery into a coherent and satisfying story . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the performances of Renner , Mackie , and Geraghty would raise their profiles considerably , and said their characters reveal their " <unk> @-@ for aspects " , such as Renner 's character being playful with an Iraqi boy . Turan applauded Boal 's " lean and compelling " script and said of Bigelow 's direction , " Bigelow and her team bring an awesome ferocity to re @-@ creating the unhinged mania of bomb removal in an alien , culturally unfathomable atmosphere . " 
 Guy Westwell of Sight & Sound wrote that the cinematographer Barry Ackroyd provided " sharp handheld coverage " and that Paul N.J. <unk> 's sound design " uses the barely perceptible ringing of tinnitus to amp up the tension . " Westwell praised the director 's skill : 
 " The careful mapping of the subtle differences between each bomb , the play with point of view ... and the attenuation of key action sequences ... lends the film a distinctive quality that can only be attributed to Bigelow 's clever , confident direction . " 
 The critic noted the film 's different take on the Iraq War , writing that " it confronts the fact that men often take great pleasure in war . " He concluded , 
 " This unapologetic celebration of a testosterone @-@ fuelled lust for war may gall . Yet there is something original and distinctive about the film 's willingness to admit that for some men ( and many moviegoers ) war carries an intrinsic dramatic charge . " 
 Amy Taubin of Film Comment described The Hurt Locker as " a structuralist war movie " and " a totally immersive , off @-@ the @-@ charts high @-@ anxiety experience from beginning to end . " Taubin praised Ackroyd 's " brilliant " cinematography with multiple viewpoints . She said of the film 's editing , " Bob Murawski and Chris Innis 's editing is similarly quick and nervous ; the rapid changes in POV as they cut from one camera 's coverage to another 's makes you feel as if you , like the characters , are under threat from all sides . " 
 Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal called it " A first @-@ rate action thriller , a vivid evocation of urban warfare in Iraq , a penetrating study of heroism and a showcase for austere technique , terse writing and a trio of brilliant performances . " The Toronto Star critic Peter Howell said , " Just when you think the battle of Iraq war dramas has been fought and lost , along comes one that demands to be seen ... If you can sit through The Hurt Locker without your heart nearly pounding through your chest , you must be made of granite . " Entertainment Weekly 's film critic Lisa Schwarzbaum gave the film the rare " A " rating , calling it , " an intense , action @-@ driven war pic , a muscular , efficient standout that simultaneously conveys the feeling of combat from within as well as what it looks like on the ground . This ain 't no war videogame . " 
 Derek Elley of Variety found The Hurt Locker to be " gripping " as a thriller but felt that the film was weakened by , " its fuzzy ( and hardly original ) psychology . " Elley wrote that it was unclear to know where the drama lay : " These guys get by on old @-@ fashioned guts and instinct rather than sissy hardware — but it 's not a pure men @-@ under @-@ stress drama either . " The critic also felt that the script showed " signs of artificially straining for character depth . " Anne Thompson , also writing for Variety , believed The Hurt Locker to be a contender for Best Picture , particularly based on the unique subject matter pursued by a female director and on being an exception to other films about the Iraq War , which had performed poorly . 
 Tara McKelvey from The American Prospect wrote that the film is pro @-@ U.S. Army propaganda , although it suggests it is anti @-@ war with the opening statement : " War is a drug . " She continues , 
 " You feel empathy for the soldiers when they shoot . And in this way , the full impact of the Iraq war — at least as it was fought in 2004 — becomes clear : American soldiers shot at Iraqi civilians even when , for example , they just happened to be holding a cell phone and standing near an IED . " She concludes , " For all the graphic violence , bloody explosions and , literally , human butchery that is shown in the film , The Hurt Locker is one of the most effective recruiting vehicles for the U.S. Army that I have seen . " 
 John Pilger , journalist and documentarian , criticized the film in the New Statesman , writing that it " offers a vicarious thrill via yet another standard @-@ issue psychopath high on violence in somebody else 's country where the deaths of a million people are consigned to cinematic oblivion . " 
 = = = Response among veterans = = = 
 The film was criticized by some Iraq veterans and embedded reporters for inaccurately portraying wartime conditions . Writing for The Huffington Post , Iraq veteran Kate <unk> said that The Hurt Locker is " Hollywood 's version of the Iraq war and of the soldiers who fight it , and their version is inaccurate . " She described the film as being more accurate than other recently released war films , but expressed concerns that a number of errors — among them wrong uniforms , lack of radio communication or misbehavior of the soldiers — would prevent service members from enjoying the film . 
 Author Brandon Friedman , also a combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan , shared a similar view at <unk> : " The Hurt Locker is a high @-@ tension , well @-@ made , action movie that will certainly keep most viewers on the edges of their seats . But if you know anything about the Army , or about operations or life in Iraq , you 'll be so distracted by the nonsensical sequences and plot twists that it will ruin the movie for you . It certainly did for me . " Friedman criticized the inaccuracy of the film 's representation of combat , saying " in real life , EOD techs don 't conduct dangerous missions as autonomous three @-@ man teams without communications gear ... Another thing you 'll rarely hear in combat is an EOD E @-@ 7 suggesting to two or three of his guys that they leave the scene of an explosion in an Iraqi city by saying : ' C 'mon , let 's split up . We can cover more ground that way . ' " 
 At the blog Army of Dude , infantryman and Iraq veteran Alex Horton noted that " the way the team goes about their missions is completely absurd . " He still generally enjoyed it and called it " the best Iraq movie to date . " 
 Troy Steward , another combat veteran , wrote on the blog <unk> that while the film accurately depicted the scale of bomb violence and the relations between Iraqis and troops , " just about everything else wasn 't realistic . " Steward went on to say : " I was amazed that a movie so bad could get any kind of accolades from anyone . " 
 A review published March 8 , 2010 in the Air Force Times cited overall negative reviews from bomb experts in Iraq attached to the 4th Brigade , 1st Armored Division , quoting a bomb disposal team leader who called the film 's portrayal of a bomb expert " grossly exaggerated and not appropriate , " and describing the lead character as " more of a run and gun cowboy type … exactly the kind of person that we 're not looking for . " Another bomb disposal team member said that the lead character 's " swagger would put a whole team at risk . Our team leaders don 't have that kind of invincibility complex , and if they do , they aren 't allowed to operate . A team leader 's first priority is getting his team home in one piece . " 
 On the embedded side , former correspondent for The Politico and Military Times Christian Lowe ( who embedded with U.S. military units each year from 2002 to 2005 ) explained at <unk> : " Some of the scenes are so disconnected with reality to be almost parody . " 
 On the other hand , Henry Engelhardt , an adjutant with the National Explosive Ordnance Disposal Association having 20 years ' experience in bomb <unk> , complimented the film 's atmosphere and depiction of the difficulties of the job , saying , " Of course , no film is realistic in all its details , but the important things were done very well . " Screenwriter Mark Boal noted that The Hurt Locker was produced independently , without US Army extras . 
 Former British bomb disposal officer Guy Marot said , “ James makes us look like hot @-@ headed , irrational adrenaline junkies with no self @-@ discipline . It ’ s immensely disrespectful to the many officers who have lost their lives . ” 
 = = Lawsuits = = 
 = = = Sarver lawsuit = = = 
 In early March 2010 , U.S. Army bomb disposal expert Master Sergeant Jeffrey Sarver filed a multimillion @-@ dollar lawsuit against The Hurt Locker . Sarver 's lawsuit claimed he used the term " hurt locker " and the phrase " war is a drug " around Boal , that his likeness was used to create the character William James , and that the portrayal of William James defames Sarver . Sarver said he felt " just a little bit hurt , a little bit felt left out " and cheated out of " financial participation " in the film . Sarver claimed he originated the title of the film ; however , the title is a decades @-@ old colloquialism for being injured , as in " they sent him to the hurt locker . " It dates back to the Vietnam War where it was one of several phrases meaning " in trouble or at a disadvantage ; in bad shape . " Boal defended himself to the press , saying " the film is a work of fiction inspired by many people 's stories . " He said he talked to more than 100 soldiers during his research . Jody Simon , a Los Angeles @-@ based entertainment lawyer , noted that " soldiers don 't have privacy " , and that when the military embedded Boal they gave him full permission to use his observations as he saw fit . Summit Entertainment , the producers of the film , said in early March that they hoped for a quick resolution to the suit . In the December 8 , 2011 , issue of The Hollywood Reporter , it was announced that Master Sergeant Sarver 's lawsuit was thrown out by the court , and a federal judge ordered him to pay more than $ 180 @,@ 000 in attorney fees . 
 = = = Copyright infringement lawsuit = = = 
 On May 12 , 2010 , Voltage Pictures , the production company behind The Hurt Locker , announced that it would attempt to sue " potentially tens of thousands " of online computer users who downloaded unlicensed copies of the film using the BitTorrent and P2P networks . It would be the largest lawsuit of its kind . On May 28 , 2010 , it filed a complaint against 5 @,@ 000 unidentified BitTorrent users in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ; Voltage announced its intention to demand $ 1 @,@ 500 from each defendant to release him or her from the suit . Several people , however , have refused to settle with the studio . The U.S. Copyright Group ( USCG ) has since dropped all cases against the alleged Hurt Locker downloaders . 
 On August 29 , 2011 , the Federal Court of Canada ordered the three Canadian ISPs — Bell Canada , Cogeco , and <unk> — to disclose the names and addresses of the subscribers whose IP addresses were suspected to have downloaded a copy of the film . The ISPs were given two weeks to comply with the order . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Festival screenings = = = 
 The Hurt Locker had its world premiere at the Venice International Film Festival on September 4 , 2008 , and the film received a 10 @-@ minute standing ovation at the end of its screening . At the festival , the film won the <unk> award , the Arca <unk> Award ( Arca Young Cinema Award ) for " Best Film Venezia 65 " ( chosen by an international youth jury ) ; the Human Rights Film Network Award ; and the Venezia Cinema Award known as the " <unk> " . The film also screened at the 33rd Annual Toronto International Film Festival on September 8 , where it generated " keen interest " , though distributors were reluctant to buy it since previous films about the Iraq War performed poorly at the box office . Summit Entertainment purchased the film for distribution in the United States in what was perceived as " a skittish climate for pic sales " . 
 In the rest of 2008 , The Hurt Locker screened at the 3rd Zurich Film Festival , the 37th Festival du Nouveau Cinéma , the 21st Mar del Plata Film Festival , the 5th Dubai International Film Festival , and the 12th Tallinn Black Nights Film Festival . In 2009 , The Hurt Locker screened at the Göteborg International Film Festival , the 10th Film Comment Selects festival , and the South by Southwest film festival . It was the closing night film at Maryland Film Festival 2009 , with Bigelow presenting . It had a centerpiece screening at the 3rd AFI Dallas International Film Festival , where director Kathryn Bigelow received the Dallas Star Award . Other 2009 festivals included the Human Rights Nights International Film Festival , the Seattle International Film Festival , and the Philadelphia Film Festival . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 The Hurt Locker was first publicly released in Italy by Warner Bros. on October 10 , 2008 . Summit Entertainment picked the film up for distribution in the United States after it was shown at the Toronto International Film Festival for $ 1 @.@ 5 million . The Hurt Locker was released in the United States on June 26 , 2009 , with a limited release at four theaters in Los Angeles and New York City . Over its first weekend the film grossed $ 145 @,@ 352 , averaging $ 36 @,@ 338 per theater . The following weekend , beginning July 3 , the film grossed $ 131 @,@ 202 at nine theaters , averaging $ 14 @,@ 578 per theater . It held the highest per @-@ screen average of any film playing theatrically in the United States for the first two weeks of its release , gradually moving into the top 20 chart with much wider @-@ released , bigger budget studio films . It held around number 13 or number 14 on box office charts for an additional four weeks . Summit Entertainment took The Hurt Locker wider to more than 200 screens on July 24 , 2009 and more than 500 screens on July 31 , 2009 . 
 The film 's final gross was $ 17 @,@ 017 @,@ 811 in the United States and Canada , and $ 32 @,@ 212 @,@ 961 in other countries , bringing its worldwide total to $ 49 @,@ 230 @,@ 772 ( less than any other Best Picture winner ) . It was a success against its budget of $ 15 million . 
 According to the Los Angeles Times , The Hurt Locker performed better than most recent dramas about Middle East conflict . The film outperformed all other Iraq @-@ war @-@ themed films such as In the Valley of Elah ( 2007 ) , Stop @-@ Loss ( 2008 ) and Afghanistan @-@ themed Lions for Lambs ( 2007 ) . 
 In the United States , The Hurt Locker is one of only four Best Picture winners ( The English Patient , Amadeus , and The Artist being the other three ) to never enter the weekend box office top 5 since top 10 rankings were first recorded in 1982 . It is also one of the only two Best Picture winners on record never to have entered the weekend box office top 10 ( The Artist being the other ) . 
 The Hurt Locker opened in the top ten in the United Kingdom in 103 theaters , scoring the fourth @-@ highest per @-@ screen average of $ 3 @,@ 607 , ranking between G @-@ Force and G.I. Joe in overall grosses . The film garnered half a million dollars in its opening weekend in the United Kingdom of August 28 through August 30 , 2009 , and grossed over a million dollars in the UK , Japan , Spain , and France through March . 
 = = = Distribution : Independent film print shortage = = = 
 According to an article in the Springfield , Illinois State Journal @-@ Register , as of August 2009 there was a shortage of film prints of The Hurt Locker , as well as other hit independent films such as Food , Inc . Distributors told theater owners that they would have to wait weeks or months past the initial U.S. release date to get the few available prints that were already in distribution . " Sometimes the distributors goof up , " said a film buyer for one theater . " They misjudge how wide they should go . " One theory is that the independent films have a hard time competing for screen space during the summer against blockbuster tent @-@ pole films that take up as much as half the screens in any given city , flooding the United States market with thousands of prints . Theater owners have also complained about distributors " bunching too many movies too close together " . It is also thought that independent film distributors are trying to cut their losses on prints by recycling them . Given the popularity of some of the films that are " hard to come by " , this strategy may be leaving box office money on the table . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Hurt Locker was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in North America on January 12 , 2010 . This disc includes an added audio commentary featuring director Kathryn Bigelow , writer Mark Boal , and other members of the production crew ; an image gallery of photos from shooting ; and a 15 @-@ minute EPK featurette highlighting the filming experience in Jordan and the film 's production . The UK DVD and Blu @-@ ray has no commentary . 
 U.S. sales of the DVD topped $ 30 million by mid @-@ August 2010 . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 Starting with its initial screening at the 2008 Venice International Film Festival , The Hurt Locker has earned many awards and honors . It also ranked on more film critics ' top 10 lists than any other film of 2009 . It was nominated in nine categories at the 82nd Academy Awards and won in six : Best Picture , Best Director , Best Original Screenplay , Best Sound Editing , Best Sound Mixing , and Best Film Editing . It lost the award for Best Actor to Crazy Heart , Best Original Score to Up , and Best Cinematography to Avatar . Bigelow became the first woman to win an Oscar for Best Director , and The Hurt Locker is to date , the lowest @-@ grossing film to win Best Picture . 
 Kathryn Bigelow was awarded the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Feature Film for the film , the first time a female director has ever won . The film won six awards at the BAFTAs held on February 21 , 2010 , including Best Film and Best Director for Bigelow . The Hurt Locker was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards . 
 The Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best Director was given to Kathryn Bigelow , the first time the honor has gone to a woman . The film swept most critics groups awards for Best Director and Best Picture , including Chicago , Boston , and Las Vegas , Los Angeles , New York ' film critics group associations . The Hurt Locker is one of only five films that have won all three major U.S. critics group prizes ( LA , NY , <unk> ) , together with Goodfellas , Schindler 's List , L.A. Confidential , and The Social Network . 
 The five awards from the Boston Society of Film Critics were the most by that organization to a single film in the group 's 30 @-@ year history . 
 In February 2010 , the film 's producer Nicolas Chartier emailed a group of Academy Award voters in an attempt to sway them to vote for The Hurt Locker instead of " a $ 500M film " ( referring to Avatar ) for the Best Picture award . He later issued a public apology , saying that it was " out of line and not in the spirit of the celebration of cinema that this acknowledgment is " . The Academy banned him from attending the award ceremony , the first time the Academy has ever banned an individual nominee . 
 = Henry II of England = 
 Henry II ( 5 March 1133 – 6 July 1189 ) , also known as Henry <unk> ( French : Court @-@ <unk> ) , Henry FitzEmpress or Henry Plantagenet , ruled as Count of Anjou , Count of Maine , Duke of Normandy , Duke of Aquitaine , Count of Nantes , King of England ( 1154 – 89 ) and Lord of Ireland ; at various times , he also controlled Wales , Scotland and Brittany . Henry was the son of Geoffrey of Anjou and Matilda , daughter of Henry I of England . He became actively involved by the age of 14 in his mother 's efforts to claim the throne of England , then occupied by Stephen of Blois , and was made Duke of Normandy at 17 . He inherited Anjou in 1151 and shortly afterwards married Eleanor of Aquitaine , whose marriage to Louis VII of France had recently been annulled . Stephen agreed to a peace treaty after Henry 's military expedition to England in 1153 : Henry inherited the kingdom on Stephen 's death a year later . 
 Henry was an energetic and sometimes ruthless ruler , driven by a desire to restore the lands and privileges of his royal grandfather , Henry I. During the early years of the younger Henry 's reign he restored the royal administration in England , re @-@ established hegemony over Wales and gained full control over his lands in Anjou , Maine and Touraine . Henry 's desire to reform the relationship with the Church led to conflict with his former friend Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury . This controversy lasted for much of the 1160s and resulted in Becket 's murder in 1170 . Henry soon came into conflict with Louis VII and the two rulers fought what has been termed a " cold war " over several decades . Henry expanded his empire , often at Louis ' expense , taking Brittany and pushing east into central France and south into Toulouse ; despite numerous peace conferences and treaties , no lasting agreement was reached . By 1172 , he controlled England , large parts of Wales , the eastern half of Ireland and the western half of France , an area that would later come to be called the Angevin Empire . 
 Henry and Eleanor had eight children . As they grew up , tensions over the future inheritance of the empire began to emerge , encouraged by Louis and his son King Philip II . In 1173 Henry 's heir apparent , " Young Henry " , rebelled in protest ; he was joined by his brothers Richard and Geoffrey and by their mother , Eleanor . France , Scotland , Flanders and Boulogne allied themselves with the rebels . The Great Revolt was only defeated by his vigorous military action and talented local commanders , many of them " new men " appointed for their loyalty and administrative skills . Young Henry and Geoffrey revolted again in 1183 , resulting in Young Henry 's death . The Norman invasion of Ireland provided lands for his youngest son John , but Henry struggled to find ways to satisfy all his sons ' desires for land and immediate power . Philip successfully played on Richard 's fears that Henry would make John king , and a final rebellion broke out in 1189 . <unk> defeated by Philip and Richard and suffering from a bleeding ulcer , Henry retreated to Chinon in Anjou , where he died . 
 Henry 's empire quickly collapsed during the reign of his youngest son John . Many of the changes Henry introduced during his long rule , however , had long @-@ term consequences . Henry 's legal changes are generally considered to have laid the basis for the English Common Law , while his intervention in Brittany , Wales and Scotland shaped the development of their societies and governmental systems . Historical interpretations of Henry 's reign have changed considerably over time . In the 18th century , scholars argued that Henry was a driving force in the creation of a genuinely English monarchy and , ultimately , a unified Britain . During the Victorian expansion of the British Empire , historians were keenly interested in the formation of Henry 's own empire , but they also expressed concern over his private life and treatment of Becket . Late @-@ 20th @-@ century historians have combined British and French historical accounts of Henry , challenging earlier Anglo @-@ centric interpretations of his reign . 
 = = Early years ( 1133 – 49 ) = = 
 Henry was born in France at Le Mans on 5 March 1133 as the eldest child of Geoffrey the Fair , Count of Anjou , and the Empress Matilda , so titled because of her first marriage to Henry V , the Holy Roman Emperor . The French county of Anjou was formed in the 10th century and the Angevin rulers attempted for several centuries to extend their influence and power across France through careful marriages and political alliances . In theory , the county answered to the French king , but royal power over Anjou weakened during the 11th century and the county became largely autonomous . 
 Henry 's mother was the eldest daughter of Henry I , King of England and Duke of Normandy . She was born into a powerful ruling class of Normans , who traditionally owned extensive estates in both England and Normandy . Matilda was married at a young age to Henry V ; after his death she was remarried to Geoffrey . Following Henry I 's death in 1135 , Matilda hoped to claim the English throne , but instead her cousin Stephen of Blois was crowned king and recognised as the Duke of Normandy , resulting in civil war between their rival supporters . Geoffrey took advantage of the confusion to attack the Duchy of Normandy but played no direct role in the English conflict , leaving this to Matilda and her half @-@ brother , Robert of Gloucester . The war , termed the Anarchy by Victorian historians , dragged on and degenerated into stalemate . 
 Henry probably spent some of his earliest years in his mother 's household , and accompanied Matilda to Normandy in the late 1130s . Henry 's later childhood , probably from the age of seven , was spent in Anjou , where he was educated by Peter of Saintes , a noted grammarian of the day . In late 1142 , Geoffrey decided to send the nine @-@ year @-@ old to Bristol , the centre of Angevin opposition to Stephen in the south @-@ west of England , accompanied by Robert of Gloucester . Although having children educated in relatives ' households was common among noblemen of the period , sending Henry to England also had political benefits , as Geoffrey was coming under criticism for refusing to join the war in England . For about a year , Henry lived alongside Roger of Worcester , one of Robert 's sons , and was instructed by a magister , Master Matthew ; Robert 's household was known for its education and learning . The canons of St Augustine 's in Bristol also helped in Henry 's education , and he remembered them with affection in later years . Henry returned to Anjou in either 1143 or 1144 , resuming his education under William of <unk> , another famous academic . 
 Henry returned to England in 1147 , when he was fourteen . Taking his immediate household and a small number of mercenaries , he left Normandy and landed in England , striking into Wiltshire . Despite initially causing considerable panic , the expedition had little success , and Henry found himself unable to pay his forces and therefore unable to return to Normandy . Neither his mother nor his uncle were prepared to support him , implying that they had not approved of the expedition in the first place . Surprisingly , Henry instead turned to King Stephen , who paid the outstanding wages and thereby allowed Henry to retire gracefully . Stephen 's reasons for doing so are unclear . One potential explanation is his general courtesy to a member of his extended family ; another is that he was starting to consider how to end the war peacefully , and saw this as a way of building a relationship with Henry . Henry intervened once again in 1149 , commencing what is often termed the Henrician phase of the civil war . This time , Henry planned to form a northern alliance with King David I of Scotland , Henry 's great @-@ uncle , and Ranulf of Chester , a powerful regional leader who controlled most of the north @-@ west of England . Under this alliance , Henry and Ranulf agreed to attack York , probably with help from the Scots . The planned attack disintegrated after Stephen marched rapidly north to York , and Henry returned to Normandy . 
 = = Appearance and personality = = 
 Henry was said by chroniclers to be good @-@ looking , red @-@ haired , freckled , with a large head ; he had a short , stocky body and was bow @-@ legged from riding . Often he was <unk> dressed . Not as reserved as his mother Matilda , nor as charming as his father Geoffrey , Henry was famous for his energy and drive . He was also infamous for his piercing stare , bullying , bursts of temper and , on occasion , his sullen refusal to speak at all . Some of these outbursts , however , may have been theatrical and for effect . Henry was said to have understood a wide range of languages , including English , but spoke only Latin and French . In his youth Henry enjoyed warfare , hunting and other adventurous pursuits ; as the years went by he put increasing energy into judicial and administrative affairs and became more cautious , but throughout his life he was energetic and frequently impulsive . 
 Henry had a passionate desire to rebuild his control of the territories that his grandfather , Henry I , had once governed . He may well have been influenced by his mother in this regard , as Matilda also had a strong sense of ancestral rights and privileges . Henry took back territories , regained estates , and re @-@ established influence over the smaller lords that had once provided what historian John Gillingham describes as a " protective ring " around his core territories . He was probably the first king of England to use a heraldic design : a signet ring with either a leopard or a lion engraved on it . The design would be altered in later generations to form the royal seal of England . 
 = = Early reign ( 1150 – 62 ) = = 
 = = = Succession in Normandy and Anjou = = = 
 By the late 1140s the active phase of the civil war was over , barring the occasional outbreak of fighting . Many of the barons were making individual peace agreements with each other to secure their war gains and it increasingly appeared as though the English Church was considering promoting a peace treaty . On Louis VII 's return from the Second Crusade in 1149 , he became concerned about the growth of Geoffrey 's power and the potential threat to his own possessions , especially if Henry could acquire the English crown . In 1150 , Geoffrey made Henry the Duke of Normandy and Louis responded by putting forward King Stephen 's son Eustace as the rightful heir to the duchy and launching a military campaign to remove Henry from the province . Henry 's father advised him to come to terms with Louis and peace was made between them in August 1151 after mediation by Bernard of Clairvaux . Under the settlement Henry did homage to Louis for Normandy , accepting Louis as his feudal lord , and gave him the disputed lands of the Norman Vexin ; in return , Louis recognised him as duke . 
 Geoffrey died in September 1151 , and Henry postponed his plans to return to England , as he first needed to ensure that his succession , particularly in Anjou , was secure . At around this time Henry was also probably secretly planning his marriage to Eleanor of Aquitaine , then still the wife of Louis . Eleanor was the Duchess of Aquitaine , a land in the south of France , and was considered beautiful , lively and controversial , but had not borne Louis any sons . Louis had the marriage annulled and Henry married Eleanor eight weeks later on 18 May . The marriage instantly reignited Henry 's tensions with Louis : the marriage was considered an insult , it ran counter to feudal practice and it threatened the inheritance of Louis and Eleanor 's two daughters , who might otherwise have had claims to Aquitaine on Eleanor 's death . With his new lands , Henry now possessed a much larger proportion of France than Louis . Louis organised a coalition against Henry , including Stephen , Eustace , Henry the Count of Champagne , and Robert the Count of Perche . Louis 's alliance was joined by Henry 's younger brother , Geoffrey , who rose in revolt , claiming that Henry had dispossessed him of his inheritance . Geoffrey of Anjou 's plans for the inheritance of his lands had been ambiguous , making the veracity of his son Geoffrey 's claims hard to assess . Contemporaneous accounts suggest he left the main castles in Poitou to Geoffrey , implying that he may have intended Henry to retain Normandy and Anjou and not Poitou . 
 Fighting immediately broke out again along the Normandy borders , where Henry of Champagne and Robert captured the town of Neufmarché @-@ sur @-@ Epte . Louis 's forces moved to attack Aquitaine . Stephen responded by placing Wallingford Castle , a key fortress loyal to Henry along the Thames Valley , under siege , possibly in an attempt to force a successful end to the English conflict while Henry was still fighting for his territories in France . Henry moved quickly in response , avoiding open battle with Louis in Aquitaine and stabilising the Norman border , pillaging the Vexin and then striking south into Anjou against Geoffrey , capturing one of his main castles . Louis fell ill and withdrew from the campaign , and Geoffrey was forced to come to terms with Henry . 
 = = = Taking the English throne = = = 
 In response to Stephen 's siege , Henry returned to England again at the start of 1153 , braving winter storms . Bringing only a small army of mercenaries , probably paid for with borrowed money , Henry was supported in the north and east of England by the forces of Ranulf of Chester and Hugh Bigod , and had hopes of a military victory . A delegation of senior English clergy met with Henry and his advisers at Stockbridge shortly before Easter in April . Details of their discussions are unclear , but it appears that the churchmen emphasised that while they supported Stephen as king , they sought a negotiated peace ; Henry reaffirmed that he would avoid the English cathedrals and would not expect the bishops to attend his court . 
 In an attempt to draw Stephen 's forces away from Wallingford , Henry besieged Stephen 's castle at Malmesbury , and the King responded by marching west with an army to relieve it . Henry successfully evaded Stephen 's larger army along the River Avon , preventing Stephen from forcing a decisive battle . In the face of the increasingly wintry weather , the two men agreed to a temporary truce , leaving Henry to travel north through the Midlands , where the powerful Robert de Beaumont , Earl of Leicester , announced his support for the cause . Henry was then free to turn his forces south against the besiegers at Wallingford . Despite only modest military successes , he and his allies now controlled the south @-@ west , the Midlands and much of the north of England . Meanwhile , Henry was attempting to act the part of a legitimate king , witnessing marriages and settlements and holding court in a regal fashion . 
 Over the next summer , Stephen massed troops to renew the siege of Wallingford Castle in a final attempt to take the stronghold . The fall of Wallingford appeared imminent and Henry marched south to relieve the siege , arriving with a small army and placing Stephen 's besieging forces under siege themselves . Upon news of this , Stephen returned with a large army , and the two sides confronted each other across the River Thames at Wallingford in July . By this point in the war , the barons on both sides were eager to avoid an open battle , so members of the clergy brokered a truce , to the annoyance of both Henry and Stephen . Henry and Stephen took the opportunity to speak together privately about a potential end to the war ; conveniently for Henry , Stephen 's son Eustace fell ill and died shortly afterwards . This removed the most obvious other claimant to the throne , as while Stephen had another son , William , he was only a second son and appeared unenthusiastic about making a plausible claim on the throne . Fighting continued after Wallingford , but in a rather half @-@ hearted fashion , while the English Church attempted to broker a permanent peace between the two sides . 
 In November the two leaders ratified the terms of a permanent peace . Stephen announced the Treaty of Winchester in Winchester Cathedral : he recognised Henry as his adopted son and successor , in return for Henry doing homage to him ; Stephen promised to listen to Henry 's advice , but retained all his royal powers ; Stephen 's remaining son , William , would do homage to Henry and renounce his claim to the throne , in exchange for promises of the security of his lands ; key royal castles would be held on Henry 's behalf by guarantors whilst Stephen would have access to Henry 's castles ; and the numerous foreign mercenaries would be demobilised and sent home . Henry and Stephen sealed the treaty with a kiss of peace in the cathedral . The peace remained precarious , however , and Stephen 's second son William remained a possible future rival to Henry . Rumours of a plot to kill Henry were circulating and , possibly as a consequence , Henry decided to return to Normandy for a period . Stephen , however , fell ill with a stomach disorder and died on 25 October 1154 , allowing Henry to inherit the throne rather sooner than had been expected . 
 = = = Reconstruction of royal government = = = 
 On landing in England on 8 December 1154 , Henry quickly took oaths of loyalty from some of the barons and was then crowned alongside Eleanor at Westminster on 19 December . The royal court was gathered in April 1155 , where the barons swore fealty to the King and his sons . Several potential rivals still existed , including Stephen 's son William and Henry 's brothers Geoffrey and William , but — fortunately for Henry — they all died in the next few years , leaving Henry 's position remarkably secure . Nonetheless , Henry inherited a difficult situation in England , as the kingdom had suffered extensively during the civil war . In many parts of the country the fighting had caused serious devastation , although some other areas remained largely unaffected . Numerous " adulterine " , or unauthorised , castles had been built as bases for local lords . The royal forest law had collapsed in large parts of the country . The king 's income had declined seriously and royal control over the mints remained limited . 
 Henry presented himself as the legitimate heir to Henry I and commenced rebuilding the kingdom in his image . Although Stephen had tried to continue Henry I 's method of government during his reign , the younger Henry 's new government characterised those nineteen years as a chaotic and troubled period , with all these problems resulting from Stephen 's usurpation of the throne . Henry was also careful to show that , unlike his mother the Empress , he would listen to the advice and counsel of others . Various measures were immediately carried out although , since Henry spent six and a half years out of the first eight years of his reign in France , much work had to be done at a distance . The process of demolishing the unauthorised castles from the war continued . Efforts were made to restore the system of royal justice and the royal finances . Henry also invested heavily in the construction and renovation of prestigious new royal buildings . 
 The King of Scotland and local Welsh rulers had taken advantage of the long civil war in England to seize disputed lands ; Henry set about reversing this trend . In 1157 pressure from Henry resulted in the young King Malcolm of Scotland returning the lands in the north of England he had taken during the war ; Henry promptly began to refortify the northern frontier . Restoring Anglo @-@ Norman supremacy in Wales proved harder , and Henry had to fight two campaigns in north and south Wales in 1157 and 1158 before the Welsh princes Owain Gwynedd and Rhys ap Gruffydd submitted to his rule , agreeing to the pre @-@ civil war borders . 
 = = = France : Brittany , Toulouse and the Vexin = = = 
 Henry had a problematic relationship with Louis VII of France throughout the 1150s . The two men had already clashed over Henry 's succession to Normandy and the remarriage of Eleanor , and the relationship was not repaired . Louis invariably attempted to take the moral high ground in respect to Henry , capitalising on his reputation as a crusader and circulating rumours about his rival 's behaviour and character . Henry had greater resources than Louis , however , particularly after taking England , and Louis was far less dynamic in resisting Angevin power than he had been earlier in his reign . The disputes between the two drew in other powers across the region , including Thierry , the Count of Flanders , who signed a military alliance with Henry , albeit with a clause that prevented the count from being forced to fight against Louis , his feudal lord . Further south , Theobald V , the Count of Blois , an enemy of Louis , became another early ally of Henry . The resulting military tensions and the frequent face @-@ to @-@ face meetings to attempt to resolve them has led historian Jean <unk> to liken the situation to the period of the Cold War in Europe in the 20th century . 
 On his return to the continent from England , Henry sought to secure his French lands and quash any potential rebellion . As a result , in 1154 Henry and Louis agreed a peace treaty , under which Henry bought back the Vernon and the Neuf @-@ Marché from Louis . The treaty appeared shaky , however and tensions remained — in particular , Henry had not given homage to Louis for his French possessions . In an attempt to improve relations , Henry met with Louis at Paris and Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Michel in 1158 , agreeing to betroth Henry 's eldest living son , the Young Henry , to Louis 's daughter Margaret . The marriage deal would have involved Louis granting the disputed territory of the Vexin to Margaret on her marriage to the Young Henry : while this would ultimately give Henry the lands that he claimed , it also cunningly implied that the Vexin was Louis 's to give away in the first place , in itself a political concession . For a short while , a permanent peace between Henry and Louis looked plausible . 
 Meanwhile , Henry turned his attention to the Duchy of Brittany , which neighboured his lands and was traditionally largely independent from the rest of France , with its own language and culture . The Breton dukes held little power across most of the duchy , which was mostly controlled by local lords . In 1148 , Duke Conan III died and civil war broke out . Henry claimed to be the overlord of Brittany , on the basis that the duchy had owed loyalty to Henry I , and saw controlling the duchy both as a way of securing his other French territories and as a potential inheritance for one of his sons . Initially Henry 's strategy was to rule indirectly through proxies , and accordingly Henry supported Conan IV 's claims over most of the duchy , partly because Conan had strong English ties and could be easily influenced . Conan 's uncle , <unk> , continued to control the county of Nantes in the east until he was deposed in 1156 by Henry 's brother , Geoffrey , possibly with Henry 's support . When Geoffrey died in 1158 , Conan attempted to reclaim Nantes but was opposed by Henry who annexed it for himself . Louis took no action to intervene as Henry steadily increased his power in Brittany . 
 Henry hoped to take a similar approach to regaining control of Toulouse in southern France . Toulouse , while technically part of the Duchy of Aquitaine , had become increasingly independent and was now ruled by Count Raymond V , who had only a weak claim to the lands . Encouraged by Eleanor , Henry first allied himself with Raymond 's enemy Raymond Berenguer of Barcelona and then in 1159 threatened to invade himself to depose Raymond . Louis , however , married his sister Constance to Raymond in an attempt to secure his southern frontiers ; nonetheless , when Henry and Louis discussed the matter of Toulouse , Henry left believing that he had the French king 's support for military intervention . Henry invaded Toulouse , only to find Louis visiting Raymond in the city . Henry was not prepared to directly attack Louis , who was still his feudal lord , and withdrew , settling himself with ravaging the surrounding county , seizing castles and taking the province of Quercy . The episode proved to be a long @-@ running point of dispute between the two kings and the chronicler William of Newburgh called the ensuing conflict with Toulouse a " forty years ' war " . 
 In the aftermath of the Toulouse episode , Louis made an attempt to repair relations with Henry through an 1160 peace treaty : this promised Henry the lands and the rights of his grandfather , Henry I ; it reaffirmed the betrothal of Young Henry and Margaret and the Vexin deal ; and it involved Young Henry giving homage to Louis , a way of reinforcing the young boy 's position as heir and Louis 's position as king . Almost immediately after the peace conference , however , Louis shifted his position considerably . Louis 's wife Constance died and Louis married Adèle , the sister of the Counts of Blois and Champagne . Louis also betrothed his two daughters Marie and Alix to Theobald of Blois 's sons , Theobald and Henry . This represented an aggressive containment strategy towards Henry rather than the agreed rapprochement , and caused Theobald to abandon his alliance with Henry . Henry reacted angrily ; the King had custody of both Young Henry and Margaret , and in November he bullied several papal legates into marrying them — despite the children being only five and three years old respectively — and promptly seized the Vexin . Now it was Louis 's turn to be furious , as the move clearly broke the spirit of the 1160 treaty . 
 Military tensions between the two leaders immediately increased . Theobald mobilised his forces along the border with Touraine ; Henry responded by attacking Chaumont in Blois in a surprise attack ; he successfully took Theobald 's castle in a notable siege . At the start of 1161 war seemed likely to spread across the region , until a fresh peace was negotiated at <unk> that autumn , followed by a second peace treaty in 1162 , overseen by Pope Alexander III . Despite this temporary halt in hostilities , Henry 's seizure of the Vexin proved to be a second long @-@ running dispute between him and the kings of France . 
 = = Government , family and household = = 
 = = = Empire and nature of government = = = 
 Henry controlled more of France than any ruler since the Carolingians ; these lands , combined with his possessions in England , Wales , Scotland and much of Ireland , produced a vast domain often referred to by historians as the Angevin empire . The empire lacked a coherent structure or central control ; instead , it consisted of a loose , flexible network of family connections and lands . Different local customs applied within each of Henry 's different territories , although common principles underpinned some of these local variations . Henry travelled constantly across the empire , producing what the historian John Jolliffe describes as a " government of the roads and roadsides " . His travels coincided with regional governmental reforms and other local administrative business , although messengers connected him to his possession wherever he went . In his absence the lands were ruled by seneschals and justiciars , and beneath them local officials in each of the regions carried on with the business of government . Nonetheless , many of the functions of government centred on Henry himself and he was often surrounded by petitioners requesting decisions or favours . 
 From time to time , Henry 's royal court became a magnum concilium , a great council ; these were sometimes used to take major decisions but the term was loosely applied whenever a large number of barons and bishops attended the king . A great council was supposed to advise the king and give assent to royal decisions , although it is unclear how much freedom they actually enjoyed to oppose Henry 's intentions . Henry also appears to have consulted with his court when making legislation ; the extent to which he then took their views into account is unclear . As a powerful ruler , Henry was able to provide either valuable patronage or impose devastating harm on his subjects . Using his powers of patronage , Henry was very effective at finding and keeping competent officials , including within the Church , in the 12th century a key part of royal administration . Indeed , royal patronage within the Church provided an effective route to advancement under Henry and most of his preferred clerics eventually became bishops and archbishops . Henry could also show his ira et malevolentia — " anger and ill @-@ will " — a term that described his ability to punish or financially destroy particular barons or clergy . 
 In England , Henry initially relied on his father 's former advisers whom he brought with him from Normandy , and on some of Henry I 's remaining officials , reinforced with some of Stephen 's senior nobility who made their peace with Henry in 1153 . During his reign Henry , like his grandfather , increasingly promoted " new men " , minor nobles without independent wealth and lands , to positions of authority in England . By the 1180s this new class of royal administrators was predominant in England , supported by various illegitimate members of Henry 's family . In Normandy , the links between the two halves of the Anglo @-@ Norman nobility had weakened during the first half of the 12th century , and continued to do so under Henry . Henry drew his close advisers from the ranks of the Norman bishops and , as in England , recruited many " new men " as Norman administrators : few of the larger landowners in Normandy benefited from the king 's patronage . Henry frequently intervened with the Norman nobility through arranged marriages or the treatment of inheritances , either using his authority as duke or his influence as king of England over their lands there : Henry 's rule was a harsh one . Across the rest of France , local administration was less developed : Anjou was governed through a combination of officials called <unk> and seneschals based along the Loire and in western Touraine , but Henry had few officials elsewhere in the region . In Aquitaine , ducal authority remained very limited , despite increasing significantly during Henry 's reign , largely due to Richard 's efforts in the late 1170s . 
 = = = Court and family = = = 
 Henry 's wealth allowed him to maintain what was probably the largest curia regis , or royal court , in Europe . His court attracted huge attention from contemporary chroniclers , and typically comprised a number of major nobles and bishops , along with knights , domestic servants , prostitutes , clerks , horses and hunting dogs . Within the court were his officials , <unk> , his friends , amici , and the familiares regis , the king 's informal inner circle of confidants and trusted servants . Henry 's familiares were particularly important to the operation of his household and government , driving government initiatives and filling the gaps between the official structures and the king . 
 Henry tried to maintain a sophisticated household that combined hunting and drinking with cosmopolitan literary discussion and courtly values . Nonetheless , Henry 's passion was for hunting , for which the court became famous . Henry had a number of preferred royal hunting lodges and apartments across his lands , and invested heavily in his royal castles , both for their practical utility as fortresses , and as symbols of royal power and prestige . The court was relatively formal in its style and language , possibly because Henry was attempting to compensate for his own sudden rise to power and relatively humble origins as the son of a count . He opposed the holding of tournaments , probably because of the security risk that such gatherings of armed knights posed in peacetime . 
 The Angevin empire and court was , as historian John Gillingham describes it , " a family firm " . His mother , Matilda , played an important role in his early life and exercised influence for many years later . Henry 's relationship with his wife Eleanor was complex : Henry trusted Eleanor to manage England for several years after 1154 , and was later content for her to govern Aquitaine ; indeed , Eleanor was believed to have influence over Henry during much of their marriage . Ultimately , however , their relationship disintegrated and chroniclers and historians have speculated on what ultimately caused Eleanor to abandon Henry to support her older sons in the Great Revolt of 1173 – 74 . Probable explanations include Henry 's persistent interference in Aquitaine , his recognition of Raymond of Toulouse in 1173 , or his harsh temper . Henry had several long @-@ term mistresses , including Annabel de Balliol and Rosamund Clifford . 
 Henry had eight legitimate children by Eleanor , five sons — William , the Young Henry , Richard , Geoffrey and John , and three daughters , Matilda , Eleanor and Joan . Henry also had several illegitimate children ; amongst the most prominent of these were Geoffrey ( later Archbishop of York ) and William ( later Earl of Salisbury ) . Henry was expected to provide for the future of his legitimate children , either through granting lands to his sons or marrying his daughters well . Henry 's family was divided by rivalries and violent hostilities , more so than many other royal families of the day , in particular the relatively cohesive French <unk> . Various suggestions have been put forward to explain Henry 's family 's bitter disputes , from their inherited family genetics to the failure of Henry and Eleanor 's parenting . Other theories focus on the personalities of Henry and his children . Historians such as Matthew Strickland have argued that Henry made sensible attempts to manage the tensions within his family , and that , had the King died younger , the succession might have proven much smoother . 
 = = = Law = = = 
 Henry 's reign saw significant legal changes , particularly in England and Normandy . By the middle of the 12th century , England had many different ecclesiastical and civil law courts , with overlapping jurisdictions resulting from the interaction of diverse legal traditions . Henry greatly expanded the role of royal justice in England , producing a more coherent legal system , summarised at the end of his reign in the treatise of Glanvill , an early legal handbook . Despite these reforms it is uncertain if Henry had a grand vision for his new legal system and the reforms seem to have proceeded in a steady , pragmatic fashion . Indeed , in most cases he was probably not personally responsible for creating the new processes , but he was greatly interested in the law , seeing the delivery of justice as one of the key tasks for a king and carefully appointing good administrators to conduct the reforms . 
 In the aftermath of the disorders of Stephen 's reign in England there were many legal cases concerning land to be resolved : many religious houses had lost land during the conflict , while in other cases owners and heirs had been dispossessed of their property by local barons , which in some cases had since been sold or given to new owners . Henry relied on traditional , local courts — such as the shire courts , hundred courts and in particular <unk> courts — to deal with most of these cases , hearing only a few personally . This process was far from perfect and in many cases claimants were unable to pursue their cases effectively . While interested in the law , during the first years of his reign Henry was preoccupied with other political issues and even finding the King for a hearing could mean travelling across the Channel and locating his peripatetic court . Nonetheless , Henry was prepared to take action to improve the existing procedures , intervening in cases which he felt had been mishandled , and creating legislation to improve both ecclesiastical and civil court processes . Meanwhile , in neighbouring Normandy , Henry delivered justice through the courts run by his officials across the duchy and occasionally these cases made their way to the King himself . He also operated an exchequer court at Caen that heard cases relating to royal revenues and maintained a number of king 's justices who travelled across the duchy . Between 1159 and 1163 , Henry spent time in Normandy conducting reforms of royal and church courts and some measures later introduced in England are recorded as existing in Normandy as early as 1159 . 
 In 1163 Henry returned to England , intent on reforming the role of the royal courts . He cracked down on crime , seizing the belongings of thieves and fugitives , and travelling justices were dispatched to the north and the Midlands . After 1166 , Henry 's exchequer court in Westminster , which had previously only heard cases connected with royal revenues , began to take wider civil cases on behalf of the king . The reforms continued and Henry created the General Eyre , probably in 1176 , which involved dispatching a group of royal justices to visit all the counties in England over a given period of time , with authority to cover both civil and criminal cases . Local juries were used occasionally in previous reigns , but Henry made much wider use of them . Juries were introduced in petty assizes from around 1176 , where they were used to establish the answers to particular pre @-@ established questions , and in grand assizes from 1179 , where they were used to determine the guilt of a defendant . Other methods of trial continued , however , including trial by combat and trial by ordeal . After the Assize of Clarendon in 1166 , royal justice was extended into new areas through the use of new forms of assizes , in particular novel disseisin , mort d 'ancestor and dower <unk> <unk> <unk> , which dealt with the wrongful dispossession of land , inheritance rights and the rights of widows respectively . In making these reforms Henry both challenged the traditional rights of barons in dispensing justice and reinforced key feudal principles , but over time they greatly increased royal power in England . 
 = = = Relations with the church = = = 
 Henry 's relationship with the Church varied considerably across his lands and over time : as with other aspects of his rule , there was no attempt to form a common ecclesiastical policy . Insofar as Henry had a policy it was to generally push back on papal influence , increasing his own local authority . The 12th century saw a reforming movement within the Church , however , advocating greater autonomy from royal authority for the clergy and more influence for the papacy . This trend had already caused tensions in England , for example when King Stephen forced Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury , into exile in 1152 . There were also long @-@ running concerns over the legal treatment of members of the clergy . 
 By contrast with the tensions in England , in Normandy Henry had occasional disagreements with the Church but generally enjoyed very good relations with the Norman bishops . In Brittany , Henry had the support of the local church hierarchy and rarely intervened in clerical matters , except occasionally in order to cause difficulties for his rival Louis of France . Further south , however , the power of the dukes of Aquitaine over the local church was much less than in the north , and Henry 's efforts to extend his influence over local appointments created tensions . During the disputed papal election of 1159 , Henry , like Louis , supported Alexander III over his rival Victor IV . 
 Henry was not an especially pious king by medieval standards . In England , he provided steady patronage to the monastic houses , but established few new monasteries and was relatively conservative in determining which he did support , favouring those with established links to his family , such as Reading Abbey . In this regard Henry 's religious tastes appear to have been influenced by his mother , and indeed before his ascension a number of religious charters were issued in their joint names . Henry did found a number of religious hospitals in England and France . After the death of Becket , Henry built and endowed various monasteries in France , primarily to improve his popular image . Since travel by sea during the period was dangerous , he would also take full confession before setting sail and use <unk> to determine the best time to travel . Henry 's movements may also have been planned to take advantage of saints ' days and other fortuitous occasions . 
 = = = Economy and finance = = = 
 Henry restored many of the old financial institutions of his grandfather Henry I and undertook further , long @-@ lasting reforms of the way that the English currency was managed ; one result was a long @-@ term increase in the supply of money within the economy , leading to a growth both in trade and inflation . Medieval rulers such as Henry enjoyed various sources of income during the 12th century . Some of their income came from their private estates , called demesne ; other income came from imposing legal fines and arbitrary amercements , and from taxes , which at this time were raised only intermittently . Kings could also raise funds by borrowing ; Henry did this far more than earlier English rulers , initially through moneylenders in Rouen , turning later in his reign to Jewish and Flemish lenders . Ready cash was increasingly important to rulers during the 12th century to enable the use of mercenary forces and the construction of stone castles , both vital to successful military campaigns . 
 Henry inherited a difficult situation in England in 1154 . Henry I had established a system of royal finances that depended upon three key institutions : a central royal treasury in London , supported by treasuries in key castles ; the exchequer that accounted for payments to the treasuries ; and a team of royal officials called " the chamber " that followed the king 's travels , spending money as necessary and collecting revenues along the way . The long civil war had caused considerable disruption to this system and some figures suggest that royal income fell by 46 % between 1129 – 30 and 1155 – 56 . A new coin , called the <unk> silver penny , was issued in 1153 in an attempt to stabilise the English currency after the war . Less is known about how financial affairs were managed in Henry 's continental possessions , but a very similar system operated in Normandy , and a comparable system probably operated in both Anjou and Aquitaine . 
 On taking power Henry gave a high priority to the restoration of royal finances in England , reviving Henry I 's financial processes and attempting to improve the quality of the royal accounting . Revenue from the demesne formed the bulk of Henry 's income in England , although taxes were used heavily in the first 11 years of his reign . Aided by the capable Richard FitzNeal , Henry reformed the currency in 1158 , putting his name on English coins for the first time and heavily reducing the number of moneyers licensed to produce coins . These measures were successful in improving his income , but on his return to England in the 1160s Henry took further steps . New taxes were introduced and the existing accounts re @-@ audited , and the reforms of the legal system brought in new streams of money from fines and amercements . A wholesale reform of the coinage occurred in 1180 , with royal officials taking direct control of the mints and passing the profits directly to the treasury . A new penny , called the Short Cross , was introduced , and the number of mints reduced substantially to ten across the country . Driven by the reforms , the royal revenues increased significantly ; during the first part of the reign , Henry 's average exchequer income was only around £ 18 @,@ 000 ; after 1166 , the average was around £ 22 @,@ 000 . One economic effect of these changes was a substantial increase in the amount of money in circulation in England and , post @-@ 1180 , a significant , long @-@ term increase in both inflation and trade . 
 = = Later reign ( 1162 – 75 ) = = 
 = = = Developments in France = = = 
 Long @-@ running tensions between Henry and Louis VII continued during the 1160s , the French king slowly becoming more vigorous in opposing Henry 's increasing power in Europe . In 1160 Louis strengthened his alliances in central France with the Count of Champagne and Odo II , the Duke of Burgundy . Three years later the new Count of Flanders , Philip , concerned about Henry 's growing power , openly allied himself with the French king . Louis 's wife Adèle gave birth to a male heir , Philip Augustus , in 1165 , and Louis was more confident of his own position than for many years previously . As a result , relations between Henry and Louis deteriorated again in the mid @-@ 1160s . 
 Meanwhile , Henry had begun to alter his policy of indirect rule in Brittany and started to exert more direct control . In 1164 Henry intervened to seize lands along the border of Brittany and Normandy , and in 1166 invaded Brittany to punish the local barons . Henry then forced Conan to abdicate as duke and to give Brittany to his daughter Constance ; Constance was handed over and betrothed to Henry 's son Geoffrey . This arrangement was quite unusual in terms of medieval law , as Conan might have had sons who could have legitimately inherited the duchy . Elsewhere in France , Henry attempted to seize the Auvergne , much to the anger of the French king . Further south Henry continued to apply pressure on Raymond of Toulouse : the King campaigned there personally in 1161 , sent the Archbishop of Bordeaux against Raymond in 1164 and encouraged Alfonso II of Aragon in his attacks . In 1165 Raymond divorced Louis 's sister and attempted to ally himself with Henry instead . 
 These growing tensions between Henry and Louis finally spilled over into open war in 1167 , triggered by a trivial argument over how money destined for the Crusader states of the Levant should be collected . Louis allied himself with the Welsh , Scots and Bretons , and the French king attacked Normandy . Henry responded by attacking Chaumont @-@ sur @-@ Epte , where Louis kept his main military arsenal , burning the town to the ground and forcing Louis to abandon his allies and make a private truce . Henry was then free to move against the rebel barons in Brittany , where feelings about his seizure of the duchy were still running high . 
 As the decade progressed , Henry increasingly wanted to resolve the question of the inheritance . He decided that he would divide up his empire after his death , with Young Henry receiving England and Normandy , Richard being given the Duchy of Aquitaine , and Geoffrey acquiring Brittany . This would require the consent of Louis as king of France , and accordingly Henry and Louis held fresh peace talks in 1169 at Montmirail . The talks were wide ranging , culminating with Henry 's sons giving homage to Louis for their future inheritances in France , and with Richard being betrothed to Louis 's daughter Alice . 
 If the agreements at Montmirail had been followed up , the acts of homage could potentially have confirmed Louis 's position as king , while undermining the legitimacy of any rebellious barons within Henry 's territories and the potential for an alliance between them and Louis . In practice , however , Louis perceived himself to have gained a temporary advantage , and immediately after the conference he began to encourage tensions between Henry 's sons . Meanwhile , Henry 's position in the south of France continued to improve , and by 1173 he had agreed to an alliance with Humbert , the Count of Savoy , which betrothed Henry 's son John and Humbert 's daughter Alicia . Henry 's daughter Eleanor was married to Alfonso VIII of Castile in 1170 , enlisting an additional ally in the south . In February 1173 , Raymond finally gave in and publicly gave homage for Toulouse to Henry and his heirs . 
 = = = Thomas Becket controversy = = = 
 One of the major international events surrounding Henry during the 1160s was the Becket controversy . When the Archbishop of Canterbury , Theobald of Bec , died in 1161 Henry saw an opportunity to reassert his rights over the church in England . Henry appointed Thomas Becket , his English Chancellor , as archbishop in 1162 , probably believing that Becket , in addition to being an old friend , would be politically weakened within the Church because of his former role as Chancellor , and would therefore have to rely on Henry 's support . Both Matilda and Eleanor appear to have had doubts about the appointment , but Henry continued regardless . His plan did not have the desired result , however , as Becket promptly changed his lifestyle , abandoned his links to the King and portrayed himself as a staunch protector of church rights . 
 Henry and Becket quickly disagreed over a number of issues , including Becket 's attempts to regain control of lands belonging to the archbishopric and his views on Henry 's taxation policies . The main source of conflict , however , concerned the treatment of clergy who committed secular crimes : Henry argued that the legal custom in England allowed the king to enforce justice over these clerics , while Becket maintained that only church courts could try the cases . The matter came to a head in January 1164 , when Henry forced through agreement to the Constitutions of Clarendon ; under tremendous pressure , Becket temporarily agreed but changed his position shortly afterwards . The legal argument was complex at the time and remains contentious . 
 The argument between Henry and Becket became both increasingly personal and international in nature . Henry was stubborn and bore grudges , while Becket was vain , ambitious and overly political : neither man was willing to back down . Both sought the support of Alexander III and other international leaders , arguing their positions in various forums across Europe . The situation worsened in 1164 when Becket fled to France to seek sanctuary with Henry 's enemy , Louis VII . Henry harassed Becket 's associates in England , and Becket excommunicated religious and secular officials who sided with the king . The pope supported Becket 's case in principle but needed Henry 's support in dealing with Frederick I , Holy Roman Emperor , so he repeatedly sought a negotiated solution ; the Norman church also intervened to try to assist Henry in finding a solution . 
 By 1169 , however , Henry had decided to crown his son Young Henry as king of England . This required the acquiescence of Becket as the Archbishop of Canterbury , traditionally the churchman with the right to conduct the ceremony . Furthermore , the whole Becket matter was an increasing international embarrassment to Henry . He began to take a more conciliatory tone with Becket but , when this failed , had Young Henry crowned anyway by the Archbishop of York . The pope authorized Becket to lay an interdict on England , forcing Henry back to negotiations ; they finally came to terms in July 1170 , and Becket returned to England in early December . Just when the dispute seemed resolved , however , Becket excommunicated another three supporters of Henry : the King was furious and infamously announced " What miserable drones and traitors have I nourished and promoted in my household , who let their lord be treated with such shameful contempt by a low @-@ born clerk ! " 
 In response , four knights made their way secretly to Canterbury , apparently with the intent of confronting and if necessary arresting Becket for breaking his agreement with Henry . The Archbishop refused to be arrested by relatively low @-@ born knights , so they hacked him to death on 29 December 1170 . This event , particularly in front of an altar , horrified Christian Europe . Although Becket had not been popular while he was alive , in death he was declared a martyr by the local monks . Louis seized on the case , and , despite efforts by the Norman church to prevent the French church from taking action , a new interdict was announced on Henry 's possessions . Henry was focused on dealing with Ireland and took no action to arrest Becket 's killers , arguing that he was unable to do so . International pressure on Henry grew , and in May 1172 he negotiated a settlement with the papacy in which the King swore to go on crusade as well as effectively overturning the Constitutions of Clarendon . In the coming years , although Henry never actually went on his crusade , he exploited the growing " cult of Becket " for his own ends . 
 = = = Invasion of Ireland = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 12th century Ireland was ruled by a number of local kings , although their authority was more limited than their counterparts in the rest of western Europe . Mainstream Europeans regarded the Irish as relatively barbarous and backward . In the 1160s King Diarmait Mac Murchada was deposed as King of Leinster by the High King of Ireland , <unk> Ua Conchobair . Diarmait turned to Henry for assistance in 1167 , and the English king agreed to allow Diarmait to recruit mercenaries within his empire . Diarmait put together a force of Anglo @-@ Norman and Flemish mercenaries drawn from the Welsh Marches , including Richard de Clare . With his new supporters , he reclaimed Leinster but died shortly afterwards in 1171 ; de Clare then claimed Leinster for himself . The situation in Ireland was tense and the Anglo @-@ Normans heavily outnumbered . 
 Henry took this opportunity to intervene personally in Ireland . He took a large army into south Wales , forcing the rebels who had held the area since 1165 into submission prior to sailing from Pembroke and landing in Ireland in October 1171 . Some of the Irish lords appealed to Henry to protect them from the Anglo @-@ Norman invaders , while de Clare offered to submit to Henry if he was allowed to retain his new possessions . Henry 's timing was influenced by several factors , including encouragement from Pope Alexander , who saw the opportunity to establish papal authority over the Irish church . The critical factor though appears to have been Henry 's concern that his nobles in the Welsh Marches would acquire independent territories of their own in Ireland , beyond the reach of his authority . Henry 's intervention was successful , and both the Irish and Anglo @-@ Normans in the south and east of Ireland accepted his rule . 
 Henry undertook a wave of castle @-@ building during his visit in 1171 to protect his new territories — the Anglo @-@ Normans had superior military technologies to the Irish , and castles gave them a significant advantage . Henry hoped for a longer term political solution , however , similar to his approach in Wales and Scotland , and in 1175 he agreed to the Treaty of Windsor , under which Rory O 'Connor would be recognised as the high king of Ireland , giving homage to Henry and maintaining stability on the ground on his behalf . This policy proved unsuccessful , as O 'Connor was unable to exert sufficient influence and force in areas such as Munster : Henry instead intervened more directly , establishing a system of local fiefs of his own through a conference held in Oxford in 1177 . 
 = = = Great Revolt ( 1173 – 74 ) = = = 
 In 1173 Henry faced the Great Revolt , an uprising by his eldest sons and rebellious barons , supported by France , Scotland and Flanders . A number of grievances underpinned the revolt . Young Henry was unhappy that , despite the title of king , in practice he made no real decisions and was kept chronically short of money by Henry . Young Henry had also been very attached to Thomas Becket , his former tutor , and may have held his father responsible for Becket 's death . Geoffrey faced similar difficulties ; Duke Conan of Brittany had died in 1171 , but Geoffrey and Constance were still unmarried , leaving Geoffrey in limbo without his own lands . Richard was encouraged to join the revolt as well by Eleanor , whose relationship with Henry , as previously described , had disintegrated . Meanwhile , local barons unhappy with Henry 's rule saw opportunities to recover traditional powers and influence by allying themselves with his sons . 
 The final straw was Henry 's decision to give his youngest son John three major castles belonging to Young Henry , who first protested and then fled to Paris , followed by his brothers Richard and Geoffrey ; Eleanor attempted to join them but was captured by Henry 's forces in November . Louis supported Young Henry and war became imminent . Young Henry wrote to the pope , complaining about his father 's behaviour , and began to acquire allies , including King William of Scotland and the Counts of Boulogne , Flanders and Blois — all of whom were promised lands if Young Henry won . Major baronial revolts broke out in England , Brittany , Maine , Poitou and Angoulême . In Normandy some of the border barons rose up and , although the majority of the duchy remained openly loyal , there appears to have been a wider undercurrent of discontent . Only Anjou proved relatively secure . Despite the size and scope of the crisis , Henry had several advantages , including his control of a large number of powerful royal castles in strategic areas , control of most of the English ports throughout the war , and his continuing popularity within the towns across his empire . 
 In May 1173 Louis and the Young King probed the defences of the Vexin , the main route to the Norman capital , Rouen ; armies invaded from Flanders and Blois , attempting a pincer movement , while rebels from Brittany invaded from the west . Henry secretly travelled back to England to order an offensive on the rebels , and on his return counter @-@ attacked Louis 's army , massacring many of them and pushing them back across the border . An army was dispatched to drive back the Brittany rebels , whom Henry then pursued , surprised and captured . Henry offered to negotiate with his sons , but these discussions at Gisors soon broke down . Meanwhile , the fighting in England proved evenly balanced until a royal army defeated a superior force of rebel and Flemish reinforcements in September in the battle of Fornham near Fornham in East Anglia . Henry took advantage of this respite to crush the rebel strongholds in Touraine , securing the strategically important route through his empire . In January 1174 the forces of Young Henry and Louis attacked again , threatening to push through into central Normandy . The attack failed and the fighting paused while the winter weather set in . 
 In early 1174 , Henry 's enemies appeared to have tried to lure him back into England , allowing them to attack Normandy in his absence . As part of this plan , William of Scotland attacked the south of England , supported by the northern English rebels ; additional Scottish forces were sent into the Midlands , where the rebel barons were making good progress . Henry refused the bait and instead focused on crushing opposition in south @-@ west France , and William 's campaign began to falter as the Scots failed to take the key northern royal castles , in part due to the efforts of Henry 's illegitimate son , Geoffrey . In an effort to reinvigorate the plan , Philip , the Count of Flanders , announced his intention to invade England and sent an advance force into East Anglia . The prospective Flemish invasion forced Henry to return to England in early July . Louis and Philip could now push overland into eastern Normandy and reached Rouen . Henry travelled to Becket 's tomb in Canterbury , where he announced that the rebellion was a divine punishment on him , and took appropriate penance ; this made a major difference in restoring his royal authority at a critical moment in the conflict . Word then reached Henry that King William had been defeated and captured by local forces at Alnwick , crushing the rebel cause in the north . The remaining English rebel strongholds collapsed and in August Henry returned to Normandy . Louis had not yet been able to take Rouen , and Henry 's forces fell upon the French army just before the final French assault on the city began ; pushed back into France , Louis requested peace talks , bringing an end to the conflict . 
 = = Final years ( 1175 – 89 ) = = 
 = = = Aftermath of the Great Revolt = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Great Revolt , Henry held negotiations at Montlouis , offering a lenient peace on the basis of the pre @-@ war status quo . Henry and Young Henry swore not to take revenge on each other 's followers ; Young Henry agreed to the transfer of the disputed castles to John , but in exchange the elder Henry agreed to give the younger Henry two castles in Normandy and 15 @,@ 000 Angevin pounds ; Richard and Geoffrey were granted half the revenues from Aquitaine and Brittany respectively . Eleanor , however , was kept under effective house arrest until the 1180s . The rebel barons were kept imprisoned for a short time and in some cases fined , then restored to their lands . The rebel castles in England and Aquitaine were destroyed . Henry was less generous to William of Scotland , who was not released until he had agreed to the Treaty of Falaise in December 1174 , under which he publicly gave homage to Henry and surrendered five key Scottish castles to Henry 's men . Philip of Flanders declared his neutrality towards Henry , in return for which the King agreed to provide him with regular financial support . 
 Henry now appeared to his contemporaries to be stronger than ever , and he was courted as an ally by many European leaders and asked to arbitrate over international disputes in Spain and Germany . He was nonetheless busy resolving some of the weaknesses that he believed had exacerbated the revolt . Henry set about extending royal justice in England to reassert his authority and spent time in Normandy shoring up support amongst the barons . The King also made use of the growing Becket cult to increase his own prestige , using the power of the saint to explain his victory in 1174 , especially his success in capturing William . 
 The 1174 peace did not deal with the long @-@ running tensions between Henry and Louis , however , and these resurfaced during the late 1170s . The two kings now began to compete for control of Berry , a prosperous region of value to both kings . Henry had some rights to western Berry , but in 1176 announced an extraordinary claim that he had agreed in 1169 to give Richard 's fiancée Alice the whole province as part of the marriage settlement . If Louis accepted this , it would have implied that the Berry was Henry 's to give away in the first place , and would have given Henry the right to occupy it on Richard 's behalf . To put additional pressure on Louis , Henry mobilised his armies for war . The papacy intervened and , probably as Henry had planned , the two kings were encouraged to sign a non @-@ aggression treaty in September 1177 , under which they promised to undertake a joint crusade . The ownership of the Auvergne and parts of the Berry were put to an arbitration panel , which reported in favour of Henry ; Henry followed up this success by purchasing La Marche from the local count . This expansion of Henry 's empire once again threatened French security and promptly put the new peace at risk . 
 = = = Family tensions = = = 
 In the late 1170s Henry focused on trying to create a stable system of government , increasingly ruling through his family , but tensions over the succession arrangements were never far away , ultimately leading to a fresh revolt . Having quelled the left @-@ over rebels from the Great Revolt , Richard was recognised by Henry as the Duke of Aquitaine in 1179 . In 1181 Geoffrey finally married Constance and became Duke of Brittany ; by now most of Brittany accepted Angevin rule , and Geoffrey was able to deal with the remaining disturbances on his own . John had spent the Great Revolt travelling alongside his father and most observers now began to regard the prince as Henry 's favourite child . Henry began to grant John more lands , mostly at various nobles ' expense , and in 1177 made him the Lord of Ireland . Meanwhile , Young Henry spent the end of the decade travelling in Europe , taking part in tournaments and playing only a passing role in either government or Henry and Richard 's military campaigns ; he was increasingly dissatisfied with his position and lack of power . 
 By 1182 Young Henry reiterated his previous demands : he wanted to be granted lands , for example the Duchy of Normandy , which would allow him to support himself and his household with dignity . Henry refused , but agreed to increase his son 's allowance , but this was not enough to placate Young Henry . With trouble clearly brewing , Henry attempted to defuse the situation by insisting that Richard and Geoffrey give homage to Young Henry for their lands . Richard did not believe that Young Henry had any claim over Aquitaine and refused to give homage ; when Henry forced Richard to give homage , Young Henry angrily refused to accept it . Young Henry formed an alliance with some of the disgruntled barons of the Aquitaine who were unhappy with Richard 's rule , and Geoffrey sided with him , raising a mercenary army in Brittany to threaten Poitou . Open war broke out in 1183 and Henry and Richard led a joint campaign into Aquitaine : before they could conclude it , however , Young Henry caught a fever and died , bringing a sudden end to the rebellion . 
 With his eldest son dead , Henry rearranged the plans for the succession : Richard was to be made king of England , albeit without any actual power until the death of his father ; Geoffrey would have to retain Brittany , as he held it by marriage , so Henry 's favourite son John would become the duke of Aquitaine in place of Richard . Richard , however , refused to give up Aquitaine ; he was deeply attached to the duchy , and had no desire to exchange this role for the meaningless one of being the junior King of England . Henry was furious , and ordered John and Geoffrey to march south and retake the duchy by force . The short war ended in stalemate and a tense family reconciliation at Westminster in England at the end of 1184 . Henry finally got his own way in early 1185 by bringing Eleanor to Normandy to instruct Richard to obey his father , while simultaneously threatening to give Normandy , and possibly England , to Geoffrey . This proved enough and Richard finally handed over the ducal castles in Aquitaine to Henry . 
 Meanwhile , John undertook an expedition to Ireland in 1185 , which was not a success . Ireland had only recently been conquered by Anglo @-@ Norman forces , and tensions were still rife between Henry 's representatives , the new settlers and the existing inhabitants . John offended the local Irish rulers , failed to make allies amongst the Anglo @-@ Norman settlers , began to lose ground militarily against the Irish , and finally returned to England within the year . In 1186 Henry was about to return John to Ireland once again , when news came that Geoffrey had died in a tournament at Paris , leaving two young children ; this event once again changed the balance of power between Henry and his remaining sons . 
 = = = Henry and Philip Augustus = = = 
 Henry 's relationship with his two surviving heirs was fraught , for , while the King had great affection for his youngest son John , he showed little warmth towards Richard and indeed seems to have borne him a grudge after their argument in 1184 . The bickering and simmering tensions between Henry and Richard were cleverly exploited by the new French king , Philip Augustus . Philip had come to power in 1180 and he rapidly demonstrated that he could be an assertive , calculating and manipulative political leader . Initially Henry and Philip Augustus had enjoyed a good relationship . Despite attempts to divide the two , Henry and Philip Augustus agreed a joint alliance , even though this cost the French king the support of Flanders and Champagne . Philip Augustus regarded Geoffrey as a close friend , and would have welcomed him as a successor to Henry . With the death of Geoffrey , however , the relationship between Henry and Philip broke down . 
 In 1186 , Philip Augustus demanded that he be given custody of Geoffrey 's children and Brittany , and insisted that Henry order Richard to withdraw from Toulouse , where he had been sent with an army to apply new pressure on Philip 's uncle , Raymond . Philip threatened to invade Normandy if this did not happen . He also reopened the question of the Vexin which had formed part of Margaret 's dowry several years before ; Henry still occupied the region and now Philip insisted that the King either complete the long agreed Richard @-@ Alice marriage , or return Margaret 's dowry . Philip invaded the Berry and Henry mobilised a large army which confronted the French at Châteauroux , before papal intervention brought a truce . During the negotiations , however , Philip suggested to Richard that he should ally with the French king against Henry , marking the start of a new strategy to divide the father and son . 
 Philip 's offer coincided with a crisis in the Levant . In 1187 Jerusalem surrendered to Saladin and calls for a new crusade swept Europe . Richard was enthusiastic and announced his intention to join the crusade , and Henry and Philip Augustus announced their similar intent at the start of 1188 . Taxes began to be raised and plans made for supplies and transport . Richard was keen to start his crusade , but was forced to wait for Henry to make his arrangements . In the meantime , Richard set about crushing some of his enemies in Aquitaine in 1188 , before once again attacking the Count of Toulouse . Richard 's campaign undermined the truce between Henry and Philip and both sides again mobilised large forces in anticipation of war . This time Henry rejected Philip 's offers of a short @-@ term truce in the hope of convincing the French king to agree to a long @-@ term peace deal , but Philip refused to consider Henry 's proposals . A furious Richard , however , believed that Henry was stalling for time and delaying the departure of the crusade . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The relationship between Henry and Richard finally dissolved into violence shortly before Henry 's death . Philip held a peace conference in November 1188 , making a public offer of a generous long @-@ term peace settlement with Henry , conceding to his various territorial demands , if Henry would finally marry Richard and Alice and announce Richard as his recognised heir . Henry refused the proposal , whereupon Richard himself spoke up , demanding to be recognised as Henry 's successor . Henry remained silent and Richard then publicly changed sides at the conference and gave formal homage to Philip in front of the assembled nobles . 
 The papacy intervened once again to try to produce a last @-@ minute peace deal , resulting in a fresh conference at La Ferté @-@ Bernard in 1189 . By now Henry was suffering from a bleeding ulcer that would ultimately prove fatal . The discussions achieved little , although Henry is alleged to have offered Philip that John , rather than Richard , could marry Alice , reflecting the rumours circulating over the summer that Henry was considering openly disinheriting Richard . The conference broke up with war appearing likely , but Philip and Richard launched a surprise attack immediately afterwards during what was conventionally a period of truce . 
 Henry was caught by surprise at Le Mans but made a forced march north to Alençon , from where he could escape into the safety of Normandy . Suddenly , however , Henry turned back south towards Anjou , against the advice of his officials . The weather was extremely hot , the King was increasingly ill and he appears to have wanted to die peacefully in Anjou rather than fight yet another campaign . Henry evaded the enemy forces on his way south and collapsed in his castle at Chinon . Philip and Richard were making good progress , not least because it was now obvious that Henry was dying and that Richard would be the next king , and the pair offered negotiations . They met at Ballan , where Henry , only just able to remain seated on his horse , agreed to a complete surrender : he would do homage to Philip ; he would give up Alice to a guardian and she would marry Richard at the end of the coming crusade ; he would recognise Richard as his heir ; he would pay Philip compensation , and key castles would be given to Philip as a guarantee . 
 Henry was carried back to Chinon on a litter , where he was informed that John had publicly sided with Richard in the conflict . This desertion proved the final shock and he finally collapsed into a fever , only coming to for a few moments during which he gave confession . Henry died on 6 July 1189 , aged 56 ; the King had wished to be interred at <unk> Abbey in the Limousin , but the hot weather made transporting his body impractical and he was instead buried at the nearby Fontevraud Abbey . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of Henry 's death , Richard successfully claimed his father 's lands ; he later left on the Third Crusade , but never married Alice as he had agreed with Philip Augustus . Eleanor was released from house arrest and regained control of Aquitaine , where she ruled on Richard 's behalf . Henry 's empire , however , did not survive long and collapsed during the reign of his youngest son John , when Philip captured all of the Angevin possessions in France except Gascony . This collapse had various causes , including long @-@ term changes in economic power , growing cultural differences between England and Normandy but , in particular , the fragile , familial nature of Henry 's empire . 
 Henry was not a popular king and few expressed much grief on news of his death . Writing in the 1190s , William of Newburgh commented that " in his own time he was hated by almost everyone " ; he was widely criticised by his own contemporaries , even within his own court . Many of the changes Henry introduced during his long rule , however , had major long @-@ term consequences . His legal changes are generally considered to have laid the basis for English Common Law , with the Exchequer court a forerunner of the later Common Bench at Westminster . Henry 's itinerant justices also influenced his contemporaries ' legal reforms : Philip Augustus ' creation of itinerant bailli , for example , clearly drew on the Henrician model . Henry 's intervention in Brittany , Wales and Scotland also had a significant long @-@ term impact on the development of their societies and governmental systems . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Henry and his reign have attracted historians for many years . In the 18th century the historian David Hume argued that Henry 's reign was pivotal to creating a genuinely English monarchy and , ultimately , a unified Britain . Henry 's role in the Becket controversy was considered relatively praiseworthy by Protestant historians of the period , while his disputes with the French king , Louis , also attracted positive patriotic comment . In the Victorian period there was a fresh interest in the personal morality of historical figures and scholars began to express greater concern over aspects of Henry 's behaviour , including his role as a parent and husband . The king 's role in the death of Becket attracted particular criticism . Late @-@ Victorian historians , with increasing access to the documentary records from the period , stressed Henry 's contribution to the evolution of key English institutions , including the development of the law and the exchequer . William Stubbs ' analysis led him to label Henry as a " legislator king " , responsible for major , long @-@ lasting reforms in England . Influenced by the contemporary growth of the British Empire , historians such as Kate Norgate undertook detailed research into Henry 's continental possessions , creating the term " the Angevin Empire " in the 1880s . 
 Twentieth @-@ century historians challenged many of these conclusions . In the 1950s Jacques <unk> and John Jolliffe , among others , examined the nature of Henry 's " empire " ; French scholars in particular analysed the mechanics of how royal power functioned during this period . The Anglocentric aspects of many histories of Henry were challenged from the 1980s onwards , with efforts made to bring together British and French historical analysis of the period . More detailed study of the written records left by Henry has cast doubt on some earlier interpretations : Robert Eyton 's ground @-@ breaking 1878 work tracing Henry 's itinerary through deductions from the pipe rolls , for example , has been criticised as being too certain a way of determining location or court attendance . Although many more of Henry 's royal charters have been identified , the task of interpreting these records , the financial information in the pipe rolls and wider economic data from the reign is understood to be more challenging than once thought . Significant gaps in historical analysis of Henry remain , especially the nature of his rule in Anjou and the south of France . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 Henry II appears as a character in several modern plays and films . He is a central character in James Goldman 's 1966 play The Lion in Winter , set in 1183 and presenting an imaginary encounter between Henry 's immediate family and Philip Augustus over Christmas at Chinon . The 1968 film adaptation communicates the modern popular view of Henry as a somewhat sacrilegious , fiery and determined king although , as Goldman acknowledges , Henry 's passions and character are essentially fictional . The Lion in Winter has proved to be an enduring representation of Henry , being turned into an Academy @-@ Award @-@ winning film and remade in 2003 for television . Henry also appears in the play Becket by Jean Anouilh , filmed in 1964 ; once again , however , the character of the King is deliberately fictitious , driven by the need for drama between Henry and Becket in the play . The Becket controversy also forms the basis for T. S. Eliot 's play Murder in the Cathedral , where the tensions between Henry and Becket form the basis both for a discussion of the more superficial events of Becket 's death , and Eliot 's deeper religious interpretation of the episode . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Effects of Hurricane Dennis in Mississippi = 
 The Effects of Hurricane Dennis in Mississippi were mostly minor and included one indirect death . On June 29 , 2005 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa . Gradually , the system organized on July 2 and formed a broad low pressure area . The system continued to develop , and became a tropical depression on July 4 . Tracking westward , it became a tropical storm on July 5 and a hurricane on July 7 . Dennis rapidly intensified to attain Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale before making landfall on Cuba . The hurricane weakened to Category 1 status before re @-@ emerging in the Gulf of Mexico and intensifying to Category 4 strength . Dennis made landfall on the Florida Panhandle on July 10 as a Category 3 hurricane , then tracked over southeast Alabama and entered Mississippi as a tropical depression . 
 Dennis lightly affected Mississippi , dropping between 1 – 5 inches ( 25 – 125 mm ) of rainfall and producing wind gusts up to 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) , causing several hundred trees to uproot or snap and damaging a total of 21 homes and businesses . Over 40 structures were flooded , forcing 200 people to leave their homes . One indirect death occurred from a traffic accident in Jasper County due to wet roads . During the height of the storm , 24 @,@ 000 customers were without power . In all , Hurricane Dennis caused $ 2 @.@ 4 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage across the state . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At 2100 UTC on July 8 a hurricane watch was put into effect for coastal areas from the Steinhatchee River , Florida to the mouth of the Pearl River . At 0900 UTC on July 9 , the hurricane watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning . The hurricane warning was soon downgraded to a tropical storm warning as Dennis moved inland , and by 0300 UTC on July 10 all advisories were discontinued . 
 In anticipation of Hurricane Dennis , 190 @,@ 000 people were ordered to evacuate , though many opted not to . Jackson County issued a mandatory evacuation for its residents , while Hancock County called for a voluntary evacuation . Governor Haley Barbour issued a state of emergency , and 600 National Guard soldiers were on standby . Harrison County issued a mandatory evacuation for residents living in low @-@ lying areas , and ordered the closing of its casinos . Also , the Red Cross provided 60 mobile canteens capable of serving 30 @,@ 000 hot meals to staging areas in Hattiesburg and Jackson . 32 law officials were sent to Hattiesburg to assist with traffic control near the intersection with I @-@ 59 and U.S. Route 49 . Additionally , a horse park in Starkville was caring for over 50 horses belonging to residents who were forced to evacuate and had no other location for them . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 In Mississippi , damage was not as severe as previously anticipated . As Dennis impacted the state , storm tide of 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) – 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal was reported . Rainfall from the hurricane averaged between 1 – 5 inches ( 25 – 125 mm ) , and minimum barometric pressure of 994 @.@ 2 mb was reported near Pascagoula . Wind gusts peaked at 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) causing several hundred trees to uproot or snap , damaging a total of 21 homes and businesses . 
 In Southaven , 40 homes were flooded and 200 were left homeless as a result of the heavy rainfall . A church undergoing construction in Calhoun County was damaged , and a street light in Lee County was snapped . Also , a fallen tree damaged a house in <unk> County . One indirect fatality occurred in Jasper County from an automobile accident due to wet roads . An estimated 24 @,@ 000 customers lost electric power during the storm . After the storm , several fires were sparked due to downed electrical wires . In all , the weakening Hurricane Dennis left $ 2 @.@ 6 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage . 
 Although impact was mostly minor , President George W. Bush initially declared 38 counties in Mississippi federal disaster areas , making them eligible for assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) . In the city of Meridian , over 300 people sought shelter . More than 885 people took shelter in Jackson County , and 1 @,@ 000 people were in shelters in neighboring Harrison County . On July 15 , three additional counties became eligible for federal assistance , bringing the number of declared disaster areas to 41 . 
 = 2nd Parachute Brigade in Southern France = 
 The British 2nd Parachute Brigade was part of the Operation Rugby airborne landings in August 1944 . The operation was carried out by an ad hoc airborne formation called the 1st Airborne Task Force . Operation Rugby was itself part of the Operation Dragoon invasion of Southern France by the American 7th Army . The airborne task force landed in the River Argens valley with the objective of preventing German reinforcements from reaching the landing beaches . The landings were mainly an American operation and the brigade was the only British Army formation involved . 
 The brigade 's pathfinders landed accurately and set up their homing beacons , but the main body of the brigade landed over a large area , some 20 miles ( 32 km ) away . The following glider force also had problems ; weather conditions forced the brigade 's anti @-@ tank unit to turn back for Italy and return with the second wave later that day . Eventually the brigade captured their primary objectives , but the lack of manpower meant that their secondary objective of Le Muy was given to the American airborne forces . The seaborne and airborne landings linked up within two days , and the brigade became the reserve formation for the operation . 
 As a British withdrawal from France at the earliest opportunity had been the original intent , the brigade boarded ships bound for Italy eleven days after landing . The operation had cost the brigade 362 casualties , but this did not hinder their next mission in Greece two months later . Only 126 replacements were required to bring the brigade back up to full strength . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = 2nd Parachute Brigade = = = 
 Commanded by Brigadier Charles Hilary Vaughan Pritchard , the 2nd Parachute Brigade formed in 1942 and was assigned to the 1st Airborne Division . It comprised three parachute battalions , with their own artillery and engineer support . Although the brigade had not been involved in the division 's operations in Sicily , it took part in Operation Slapstick , the landing at Taranto in Italy . At the end of 1943 , when the 1st Airborne Division returned to the United Kingdom , the brigade remained behind fighting in the Italian Campaign . Since then , the brigade had taken part in patrols probing German lines , and the battles at Cassino and along the Sangro river at the Bernhardt Line . Previously , their only parachute mission had been Operation Hasty , which required only sixty men from the brigade . 
 = = = Operation Dragoon = = = 
 The Allied invasion of Southern France during the Second World War was given the code name Operation Dragoon . It would take place in the South of France , between Cannes and Toulon in August 1944 . The landings would be undertaken by the American 7th Army , with the Free French First Army landing after the beachhead was secure . Following the success of the Normandy airborne landings , Allied planners wanted to use an airborne force to support the invasion . However the airborne divisions in Europe , the American 82nd and 101st , had participated in the Normandy landings and were refitting for further operations to support the advance in France and the Low Countries . The two British divisions were also unavailable ; the 1st Airborne Division was preparing for operations in Northern Europe and the 6th Airborne Division was still fighting in Normandy . 
 The only other Allied airborne divisions were three American units . However , the 11th Airborne Division was in the Pacific , while the 13th and the 17th were back in the United States training . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = 1st Airborne Task Force = = = 
 Lack of an available airborne division forced the Allies to assemble an ad hoc formation , the 1st Airborne Task Force , in Italy on 1 July 1944 . Its objective was to land in the River Argens valley between Le Muy and Le Luc to prevent any German reinforcements reaching the landing beaches . 
 The task force initially comprised the American 517th Parachute Regimental Combat Team , reinforced by the 509th , and the 1st / 551st parachute infantry battalions and their only glider infantry battalion , the 550th . Command of the task force was given to Brigadier General Robert T. Frederick , who had previously commanded the 1st Special Service Force . To provide additional manpower , the experienced 2nd Parachute Brigade , was attached to the task force . But they would only stay in France until the beachhead had been established and the seaborne and airborne elements had linked up . Initially two Free French parachute battalions had been assigned to the task force , but they were withdrawn for a potential French airborne landing in the Massif Central . When the Americans and British refused to endorse the French plan , as it offered no support to operations in Normandy or to Dragoon , the French commander General de Gaulle would not allow them to be used in the landings . 
 In the initial plan for Operation Rugby , the codename for the airborne landings , the 2nd Parachute Brigade would land to the west of Le Muy , only 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the coast . The American 517th Regimental Combat Team would land beside Le Luc , and the 509th and 551st Battalions near <unk> . They would then hold the high ground and junctions along the main road through the Argens valley from Frejus to Toulon . This plan had the units widely separated and any German resistance or counterattack could cut off and destroy the task force piecemeal before help arrived from the landing beaches . 
 A revised plan produced on 12 July had the 2nd Parachute Brigade landing at the same place , but all the Americans would land at a large drop zone between Le Muy and <unk> , only 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the west of St Tropez . The task force 's staff were still not satisfied with the mission and on 15 July proposed a third plan . The new plan placed all the task force drop zones around 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Le Muy . In the first wave of landings , the 2nd Parachute Brigade drop zone was to the north of Le Muy , with their objective to capture Le Muy and the surrounding area including the village of La Motte . At the same time the 517th Regiment would land to the west of Le Muy and the 509th Battalion to the southeast . 
 A shortage of aircraft played a role in transporting the task force to France , which had to be divided into two large groups and a small glider group for the British . On D @-@ Day the first large group would be transported to France by 394 aircraft and eighty gliders . A second group of 325 aircraft and 270 gliders would arrive in the afternoon . The smaller British group consisting of the 2nd Parachute Brigade 's glider forces would arrive shortly after the first group in the morning . In total 9 @,@ 099 troops , 221 vehicles and 213 artillery guns would be delivered to France during Operation Rugby . 
 = = = German forces = = = 
 The German forces in the area of the landings were under the command of Army Group G , and also divided between the 1st Army in the west and the 19th Army in the east . In June 1944 , these three headquarters commanded three panzer divisions , around thirteen infantry divisions and some smaller formations . By this stage of the war , many of these divisions were lacking modern equipment , inexperienced and under @-@ trained . The troops were mainly elderly , or not fit for service in a first class division . Some divisions had several complete battalions formed by the Ostlegionen ( conscripted foreigners from Poland and Russia ) . Four of the divisions were static or garrison divisions and five were reserve formations that had only been used in an internal security role against the French Resistance . 
 After the Normandy landings many of these units moved north . Replacements that joined Army Group G came to refit after the fighting in Normandy or on the Eastern Front . They were under strength , with little or no equipment . 
 By August 1944 , the 19th Army comprised the 11th Panzer Division , the 198th , 242nd , 244th , 338th , 716th infantry divisions and the 148th , 157th and 189th reserve divisions , all of which were still under strength and lacking equipment . In the Argens valley area , where the 2nd Parachute Brigade would be landing , was the 242nd Infantry Division commanded by Generalleutnant Johannes <unk> . 
 = = Operation Rugby = = 
 = = = D @-@ Day = = = 
 At 03 : 34 on 15 August 1944 , the brigade 's pathfinders from the 23rd Independent Parachute Platoon landed on Drop Zone ' O ' . The brigade drop zone was in a valley 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long and around 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) wide running north to south , bordered on the south by the River Naturby . Their primary objective , Le Muy , was only around 400 yards ( 370 m ) from the southern edge of the drop zone , but they would have to cross the river to reach it . 
 By 04 : 30 the pathfinders had set up two Eureka beacons and landing lights to guide the transport planes to the correct drop zone . When the main force of C @-@ 47 aircraft arrived around 04 : 45 only seventy @-@ three dropped their parachutists on the correct drop zone . The other fifty @-@ three aircraft scattered their loads , mostly from the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion , over the countryside , some landing 20 miles ( 32 km ) away at Cannes and <unk> . Only Brigade Headquarters arrived at the drop zone in one piece , Brigadier Pritchard landing only 15 yards ( 14 m ) from the Eureka beacons . The 4th Parachute Battalion had around forty per cent of its manpower and the 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion sixty per cent . By 06 : 30 Brigade Headquarters was established at Le <unk> and radio contact made with the American 36th Infantry Division , which at the time was still on their transports out at sea . On the drop zone the pathfinders and Royal Engineers of the 2nd Parachute Squadron were removing obstacles , preparing for the arrival of their gliders later in the day , while the under strength parachute battalions headed for their objectives . 
 The 4th Parachute Battalion secured its first objectives , the high ground overlooking the village of Le Muy from the north and the village of Les Serres , by 04 : 30 . However the men left defending the village had to fight off several small German counterattacks throughout the day . The battalion then assaulted and captured the bridge over the River Naturby , which carried the road to Le Muy , taking twenty @-@ nine prisoners . The fighting cost the battalion seven dead and nine wounded . 
 Most of the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion landed in several groups , some distance from their drop zone . One large group comprised the commanding officer , most of the battalion headquarters and ' C ' Company . A second group was formed by ' D ' Company . Twenty @-@ one men , including the battalion intelligence officer , formed a third smaller group . The first group divided into three smaller units , all of which arrived at brigade headquarters by 22 : 30 on the same day . 
 The second group occupied the village of <unk> , and soon after attacked a German convoy , damaging several vehicles and causing heavy casualties among the occupants . Then they met with the 3rd Battalion of the 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment and both units headed south towards Le Muy . 
 One result of the brigades ' scattered landing was that several small groups of men caused havoc among the Germans , ambushing men and vehicles . One lone sergeant arrived at brigade headquarters with eighty prisoners , having convinced them that they were surrounded and should surrender . The 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion 's ' B ' Company , which had landed on the correct drop zone , ambushed a convoy of five trucks , killing twelve Germans , then assaulted a château , killing another thirty men before the surviving fifty surrendered . 
 The 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion lost some men to German fire as they descended and , once on the ground , had to fight their way to the battalion rendezvous . Then headed for their first objectives capturing La Motte , which became the first village liberated in the South of France . By 12 : 00 , they had taken all of their objectives , capturing over 100 prisoners . 
 The first of the brigade 's glider units , forty Waco gliders carrying the 64th Airlanding Light Battery Royal Artillery and their 75 mm pack howitzers , landed at 09 : 20 . The thirty @-@ five larger Horsa gliders , transporting the 300th Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery and its equipment , failed to arrive , turning back to Italy due to an overcast sky at the landing zone . The Horsas returned with the afternoon 's second wave landing at 15 : 04 . 
 By 22 : 15 the brigade had secured all of its day one objectives and some of the missing men had arrived in the brigade area . However , there were many still unaccounted for . The 4th Parachute Battalion numbered around 200 men with almost no heavy weapons . The 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion had 317 men . There were only enough men of the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion to guard the approach roads leading to the drop zone from the north . 
 = = = Link up with seaborne landings = = = 
 The scattered nature of the airborne landings caused some confusion among the German high command . At the LXII Corps headquarters , several reports of the landings exaggerated their strength , causing the Germans to believe they were faced with a far greater force . Also , 600 dummy paratroops that had landed to the north and west of Toulon , as part of the Allied deception plan , convinced the Germans another landing had taken place there . 
 The 2nd Parachute Brigade had a secondary objective of capturing Le Muy . It was supposed to have been assaulted by the 4th Parachute Battalion with the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion providing fire support . With the forces he had at hand , Pritchard was unable to carry out the task . The objective was then given to the 550th Glider Infantry Battalion , which had arrived with the second wave of aircraft . At 02 : 15 16 August the American battalion moved through the British positions and assaulted the village . The village was defended in strength by the Germans and the attack failed , causing several casualties to the Americans . A second attempt at 11 : 40 was more successful , killing or wounding 300 Germans and taking 700 prisoners . 
 Further north , the missing men of the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion were still trying to reach the brigade area . The smaller group commanded by the battalion intelligence officer observed a German convoy heading south towards Le Muy . They quickly set up an ambush and destroyed several vehicles before being forced to withdraw into the hills by the stronger German force . 
 On 17 August the leading units of the 36th Infantry Division reached Le Muy , which should have effectively ended the brigade 's participation in the operation ; however , two of the brigade 's companies defending roads in the area were attacked by retreating Germans and forced to withdraw to the high ground . The brigade sent reinforcements which successfully counterattacked the Germans , taking ninety @-@ seven prisoners . 
 Early on 18 August the brigade elements to the north @-@ east of Le Muy were relieved by the 36th Infantry Division , and the brigade became the Operation Dragoon reserve formation . Then problems on the far right of the landings between Grasse and Cannes resulted in the brigade being sent to that area . Having no transport other than a small number of Jeeps , mostly to tow their artillery guns , the brigade commandeered several trucks , tractors , buses and horse @-@ drawn wagons and was in place within twenty @-@ four hours . Cannes was liberated on 25 August . On the next day , the brigade left France to return to Italy . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The 2nd Parachute Brigade arrived by sea at Naples on 28 August . From there they moved to Rome on 3 September , and on 8 September , to a camp near Taranto in preparation for their next mission . During Operation Rugby the 2nd Parachute Brigade recorded 362 casualties ; 51 dead , 130 wounded and 181 missing . Most of the missing eventually returned to the brigade and only 126 replacements were required to bring the brigade back up to strength . 
 The brigade 's next mission was Operation Manna . This time they would be landing in Greece . The Soviet Red Army advance in the east had forced the Germans to withdraw from the country or risk being cut off from any support or reinforcements . Over the night of 12 / 13 October 1944 , the first of the brigade 's units parachuted onto Megara airfield near Athens to prepare a landing zone for the follow @-@ up waves from the rest of the brigade . The brigade moved into Athens and then over three months fought their way to Salonika and the border with Bulgaria . 
 When the brigade left the 1st Airborne Task Force , the 1st Special Service Force replaced them . The task force advanced eastwards and reached the Franco @-@ Italian border in the Menton area and the French Alps along part of what was the Maginot line . Here they halted in a defensive position for three months before being pulled out . The task force was now surplus to requirements and was disbanded on 23 November 1944 . Its surviving manpower was used as reinforcements for the other American airborne formations . 
 = = Brigade order of battle = = 
 Brigade headquarters 
 4th Parachute Battalion 
 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion 
 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion 
 127th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance 
 64th Airlanding Light Battery Royal Artillery 
 300th Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery Royal Artillery 
 2nd Parachute Squadron Royal Engineers 
 <unk> Parachute Brigade Company Royal Army Service Corps 
 2nd Parachute Brigade Group Workshop Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers 
 2nd Parachute Brigade Group Signals Royal Corps of Signals 
 1st Independent Glider Pilot Squadron Army Air Corps 
 23rd Independent Parachute Platoon 
 = Purr by Katy Perry = 
 Purr by Katy Perry is a fragrance created by American singer Katy Perry and Gigantic <unk> . Katy 's love for cats and kittens influenced both her decision to create the perfume and its design , although further inspiration for the bottle 's design came from other perfume products worldwide . Purr features a variety of scents , including citrus fruits . Released in November 2010 , it is available in a purple cat @-@ shaped bottle . Purr is available in 1 @.@ 7 and 3 @.@ 4 fluid ounce bottles , with a retail price in the US of $ 35 @.@ 00 to $ 45 @.@ 00 for the smaller size and $ 65 @.@ 00 for the larger . 
 = = Conception = = 
 Katy Perry chose to release her own signature fragrance , Purr , to add a personal touch and compete with other celebrities ' perfumes ; she cited Beyoncé and Kim Kardashian as examples . Having teamed up with Gigantic <unk> , she was actively involved in the development of her fragrance . She mentioned in an interview that she created the product because she loves cats . 
 Katy ( a self @-@ described " lyrical @-@ based person " ) decided the name " Purr " seemed natural since it sounded like " perfume " , " perfect " and even " Perry " . Working with Firmenich fragrances , she wanted to make a scent that would have a strong effect on people and something that was not reminiscent of other perfumes she had smelt . Nordstrom National Beauty and Fragrance Director Cheri <unk> said that while the pop singer was working with perfumers on Purr , the aim was to " capture the distinctive notes of her favorite perfumes " . 
 = = = Packaging and scent = = = 
 Purr 's scent is fresh with a citrus twist which also features peach nectar and apple with green bamboo . It also includes a " delicate bouquet of jasmine blossom , pink freesia and Bulgarian rose , balanced by vanilla orchid , white amber , creamy sandalwood and musk . " The bottle is purple , shaped like a cat , decorated with jeweled eyes and features metallic details . Its design was hand @-@ sketched by Katy Perry herself , and was influenced by her Catwoman stage costume . 
 = = Release = = 
 Following the theme of the bottle 's design , Purr 's feline @-@ inspired print advertisements featured Perry posing provocatively in a purple and pink cat suit . While she was shooting the commercial advert for Purr , the television show Extra conducted a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes interview with Perry about the design of the bottle . Purr was launched in November 2010 in the United Kingdom , where it was available exclusively at London 's Selfridges store for one week , ahead of a national roll @-@ out beginning November 20 . 
 In the United States , the fragrance is available exclusively at Nordstrom stores . It is sold in 1 @.@ 7 and 3 @.@ 4 fluid ounce bottles at a reported retail price of $ 35 @.@ 00 to $ 45 @.@ 00 for the former and $ 65 @.@ 00 for the larger . Purr is also available online through <unk> 's official website . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Monthly teen magazine Seventeen called Purr 's bottle design " cute " . Miriam Lacey of <unk> 's spin @-@ off website <unk> gave the perfume a favorable review and said it smelt " like a fancier , less chemical @-@ laden version " of fruit @-@ scented body sprays . In her review , Lacey also called Purr an " upside @-@ down " fragrance , because unlike most perfumes which " open with their prettiest notes and then end with a relatively generic bottom accord " , Purr has a " really nice caramel and sweet patchouli dry down that fans of Angel will adore , but to get there , you have to sit through a bunch of fruity opening notes " . Lacey observed that its scent only lasted about 2 hours ; she thought it would be better to spray it onto your hairbrush , " since the oils on your scalp will help it last longer " . 
 = Ed Jew = 
 Edmund " Ed " Jew ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; Jyutping : <unk> <unk> <unk> , born 1960 in San Francisco , California ) is a former Chinese American politician based in San Francisco , who was convicted of extortion , bribery , and perjury in 2008 . 
 He graduated from San Francisco State University with a degree in economics and later earned a master 's degree in business administration at Golden Gate University . After spending several years as a businessman managing his family enterprises , he entered politics in 1980s and went on to serve in various community organizations . In 1996 , he was the volunteer liaison for then District 4 supervisor Leland Yee . In 2002 , Yee successfully ran for a seat in the California Assembly , and Jew ran for Yee 's seat on the Board of Supervisors in the 2002 election , but was defeated . When Yee 's successor Fiona Ma in 2006 ran for state assembly , Jew again ran for supervisor in District 4 , which comprises most of the Sunset District . After winning a highly competitive election decided by instant @-@ runoff voting , he was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors . 
 Six months after he took office , the FBI raided his office and homes for allegedly extorting money from small business owners in his district . Shortly after the raid , the city attorney began investigating Jew for violating residency requirements necessary to hold his supervisor position . In September 2007 , he was suspended by Mayor Gavin Newsom and later resigned in the face of extortion and perjury charges . In late 2008 , he pleaded guilty to both charges . He was sentenced to 64 months in federal prison for extortion , and a year in county jail for perjury . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Edmund Jew was born in San Francisco , California in 1960 . The Jew family emigrated from China around the start of the 20th century . His grandfather James Jew , who arrived to the city in 1913 , established an employment agency in 1925 and the Canton Flower Shop in Chinatown in 1927 . He became a distinguished leader in the Chinese community after serving many local Chinese American associations . 
 Jew was raised in Chinatown . After graduating from McAteer High School , Jew attended City College of San Francisco and San Francisco State University , where he earned a degree in economics . In 1984 , he also earned a Master of Business Administration degree from Golden Gate University . 
 Before entering politics , Jew was an entrepreneur . Among other enterprises , he managed his family 's flower shop and owned a local taxi company named Howard Mock Jew , Inc . In addition , he invested in real estate . He bought his first property in San Francisco at the age of 21 and , as of 2002 , he had a real estate portfolio ( including properties in the Bay Area and Arizona ) worth as much as $ 5 million . 
 Jew 's wife Lorene and their daughter <unk> live in Burlingame , California . He also has a brother named David Jew . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Jew began his political career in the 1980s , establishing the Chinese Neighborhood Resource Center , which helped to clean up alleyways in Chinatown . He was then appointed by the mayor to serve on the Ten Year Plan Council to End Chronic Homelessness and the Office of Aging Advisory Council , the later oversaw the city 's senior services . Like his grandfather , Jew was heavily involved in local Chinese @-@ American politics , serving as president of the Jew Family Benevolent Association , the Yeong Wo Benevolent Association , the Hay Sen Benevolent Association , the Hip Sen Benevolent Association , and the Lung Kong Benevolent Association . He was also an active participant of numerous other community organizations , such as the Northeast Community Federal Credit Union , the Chinese Holocaust Museum , the Sunset Residents Association , and the Sunset Parkside Education and Action Committee . Jew once served as vice chairman of the San Francisco County Republican Central Committee before re @-@ registering as an Independent and then as a Democrat . 
 From 1996 to 2001 , Jew was District 4 then @-@ supervisor Leland Yee 's volunteer community liaison . Jew first ran for Yee 's District 4 seat in 2002 when Yee ran for the California State Assembly . Despite Yee 's endorsement , Jew finished third , missing the runoff election . In 2006 , Jew again ran for same supervisor seat when Fiona Ma ran for the California Assembly . Jew led other candidates including his top challenger Ron <unk> in the first round with 26 % first @-@ place votes . He eventually won the closely fought election after securing a 52 % majority . In December 2006 , Mayor Gavin Newsom appointed Jew to serve out the remainder of Ma 's term ; he took office in January 2007 . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = FBI raid and extortion charges = = = 
 On May 18 , 2007 , six months after Jew took office as supervisor , agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , armed with a federal warrant , raided his office at City Hall , his houses in San Francisco and Burlingame , and his Chinatown flower shop . The FBI sought evidence in Jew 's computers and records regarding " potentially criminal allegations " surrounding an extortion attempt . 
 Jew said that he had been contacted by the owners of a local chain tapioca drink shop , Quickly , to resolve Quickly 's business permit issues . Jew demanded $ 80 @,@ 000 for his assistance , but agreed to accept $ 40 @,@ 000 . The shop owners then contacted the FBI , which supplied the cash for a sting operation . The FBI used an undercover agent to meet with Jew and hand over the money . 
 Jew claimed that he turned over the money to a man named Robert Chan from a land use consulting firm called Bridge Consulting , though this was never substantiated . He also asked that half of the money be donated to the Friends of Sunset Playground , a local organization set up to raise money for the renovation of a playground at 28th Avenue and Lawton Street . The donation was later rejected by the group 's fiscal agency , Sunset Youth Services , after the directors , Dawn and Ron <unk> and <unk> Mack learned the nature of the donation source . 
 On September 20 , 2007 , federal prosecutors charged Jew with one count of mail fraud in connection with extorting $ 80 @,@ 000 from Quickly . Jew denied any wrongdoing . He questioned what influence he could have over the issuing of permits , and reiterated his refusal to resign his position , despite insistence from Mayor Gavin Newsom . On November 7 , 2007 , a federal grand jury added five felony charges , including two counts each of bribery and mail fraud and one count of extortion . He was also accused of accepting $ 4 @,@ 000 in cash from the owner of another local business , Wonderful Desserts and Cafe . Jew pleaded not guilty to all charges . 
 = = = Residency requirements violation = = = 
 In late May 2007 , following the FBI raid , questions surfaced about whether or not Jew actually lived in his San Francisco home , and whether or not Jew therefore met the residency requirements of his supervisor position . The house in question ( on 28th Avenue in the Sunset District ) was owned by his father , though Jew 's neighbors said that the house was vacant and utility bills showed little to no usage of water or electricity . Jew claimed that he spent most of his time at his flower shop , but was not able to provide more information in response to City Attorney Dennis Herrera 's formal requests . 
 On June 12 , 2007 , San Francisco District Attorney Kamala Harris issued a warrant for Jew 's arrest , and charged him with nine felony counts of perjury , election code violations , voter fraud , and providing false documents . Jew turned himself in to the Burlingame Police Department . 
 On June 18 , 2007 , City Attorney Dennis Herrera sought approval from then California Attorney General Jerry Brown to remove Ed Jew from office . Citing records that showed little use of utilities and interviews with 32 neighbors , Herrera declared that Jew had violated the residency requirements of the City Charter by falsely claiming in his campaign papers that he was a resident of San Francisco . Mayor Gavin Newsom said the case against Jew was " very damning " and raised concern about Jew continuing to cast votes while the legitimacy of his residency was in question . 
 On July 4 , 2007 , Jew 's attorneys issued a 138 @-@ page response to Herrera 's petition , arguing that even if Jew had not lived full @-@ time in his home in District 4 , his election had not violated any laws . They also accused Herrara of political bias in bringing the charges . Herrera denied Jew 's accusations , and released signed bank loan documents on which Jew had identified his address in Burlingame . On July 17 , 2007 , Jew pleaded not guilty to the perjury charges , and was granted bail after Jew agreed to surrender his passport . 
 During the preliminary hearing in late July , prosecutors presented testimonies from Jew 's neighbors at both of his homes , indicating that Jew had never lived in his 28th Avenue house and spent most of his time in Burlingame . Testimony from a U.S. Postal Service inspector revealed that Jew 's first @-@ class mail went to Burlingame while junk mail went to his San Francisco address ; prosecutors cited utility bills showing low usage of water and electricity at his 28th Avenue home , as well as loan applications that indicated he lived in Burlingame . In his defense , Jew produced a jury duty summons to indicate his address in San Francisco , and questioned the possible bias of the witnesses against him . 
 = = = Suspension and resignation = = = 
 On September 25 , 2007 , Mayor Gavin Newsom suspended Jew for alleged official misconduct and began the process of removing him from office . The city attorney also served Jew with civil charges of misconduct for allegedly lying about where he lived . Deputy budget director Carmen Chu was appointed as Jew 's temporary replacement on the Board of Supervisors . On January 10 , 2008 , Jew tendered his resignation in exchange for Herrera and Newsom dropping both the civil lawsuit and misconduct proceeding before the Ethics Commission regarding his residency violation . In a letter , he noted that he resigned due to tremendous legal expenses and swore never to seek public office again in the best interest of his family . Chu became Jew 's interim successor until the election in November 2008 . 
 = = = Guilty plea and sentencing = = = 
 On October 10 , 2008 , Jew changed his plea to guilty on the federal mail fraud and extortion charges . The following month , he also changed his plea to guilty on the perjury charges . 
 On April 3 , 2009 , Jew was sentenced to 64 months in state prison and fined $ 10 @,@ 000 on the federal extortion charge . Prosecutors stated that he " preyed upon and victimized the very people whom he had proposed to support in his campaign : small business owners in the Sunset District . " On April 22 , 2009 , he was sentenced to one year in county jail , three years of probation , and a $ 2 @,@ 000 fine on the state perjury charge . Jew reported to a federal prison in Safford , Arizona on June 30 , 2009 . In June 2012 , Jew was held at Taft Federal Correctional Institution in Kern County , California . 
 = = = After prison = = = 
 In 2013 , Ed Jew was released to a halfway house in San Francisco 's Tenderloin area . In late 2014 , he took up a low @-@ paying job in a city @-@ funded program targeting illegal garbage dumping in Chinatown , a position he still held in 2016 . 
 = New Jersey Route 139 = 
 Route 139 is a state highway in Jersey City , New Jersey in the United States that heads east from the Pulaski Skyway over Tonnele Circle to the state line with New Jersey and New York in the Holland Tunnel , which is under the Hudson River , to New York City . The western portion of the route is a two level highway that is charted by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as two separate roadways : The 1 @.@ 45 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 33 km ) lower roadway ( Route 139 ) between U.S. Route 1 / 9 over Tonnele Circle and Interstate 78 at Jersey Avenue , and the 0 @.@ 83 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 34 km ) upper roadway ( Route <unk> or Hoboken Avenue ) running from County Route 501 ( John F. Kennedy Boulevard ) and ending where it joins the lower highway as part of the 12th Street Viaduct , which ends at Jersey Avenue . The lower roadway is listed on the federal and NJ state registers of historic places since 2005 . The eastern 1 @.@ 32 miles ( 2 @.@ 12 km ) of the route includes the Holland Tunnel approach that runs concurrent with Interstate 78 on the one @-@ way pair of 12th Street eastbound and 14th Street westbound . Including the concurrency , the total length of Route 139 is 2 @.@ 77 miles ( 4 @.@ 46 km ) . 
 What is now Route 139 was originally the northernmost part of the Route 1 Extension . Route 25 replaced Route 1 in the 1927 renumbering . In 1953 renumbering , Route 25 was changed back to U.S. Route 1 , which had been previously rerouted to cross the Hudson River when the George Washington Bridge opened in 1931 . Route 25 from the Pulaski Skyway over Tonnele Circle to the Holland Tunnel became U.S. Route 1 / 9 Business . By the 1990s , U.S. Route 1 / 9 Business was replaced by Route 139 . 
 The New Jersey Department of Transportation ( NJDOT ) began a rehabilitation program for the lower and upper levels of the highway in 2005 . The renovation work for the 12th Street and 14th Street viaducts was completed in 2010 . Renovation of the upper roadway , including the Hoboken Avenue Viaduct , and Conrail Viaduct on the lower roadway is expected to be completed by 2016 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 139 is essentially three distinct , but connected highways : the upper level , the lower level , and the Holland Tunnel approach ( the Interstate 78 concurrency ) . NJDOT officially charts the lower and upper levels as independent highways , with the lower level considered Route 139 with a notation that the highway then coincides with I @-@ 78 , and the upper level considered Route <unk> . 
 = = = Lower level = = = 
 The lower level of Route 139 is a four @-@ lane freeway with its western end at U.S. Route 1 / 9 a continuation of the Pulaski Skyway over Tonnele Circle . A direct ramp , known as the Tonnele Circle Viaduct , passes over the circle , to connect westbound traffic with southbound U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck , which quickly connects to Route 7 that leads to Interstate 280 . Northbound U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck connects through the circle to eastbound traffic . The skyway soon ends with eastbound and westbound ramps at a cut in Bergen Hill and the four @-@ lane highway passes under John F. Kennedy Boulevard . The road turns to the southeast as the Conrail Viaduct crosses over Bergen Arches . It then runs under the upper level of Route 139 as it passes through the Hudson Palisades and is known as the Depressed Highway . The covered roadway is naturally ventilated with wide openings on the south side of the eastbound lanes and ventilation bays over the westbound lanes . The road re @-@ emerges under Palisade Avenue and splits into two viaducts ( one eastbound and one westbound ) that merge with Interstate 78 just west of Jersey Avenue at the Holland Tunnel approach . 
 = = = Upper level = = = 
 The upper level of Route 139 ( also known as State Highway and Hoboken Avenue Viaduct ) begins at an intersection with County Route 501 ( Kennedy Boulevard ) , which connects to Bayonne and Union City . The road heads to the southeast through urban residential and commercial areas as a four @-@ lane undivided road , coming to an intersection with Collard Street . Just past this , the route becomes a four @-@ lane divided road , which is separated by ventilation bays from the lower roadway , with the eastbound lanes running above the lower level of Route 139 . It continues between the Heights district to the north and the Journal Square district to the south . It crosses several streets , including County Route 646 ( St. Pauls Avenue ) , County Route 617 ( Summit Avenue ) , County Route 663 ( Central Avenue ) , and County Route 644 ( Oakland Street ) . The road meets Concord Street , where there is an eastbound left lane exit and a westbound intersection . After the intersection with Palisade Avenue , the upper level of Route 139 splits and merges with the lower level with a westbound ramp , which has a westbound entrance from the local Hoboken Avenue , and an eastbound ramp . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The four @-@ lane 12th Street and 14th Street viaducts , completed in 1927 and 1951 respectively , carry Route 139 between Jersey Avenue at Boyle Plaza and the cut into Bergen Hill under Palisades Avenue . Ramps from western end of 12th Street Viaduct connect to the upper level roadway at the top of Bergen Hill at the Palisades Avenue intersection . Westbound ramp on north side is separated from the main highway by a reinforced concrete retaining wall ; the eastbound ramp on south side is supported by reinforced concrete deck arch spans . The western end of 12th Street Viaduct transitions from two @-@ way to one @-@ way , four @-@ lane eastbound traffic just east of the connection with the westbound 14th Street Viaduct . The New Jersey Department of Transportation undertook a $ 92 million project to renew the viaducts . The reason for this project was that the viaducts were structurally deficient . The steel beams on the viaducts had deteriorated and the concrete was just extra weight . The project included replacement of the concrete deck , retrofitting for earthquakes , repair of the substructure and superstructure , and construction of a shoulder on westbound 14th Street Viaduct . The rehabilitated viaducts were to also feature ornamental designs to recall the historical significance of the two viaducts . This project was completed in 2010 . 
 = = = I @-@ 78 concurrency = = = 
 The elevated westbound Interstate 78 diverges from 14th Street Viaduct of Route 139 one block west of Jersey Avenue . A viaduct for eastbound Interstate 78 runs along south side of eastern section of the 12th Street Viaduct . The highway merges with Route 139 at eastern terminus of 12th Street Viaduct . From here , Route 139 continues east concurrent with that route and passes through business areas as a one @-@ way pair that follows six @-@ lane 12th Street eastbound and six @-@ lane 14th Street westbound . This segment of the route is under the jurisdiction of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and this area is also known as Boyle Plaza . The first intersection is with Jersey Avenue , which heads to Downtown Jersey City and Hoboken . It intersects with the one @-@ way northbound County Route 633 ( Erie Street ) next before crossing one @-@ way southbound County Route 635 ( Grove Street ) . After Grove Street , the road crosses County Route 637 ( Luis Muñoz Marín Boulevard ) near the Newport Centre Mall just to the south . Past this intersection , the eastbound traffic comes to the toll plaza for the Holland Tunnel . From here , the concurrency enters the Holland Tunnel under the Hudson River , which carries two lanes in each direction . Route 139 ends at the New Jersey and New York state line within the tunnel and Interstate 78 continues into New York City . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now the lower level of Route 139 was originally designated as the northernmost part of Route 1 Extension , which was authorized by the New Jersey Legislature in 1922 , a route that was to extend the existing Route 1 from Elizabeth to the Holland Tunnel in Jersey City . When the U.S. Highway System was established in 1926 , this road was also designated as part of U.S. Route 1 . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , this highway became part of Route 25 , a route that was to run from the Ben Franklin Bridge in Camden to the Holland Tunnel . 
 In the 1953 state highway renumbering , Route 25 designation was changed to U.S. Route 1 / 9 Business from the Pulaski Skyway over Tonnele Circle to the Holland Tunnel . By the 1990s , U.S. Route 1 / 9 Business was renumbered to NJ Route 139 . Along with the Pulaski Skyway , most of the Route 139 lower level became a contributing property to the Route 1 Extension historic district listed with the state and federal registers of historic places in 2005 . 
 Newark Bay Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike for Interstate 78 was opened in 1956 to provide access from the New Jersey Turnpike to the Holland Tunnel . Route 139 and I @-@ 78 were designated as concurrent where the roads joined at the Holland Tunnel approach near Jersey Avenue all the way to the New York state line in the Holland Tunnel . 
 As part of the Holland Tunnel project , the New Jersey Interstate Bridge and Tunnel Commission and the New York State Bridge and Tunnel Commission widened the four blocks of 12th and 14th Streets in Jersey City from Jersey Avenue to Provost Street . 12th Street was widened west of Grove Street to 100 feet ( 30 m ) , with the remaining block , at the toll plaza , being 160 feet ( 49 m ) wide . 14th Street , and the two blocks of Jersey Avenue carrying westbound traffic to the 12th Street Viaduct , were widened to 100 feet ( 30 m ) . 
 The two @-@ way , 12th Street Viaduct from Jersey Avenue to the top of Bergen Hill was opened July 4 , 1927 . The four @-@ lane , westbound , 1 @,@ 800 @-@ foot ( 550 m ) , 14th Street Viaduct , which was connected to the 12th Street Viaduct , was opened on February 13 , 1951 . The Port of New York Authority , which superseded the two state tunnel commissions and took over authority for the Holland Tunnel in 1930 , built the 14th Street Viaduct in order to avoid the turns to and from Jersey Avenue , but turned over authority over the viaduct to the New Jersey State Highway Commission . The western end of 12th Street Viaduct was transitioned from two @-@ way traffic to one @-@ way , four @-@ lane , eastbound traffic just east of the connection with the westbound 14th Street Viaduct . It was widened on the southern side between span nos . 1 @-@ 24 on the eastern end to accommodate the merge in 1956 with the eastbound New Jersey Turnpike extension , I @-@ 78 . 
 In 1928 , the completed lower level portion of the highway , along with Route 1 Extension on the eastern side of the Passaic River , was opened as the first part of the eventual high @-@ speed connection between the Holland Tunnel and Newark . The upper level of Route 139 ( Hoboken Avenue Viaduct ) , which provided a multi @-@ lane thoroughfare from Palisades Avenue to John F. Kennedy Boulevard , was also opened . 
 The high @-@ speed freeway connection was completed with the opening of the Pulaski Skyway in 1932 . The Pulaski Skyway ramp at its eastern terminus was eventually replaced with two long outside ramps that were dedicated for eastbound and westbound traffic from the cut in Bergen Hill just west of John F. Kennedy Boulevard . On September 14 , 1938 , a direct ramp , known as the Tonnele Circle Viaduct , opened over Tonnele Circle to connect westbound traffic with southbound U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck , which quickly connects to Route 7 that leads to Interstate 280 . 
 The Bergen Arches Expressway was proposed in 1989 by Governor Thomas Kean to connect the Jersey City waterfront with a new railroad line , which would provide access to the Meadowlands Sports Complex . This four @-@ lane road was to follow an abandoned railroad line known as the Bergen Arches . This proposed highway was strongly supported by Jersey City Mayor Bret Schundler , who felt that the road could bring further development , as well as provide traffic relief to the four @-@ lane Route 139 . In 1998 , this project was allocated $ 26 million in the federal Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century . Both Jersey City mayor candidates in 2001 supported a transit line instead of a highway along the Bergen Arches . Plans for a highway along the Bergen Arches were dropped in 2002 as leaders of Jersey City , including Mayor Glenn Dale Cunningham , favored mass transit . 
 In a controversial move in 2011 , Governor Chris Christie directed the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to divert money originally earmarked for the Access to the Region 's Core rail project to highway projects . The agency agreed to pay $ 1 @.@ 8 billion to partially fund rehabilitation to the Pulaski Skyway and Route 139 , and other projects that it considers part of the larger distribution network in the Port of New York and New Jersey . 
 The Route 139 project will rehabilitate the eastbound side of Hoboken Avenue Viaduct and resurface the westbound roadway . There will be operational improvements at several intersections on the upper roadway . It will replace the deck and rehabilitate the superstructure of the Conrail Viaduct . The total project cost is estimated at $ 180 – 200 million and is expected to be completed by 2016 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = = Mainline = = = 
 The entire route is in Hudson County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = = = Hoboken Avenue ( Upper Level ) = = = 
 The entire route is in Jersey City , Hudson County . 
 = 2011 Tirreno – Adriatico = 
 The 2011 Tirreno – Adriatico was the 46th running of the Tirreno – Adriatico cycling stage race , often known as the Race of two seas . It started on 9 March in Marina di Carrara and ended on 15 March in San Benedetto del Tronto and consisted of seven stages , including a team time trial to begin the race and an individual time trial to conclude it . It was the third race of the 2011 UCI World Tour season . 
 The race was won by BMC Racing Team rider Cadel Evans , who claimed the leader 's blue jersey on stage five before a stage win on stage six . Evans ' winning margin over runner @-@ up Robert Gesink ( Rabobank ) was 11 seconds , as Gesink overhauled both Ivan Basso of Liquigas – Cannondale and Lampre – ISD 's Michele Scarponi on the final time trial stage . Scarponi – winner of the fourth stage – completed the podium , 15 seconds down on Evans . 
 In the race 's other classifications , Gesink 's second place overall won him the white jersey for the highest placed rider aged 25 or under , and Scarponi took home the red jersey for amassing the highest number of points during stages at intermediate sprints and stage finishes . Quick @-@ Step rider Davide Malacarne won the King of the Mountains classification , with Liquigas – Cannondale finishing at the head of the teams classification . 
 = = Teams = = 
 The Tirreno – Adriatico was part of the 2011 UCI World Tour , so all 18 UCI ProTeams were invited automatically and obligated to attend . Two UCI Professional Continental teams were awarded wildcards . These were the Acqua & Sapone team of defending champion Stefano Garzelli and the Farnese Vini – Neri Sottoli team of Italian national champion Giovanni Visconti , both of whom were present in the race . 
 The full list of participating teams is : 
 = = Race previews and favorites = = 
 Numerous notable riders were present in the race peloton , though their reasons for attending varied slightly . Top stage racers like Cadel Evans , Ivan Basso , Robert Gesink , Vincenzo Nibali , Joaquim Rodríguez , Andy Schleck , and Marco Pinotti were present . Evans ' attendance was mainly for racing kilometers before attempting to win the Tour de France . Basso , who likewise planned to peak at the Tour de France , came to the race hoping for overall victory . He named Gesink as a potential rival , and Gesink for his part claimed Basso as a rider he fears . Schleck , Nibali , and Evans were named by one pre @-@ race analysis as possible contenders , but not favorites , due to their plans to be at peak form later in the season . 
 Other riders named as contenders included Philippe Gilbert , Damiano Cunego , Thomas <unk> , David Millar , Italian national champion Giovanni Visconti and Edvald Boasson Hagen . 2010 's top two , Stefano Garzelli and Michele Scarponi , both returned , but as the race had no time trial in 2010 and had two in 2011 , their chances were diminished due to their relatively weak time trial skills . Other notable riders present in the field included 2008 winner Fabian Cancellara , American time trial specialist David Zabriskie , Italian classics rider and former Tirreno – Adriatico podium finisher Alessandro Ballan , former Italian national champion Filippo Pozzato , 2010 Giro d 'Italia runner @-@ up David Arroyo , and Australian sprinter Robbie McEwen . 
 Despite there being only two flat stages ( the first two road race days ) , many top @-@ tier sprinters started the race , as the Tirreno – Adriatico is traditionally considered to be excellent preparation for Milan – San Remo . Every Milan – San Remo winner since Andrei <unk> in 1999 raced Tirreno – Adriatico ( rather than Paris – Nice ) beforehand . Tyler Farrar , Tom Boonen , Alessandro Petacchi , André Greipel , world champion Thor Hushovd , the aforementioned McEwen , and the last two Milan – San Remo winners Mark Cavendish and Óscar Freire all started the race . 
 The stage 1 team time trial was the first in the Tirreno – Adriatico 's 46 @-@ year history . The individual time trial returned in stage 7 , after not being present in 2010 . Along with the two flat stages and the two time trials were three hilly stages . While there were no exceptionally high passes visited in the race , each of the hilly stages was long and featured several small , steep ascents . Stages 4 and 5 were both 240 km ( 150 mi ) in length , which is long for stages in a multi @-@ day race . The five road races covered 1 @,@ 049 km ( 652 mi ) in total . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 9 March 2011 – Marina di Carrara , 16 @.@ 8 km ( 10 @.@ 4 mi ) , team time trial ( TTT ) 
 The race of the two seas began with a flat team time trial starting and ending in Marina di Carrara in Tuscany on the Tyrrhenian coast . The course cut inland briefly , but doubled back and ended less than a kilometer from where it started . 
 The Dutch team Rabobank was the first out of the starthouse , finishing with six of their eight riders in a time of 18 ' 08 " . The stage 's main favorites took the course later , and each fell short of the time set . Garmin – Cervélo had a slow start , but picked up speed as their ride wore on , finishing second nine seconds slower than Rabobank . HTC – Highroad and Liquigas – Cannondale , winners of the TTT in the respective last two editions of the Giro d 'Italia , finished third and fifth at 10 and 22 seconds off Rabobank 's time . Omega Pharma – Lotto sprinter André Greipel crashed in the warmups for the TTT and suffered numerous facial injuries . He rode the time trial with several bandages on his head , and abandoned the race before stage 2 with his left eye swollen completely shut . 
 The Leopard Trek team , driven by world time trial champion Fabian Cancellara , had trouble retaining the minimum of five riders . Tom Stamsnijder fell off the group 's pace outside the final kilometer and Cancellara , likely unaware , kept drilling his squad to get them to the line as fast as possible . Their time was not taken until Stamsnijder finished , several seconds after the first four riders , giving them seventh place at 29 seconds back . The squads of Michele Scarponi , Giovanni Visconti , and defending champion Stefano Garzelli all lost considerable time , finishing 37 , 55 , and 47 seconds off the pace respectively . Lars Boom took the first blue jersey as race leader since he had been the first Rabobank rider to cross the finish line , but more significant was the time in hand the result meant for Robert Gesink against his rivals for the overall classification . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 10 March 2011 – Carrara to Arezzo , 202 km ( 126 mi ) 
 The profile for the first road race stage was largely flat , with two small climbs coming about two @-@ thirds of the way in . The course was easterly , heading from the start town of Carrara to the frazione of <unk> in Arezzo . 
 Despite the stage being all but certain to end in a field sprint , Javier <unk> , Leonardo Giordani , and Olivier Kaisen tried their luck with a breakaway after just 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . They were able to increase their advantage by two minutes at one point when the peloton was caught behind a closed railroad crossing , and the race jury decided that the breakaway would not have to stop while the peloton did . When their advantage hit 7 ' 30 " , the chase , led largely by Team Katusha , began in earnest . Tom Boonen and Mark Cavendish were both gapped off during the chase . Boonen finished 91 seconds back on the day , and though Cavendish did rejoin the leading group , he was not a factor in the sprint finish . The three @-@ man breakaway was caught 44 km ( 27 mi ) from the finish line , leaving Kaisen 's teammate Vicente <unk> to try a counter @-@ move , but he was never allowed more than 30 seconds ' advantage . A large group sprint indeed took place , won by Tyler Farrar after a strong leadout from world champion Thor Hushovd . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 11 March 2011 – <unk> Bracciolini to Perugia , 189 km ( 117 mi ) 
 Stage 3 was also flat , heading southeasterly to Perugia in the region of Umbria . A short point @-@ awarding climb occurred 25 km ( 16 mi ) before the finish line . 
 A lone Euskaltel – Euskadi rider formed the day 's breakaway . Daniel Sesma slipped ahead of the peloton after only 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . Given the stage 's flat profile and the limited power one rider can muster on his own , he was allowed an advantage of nearly ten minutes at one point , before the chase began . When he was caught , at the 30 km ( 19 mi ) to go mark , the Farnese Vini – Neri Sottoli team took to the front of the field to try to set up an attack by their leader Giovanni Visconti . Visconti never had much of an advantage , but the work done by his team did put sprinters like Mark Cavendish into more difficulty than anticipated on the short climb that preceded the finish . For the second day in a row , Cavendish had to chase back on to the main field prior to the mass sprint finale . In the sprint , world champion Thor Hushovd again led out race leader Tyler Farrar , but may have been too strong in so doing , as he briefly opened up a gap on his team leader . Cavendish lost the wheel of his leadout man Mark Renshaw , and again failed to factor into the finish . Hushovd 's early leadout left Farrar to go for the finish line from 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) out , which proved too far as Juan José Haedo was able to come around the American at the last moment and just pip him at the line for the victory . Farrar , however , retained the race leadership for another day . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 12 March 2011 – <unk> to Chieti , 240 km ( 150 mi ) 
 In stage 4 , the peloton nearly reached the Adriatic coast , ending in Chieti in Abruzzo just a few kilometers away . The course was hilly , with a climb and a descent early on and several short but steep climbs toward the finish . 
 The first of two very long stages began with a moment of silence in commemoration of the lives lost in the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , led by Team RadioShack 's <unk> Beppu , the only Japanese rider in the race . Beppu 's family was safe , and he chose to continue in the race . 
 After 25 km ( 16 mi ) , a leading trio came clear of the peloton . These were Mickaël Cherel , <unk> Štangelj , and Sebastian Lang . Their lead exceeded 15 minutes at one point , the most advantage given to a breakaway so far in the race . The mid @-@ course hills took their toll and the leaders ' time gap steadily fell as the day went on . Lang was dropped after he punctured and could not chase back on , leaving Cherel and Štangelj alone in front of the race . Their fatigue evident , Cherel tried to ride away from Štangelj with 20 km ( 12 mi ) left to race , but he could not muster much of an attack , and he was brought back 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) later after riding with a very slow cadence and a large gear for those 10 km . 
 Just before the stage @-@ concluding ascent to the hilltop town of Chieti truly began , world time trial champion Fabian Cancellara , Giovanni Visconti , Dmitriy Muravyev , and world road race champion Thor Hushovd tried a counter @-@ move , but none could keep Cancellara 's wheel , so they did not attain a meaningful advantage and were soon brought back . As the climb began , Michele Scarponi , Philippe Gilbert , Danilo Di Luca , and Damiano Cunego went on the attack and gapped off some of their rivals . Ivan Basso and Cadel Evans at first rode more conservatively , but did bridge back up . Scarponi was the strongest of the attackers , quickly surging to the front of the race . Gilbert and then Evans in succession tried to make their way up to him . Cunego marked each move and stayed in their slipstream , so that should the man he was following catch Scarponi , he would be fresher to attack and take victory for his team . Since his teammate was up the road , he did not help either in the chase . Scarponi faded toward the end but held on for victory by a few bike lengths . When it was clear that Scarponi would win the day , Cunego put in a finishing kick to take second place ahead of Evans , giving Lampre – ISD the top two finishers on the day . Scarponi also won in Chieti in the 2010 Tirreno – Adriatico . The gruppetto containing the sprinters , including overnight race leader Tyler Farrar , was 17 minutes back , so there was a new leader after this stage . That was Robert Gesink , still well @-@ placed because of Rabobank 's win in the team time trial , but he had had his advantage narrowed by finishing 12 seconds back on this stage . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 13 March 2011 – Chieti to Castelraimondo , 240 km ( 150 mi ) 
 The fifth stage included the only climb in the race of over 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) in height , the Sasso Tetto cresting at 154 km ( 96 mi ) in . The early part of the route hugged the Adriatic coast before cutting inland for the climbs . The riders saw the finish line twice , taking a 26 @.@ 6 km ( 16 @.@ 5 mi ) circuit in Castelraimondo . 
 Again , the day 's principal breakaway was given a large time gap . After 100 km ( 62 mi ) , Andrey Amador , Davide Malacarne , Mathew Hayman , Fabian Wegmann and Jens <unk> had a lead of over 11 minutes . The parcours began to take its toll at this point , and as the chase ramped up in the peloton , the time gap fell precipitously . By the time the ascent of the Sasso Tetto began , <unk> was gapped off and lost more and more time as the day went on , eventually finishing 21 minutes behind the stage winner . Hayman and Wegmann kept the pace for a while , and Wegmann won the day 's second climb , the Camerino at 201 @.@ 8 km ( 125 @.@ 4 mi ) , but eventually only Amador and Malacarne were left out front . The second group on the road eventually reduced itself to just a select group of overall favorites and contenders . Amador attacked first on the finishing circuit , but Malacarne made the bridge . Instead of working together to stay away and let a two @-@ up sprint decide the stage winner , Amador and Malacarne sat on one another 's wheels and let their rapidly falling advantage dwindle even further . From the elite group of contenders , Pinotti put in an attack on an uphill section of the finishing circuit that effectively gapped off race leader Robert Gesink , who had used up all of his support riders at this point . Gesink finished 17 seconds back on the day , losing the race leadership . 
 Amador and Malacarne hung on to an advantage of just under two minutes with 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) left to go , meaning they had a chance to stay away . Through a downhill section at 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) to go , their advantage held steady , but the uphill finish was too much for them . They were unaware that Wout Poels had come clear of the elite group of overall favorites and bridged up to them , and the Dutchman was in first position on the road with 200 m ( 660 ft ) to go . But instead of taking the optimal line along the barricades , Poels rode the final meters of the stage in the middle of the road , which gave classics specialist Philippe Gilbert the inside track to pip him at the line for the stage win . Damiano Cunego and Danilo Di Luca also finished at the front of the race , two seconds ahead of the next group . Malacarne 's all @-@ day effort in the breakaway did not go unrewarded , as he became the new leader of the mountains classification . Cadel Evans became the new race leader , and he expressed surprise that Gesink had lost it on a day that seemed to suit his strengths . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 14 March 2011 – <unk> to Macerata , 178 km ( 111 mi ) 
 This course was hilly . The riders rode part of the final kilometer in Macerata twice before the actual conclusion of the race , though they only crossed the finish line once . The final kilometer was uphill ; the first visit counted as a point @-@ awarding climb and the second was an intermediate sprint . 
 The first rider to break away for any length of time was Vacansoleil – DCM 's Borut Božič , coming clear at the 44 km ( 27 mi ) mark . He was joined shortly thereafter by a bridging Bert <unk> , and just 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) after Božič 's initial escape , the duo had five minutes on the main field . That time gap held steady until the finishing circuits in Macerata began , and the Lampre – ISD team came forward to lead the chase . The lead was two minutes on the hill climb pass at the end of the first circuit but only 20 seconds on the intermediate sprint at the end of the second , and they were caught not long after . 
 Lampre – ISD continued to work to soften up the field . Przemysław Niemiec was the first , and with only 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) left , Damiano Cunego was the last , as their leader Michele Scarponi figured to need to take not only the blue jersey but time in hand over race leader Cadel Evans should he hope to win the race overall , since Evans is the stronger time trialist . On the final ascent , Scarponi and Vincenzo Nibali both got clear of the lead group of overall favorites , but both strangely sat up and stopped riding hard , eying one another , after a turn in the road . This allowed Evans and the other top contenders to catch them . With 200 m ( 660 ft ) to go , Evans hit the front himself , and never gave up first position , holding on for the stage victory . He confirmed after the stage that he had come in simply hoping to retain the race lead , or at least limit any major losses , but when the opportunity to increase that lead presented itself , he took full advantage . 
 = = = Stage 7 = = = 
 15 March 2011 – San Benedetto del Tronto , 9 @.@ 3 km ( 5 @.@ 8 mi ) , individual time trial ( ITT ) 
