 The Tirreno – Adriatico ended as its parent race the Giro d 'Italia had for the last three seasons , with an individual time trial . San Benedetto del Tronto in the Marche region played host to a perfectly flat out @-@ and @-@ back ride right along the Adriatic coast . 
 The winning time came early in the day , from a likely source : four @-@ time world time trial champion Fabian Cancellara stopped the clock in 10 ' 33 " about two hours before the race 's top overall riders took to the course . Though it did hold up as best , Cancellara said afterward that he was far from certain in his time holding up , considering that he had no reference point . In contrast to the world championships , when he has usually started last as the defending champion and therefore knows the times and splits of his rivals , Cancellara had no such information for this ride . It was Cancellara 's first win for Leopard Trek and only the second win overall for the team , after the GP Samyn . 
 Later , the race 's top riders took the course to decide the overall standings . Robert Gesink , generally regarded as a poor time trialist , put up his second very strong individual performance in as many races , after having won the ITT at the Tour of Oman . He finished ninth on the day , 27 seconds back of Cancellara at an even 11 minutes , and successfully moved up to second in the overall standings . Ivan Basso , regarded as solid but unremarkable in the time trial discipline , had a difficult ride , finishing in 11 ' 16 " and slipping to fourth overall . Michele Scarponi did him one second better , at 11 ' 15 " , but fell short of overtaking even Gesink , let alone race leader Cadel Evans , with that time . Italian national champion Marco Pinotti finished sixth both in the time trial and the race overall , coming in at 10 ' 57 " on the day . As race leader , Evans was the last man on course , and he clocked in at 11 ' 04 " , ceding four seconds to Gesink in 12th place on the day , but this was sufficient for him to win the race overall . He knew Vincenzo Nibali 's time , which was 11 ' 14 " , before he began his ride , but not any of the others of his rivals . Evans became the first rider from the southern hemisphere to win Tirreno – Adriatico . Third place finisher Scarponi won the points classification , having taken the jersey from Tyler Farrar after stage 6 . Gesink took home the white jersey , having led the youth classification for the entire race . Stage 5 breakaway man Davide Malacarne was the winner of the mountains classification , and Basso and Nibali 's Liquigas – Cannondale squad won the team award . 
 = = Classification leadership table = = 
 In the Tirreno @-@ Adriatico , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , and allowing time bonuses in intermediate sprints and at the finish in mass @-@ start stages , the leader received a blue jersey . This classification was considered the most important of the Tirreno @-@ Adriatico , and the winner was considered the winner of the race itself . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a red jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing in the top ten in a stage . The stage win awarded 12 points , second place awarded 10 points , third 8 , and one point fewer per place down the line , to a single point for tenth . In addition , the first four riders across the intermediate sprint lines earned points , 5 , 3 , 2 , and 1 in succession . 
 There is also a mountains classification , which awarded a green jersey . In the mountains classifications , points were won by reaching the top of a mountain before other cyclists . There were sixteen recognized climbs in the race . Unlike most other races , the climbs were not separated into categories – each awarded the same points to the first five riders over its summit . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , which awarded a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1986 are eligible . 
 = Wright brothers = 
 The Wright brothers , Orville ( August 19 , 1871 – January 30 , 1948 ) and Wilbur ( April 16 , 1867 – May 30 , 1912 ) , were two American brothers , inventors , and aviation pioneers who are generally credited with inventing , building , and flying the world 's first successful airplane . They made the first controlled , sustained flight of a powered , heavier @-@ than @-@ air aircraft on December 17 , 1903 , four miles south of Kitty Hawk , North Carolina . In 1904 – 05 the brothers developed their flying machine into the first practical fixed @-@ wing aircraft . Although not the first to build and fly experimental aircraft , the Wright brothers were the first to invent aircraft controls that made fixed @-@ wing powered flight possible . 
 The brothers ' fundamental breakthrough was their invention of three @-@ axis control , which enabled the pilot to steer the aircraft effectively and to maintain its equilibrium . This method became and remains standard on fixed @-@ wing aircraft of all kinds . From the beginning of their aeronautical work , the Wright brothers focused on developing a reliable method of pilot control as the key to solving " the flying problem " . This approach differed significantly from other experimenters of the time who put more emphasis on developing powerful engines . Using a small homebuilt wind tunnel , the Wrights also collected more accurate data than any before , enabling them to design and build wings and propellers that were more efficient than any before . Their first U.S. patent , 821 @,@ 393 , did not claim invention of a flying machine , but rather , the invention of a system of aerodynamic control that manipulated a flying machine 's surfaces . 
 They gained the mechanical skills essential for their success by working for years in their shop with printing presses , bicycles , motors , and other machinery . Their work with bicycles in particular influenced their belief that an unstable vehicle like a flying machine could be controlled and balanced with practice . From 1900 until their first powered flights in late 1903 , they conducted extensive glider tests that also developed their skills as pilots . Their bicycle shop employee Charlie Taylor became an important part of the team , building their first airplane engine in close collaboration with the brothers . 
 The Wright brothers ' status as inventors of the airplane has been subject to counter @-@ claims by various parties . Much controversy persists over the many competing claims of early aviators . Edward Roach , historian for the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park argues that they were excellent self @-@ taught engineers who could run a small company , but they did not have the business skills or temperament to dominate the growing aviation industry . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 The Wright brothers were two of seven children born to Milton Wright ( 1828 – 1917 ) , of English and Dutch ancestry , and Susan Catherine Koerner ( 1831 – 1889 ) , of German and Swiss ancestry . Wilbur was born near Millville , Indiana , in 1867 ; Orville in Dayton , Ohio , in 1871 . The brothers never married . The other Wright siblings were Reuchlin ( 1861 – 1920 ) , Lorin ( 1862 – 1939 ) , Katharine ( 1874 – 1929 ) , and twins Otis and Ida ( born 1870 , died in infancy ) . In elementary school , Orville was given to mischief and was once expelled . The direct paternal ancestry goes back to a Samuel Wright ( b . 1606 in Essex , England ) who sailed to America and settled in Massachusetts in 1636 . 
 In 1878 their father , who traveled often as a bishop in the Church of the United Brethren in Christ , brought home a toy helicopter for his two younger sons . The device was based on an invention of French aeronautical pioneer Alphonse <unk> . Made of paper , bamboo and cork with a rubber band to twirl its rotor , it was about a foot long . Wilbur and Orville played with it until it broke , and then built their own . In later years , they pointed to their experience with the toy as the spark of their interest in flying . 
 = = Early career and research = = 
 Both brothers attended high school , but did not receive diplomas . The family 's abrupt move in 1884 from Richmond , Indiana to Dayton , Ohio , where the family had lived during the 1870s , prevented Wilbur from receiving his diploma after finishing four years of high school . The diploma was awarded posthumously to Wilbur on April 16 , 1994 , which would have been his 127th birthday . 
 In late 1885 or early 1886 Wilbur was struck in the face by a hockey stick while playing an ice @-@ skating game with friends , resulting in the loss of his front teeth . He had been vigorous and athletic until then , and although his injuries did not appear especially severe , he became withdrawn . He had planned to attend Yale . Instead , he spent the next few years largely housebound . During this time he cared for his mother who was terminally ill with tuberculosis , read extensively in his father 's library and ably assisted his father during times of controversy within the Brethren Church , but also expressed unease over his own lack of ambition . 
 Orville dropped out of high school after his junior year to start a printing business in 1889 , having designed and built his own printing press with Wilbur 's help . Wilbur joined the print shop , and in March the brothers launched a weekly newspaper , the West Side News . Subsequent issues listed Orville as publisher and Wilbur as editor on the masthead . In April 1890 they converted the paper to a daily , The Evening Item , but it lasted only four months . They focused on commercial printing afterward . One of their clients for printing jobs was Orville 's friend and classmate in high school , Paul Laurence Dunbar , who rose to international acclaim as a ground @-@ breaking African @-@ American poet and writer . For a brief period the Wrights printed the Dayton Tattler , a weekly newspaper that Dunbar edited . 
 Capitalizing on the national bicycle craze ( spurred by the invention of the safety bicycle and its substantial advantages over the penny @-@ farthing design ) , in December 1892 the brothers opened a repair and sales shop ( the Wright Cycle Exchange , later the Wright Cycle Company ) and in 1896 began manufacturing their own brand . They used this endeavor to fund their growing interest in flight . In the early or mid @-@ 1890s they saw newspaper or magazine articles and probably photographs of the dramatic glides by Otto Lilienthal in Germany . 1896 brought three important aeronautical events . In May , Smithsonian Institution Secretary Samuel Langley successfully flew an unmanned steam @-@ powered fixed @-@ wing model aircraft . In mid @-@ year , Chicago engineer and aviation authority Octave Chanute brought together several men who tested various types of gliders over the sand dunes along the shore of Lake Michigan . In August , Lilienthal was killed in the plunge of his glider . These events lodged in the consciousness of the brothers . In May 1899 Wilbur wrote a letter to the Smithsonian Institution requesting information and publications about aeronautics . Drawing on the work of Sir George Cayley , Chanute , Lilienthal , Leonardo da Vinci , and Langley , they began their mechanical aeronautical experimentation that year . 
 The Wright brothers always presented a unified image to the public , sharing equally in the credit for their invention . Biographers note that Wilbur took the initiative in 1899 – 1900 , writing of " my " machine and " my " plans before Orville became deeply involved when the first person singular became the plural " we " and " our " . Author James Tobin asserts , " it is impossible to imagine Orville , bright as he was , supplying the driving force that started their work and kept it going from the back room of a store in Ohio to conferences with capitalists , presidents , and kings . Will did that . He was the leader , from the beginning to the end . " 
 = = = Ideas about control = = = 
 Despite Lilienthal 's fate , the brothers favored his strategy : to practice gliding in order to master the art of control before attempting motor @-@ driven flight . The death of British aeronaut Percy Pilcher in another hang gliding crash in October 1899 only reinforced their opinion that a reliable method of pilot control was the key to successful — and safe — flight . At the outset of their experiments they regarded control as the unsolved third part of " the flying problem " . They believed sufficiently promising knowledge of the other two issues — wings and engines — already existed . The Wright brothers thus differed sharply from more experienced practitioners of the day , notably Clément Ader , Maxim and Langley who built powerful engines , attached them to airframes equipped with unproven control devices , and expected to take to the air with no previous flying experience . Although agreeing with Lilienthal 's idea of practice , the Wrights saw that his method of balance and control by shifting his body weight was inadequate . They were determined to find something better . 
 On the basis of observation , Wilbur concluded that birds changed the angle of the ends of their wings to make their bodies roll right or left . The brothers decided this would also be a good way for a flying machine to turn — to " bank " or " lean " into the turn just like a bird — and just like a person riding a bicycle , an experience with which they were thoroughly familiar . Equally important , they hoped this method would enable recovery when the wind tilted the machine to one side ( lateral balance ) . They puzzled over how to achieve the same effect with man @-@ made wings and eventually discovered wing @-@ warping when Wilbur idly twisted a long inner @-@ tube box at the bicycle shop . 
 Other aeronautical investigators regarded flight as if it were not so different from surface locomotion , except the surface would be elevated . They thought in terms of a ship 's rudder for steering , while the flying machine remained essentially level in the air , as did a train or an automobile or a ship at the surface . The idea of deliberately leaning , or rolling , to one side seemed either undesirable or did not enter their thinking . Some of these other investigators , including Langley and Chanute , sought the elusive ideal of " inherent stability " , believing the pilot of a flying machine would not be able to react quickly enough to wind disturbances to use mechanical controls effectively . The Wright brothers , on the other hand , wanted the pilot to have absolute control . For that reason , their early designs made no concessions toward built @-@ in stability ( such as dihedral wings ) . They deliberately designed their 1903 first powered flyer with anhedral ( drooping ) wings , which are inherently unstable , but less susceptible to upset by gusty cross winds . 
 = = Flights = = 
 = = = Toward flight = = = 
 In July 1899 Wilbur put wing warping to the test by building and flying a biplane kite with a five @-@ foot ( 1.5m ) wingspan . When the wings were warped , or twisted , one end of the wings produced more lift and the other end less lift . The unequal lift made the wings tilt , or bank : the end with more lift rose , while the other end dropped , causing a turn in the direction of the lower end . The warping was controlled by four cords attached to the kite , which led to two sticks held by the kite flyer , who tilted them in opposite directions to twist the wings . 
 In 1900 the brothers went to Kitty Hawk , North Carolina , to begin their manned gliding experiments . In his reply to Wilbur 's first letter , Octave Chanute had suggested the mid @-@ Atlantic coast for its regular breezes and soft sandy landing surface . Wilbur also requested and examined U.S. Weather Bureau data , and decided on Kitty Hawk after receiving information from the government meteorologist stationed there . Kitty Hawk , although remote , was closer to Dayton than other places Chanute had suggested , including California and Florida . The spot also gave them privacy from reporters , who had turned the 1896 Chanute experiments at Lake Michigan into something of a circus . Chanute visited them in camp each season from 1901 to 1903 and saw gliding experiments , but not the powered flights . 
 = = = Gliders = = = 
 The Wrights based the design of their kite and full @-@ size gliders on work done in the 1890s by other aviation pioneers . They adopted the basic design of the Chanute @-@ Herring biplane hang glider ( " double @-@ decker " as the Wrights called it ) , which flew well in the 1896 experiments near Chicago , and used aeronautical data on lift that Lilienthal had published . The Wrights designed the wings with camber , a curvature of the top surface . The brothers did not discover this principle , but took advantage of it . The better lift of a cambered surface compared to a flat one was first discussed scientifically by Sir George Cayley . Lilienthal , whose work the Wrights carefully studied , used cambered wings in his gliders , proving in flight the advantage over flat surfaces . The wooden uprights between the wings of the Wright glider were braced by wires in their own version of Chanute 's modified Pratt truss , a bridge @-@ building design he used for his biplane glider ( initially built as a triplane ) . The Wrights mounted the horizontal elevator in front of the wings rather than behind , apparently believing this feature would help to avoid , or protect them , from a nosedive and crash like the one that killed Lilienthal . Wilbur incorrectly believed a tail was not necessary , and their first two gliders did not have one . According to some Wright biographers , Wilbur probably did all the gliding until 1902 , perhaps to exercise his authority as older brother and to protect Orville from harm as he did not want to have to explain to Bishop Wright if Orville got injured . 
 * ( This airfoil caused severe stability problems ; the Wrights modified the camber on @-@ site . ) 
 = = = = 1900 Glider = = = = 
 The brothers flew the glider for only a few days in the early autumn of 1900 at Kitty Hawk . In the first tests , probably on October 3 , Wilbur was aboard while the glider flew as a kite not far above the ground with men below holding tether ropes . Most of the kite tests were unpiloted , with sandbags or chains and even a local boy as ballast . 
 They tested wing @-@ warping using control ropes from the ground . The glider was also tested unmanned while suspended from a small homemade tower . Wilbur , but not Orville , made about a dozen free glides on only a single day , October 20 . For those tests the brothers trekked four miles ( 6 km ) south to the Kill Devil Hills , a group of sand dunes up to 100 feet ( 30 m ) high ( where they made camp in each of the next three years ) . Although the glider 's lift was less than expected , the brothers were encouraged because the craft 's front elevator worked well and they had no accidents . However , the small number of free glides meant they were not able to give wing @-@ warping a true test . 
 The pilot lay flat on the lower wing , as planned , to reduce aerodynamic drag . As a glide ended , the pilot was supposed to lower himself to a vertical position through an opening in the wing and land on his feet with his arms wrapped over the framework . Within a few glides , however , they discovered the pilot could remain prone on the wing , headfirst , without undue danger when landing . They made all their flights in that position for the next five years . 
 = = = = 1901 Glider = = = = 
 Hoping to improve lift , they built the 1901 glider with a much larger wing area and made dozens of flights in July and August for distances of 50 to 400 ft ( 15 to 122 m ) . The glider stalled a few times , but the parachute effect of the forward elevator allowed Wilbur to make a safe flat landing , instead of a nose @-@ dive . These incidents wedded the Wrights even more strongly to the canard design , which they did not give up until 1910 . The glider , however , delivered two major disappointments . It produced only about one @-@ third the lift calculated and sometimes pointed opposite the intended direction of a turn – a problem later known as adverse yaw – when Wilbur used the wing @-@ warping control . On the trip home a deeply dejected Wilbur remarked to Orville that man would not fly in a thousand years . 
 The poor lift of the gliders led the Wrights to question the accuracy of Lilienthal 's data , as well as the " Smeaton coefficient " of air pressure , a value which had been in use for over 100 years and was part of the accepted equation for lift . 
 The Wrights used this equation to calculate the amount of lift that a wing would produce . Over the years a wide variety of values had been measured for the Smeaton coefficient ; Chanute identified up to 50 of them . Wilbur knew that Langley , for example , had used a lower number than the traditional one . Intent on confirming the correct Smeaton value , Wilbur performed his own calculations using measurements collected during kite and free flights of the 1901 glider . His results correctly showed that the coefficient was very close to 0 @.@ 0033 ( similar to the number Langley used ) , not the traditional 0 @.@ 0054 , which would significantly exaggerate predicted lift . 
 To learn whether errors actually existed in Lilienthal 's data tables , the brothers used a bicycle for a new type of experiment . They made a model @-@ size airfoil and a counter @-@ acting flat plate , both according to dimensions Lilienthal had specified , and attached them to an extra bicycle wheel , which they mounted horizontally in front of the handlebars . <unk> strenuously on a local street to create airflow over the apparatus , they observed that the third wheel rotated against the airfoil instead of remaining motionless as Lilienthal 's formula predicted . The experiment confirmed their suspicion that either the standard Smeaton coefficient or Lilienthal 's coefficients of lift and drag – or all of them – were in error . 
 They then built a six @-@ foot ( 1.8m ) wind tunnel in their shop and between October and December 1901 conducted systematic tests on dozens of miniature wings . The " balances " they devised and mounted inside the tunnel to hold the wings looked crude , made of bicycle spokes and scrap metal , but were " as critical to the ultimate success of the Wright brothers as were the gliders . " The devices allowed the brothers to balance lift against drag and accurately calculate the performance of each wing . They could also see which wings worked well as they looked through the viewing window in the top of the tunnel . The tests yielded a trove of valuable data never before known and showed that the poor lift of the 1900 and 1901 gliders was entirely due to an incorrect Smeaton value , and that Lilienthal 's published data were fairly accurate for the tests he had done . 
 Before the detailed wind tunnel tests Wilbur traveled to Chicago at Chanute 's invitation to give a lecture to the Western Society of Engineers on September 18 , 1901 . He presented a thorough report about the 1900 – 01 glider experiments and complemented his talk with a lantern slide show of photographs . Wilbur 's speech was the first public account of the brothers ' experiments . 
 = = = = 1902 Glider = = = = 
 Lilienthal had made " whirling arm " tests on only a few wing shapes , and the Wrights mistakenly assumed the data would apply to their wings , which had a different shape . The Wrights took a huge step forward and made basic wind tunnel tests on 200 wings of many shapes and airfoil curves , followed by detailed tests on 38 of them . The tests , according to biographer Fred Howard , " were the most crucial and fruitful aeronautical experiments ever conducted in so short a time with so few materials and at so little expense " . An important discovery was the benefit of longer narrower wings : in aeronautical terms , wings with a larger aspect ratio ( wingspan divided by chord — the wing 's front @-@ to @-@ back dimension ) . Such shapes offered much better lift @-@ to @-@ drag ratio than the broader wings the brothers had tried so far . 
 With this knowledge , and a more accurate Smeaton number , the Wrights designed their 1902 glider . Using another crucial discovery from the wind tunnel , they made the airfoil flatter , reducing the camber ( the depth of the wing 's curvature divided by its chord ) . The 1901 wings had significantly greater curvature , a highly inefficient feature the Wrights copied directly from Lilienthal . Fully confident in their new wind tunnel results , the Wrights discarded Lilienthal 's data , now basing their designs on their own calculations . 
 With characteristic caution , the brothers first flew the 1902 glider as an unmanned kite , as they had done with their two previous versions . <unk> their wind tunnel work , the glider produced the expected lift . It also had a new structural feature : a fixed , rear vertical rudder , which the brothers hoped would eliminate turning problems . 
 By 1902 they realized that wing @-@ warping created " differential drag " at the wingtips . Greater lift at one end of the wing also increased drag , which slowed that end of the wing , making the glider swivel — or " yaw " — so the nose pointed away from the turn . That was how the tailless 1901 glider behaved . 
 The improved wing design enabled consistently longer glides , and the rear rudder prevented adverse yaw — so effectively that it introduced a new problem . Sometimes when the pilot attempted to level off from a turn , the glider failed to respond to corrective wing @-@ warping and persisted into a tighter turn . The glider would slide toward the lower wing , which hit the ground , spinning the aircraft around . The Wrights called this " well digging " . 
 Orville apparently visualized that the fixed rudder resisted the effect of corrective wing @-@ warping when attempting to level off from a turn . He wrote in his diary that on the night of October 2 , " I studied out a new vertical rudder " . The brothers then decided to make the rear rudder movable to solve the problem . They hinged the rudder and connected it to the pilot 's warping " cradle " , so a single movement by the pilot simultaneously controlled wing @-@ warping and rudder deflection . Tests while gliding proved that the trailing edge of the rudder should be turned away from whichever end of the wings had more drag ( and lift ) due to warping . The opposing pressure produced by turning the rudder enabled corrective wing @-@ warping to reliably restore level flight after a turn or a wind disturbance . Furthermore , when the glider banked into a turn , rudder pressure overcame the effect of differential drag and pointed the nose of the aircraft in the direction of the turn , eliminating adverse yaw . 
 In short , the Wrights discovered the true purpose of the movable vertical rudder . Its role was not to change the direction of flight ( as a rudder does in sailing ) , but rather , to aim or align the aircraft correctly during banking turns and when leveling off from turns and wind disturbances . The actual turn — the change in direction — was done with roll control using wing @-@ warping . The principles remained the same when ailerons superseded wing @-@ warping . 
 With their new method the Wrights achieved true control in turns for the first time on October 8 , 1902 , a major milestone . From September 19 to October 24 they made between 700 and 1 @,@ 000 glides , the longest lasting 26 seconds and covering 622 @.@ 5 feet ( 189 @.@ 7 m ) . Hundreds of well @-@ controlled glides after they made the rudder steerable convinced them they were ready to build a powered flying machine . 
 Thus did three @-@ axis control evolve : wing @-@ warping for roll ( lateral motion ) , forward elevator for pitch ( up and down ) and rear rudder for yaw ( side to side ) . On March 23 , 1903 , the Wrights applied for their famous patent for a " Flying Machine " , based on their successful 1902 glider . Some aviation historians believe that applying the system of three @-@ axis flight control on the 1902 glider was equal to , or even more significant , than the addition of power to the 1903 Flyer . Peter <unk> of the Smithsonian asserts that perfection of the 1902 glider essentially represents invention of the airplane . 
 = = = Adding power = = = 
 In 1903 the brothers built the powered Wright Flyer I , using their preferred material for construction , spruce , a strong and lightweight wood , and Pride of the West muslin for surface coverings . They also designed and carved their own wooden propellers , and had a purpose @-@ built gasoline engine fabricated in their bicycle shop . They thought propeller design would be a simple matter and intended to adapt data from shipbuilding . However , their library research disclosed no established formulae for either marine or air propellers , and they found themselves with no sure starting point . They discussed and argued the question , sometimes heatedly , until they concluded that an aeronautical propeller is essentially a wing rotating in the vertical plane . On that basis , they used data from more wind tunnel tests to design their propellers . The finished blades were just over eight feet long , made of three laminations of glued spruce . The Wrights decided on twin " pusher " propellers ( counter @-@ rotating to cancel torque ) , which would act on a greater quantity of air than a single relatively slow propeller and not disturb airflow over the leading edge of the wings . 
 Wilbur made a March 1903 entry in his notebook indicating the prototype propeller was 66 % efficient . Modern wind tunnel tests on reproduction 1903 propellers show they were more than 75 % efficient under the conditions of the first flights , " a remarkable feat " , and actually had a peak efficiency of 82 % . 
 The Wrights wrote to several engine manufacturers , but none met their need for a sufficiently lightweight powerplant . They turned to their shop mechanic , Charlie Taylor , who built an engine in just six weeks in close consultation with the brothers . To keep the weight low enough , the engine block was cast from aluminum , a rare practice for the time . The Wright / Taylor engine had a primitive version of a carburetor , and had no fuel pump . Gasoline was gravity @-@ fed from the fuel tank mounted on a wing strut into a chamber next to the cylinders where it was mixed with air : the fuel @-@ air mixture was then vaporized by heat from the crankcase , forcing it into the cylinders . 
 The propeller drive chains , resembling those of bicycles , were supplied by a manufacturer of heavy @-@ duty automobile chains . The Flyer cost less than a thousand dollars , in contrast to more than $ 50 @,@ 000 in government funds given to Samuel Langley for his man @-@ carrying Great Aerodrome . The Flyer had a wingspan of 40 @.@ 3 ft ( 12 @.@ 3 m ) , weighed 605 lb ( 274 kg ) and had a 12 horsepower ( 8 @.@ 9 kW ) 180 lb ( 82 kg ) engine . 
 = = = First powered flight = = = 
 In camp at Kill Devil Hills , they endured weeks of delays caused by broken propeller shafts during engine tests . After the shafts were replaced ( requiring two trips back to Dayton ) , Wilbur won a coin toss and made a three @-@ second flight attempt on December 14 , 1903 , stalling after takeoff and causing minor damage to the Flyer . ( Because December 13 , 1903 , was a Sunday , the brothers did not make any attempts that day , even though the weather was good . ) In a message to their family , Wilbur referred to the trial as having " only partial success " , stating " the power is ample , and but for a trifling error due to lack of experience with this machine and this method of starting , the machine would undoubtedly have flown beautifully . " Following repairs , the Wrights finally took to the air on December 17 , 1903 , making two flights each from level ground into a freezing headwind gusting to 27 miles per hour ( 43 km / h ) . The first flight , by Orville at 10 : 35 am , of 120 feet ( 37 m ) in 12 seconds , at a speed of only 6 @.@ 8 miles per hour ( 10 @.@ 9 km / h ) over the ground , was recorded in a famous photograph . The next two flights covered approximately 175 and 200 feet ( 53 and 61 m ) , by Wilbur and Orville respectively . Their altitude was about 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above the ground . The following is Orville Wright 's account of the final flight of the day : 
 Wilbur started the fourth and last flight at just about 12 o 'clock . The first few hundred feet were up and down , as before , but by the time three hundred ft had been covered , the machine was under much better control . The course for the next four or five hundred feet had but little undulation . However , when out about eight hundred feet the machine began pitching again , and , in one of its darts downward , struck the ground . The distance over the ground was measured to be 852 feet ; the time of the flight was 59 seconds . The frame supporting the front rudder was badly broken , but the main part of the machine was not injured at all . We estimated that the machine could be put in condition for flight again in about a day or two . 
 Five people witnessed the flights : Adam Etheridge , John T. Daniels ( who snapped the famous " first flight " photo using Orville 's pre @-@ positioned camera ) and Will Dough , all of the U.S. government coastal lifesaving crew ; area businessman W.C. Brinkley ; and Johnny Moore , a teenaged boy who lived in the area . After the men hauled the Flyer back from its fourth flight , a powerful gust of wind flipped it over several times , despite the crew 's attempt to hold it down . Severely damaged , the airplane never flew again . The brothers shipped it home , and years later Orville restored it , lending it to several U.S. locations for display , then to a British museum ( see Smithsonian dispute below ) , before it was finally installed in 1948 in the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , D.C. , its current residence . 
 The Wrights sent a telegram about the flights to their father , requesting that he " inform press . " However , the Dayton Journal refused to publish the story , saying the flights were too short to be important . Meanwhile , against the brothers ' wishes , a telegraph operator leaked their message to a Virginia newspaper , which concocted a highly inaccurate news article that was reprinted the next day in several newspapers elsewhere , including Dayton . 
 The Wrights issued their own factual statement to the press in January . Nevertheless , the flights did not create public excitement — if people even knew about them — and the news soon faded . In Paris , however , Aero Club of France members , already stimulated by Chanute 's reports of Wright gliding successes , took the news more seriously and increased their efforts to catch up to the brothers . 
 Modern analysis by Professor Fred E. C. <unk> and Henry R. Jex ( in 1985 ) has demonstrated that the 1903 Wright Flyer was so unstable as to be almost unmanageable by anyone but the Wrights , who had trained themselves in the 1902 glider . 
 = = = Trouble establishing legitimacy = = = 
 In 1904 the Wrights built the Flyer II . They decided to avoid the expense of travel and bringing supplies to the Outer Banks and set up an airfield at Huffman Prairie , a cow pasture eight miles ( 13 km ) northeast of Dayton . They received permission to use the field rent @-@ free from owner and bank president Torrance Huffman . They invited reporters to their first flight attempt of the year on May 23 , on the condition that no photographs be taken . Engine troubles and slack winds prevented any flying , and they could manage only a very short hop a few days later with fewer reporters present . Library of Congress historian Fred Howard noted some speculation that the brothers may have intentionally failed to fly in order to cause reporters to lose interest in their experiments . Whether that is true is not known , but after their poor showing local newspapers virtually ignored them for the next year and a half . 
 The Wrights were glad to be free from the distraction of reporters . The absence of newsmen also reduced the chance of competitors learning their methods . After the Kitty Hawk powered flights , the Wrights made a decision to begin withdrawing from the bicycle business so they could concentrate on creating and marketing a practical airplane . This was financially risky , since they were neither wealthy nor government @-@ funded ( unlike other experimenters such as Ader , Maxim , Langley and Alberto Santos @-@ Dumont ) . The Wright brothers did not have the luxury of being able to give away their invention ; it was to be their livelihood . Thus , their secrecy intensified , encouraged by advice from their patent attorney , Henry Toulmin , not to reveal details of their machine . 
 At Huffman Prairie , lighter winds made takeoffs harder , and they had to use a longer starting rail than the 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) rail used at Kitty Hawk . The first flights in 1904 revealed problems with longitudinal stability , solved by adding ballast and lengthening the supports for the elevator . During the spring and summer they suffered many hard landings , often damaging the aircraft and causing minor injuries . On August 13 , making an unassisted takeoff , Wilbur finally exceeded their best Kitty Hawk effort with a flight of 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) . Then they decided to use a weight @-@ powered catapult to make takeoffs easier and tried it for the first time on September 7 . On September 20 , 1904 , Wilbur flew the first complete circle in history by a manned heavier @-@ than @-@ air powered machine , covering 4 @,@ 080 feet ( 1 @,@ 244 m ) in about a minute and a half . Their two best flights were November 9 by Wilbur and December 1 by Orville , each exceeding five minutes and covering nearly three miles in almost four circles . By the end of the year the brothers had accumulated about 50 minutes in the air in 105 flights over the rather soggy 85 acres ( 34 ha ) pasture , which , remarkably , is virtually unchanged today from its original condition and is now part of Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park , adjacent to Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base . 
 The Wrights scrapped the battered and much @-@ repaired aircraft , but saved the engine , and in 1905 built a new airplane , the Flyer III . Nevertheless , at first this Flyer offered the same marginal performance as the first two . Its maiden flight was on June 23 and the first few flights were no longer than 10 seconds . After Orville suffered a bone @-@ jarring and potentially fatal crash on July 14 , they rebuilt the Flyer with the forward elevator and rear rudder both enlarged and placed several feet farther away from the wings . They also installed a separate control for the rear rudder instead of linking it to the wing @-@ warping " cradle " as before . Each of the three axes — pitch , roll and yaw — now had its own independent control . These modifications greatly improved stability and control , enabling a series of six dramatic " long flights " ranging from 17 to 38 minutes and 11 to 24 miles ( 39 km ) around the three @-@ quarter mile course over Huffman Prairie between September 26 and October 5 . Wilbur made the last and longest flight , 24 @.@ 5 miles ( 39 @.@ 4 km ) in 38 minutes and 3 seconds , ending with a safe landing when the fuel ran out . The flight was seen by a number of people , including several invited friends , their father Milton , and neighboring farmers . 
 Reporters showed up the next day ( only their second appearance at the field since May the previous year ) , but the brothers declined to fly . The long flights convinced the Wrights they had achieved their goal of creating a flying machine of " practical utility " which they could offer to sell . 
 The only photos of the flights of 1904 – 1905 were taken by the brothers . ( A few photos were damaged in the Great Dayton Flood of 1913 , but most survived intact . ) In 1904 Ohio beekeeping businessman Amos Root , a technology enthusiast , saw a few flights including the first circle . Articles he wrote for his beekeeping magazine were the only published eyewitness reports of the Huffman Prairie flights , except for the unimpressive early hop local newsmen saw . Root offered a report to Scientific American magazine , but the editor turned it down . As a result , the news was not widely known outside of Ohio , and was often met with skepticism . The Paris edition of the Herald Tribune headlined a 1906 article on the Wrights " <unk> OR <unk> ? " 
 In years to come Dayton newspapers would proudly celebrate the hometown Wright brothers as national heroes , but the local reporters somehow missed one of the most important stories in history as it was happening a few miles from their doorstep . James M. Cox , publisher at that time of the Dayton Daily News ( later governor of Ohio and Democratic presidential nominee in 1920 ) , expressed the attitude of newspapermen — and the public — in those days when he admitted years later , " Frankly , none of us believed it . " 
 A few newspapers published articles about the long flights , but no reporters or photographers had been there . The lack of splashy eyewitness press coverage was a major reason for disbelief in Washington , D.C. and Europe and in journals like Scientific American , whose editors doubted the " alleged experiments " and asked how U.S. newspapers , " alert as they are , allowed these sensational performances to escape their notice . " 
 In October 1904 the brothers were visited by the first of many important Europeans they would befriend in coming years , Colonel J. E. Capper , later superintendent of the Royal Balloon Factory . Capper and his wife were visiting the United States to investigate the aeronautical exhibits at the St. Louis World Fair , but had been given a letter of introduction to both Chanute and the Wrights by Patrick Alexander . Capper was very favorably impressed by the Wrights , who showed him photographs of their aircraft in flight . 
 The Wright brothers were certainly complicit in the lack of attention they received . Fearful of competitors stealing their ideas , and still without a patent , they flew on only one more day after October 5 . From then on , they refused to fly anywhere unless they had a firm contract to sell their aircraft . They wrote to the U.S. government , then to Britain , France and Germany with an offer to sell a flying machine , but were rebuffed because they insisted on a signed contract before giving a demonstration . They were unwilling even to show their photographs of the airborne Flyer . The American military , having recently spent $ 50 @,@ 000 on the Langley Aerodrome — a product of the nation 's foremost scientist — only to see it plunge twice into the Potomac River " like a handful of mortar " , was particularly unreceptive to the claims of two unknown bicycle makers from Ohio . Thus , doubted or scorned , the Wright brothers continued their work in semi @-@ obscurity , while other aviation pioneers like Santos @-@ Dumont , Henri Farman , Léon <unk> and American Glenn Curtiss entered the limelight . 
 = = European skepticism = = 
 In 1906 skeptics in the European aviation community had converted the press to an anti @-@ Wright brothers stance . European newspapers , especially those in France , were openly derisive , calling them <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 Ernest Archdeacon , founder of the Aéro @-@ Club de France , was publicly scornful of the brothers ' claims in spite of published reports ; specifically , he wrote several articles and , in 1906 , stated that " the French would make the first public demonstration of powered flight " . 
 The Paris edition of the New York Herald summed up Europe 's opinion of the Wright brothers in an editorial on February 10 , 1906 : 
 The Wrights have flown or they have not flown . They possess a machine or they do not possess one . They are in fact either fliers or liars . It is difficult to fly . It 's easy to say , ' We have <unk> 
 In 1908 , after the Wrights ' first flights in France , Archdeacon publicly admitted that he had done them an injustice . 
 = = Contracts and return to Kitty Hawk = = 
 The Wright brothers made no flights at all in 1906 and 1907 . They spent the time attempting to persuade the U.S. and European governments that they had invented a successful flying machine and were prepared to negotiate a contract to sell such machines . They also experimented with a pontoon and engine setup on the Miami River ( Ohio ) in hopes of flying from the water . These experiments proved unsuccessful . 
 Replying to the Wrights ' letters , the U.S. military expressed virtually no interest in their claims . The brothers turned their attention to Europe , especially France , where enthusiasm for aviation ran high , and journeyed there for the first time in 1907 for face @-@ to @-@ face talks with government officials and businessmen . They also met with aviation representatives in Germany and Britain . Before traveling , Orville shipped a newly built Model A Flyer to France in anticipation of demonstration flights . 
 In France Wilbur met Frank P. Lahm , a lieutenant in the U.S. Army Aeronautical Division . Writing to his superiors , Lahm smoothed the way for Wilbur to give an in @-@ person presentation to the U.S. Board of Ordnance and Fortification in Washington , D.C. when he returned to the U.S. This time , the Board was favorably impressed , in contrast to its previous indifference . With further input from the Wrights , the U.S. Army Signal Corps issued Specification # 486 in December 1907 , inviting bids for construction of a flying machine under military contract . The Wrights submitted their bid in January . In early 1908 the brothers also agreed to a contract with a French company . In May they went back to Kitty Hawk with their 1905 Flyer to practice in private for their all @-@ important public demonstration flights , as required by both contracts . Their privacy was lost when New York newspapers heard about the tests and sent several reporters to the scene . 
 Their contracts required them to fly with a passenger , so they modified the 1905 Flyer by installing two seats and adding upright control levers . After tests with sandbags in the passenger seat , Charlie Furnas , a helper from Dayton , became the first fixed @-@ wing aircraft passenger on a few short flights May 14 , 1908 . For safety , and as a promise to their father , Wilbur and Orville did not fly together . However , several newspaper accounts at the time mistakenly took Orville 's flight with Furnas as both brothers flying together . Later that day after flying solo seven minutes , Wilbur suffered his worst crash when — still not well @-@ acquainted with the two new control levers — he apparently moved one the wrong way and slammed the Flyer into the sand at between 40 and 50 miles per hour ( 64 and 80 km / h ) . He emerged with only bruises and a cut nose , but the accident ended the practice flights — and the airplane 's flying career . 
 = = = Return to glider flights = = = 
 In October 1911 , Orville Wright returned to the Outer Banks again , to conduct safety and stabilization tests with a new glider . On October 24 , he soared for nine minutes and 45 seconds , a record that held for almost 10 years , when gliding as a sport began in the 1920s . 
 = = Public showing = = 
 The brothers ' contracts with the U.S. Army and a French syndicate depended on successful public flight demonstrations that met certain conditions . The brothers had to divide their efforts . Wilbur sailed for Europe ; Orville would fly near Washington , D.C. 
 Facing much skepticism in the French aeronautical community and outright scorn by some newspapers that called him a " <unk> " , Wilbur began official public demonstrations on August 8 , 1908 at the <unk> horse racing track near the town of Le Mans , France . His first flight lasted only one minute 45 seconds , but his ability to effortlessly make banking turns and fly a circle amazed and stunned onlookers , including several pioneer French aviators , among them Louis Blériot . In the following days , Wilbur made a series of technically challenging flights , including figure @-@ eights , demonstrating his skills as a pilot and the capability of his flying machine , which far surpassed those of all other pioneering aircraft and pilots of the day . 
 The French public was thrilled by Wilbur 's feats and flocked to the field by the thousands , and the Wright brothers instantly became world @-@ famous . Former doubters issued apologies and effusive praise . L 'Aérophile editor Georges Besançon wrote that the flights " have completely dissipated all doubts . Not one of the former detractors of the Wrights dare question , today , the previous experiments of the men who were truly the first to fly ... " Leading French aviation promoter Ernest Archdeacon wrote , " For a long time , the Wright brothers have been accused in Europe of bluff ... They are today hallowed in France , and I feel an intense pleasure ... to make amends . " 
 On October 7 , 1908 , Edith Berg , the wife of the brothers ' European business agent , became the first American woman passenger when she flew with Wilbur — <unk> of many passengers who rode with him that autumn . Wilbur also became acquainted with Léon Bollée and his family . Bollée was the owner of an automobile factory where Wilbur would assemble the Flyer and where he would be provided with hired assistance . Bollée would fly that autumn with Wilbur . Madame Bollée had been in the latter stages of pregnancy when Wilbur arrived in LeMans in June 1908 to assemble the Flyer . Wilbur promised her that he would make his first European flight the day her baby was born which he did , August 8 , 1908 . 
 Orville followed his brother 's success by demonstrating another nearly identical Flyer to the United States Army at Fort Myer , Virginia , starting on September 3 , 1908 . On September 9 , he made the first hour @-@ long flight , lasting 62 minutes and 15 seconds . 
 On September 17 , Army lieutenant Thomas Selfridge rode along as his passenger , serving as an official observer . A few minutes into the flight at an altitude of about 100 feet ( 30 m ) , a propeller split and shattered , sending the Flyer out of control . Selfridge suffered a fractured skull in the crash and died that evening in the nearby Army hospital , becoming the first airplane crash fatality . Orville was badly injured , suffering a broken left leg and four broken ribs . Twelve years later , after he suffered increasingly severe pains , X @-@ rays revealed the accident had also caused three hip bone fractures and a dislocated hip . The brothers ' sister Katharine , a school teacher , rushed from Dayton to Virginia and stayed by Orville 's side for the seven weeks of his hospitalization . She helped negotiate a one @-@ year extension of the Army contract . A friend visiting Orville in the hospital asked , " Has it got your nerve ? " " Nerve ? " repeated Orville , slightly puzzled . " Oh , do you mean will I be afraid to fly again ? The only thing I 'm afraid of is that I can 't get well soon enough to finish those tests next year . " Deeply shocked and upset by the accident , Wilbur determined to make even more impressive flight demonstrations ; in the ensuing days and weeks he set new records for altitude and duration . In January 1909 Orville and Katharine joined him in France , and for a time they were the three most famous people in the world , sought after by royalty , the rich , reporters and the public . The kings of Great Britain , Spain and Italy came to see Wilbur fly . 
 The Wrights traveled to Pau , in the south of France , where Wilbur made many more public flights , giving rides to a procession of officers , journalists and statesmen — and his sister Katharine on February 15 . He trained two French pilots , then transferred the airplane to the French company . In April the Wrights went to Italy where Wilbur assembled another Flyer , giving demonstrations and training more pilots . An Italian cameraman Federico Valle climbed aboard and filmed the first motion picture from an airplane . 
 After their return to the U.S. , the brothers and Katharine were invited to the White House where President Taft bestowed awards upon them . Dayton followed up with a lavish two @-@ day homecoming celebration . In July 1909 Orville , with Wilbur assisting , completed the proving flights for the U.S. Army , meeting the requirements of a two @-@ seater able to fly with a passenger for an hour at an average of speed of 40 miles an hour ( 64 km / h ) and land undamaged . They sold the airplane to the Army 's Aeronautical Division , U.S. Signal Corps for $ 30 @,@ 000 ( which included a $ 5 @,@ 000 bonus for exceeding the speed specification ) . Wilbur climaxed an extraordinary year in early October when he flew at New York City 's Hudson @-@ Fulton celebrations , circling the Statue of Liberty and making a 33 @-@ minute flight up and down the Hudson River alongside Manhattan in view of up to one million New Yorkers . These flights solidly established the fame of the Wright brothers in America . 
 = = = Family flights = = = 
 On May 25 , 1910 , back at Huffman Prairie , Orville piloted two unique flights . First , he took off on a six @-@ minute flight with Wilbur as his passenger , the only time the Wright brothers ever flew together . They received permission from their father to make the flight . They had always promised Milton they would never fly together to avoid the chance of a double tragedy and to ensure one brother would remain to continue their experiments . Next , Orville took his 82 @-@ year @-@ old father on a nearly seven @-@ minute flight , the only one of Milton Wright 's life . The aircraft rose to about 350 feet ( 107 m ) while the elderly Wright called to his son , " Higher , Orville , higher ! " 
 = = Patent war = = 
 The Wright brothers wrote their 1903 patent application themselves , but it was rejected . In January 1904 they hired Ohio patent attorney Henry Toulmin , and on May 22 , 1906 , they were granted U.S. Patent <unk> for " new and useful Improvements in Flying Machines " . 
 The patent illustrates a non @-@ powered flying machine — namely , the 1902 glider . The patent 's importance lies in its claim of a new and useful method of controlling a flying machine , powered or not . The technique of wing @-@ warping is described , but the patent explicitly states that other methods instead of wing @-@ warping could be used for adjusting the outer portions of a machine 's wings to different angles on the right and left sides to achieve lateral ( roll ) control . The concept of varying the angle presented to the air near the wingtips , by any suitable method , is central to the patent . The patent also describes the steerable rear vertical rudder and its innovative use in combination with wing @-@ warping , enabling the airplane to make a coordinated turn , a technique that prevents hazardous adverse yaw , the problem Wilbur had when trying to turn the 1901 glider . Finally , the patent describes the forward elevator , used for ascending and descending . 
 = = = Lawsuits begin = = = 
 Attempting to circumvent the patent , Glenn Curtiss and other early aviators devised ailerons to emulate lateral control described in the patent and demonstrated by the Wrights in their public flights . Soon after the historic July 4 , 1908 , one @-@ kilometer flight by Curtiss in the AEA June Bug , the Wrights warned him not to infringe their patent by profiting from flying or selling aircraft that used ailerons . 
 Curtiss was at the time a member of the Aerial Experiment Association ( AEA ) , headed by Alexander Graham Bell , where in 1908 he had helped reinvent wingtip ailerons for their Aerodrome No. 2 , known as the AEA White Wing ( the AEA 's other members became dismayed when Curtiss unexpectedly dropped out of their organization ; they later came to believe he had sold the rights to their joint innovation to the United States Government ) . 
 Curtiss refused to pay license fees to the Wrights and sold an airplane equipped with ailerons to the Aeronautic Society of New York in 1909 . The Wrights filed a lawsuit , beginning a years @-@ long legal conflict . They also sued foreign aviators who flew at U.S. exhibitions , including the leading French aviator Louis Paulhan . The Curtiss people derisively suggested that if someone jumped in the air and waved his arms , the Wrights would sue . 
 European companies which bought foreign patents the Wrights had received sued other manufacturers in their countries . Those lawsuits were only partly successful . Despite a pro @-@ Wright ruling in France , legal maneuvering dragged on until the patent expired in 1917 . A German court ruled the patent not valid because of prior disclosure in speeches by Wilbur Wright in 1901 and Chanute in 1903 . In the U.S. the Wrights made an agreement with the Aero Club of America to license airshows which the Club approved , freeing participating pilots from a legal threat . Promoters of approved shows paid fees to the Wrights . The Wright brothers won their initial case against Curtiss in February 1913 when a judge ruled that ailerons were covered under the patent . The Curtiss company appealed the decision . 
 From 1910 until his death from typhoid fever in 1912 , Wilbur took the leading role in the patent struggle , traveling incessantly to consult with lawyers and testify in what he felt was a moral cause , particularly against Curtiss , who was creating a large company to manufacture aircraft . The Wrights ' preoccupation with the legal issue stifled their work on new designs , and by 1911 Wright airplanes were considered inferior to those of European makers . Indeed , aviation development in the U.S. was suppressed to such an extent that when the U.S. entered World War I no acceptable American @-@ designed airplanes were available , and U.S. forces were compelled to use French machines . Orville and Katharine Wright believed Curtiss was partly responsible for Wilbur 's premature death , which occurred in the wake of his exhausting travels and the stress of the legal battle . 
 = = = Victory and cooperation = = = 
 In January 1914 , a U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the verdict against the Curtiss company , which continued to avoid penalties through legal tactics . Orville apparently felt vindicated by the decision , and much to the frustration of company executives , he did not push vigorously for further legal action to ensure a manufacturing monopoly . In fact , he was planning to sell the company and departed in 1915 . In 1917 , with World War I underway , the U.S. government pressured the industry to form a cross @-@ licensing organization , the Manufacturers Aircraft Association , to which member companies paid a blanket fee for the use of aviation patents , including the original and subsequent Wright patents . The Wright @-@ Martin company ( successor to the Wright company ) and the Curtiss company ( which held a number of its own patents ) each received a $ 2 million payment . The " patent war " ended , although side issues lingered in the courts until the 1920s . In a twist of irony , the Wright Aeronautical Corporation ( another successor ) and the Curtiss Aeroplane company merged in 1929 to form the Curtiss @-@ Wright Corporation , which remains in business today producing high @-@ tech components for the aerospace industry . 
 Aviation historian Charles Harvard Gibbs @-@ Smith stated a number of times that the Wrights ' legal victory would have been " doubtful " if an 1868 patent of " a prior but lost invention " by Matthew Piers Watt Boulton of the UK had been known in the period 1903 – 1906 . The patent , titled <unk> Locomotion & c , described several engine improvements and conceptual designs and included a technical description and drawings of an aileron control system and an optional feature intended to function as an autopilot . In fact , this patent was well @-@ known to participants in the Wright @-@ Curtiss lawsuit . A U.S. federal judge who reviewed previous inventions and patents and upheld the Wright patent against the Curtiss company reached the opposite conclusion of Gibbs @-@ Smith , saying the Boulton patent " is not anticipatory " . 
 = = = Public reactions = = = 
 The lawsuits damaged the public image of the Wright brothers , who were generally regarded before this as heroes . Critics said the brothers were greedy and unfair and compared their actions unfavorably to European inventors , who worked more openly . Supporters said the brothers were protecting their interests and were justified in expecting fair compensation for the years of work leading to their successful invention . Their 10 @-@ year friendship with Octave Chanute , already strained by tension over how much credit , if any , he might deserve for their success , collapsed after he publicly criticized their actions . 
 = = In business = = 
 The Wright Company was incorporated on November 22 , 1909 . The brothers sold their patents to the company for $ 100 @,@ 000 and also received one @-@ third of the shares in a million dollar stock issue and a 10 percent royalty on every airplane sold . With Wilbur as president and Orville as vice president , the company set up a factory in Dayton and a flying school / test flight field at Huffman Prairie ; the headquarters office was in New York City . 
 In mid @-@ 1910 , the Wrights changed the design of the Wright Flyer , moving the horizontal elevator from the front to the back and adding wheels although keeping the skids as part of the undercarriage unit . It had become apparent by then that a rear elevator would make an airplane easier to control , especially as higher speeds grew more common . The new version was designated the " Model B " , although the original canard design was never referred to as the " Model A " by the Wrights . However , the U.S. Army Signal Corps which bought the airplane did call it " Wright Type A " . 
 There were not many customers for airplanes , so in the spring of 1910 the Wrights hired and trained a team of salaried exhibition pilots to show off their machines and win prize money for the company — despite Wilbur 's disdain for what he called " the mountebank business " . The team debuted at the Indianapolis Speedway on June 13 . Before the year was over , pilots Ralph Johnstone and Arch <unk> died in air show crashes , and in November 1911 the brothers disbanded the team on which nine men had served ( four other former team members died in crashes afterward ) . 
 The Wright Company transported the first known commercial air cargo on November 7 , 1910 by flying two bolts of dress silk 65 miles ( 105 km ) from Dayton to Columbus , Ohio for the Morehouse @-@ Martens Department Store , which paid a $ 5 @,@ 000 fee . Company pilot Phil Parmelee made the flight — which was more an exercise in advertising than a simple delivery — in an hour and six minutes with the cargo strapped in the passenger 's seat . The silk was cut into small pieces and sold as souvenirs . 
 Between 1910 and 1916 the Wright Brothers Flying School at Huffman Prairie trained 115 pilots who were instructed by Orville and his assistants . Several trainees became famous , including Henry " Hap " Arnold , who rose to Five @-@ Star General , commanded U.S. Army Air Forces in World War II , and became first head of the U.S. Air Force ; <unk> Perry Rodgers , who made the first coast @-@ to @-@ coast flight in 1911 ( with many stops and crashes ) in a Wright Model EX named the " Vin Fiz " after the sponsor 's soft drink ; and Eddie Stinson , founder of the Stinson Aircraft Company . 
 = = = Army accidents = = = 
 In 1912 – 1913 a series of fatal crashes of Wright airplanes bought by the U.S. Army called into question their safety and design . The death toll reached 11 by 1913 , half of them in the Wright model C. All six model C Army airplanes crashed . They had a tendency to nose dive , but Orville insisted that stalls were caused by pilot error . He cooperated with the Army to equip the airplanes with a rudimentary flight indicator to help the pilot avoid climbing too steeply . A government investigation said the Wright C was " dynamically unsuited for flying " , and the American military ended its use of airplanes with " pusher " type propellers , including models made by both the Wright and Curtiss companies , in which the engine was located behind the pilot and likely to crush him in a crash . Orville resisted the switch to manufacturing " tractor " -type propeller aircraft , worried that a design change could threaten the Wright patent infringement case against Curtiss . 
 = = Smithsonian feud = = 
 Samuel P. Langley , secretary of the Smithsonian Institution from 1887 until his death in 1906 , experimented for years with model flying machines and successfully flew unmanned powered fixed @-@ wing model aircraft in 1896 and 1903 . Two tests of his manned full @-@ size motor @-@ driven Aerodrome in October and December 1903 , however , were complete failures . Nevertheless , the Smithsonian later proudly displayed the Aerodrome in its museum as the first heavier @-@ than @-@ air craft " capable " of manned powered flight , relegating the Wright brothers ' invention to secondary status and triggering a decades @-@ long feud with Orville Wright , whose brother had received help from the Smithsonian when beginning his own quest for flight . ( Ironically , the Wright brothers were the initial recipients of the Samuel P. Langley Medal for <unk> from the Smithsonian in 1910 . ) 
 The Smithsonian based its claim for the Aerodrome on short test flights Glenn Curtiss and his team made with it in 1914 . The Smithsonian allowed Curtiss , in an unsavory alliance , to make major modifications to the craft before attempting to fly it . 
 The Smithsonian hoped to salvage Langley 's aeronautical reputation by proving the Aerodrome could fly ; Curtiss wanted to prove the same thing to defeat the Wrights ' patent lawsuits against him . The tests had no effect on the patent battle , but the Smithsonian made the most of them , honoring the Aerodrome in its museum and publications . The Institution did not reveal the extensive Curtiss modifications , but Orville Wright learned of them from his brother Lorin and a close friend of his and Wilbur 's , Griffith Brewer , who both witnessed and photographed some of the tests . 
 Orville repeatedly objected to misrepresentation of the Aerodrome , but the Smithsonian was unyielding . Orville responded by lending the restored 1903 Kitty Hawk Flyer to the London Science Museum in 1928 , refusing to donate it to the Smithsonian while the Institution " perverted " the history of the flying machine . Orville would never see his invention again as he would die before its return to the United States . Charles Lindbergh attempted to mediate the dispute , to no avail . In 1942 , after years of bad publicity , and encouraged by Wright biographer Fred C. Kelly , the Smithsonian finally relented by publishing , for the first time , a list of the Aerodrome modifications and recanting misleading statements it had made about the 1914 tests . Orville then privately requested the British museum to return the Flyer , but the airplane remained in protective storage for the duration of World War II and finally came home after Orville 's death . 
 On November 23 , 1948 , the executors of Orville 's estate signed an agreement for the Smithsonian to purchase the Flyer for one dollar . At the insistence of the executors , the agreement also included strict conditions for display of the airplane . 
 The agreement reads , in part , " Neither the Smithsonian Institution or its successors , nor any museum or other agency , bureau or facilities administered for the United States of America by the Smithsonian Institution or its successors shall publish or permit to be displayed a statement or label in connection with or in respect of any aircraft model or design of earlier date than the 1903 Wright Aeroplane , claiming in effect that such aircraft was capable of carrying a man under its own power in controlled flight . " If this agreement is not fulfilled , the Flyer can be reclaimed by the heir of the Wright brothers . Some aviation buffs , particularly those who promote the legacy of Gustave Whitehead , now accuse the Smithsonian of refusing to investigate claims of earlier flights . After a ceremony in the Smithsonian museum , the Flyer went on public display on December 17 , 1948 , the 45th anniversary of the only day it was flown successfully . The Wright brothers ' nephew Milton ( Lorin 's son ) , who had seen gliders and the Flyer under construction in the bicycle shop when he was a boy , gave a brief speech and formally transferred the airplane to the Smithsonian , which displayed it with the accompanying label : 
 = = Last years = = 
 = = = Wilbur = = = 
 Neither brother married . Wilbur once quipped that he did not have time for both a wife and an airplane . Following a brief training flight in Berlin he gave to a German pilot in June 1911 , Wilbur never flew again . He gradually became occupied with business matters for the Wright Company and dealing with different lawsuits . Upon dealing with the patent lawsuits , which had put great strain on both brothers , Wilbur had written in a letter to a French friend , " When we think what we might have accomplished if we had been able to devote this time to experiments , we feel very sad , but it is always easier to deal with things than with men , and no one can direct his life entirely as he would choose . " Wilbur spent the next year before his death traveling , where he spent a full six months in Europe attending to various business and legal matters . Wilbur urged American cities to emulate the European – particularly Parisian – philosophy of apportioning generous public space near every important public building . He was also constantly back and forth between New York , Washington and Dayton . All of the stresses were taking a toll on Wilbur physically . Orville would remark that he would " come home white " . 
 It was decided by the family that a new and far grander house would be built , using the money that the Wrights had earned through their inventions and business . Called affectionately Hawthorn Hill , building had begun in the Dayton suburb of Oakwood , Ohio , while Wilbur was in Europe . Katharine and Orville oversaw the project in his absence . Wilbur 's one known expression upon the design of the house was that he have a room and bathroom of his own . The brothers hired Schenck and Williams , an architectural firm , to design the house , along with input from both Wilbur and Orville . Wilbur did not live to see its completion in 1914 . 
 He became ill on a business trip to Boston in April 1912 , the illness sometimes attributed to eating bad shellfish at a banquet . After returning to Dayton in early May 1912 , worn down in mind and body , he fell ill again and was diagnosed with typhoid fever . He lingered on , his symptoms relapsing and remitting for many days . Wilbur died , at age 45 , at the Wright family home on May 30 . His father wrote about Wilbur in his diary : 
 " A short life , full of consequences . An unfailing intellect , imperturbable temper , great self @-@ reliance and as great modesty , seeing the right clearly , pursuing it steadfastly , he lived and died . " 
 = = = Orville = = = 
 Orville succeeded to the presidency of the Wright Company upon Wilbur 's death . Sharing Wilbur 's distaste for business but not his brother 's executive skills , Orville sold the company in 1915 . After 42 years living at their residence on 7 Hawthorn Street , Orville , Katharine and their father , Milton , moved to Hawthorn Hill in the spring of 1914 . Milton died in his sleep on April 3 , 1917 , at the age of 88 . Up until his death , Milton had been very active , preoccupied with reading , writing articles for religious publications and enjoying his morning walks . He had also marched in a Dayton Woman 's Suffrage Parade , along with Orville and Katharine . Orville made his last flight as a pilot in 1918 in a 1911 Model B. He retired from business and became an elder statesman of aviation , serving on various official boards and committees , including the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ( NACA ) , predecessor agency to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) and Aeronautical Chamber of Commerce ( ACCA ) , predecessor to the Aerospace Industries Association ( AIA ) . Katharine married Henry Haskell of Kansas City , a former Oberlin classmate , in 1926 . Orville was furious and inconsolable , feeling he had been betrayed by Katharine . He refused to attend the wedding or even communicate with her . He finally agreed to see her , apparently at Lorin 's insistence , just before she died of pneumonia on March 3 , 1929 . 
 Orville Wright served NACA for 28 years . In 1930 , he received the first Daniel Guggenheim Medal established in 1928 by the Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics . In 1936 , he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences . 
 On April 19 , 1944 , the second production Lockheed Constellation , piloted by Howard Hughes and TWA president Jack Frye , flew from Burbank , California , to Washington , D.C. in 6 hours and 57 minutes ( 2300 mi – 330 @.@ 9 mph ) . On the return trip , the airliner stopped at Wright Field to give Orville Wright his last airplane flight , more than 40 years after his historic first flight . He may even have briefly handled the controls . He commented that the wingspan of the Constellation was longer than the distance of his first flight . Orville 's last major project was supervising the reclamation and preservation of the 1905 Wright Flyer III , which historians describe as the first practical airplane . Orville expressed sadness in an interview years later about the death and destruction brought about by the bombers of World War II : 
 " We dared to hope we had invented something that would bring lasting peace to the earth . But we were wrong ... No , I don 't have any regrets about my part in the invention of the airplane , though no one could deplore more than I do the destruction it has caused . I feel about the airplane much the same as I do in regard to fire . That is I regret all the terrible damage caused by fire , but I think it is good for the human race that someone discovered how to start fires and that we have learned how to put fire to thousands of important uses . " 
 Orville died on January 30 , 1948 , over 35 years after his brother , following his second heart attack , having lived from the horse @-@ and @-@ buggy age to the dawn of supersonic flight . He was followed a day later by John T. Daniels , the Coast Guardsman who took their famous first flight photo . Both brothers are buried in the family plot at Woodland Cemetery , Dayton , Ohio . 
 = = Competing claims = = 
 First flight claims are made for Ader , Whitehead , Richard Pearse , and Karl <unk> for their variously documented tests in years prior to and including 1903 . Claims that the first true flight occurred after 1903 are made for Traian Vuia and Santos @-@ Dumont . Supporters of the post @-@ Wright pioneers argue that techniques used by the Wright brothers disqualify them as first to make successful airplane flights . Those techniques were : a launch rail ; skids instead of wheels ; a headwind at takeoff ; and a catapult after 1903 . Supporters of the Wright brothers argue that proven , repeated , controlled , and sustained flights by the brothers entitle them to credit as inventors of the airplane , regardless of those techniques . The late aviation historian Charles Harvard Gibbs @-@ Smith was a supporter of the Wrights ' claim to primacy in flight . He wrote that a barn door can be made to " fly " for a short distance if enough energy is applied to it ; he determined that the very limited flight experiments of Ader , Vuia and others were " powered hops " instead of fully controlled flights . 
 = = Ohio – North Carolina rivalry = = 
 Wright coinage 
 The U.S. states of Ohio and North Carolina both take credit for the Wright brothers and their world @-@ changing inventions — Ohio because the brothers developed and built their design in Dayton , and North Carolina because Kitty Hawk was the site of the Wrights ' first powered flight . With a spirit of friendly rivalry , Ohio adopted the slogan " Birthplace of Aviation " ( later " Birthplace of Aviation Pioneers " , recognizing not only the Wrights , but also astronauts John Glenn and Neil Armstrong , both Ohio natives ) . The slogan appears on Ohio license plates . North Carolina uses the slogan " First In Flight " on its license plates . 
 The site of the first flights in North Carolina is preserved as Wright Brothers National Memorial , while their Ohio facilities are part of Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park . As the positions of both states can be factually defended , and each played a significant role in the history of flight , neither state truly has an exclusive claim to the Wrights ' accomplishment . 
 Notwithstanding the competition between those two states , the Wrights ' final bicycle shop and home , both from Dayton , Ohio , were in 1937 moved to and are now located at Greenfield Village in Dearborn , Michigan . 
 = = = Biographical = = = 
 Wilbur Wright at <unk> 
 Orville Wright at <unk> 
 Wright Brothers Aeroplane Company virtual museum 
 pictures , letters and other sources from National Archives 
 US Air Services article March 1935 My Memories of Wilbur Wright by Marquise Cordelia de Lambert ( wife of Count de Lambert ) 
 Wright Brothers Collection ( MS @-@ 1 ) at Wright State University 
 Wright Brothers Collection ( MS @-@ 001 ) at Dayton Metro Library 
 = = = Patents = = = 
 U.S. Patent 821 @,@ 393 – Flying machine – O. & W. Wright 
 U.S. Patent 821 @,@ 393 at Google Patents 
 patent in HTML 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The Wright Brothers – The Invention of the Aerial Age Smithsonian Institution 
 Smithsonian Stories of the Wright flights 
 Wilbur Wright Birthplace Museum 
 Wright Aeronautical Engineering Collection The Franklin Institute 
 The Wright Brothers ' Engines and Their Design by Leonard S. Hobbs , Smithsonian Institution Press , 1971 
 Wright @-@ Dunbar Interpretive Center and the Wright Cycle Company 
 = = = Image collections = = = 
 Library of Congress Prints & Photographs Online Catalog – Wright Brothers Negatives 
 Outer Banks of NC Wright Photographs : 1900 – 1911 ( Sourced from Library of Congress ) 
 Video clips about the invention of the fixed @-@ wing aircraft 
 The Pioneer Aviation Group Many pictures of early flying machines and a comprehensive chronology of flight attempts 
 Wilbur Wright photo gallery at Corbis ( page one ) 
 Orville Wright photo gallery at Corbis ( page one ) 
 Wright Brothers Collection digital images at Wright State University 
 New Scientist Magazine , Scientific Firsts : Print of Wright Flyer in France 1907 
 Wilbur 's world famous model A Flyer " France " sits in a hall of honor on display in a Paris museum after Wilbur donated it to the French . Its whereabouts afterwards are unknown . Sharing space with the Wright A is a Bleriot VI or VII , an Antoinette and a Voisin 
 Wright Brothers ' Newspapers at Dayton Metro Library 
 = Skip Holtz = 
 Louis Leo " Skip " Holtz , Jr . ( born March 12 , 1964 ) is an American football coach who is the current head coach at Louisiana Tech University . He was head coach at South Florida from 2010 to 2012 before being released . Prior to 2010 , Holtz served as the head coach of the East Carolina University football team . Additionally , Holtz was the head coach of the Connecticut Huskies football team between 1994 and 1998 and an assistant head coach for the University of South Carolina Gamecocks between 1998 and 2004 . 
 Skip 's father , Lou Holtz , is an acclaimed former head football coach and worked as a commentator on the television channel ESPN . Due to his father 's career as a collegiate football coach , Skip was exposed to football from an early age . At the time of Skip 's birth , Lou was a football assistant for the Connecticut Huskies . Skip attended Fayetteville High School in Arkansas and played on the school 's football team as the team 's quarterback while his father was the head coach at the University of Arkansas . After graduating from Fayetteville High School , Skip attended Holy Cross College for two years . He then transferred to Notre Dame , where he earned a bachelor 's degree in business management . While at Notre Dame , he lettered in football as a special teams member and backup wide receiver . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Skip Holtz grew up in many towns while his father coached football . After Skip was born in Connecticut , the Holtz family moved to Columbia , South Carolina for two years , as his father worked as an assistant coach at the University of South Carolina . In 1968 , the family moved to Columbus , Ohio after Holtz took a job at Ohio State University . One year later , the Holtz family moved to Williamsburg , Virginia and The College of William & Mary for Lou 's first head coaching position . After two seasons , Lou took a head coaching position with the Wolfpack of North Carolina State University . The family lived in Raleigh , North Carolina for four years until Lou accepted a head coaching job for the National Football League 's New York Jets . The family lived in Cold Spring Harbor , New York for one year , while Lou coached the Jets . After resigning from the Jets , Lou took his family back to the American South when he accepted the head coaching job in Fayetteville , Arkansas , at the University of Arkansas in 1977 . In Fayetteville , Skip attended Fayetteville High School and graduated in 1982 . 
 = = Playing experience = = 
 While at high school in Fayetteville , Skip played for the school 's football team at the quarterback position , bringing moderate success to the program . As a high school junior , he visited Notre Dame and met with head football coach Gerry Faust and head basketball coach Digger Phelps . In his final year of high school , Skip was denied admission to Notre Dame due to average grades and his failure to learn a foreign language . Coaches Faust and Phelps encouraged Skip to enroll at nearby Holy Cross College , located adjacent to the university in Notre Dame , Indiana . After two years of study at Holy Cross , Skip had improved his grades and transferred to Notre Dame . After his first year , Skip decided he wanted to speak with Coach Faust about walking on to the football team during his senior year . The discussions were cut short , however , as after the 1985 season , Coach Faust resigned . Replacing Faust was Skip 's father , Lou , who eagerly accepted his son as a walk @-@ on . Skip began spring practice before the 1986 season as a quarterback , but quickly changed to flanker due to his lack of throwing ability . As a flanker , he earned 54 yards on three receptions at the Blue @-@ Gold intra @-@ squad game in the spring of 1986 . During the fall of 1986 , Skip played in all 11 games on special teams . He never caught a pass , but rushed once for one yard . 
 = = Coaching experience = = 
 = = = Early positions = = = 
 Due to Skip 's lack of success on the field and his desire to remain associated with football , he began to investigate the possibility of becoming a coach . After Skip told Lou he wanted to start coaching , Lou put together a list of potential coaches who would give him the best training . The list included Tom Osborne , Joe Paterno , and Terry Donahue , but upon hearing of Skip 's interest , Florida State head coach Bobby Bowden said , " if you can be here in two days , I 've got a job for you at Florida State . " 
 Upon arriving at Florida State in 1987 , he became the graduate assistant coach . He met his future wife , Jennifer , in Coach Bowden 's office while in Tallahassee . He left after two years to become the wide receivers coach at Colorado State University under legendary coach Earle Bruce . After one season , he went back to Notre Dame to coach under his father . 
 = = = Notre Dame = = = 
 Holtz 's first job at his alma mater was to serve as wide receivers coach , and he filled the position for two years . In 1992 , the team began a search for a new offensive coordinator . Lou 's first choice , Joe Moore , declined . Lou then asked Skip for recommendations to fill the position . Skip initially said he wanted the position but said of Lou , " he couldn 't do it at that time with me [ Skip ] being his son . " Skip then mentioned Mark Richt , who was then the offensive coordinator at Florida State . Lou Holtz called Coach Bowden to ask permission to speak to Mark Richt . Coach Bowden said Holtz could hire Richt as long as he could hire Skip . Coach Holtz said , " Well , if I 'm just going to switch coaches , I might as well hire Skip . " Skip became Notre Dame 's offensive coordinator in 1992 . Between 1992 and 1994 , Skip and his father recorded 40 wins , eight losses , and one tie , an 82 @.@ 7 % winning percentage . Together , they coached Notre Dame to the Cotton Bowl Classic twice , beating Texas A & M both times . Skip had the third @-@ best total offense in the NCAA during the 1991 football season . 
 = = = University of Connecticut = = = 
 Following his success at Notre Dame , Skip Holtz was asked to become the head coach of the Connecticut Huskies . He accepted the offer and took his first head coaching job on December 23 , 1993 . He replaced Tom Jackson , who had gone 14 – 19 over the past three years and had decided to resign on November 17 , 1993 . He agreed to a four @-@ year contract at a salary of $ 95 @,@ 000 a year . Even though Skip came from a " major football institution " ( Notre Dame ) , University of Connecticut President Dr. Harry J. Hartley said that the hire " should not be seen as a signal that Connecticut intends to upgrade its program . " Despite Hartley 's remarks , Holtz planned to help elevate the team from I @-@ AA to I @-@ A. Holtz commented on Hartley 's remarks by saying " I 'd love to have the opportunity to coach a Division I team here .... " In 1998 , UConn , after 100 years of football and five years with Skip Holtz as its head coach , played in its first Division I @-@ AA playoff game . The Huskies scored two fourth @-@ quarter touchdowns to beat Hampton University , 42 – 34 . In the next round of the playoffs , the Huskies lost to the eventual runner @-@ up , Georgia Southern , on December 5 . Two days later , Skip resigned as head coach of the Huskies in order to rejoin his father , who had taken the head coaching job at South Carolina the day before the Huskies ' loss . As the leader of the Huskies football team , he accumulated a winning percentage of .596 ( 34 – 23 ) over five seasons . 
 = = = University of South Carolina = = = 
 On December 4 , 1998 , The University of South Carolina announced that Lou Holtz would serve as its next head football coach . Lou asked Skip if he would move down to Columbia to become his offensive coordinator — the same position Skip held during his final two years at Notre Dame . Skip accepted the offer , in part due to a desire to live closer to his parents and so his children could spend more time with their grandparents . In 1996 , Skip 's mother , Beth , was diagnosed with throat cancer . Two years later , the cancer spread to her liver , lung , adrenal glands , and ovary . Meanwhile , Skip and Lou continued to coach football at South Carolina . As Lou began to struggle as head coach , the question of his eventual successor arose . When Skip was hired in 1998 , Lou had included a clause in the hiring contract that Skip would succeed him after he retired . South Carolina Athletic Director Dave Tanner rebutted by saying , " There are no formal or informal guarantees at him , " and " It 's always helpful to have potential succession in a staff . " 
 The 2000 and 2001 seasons brought South Carolina back to national prominence with consecutive Outback Bowl wins over Ohio State and season ending rankings in the Top 25 . However , after going 5 – 7 the following two seasons and suffering a season @-@ ending blowout in 2003 by intrastate rival Clemson , Skip was demoted from the offensive coordinator and assistant head coaching positions to quarterbacks coach . Four assistant coaches — including the team 's defensive coordinator — were fired in the same shakeup that saw Skip demoted . On November 22 , 2004 , one season after Skip 's demotion , Lou Holtz announced he was retiring as head coach of South Carolina . The next day , South Carolina announced Steve Spurrier as the next head football coach . Coach Spurrier announced that he was keeping only three members of Lou Holtz 's staff . Letters were sent to all the other staffers — including Skip Holtz — informing them that they likely would not be retained . 
 = = = East Carolina University = = = 
 With his firing imminent , Holtz resigned . Because he was formerly a coach , Skip had several offers from Division I @-@ A and Division I @-@ AA teams . After several interviews , he elected to take the head coaching position at East Carolina University . East Carolina announced Skip Holtz as their 19th head football coach on December 3 , 2004 . Holtz assumed control of a program that won just three games in its past 25 contests . Skip signed 23 athletes in his first recruiting class , including his first commit , Rob Kass . Also included in the recruiting class was future NFL player <unk> Allison . Skip 's first victory at ECU came in the first game of the 2005 season as the Pirates defeated the Duke Blue Devils 24 – 21 at Dowdy @-@ Ficklen Stadium . The victory was ECU 's first non @-@ conference Division I win since 2000 , when the Pirates won the <unk> Bowl against Texas Tech . During Holtz 's first season , the Pirates also defeated conference foes Rice , Southern Methodist University , Marshall University , and the University of Alabama Birmingham . 
 In 2006 , Holtz 's second season as head coach , ECU won seven games , including victories over intrastate rival North Carolina State University , Conference USA East rival Southern Miss , and ACC foe Virginia . As a reward for their season , the Pirates earned their first bowl game under Holtz 's tenure , playing the Bulls of the University of South Florida in the <unk> Bowl , losing 24 – 7 . Despite the bowl loss , the 2006 season was ECU 's first winning season since 2000 , and the <unk> Bowl was the Pirates ' first bowl game since 2001 . 
 In 2007 , Holtz 's team won eight games , including wins over intrastate rival North Carolina and going 3 – 2 , verses Conference USA East opponents . Finishing second in the East Division , Holtz team was invited to the Hawai 'i Bowl to play # 24 Boise State University . East Carolina won the bowl game 41 – 38 . This was the first bowl victory since the 2000 <unk> Bowl verses Texas Tech . It was also the first back @-@ to @-@ back winning season and bowl berth since the 1999 and 2000 seasons . 
 The 2008 season was opened with two upsets over ranked opponents ; 17th ranked Virginia Tech in week one and 8th ranked West Virginia . This was the first time a Conference USA team beat three ranked teams in a row . Skip finished up the season 9 – 5 , which included a C @-@ USA East Division title and C @-@ USA Champions title . This was the first time the Pirates played in the C @-@ USA Championship Game . It also was the first conference title since 1976 . The Pirates played in the Liberty Bowl , losing to Kentucky , 25 – 19 . This was the third Liberty Bowl appearance . The last time the Pirates went to three straight bowl games was the 1999 , 2000 and 2001 seasons . In 2009 Skip Holtz led the ECU Pirates to a second <unk> championship . 
 = = = University of South Florida = = = 
 On January 14 , 2010 , it was announced that Holtz accepted the head Coach position at the University of South Florida , in Tampa , Florida , taking the place of the recently fired Jim Leavitt . A press conference to introduce Holtz to the community was held for January 15 , 2010 . When someone in the crowd called out , " Beat Florida ! " , Holtz replied , " That 's why I 'm here ! " However , the Bulls would eventually end up on the short end of the stick in their match @-@ up with the Gators later that season , 38 – 14 . 
 Holtz earned his first win as head coach of the Bulls on September 1 , 2010 in USF 's season opener against Stony Brook 59 – 14 . Later that season , Holtz would lead his Bulls to the program 's first victory over the Miami Hurricanes . At the end of the season Holtz lead the USF Bulls to a mostly dominant 31 – 26 victory over the Clemson Tigers at the Meineke Car Care Bowl . This would mark the first Bowl victory for USF over a BCS team . The Bulls finished with an 8 – 5 record , but 3 – 4 in Big East play . 
 To start the 2011 season , Skip Holtz led <unk> to an emotional homecoming against his Alma Mater , Notre Dame . After the 6 hour game and 2 rain delays , USF left South Bend with a 23 – 20 victory . However , the Bulls finished the season with a disappointing record of 5 – 7 , 1 – 6 in Big East play . The 2012 season was even worse as the Bulls fell to a dismal 3 – 9 , 1 – 6 in Big East play . USF fired Holtz at the conclusion of the 2012 season . 
 = = = Louisiana Tech University = = = 
 On December 13 , 2012 , Holtz accepted an offer to become the head coach for the Louisiana Tech Bulldogs . His first season , 2013 , was a down year , as he finished well below expectations at 4 – 8 . However , 2014 would see a big turnaround . Holtz 's Bulldogs went on to finish first in C @-@ USA West at 9 – 5 with a 35 – 18 win over Illinois in the Heart Of Dallas Bowl . In 2015 , the Bulldogs continued their success finishing 9 – 4 and winning the New Orleans Bowl over Arkansas State , 47 – 28 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Holtz and his wife Jennifer Fitzgerald , whom he met while he was working at Florida State , have two sons and a daughter . Outside of the football team , Holtz is deeply involved with an annual spring golf tournament named the Drew Steele @-@ Skip Holtz Golf Classic . Drew Steele is the son of former East Carolina basketball coach Mike Steele and has Down syndrome . When they first met , Holtz was impressed by Drew 's positive attitude , and he has since called upon Drew to help motivate the football team , both as a speaker and through work with the team . The Drew Steele @-@ Skip Holtz Golf Classic benefits citizens of Pitt County with special needs . 
 = = Bowl experience = = 
 Holtz has participated in 17 postseason games in his coaching career . Nine games occurred while he was head coach and eight when he was an assistant coach . Of the nine games where he was the head coach , seven occurred in the Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) ( formerly Division I @-@ A ) and two occurred in Division I @-@ AA ( now known as Football Championship Subdivision ) . As a FBS head coach , he is currently 4 – 3 . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = Re @-@ Invention World Tour = 
 Re @-@ Invention World Tour was the sixth concert tour by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It supported her ninth studio album American Life and visited North America and Europe . Madonna was inspired to create the tour , after taking part in an art installation called X @-@ STaTIC PRo = CeSS , directed by photographer Steven Klein . She incorporated the images from the installation in the tour , whose name was in reality a dig at Madonna 's critics . A number of songs were rehearsed for the tour , with twenty @-@ four of them making the final setlist . 
 The tour was divided into five segments : French Baroque – Marie Antoinette Revival , Military – Army , Circus – Cabaret , Acoustic and Scottish @-@ Tribal . The costumes were developed by designer Arianne Phillips based on the concept of re @-@ invention . The opening segment displayed performances with dance in general . Military segment displayed performances with the theme of warfare . Circus displayed light @-@ hearted performances while the Acoustic segment performances were melancholy . The final Scottish segment had Madonna and her performers display energetic dance routines . The tour garnered positive reception from contemporary critics . However , fellow singer Elton John accused Madonna of lip @-@ synching on the tour . Madonna 's representatives denied the allegations and John later apologized . 
 Re @-@ Invention Tour was a commercial success . Tickets were completely sold as soon as dates and venues for the tour were announced , prompting the organizers to add more dates . After it wrapped up , the tour was named as the highest grossing tour of 2004 , earning US $ 125 million ( $ 156 @.@ 6 million in 2016 dollars ) from 56 shows with 900 @,@ 000 fans . It won the Top Tour award as part of the 2004 Billboard Touring Awards . The tour was chronicled in a documentary titled I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret . A CD + DVD was also released along with the film . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Re @-@ Invention World Tour was Madonna 's sixth concert tour in support of her ninth studio album American Life . In 2003 , Madonna collaborated with photographer Steven Klein for an art installation project called X @-@ STaTIC Pro = CeSS . The installation portrayed Madonna in different incarnations of her spiritual practices – from yogi , prophet , queen to freak and pole dancer . The publication was a worldwide success , leading to a number of exhibitions in New York , London , Paris , Düsseldorf , Berlin and Florence . After the exhibition was over , Madonna was inspired by the images from the exhibitions and decided to incorporate them into her then unplanned tour and asked Klein to help her with the task . The poster released for the tour used one of the images from the installation project . It featured Madonna in a seventeenth century style dress , crawling on all fours towards the camera . Klein later commented that , 
 " The thing is , I always saw Madonna as a performance artist . And I think what I wanted to portray was the process about how a performer arrives at their work . And the thing is , what she had talked about as well , is that before a concert , what she finds very interesting is the rehearsals and the straining and maybe she would like to injure . [ ... ] And she said that the process of making the concert became more intriguing than the final result . " 
 The main intention of the tour was to transform Madonna 's old hits musically and display her capacity for transformation and self @-@ reflection . The tour was initially known as the Whore of Babylon World Tour , although Madonna later denied using this name . The idea was to portray Madonna as the Whore of Babylon , the figure of evil as mentioned in the Book of Revelation . However it was later changed to the Re @-@ Invention World Tour , to make it a self @-@ confident dig at all the critics and people who have expressed their views about Madonna re @-@ inventing her image over the years . The official tour poster displayed Madonna in a vintage bolero gown and a large French Renaissance @-@ like hair @-@ bun . Air @-@ conditioning was turned off during the tour on Madonna 's request as she claimed it dried up her throat during singing . 
 = = Development = = 
 During the rehearsals of the tour , a general setlist was decided where the show rehearsals would start with " I 'm So Stupid " from American Life , " Dress You Up " ( 1985 ) and " Material Girl " ( 1984 ) . But " Dress You Up " and " I 'm So Stupid " were later dropped from the show . Other songs taken out from the initial set list include " Love Profusion " <unk> Mix ( 2004 ) , " Swim " from Ray of Light ( 1998 ) , " Live to Tell " ( 1986 ) and " Take a Bow " ( 1994 ) . " Nobody Knows Me " was first rehearsed in Peter Rauhofer 's Perfect Private Life Mix . The opening song for the show was decided as " Vogue " ( 1990 ) for a long time , until Madonna decided to use " The Beast Within " as the opener . The finale of the show was decided to be " Holiday " ( 1983 ) rather than " Die Another Day " ( 2002 ) with the John Lennon song " Imagine " ( 1971 ) being added to the setlist . " Don 't Tell Me " ( 2001 ) was rehearsed in two versions – a French video backdrop version for the American leg and Paris shows , and the " Bitter Sweet Symphony " version for the other tour stops . Two new tracks rehearsed for the show included " Devil Wouldn 't Recognize You " , written by Madonna and Joe Henry , and " I Love New York " . The latter was incorporated as a bonus track of the live Re @-@ Invention Tour CD I 'm Going To Tell You A Secret ( 2005 ) and remade as a dance track for her tenth studio album Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) , while the former was included in her eleventh studio album Hard Candy ( 2008 ) . " Ray of Light " was also rehearsed during the initial phases , but Madonna later decided to eliminate it , as performing the song at the beginning of the show would hurt her voice beforehand . Finally twenty @-@ four of the thirty rehearsed songs ended up on being the official setlist for the show . 
 The costumes for the tour were created by designer Arianne Phillips . Before the show started , USA Today reported that Madonna would be making five costume changes in the tour . Phillips commented that since Madonna was revisiting her old songs for this tour , hence that was the main philosophy and inspiration behind designing the costumes . However she also noted that " Madonna has always pooh @-@ <unk> the concept of reinvention and doesn 't strategize or <unk> her new look in a boardroom , so this is the greatest ironic statement of all . " The T @-@ shirts were designed by Jean @-@ Paul Gaultier and the shoes used were provided by clothing line hosiery Miu Miu . The opening dress was created by French designer Christian Lacroix and incorporated the baroque look . The second part of the displayed military themed outfits inspired from the American Life album and designed by Phillips . The third ensemble emphasized on the emotional point of the show and hence the costumes were quieter and displayed the silhouettes of the performers . The costumes of this segment were designed by Stella McCartney . Phase four costumes , inspired by the carnivals , were designed by Chanel . The final segment of the tour displayed traditional dresses . Other than these , Madonna wore corsets during the first segment . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The central theme of the show was unity versus violence . It was divided into five acts with different themes : French Baroque – Marie Antoinette Revival , Military – Army , Circus – Cabaret , Acoustic and Scottish @-@ Tribal segments . It began with " The Beast Within " , an ominous recitation from the Book of Revelation by Madonna and the screens displaying Madonna 's X @-@ STaTIC PRo = CeSS installations . Once the introduction had finished , Madonna appeared onstage on a rising platform in a golden corset ( for some European shows she wore a lilac one ) , striking yoga poses to perform " Vogue " . It was followed by the energetically performed " Nobody Knows Me " on a conveyor belt with some of the words to the song appearing on the screens , then " Frozen " , during which a video of a naked male and a naked female wrestling , caressing and intertwining in water , their faces and genitals darkened by shadows so as to preserve their androgyny , were displayed on the backdrops . This video was directed by Chris Cunningham , who directed Madonna 's original music video to the song . The military segment started with the sound of a helicopter in the background as Madonna 's backup dancers , dressed as soldiers , crawled on their bellies as though in the middle of battle , then hugged each other as if saying goodbye . Madonna appeared onstage , on top of a structure made up of TV sets , wearing camouflage pants , an olive army jacket and black beret . She started performing " American Life " as war footage of death and destruction flashed on screens behind her ( at the end of the song , it showed a George W. Bush look @-@ alike lovingly resting his head on the shoulder of a Saddam Hussein look @-@ alike , as though the pair were waiting for a marriage license ) . During the performance Madonna ran down a lengthy V @-@ shaped catwalk that descended from the ceiling and allowed her to reach the middle of the stadium . She also twirled army rifles during a march @-@ like " Express Yourself " before strapping on a guitar for rock versions of " Burning Up " and " Material Girl " . During the latter 's performances , the backdrops displayed mathematical equations along with DNA helixes rushing through the screens . A remix interlude of " Hollywood " featured a breakdancer , a <unk> , a <unk> , a <unk> and a skateboarder . The screens displayed animations of tarot cards . 
 The interlude was followed by a Cabaret @-@ like performance of " Hanky Panky " , which started the Circus act . Next a jazz version of " Deeper and Deeper " was performed with her two female back @-@ up dancers . Then followed " Die Another Day " , with Madonna and her dancers in a Tango @-@ like choreography and backdrops displayed an old man in his deathbed . After that , she was strapped into an electric chair as she started singing " Lament " from the soundtrack of the film Evita and the platform rises with her to the top . Madonna commented later that " Lament " was her " favorite part , [ ... ] I like the idea of being restrained . I 'm singing about all the things I could have had , but my ego got in the way and I destroyed all my happiness . " The Orbital remix / video interlude of " Bedtime Story " was performed as dancers swung on trapezes . An acoustic @-@ style segment started with " Nothing Fails " , with the guitar being played by Madonna herself . After that , she sang " Don 't Tell Me " , recreating the choreography from the song 's video with her dancers . The next song played was " Like a Prayer " where symbols of the 72 names of God were displayed on the backdrops . During the performance of the combined " Mother and Father " , Catholic images along with Madonna 's Mother were displayed on the backdrops . Madonna then performed John Lennon 's pro @-@ peace song " Imagine " when photo montages of war @-@ ravaged children , bombed @-@ out villages and artillery were displayed in the backdrops . Asked why she chose to cover this song Madonna simply said : " I wanted to make a statement with the ultimate peace song . " 
 The final segment started with Scottish bagpiper players parading around the stage in kilts and playing drums and pipes . Madonna appeared onstage in similar long kilts and a white sleeveless T @-@ shirt to perform " Into the Groove " with Scottish bagpiper Lorne Cousin . A video simulation of the rapper Missy Elliott is played during the performance ; later on , Madonna started singing " Papa Don 't Preach " Madonna wore black T @-@ shirts with the line " Kabbalists Do It Better " printed on them . Madonna <unk> on the raised platform and sings the song . Other lines printed on the T @-@ shirts for various other shows included " <unk> Do It Better " , " Italians Do It Better " " Irish Do It Better " and " Brits Do It Better " . The next song , " Crazy for You " is dedicated to all her fans for " Sticking by me for the last 20 years ! " . The last two performances consisted of " Music " and the show closer , " Holiday " which was backed by a montage of morphing flags on the backdrops . The show ended with cannon shots of confetti and the phrase " Reinvent yourself " appearing onscreen . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The show received positive reviews and critical acclaim . David Segal from The Washington Post noted that the " difference between this show and the last , the Drowned World Tour of 2001 , was striking . That show seems standoffish compared with this one , in part because Madonna has finally worked through whatever issues prevented her from performing her earliest hits . [ ... ] Madonna has created a new performance hybrid . " Segal 's view was shared by Elizabeth Smith from The New York Times who also commented that " Unlike 2001 's Drowned World Tour , which was dark , often hostile , Re @-@ Invention returns Madonna to the light . She looks as if she is having a good time . " Edna Gunderson of USA Today gave the concert four out of four stars and said " Madonna seems to be having a jolly good time . Whereas her last outing had technical strengths but lacked warmth , Reinvention finds Madonna reinvested emotionally . The show doesn 't have the degree of flesh , carnal content or shock value that past outings delivered , but this time Madonna is opting for more heart than cleavage and more personality than profanity . " Joshua Klein from Chicago Tribune commented that Madonna 's show displayed more spectacle than substance . 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented on the theme of the concert and said that " the best thing that can come out of Madonna revisiting ( and reinventing ) the past is that she , and we , will be reminded of what she does best : making us forget about the bad times , come together , release the pressure , and have a holiday . " Kelefa Sanneh from The New York Times said that the concert was " a dense , dizzying , often incoherent , sometimes exhilarating night , starring a great performer who often found herself <unk> with her own past lives . " Dan Aquilante from New York Post said that the concert " razzle @-@ dazzled her way into the hearts of the devoted audience with an entertaining theatrical revue that was elaborately staged , costumed and cast with a full dance troupe . " Thea Singer of the Boston Herald said that " Madonna brought Jewish mysticism on tour . " John Hand from BBC noted that the " Re @-@ Invention Tour happily <unk> [ d ] past and present Madonna . [ ... ] It is a far more rounded concert experience for the dedicated fan . " However Robert Hilburn from Los Angeles Times felt that the show eventually took on a darker , more political tone and condemned the " weakly political Re @-@ Invention concert [ as ] unsexy and uninspiring . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 The first tickets for the tour were allotted to the members of Icon , Madonna 's official fan club members . However , the tour soon started selling all around the world . Originally scheduled to perform in twelve major markets in North America with additional stops in Paris and London , the demand for tickets became so high that in New York City after two Madison Square Garden dates sold out in record time , Madonna 's manager Caresse Henry , and the worldwide tour promoter Clear Channel Entertainment , decided to add new dates to the tour . Within the first five days the tour was a sell @-@ out for the dates at Los Angeles , Las Vegas , New York City , Boston , Chicago , Toronto , Philadelphia and Miami . High @-@ priced ticket packages for all dates on the tour were sold from Madonna 's tour website <unk> The tickets were priced at $ 700 ( $ 877 in 2016 dollars ) per person . MTV arranged for an on @-@ air contest titled Front and Center With Madonna Contest where fans were able to win tickets to an onstage area at any of the scheduled shows . After the tour started , mid @-@ year it was announced that the tour has grossed US $ 44 @.@ 9 million ( $ 56 @.@ 25 million in 2016 dollars ) , from the selling of 258 @,@ 000 tickets at an average price of $ 174 @.@ 17 . Her average gross per show was US $ 6 @.@ 414 million ( $ 8 @.@ 04 million in 2016 dollars ) with still more than half the dates being left . 
 Before the show was over , Billboard magazine projected total sales of $ 120 million ( $ 150 @.@ 34 million in 2016 dollars ) for Re @-@ Invention . This was confirmed by People magazine who said that the tour grossed around $ 120 million from all the shows , thus making it the highest grossing tour of 2004 . Although musician Prince 's Musicology Tour was initially projected to be the highest grossing tour , Billboard Boxscore published that the Re @-@ Invention Tour had sold 55 out of the 56 shows and grossed US $ 125 million ( $ 156 @.@ 6 million in 2016 dollars ) . At the 2004 Billboard Touring Awards , Re @-@ Invention Tour received the Top Tour award during the Backstage Pass Conference at New York City 's Roosevelt Hotel on November 9 , 2004 . Madonna 's tour manager Caresse Henry was awarded the Top Manager award . 
 = = Lip sync allegation = = 
 During the Q magazine awards , Elton John accused Madonna for lip @-@ synching in her shows . He commented " Since when has lip @-@ synching been live ? Anyone who lip @-@ synchs in public on stage when you pay $ 134 to see them should be shot . That 's me off her fucking Christmas card list . [ ... ] But do I give a toss ? No . " Madonna 's publicist , Liz Rosenberg , rejected John 's allegations by saying " Madonna does not lip @-@ sync nor does she spend her time trashing other artists , [ ... ] She sang every note of her Re @-@ Invention tour live and is not ashamed that she was well paid for her hard work . [ ... ] Elton John remains on her Christmas card list whether he is nice ... or naughty . " John later released a statement to Entertainment Weekly saying that he would like to apologize to Madonna for his comments . He said : 
 I don 't want to escalate it because I like Madonna , [ ... ] She 's been to my house for dinner . It was something that was said in the heat of the moment , and probably should not have been said . [ ... ] Would I apologize to her if I saw her ? Yeah , because I don 't want to hurt any artist 's feelings . It was my fault . I instigated the whole thing . But it applies to all those bloody teenage singers . [ ... ] The reaction to it was so hysterical , It was like I said , ' I think all gays should be killed or I think Hitler was right . ' I just said someone was lip @-@ synching . I 'm not afraid to speak my mind . I 'm not going to mellow with age . I get more enraged about things as I get older because you see that these injustices go on . 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 The show was expected to broadcast on CBS . It was taped on the final night in Lisbon . CBS reportedly offered to pay $ 10 million to broadcast the concert as a two @-@ hour special but it did not happen . 
 A documentary titled I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret , which chronicled the tour , was released . The documentary was recorded during Madonna 's performance on the tour and was finished during the recording of Madonna 's tenth studio album Confessions on a Dance Floor . The DVD + CD containing the documentary and a live album of highlights from the show was also released in May 2006 . The DVD contained a two @-@ hour long look at the tour , including its rehearsal plus some performance footage , while the CD offers thirteen songs of the set list plus the rock demo of " I Love New York " . 
 The documentary was directed by Jonas Åkerlund . Barry Walters from Rolling Stone commented that " Jonas Akerlund 's 2005 kinetic yet personable documentary of Madonna 's 2004 Re @-@ Invention Tour lacks the dishy delights of the diva 's 1991 Truth or Dare doc . Instead , a more worldly Madge struggles to become a less sound @-@ bite @-@ reliant , more sincere person . The bonus live CD proves that she 's a better singer . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic complimented the release saying " as Madonna 's first live CD , I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret is strong and entertaining , and even if the excessive minutiae on the accompanying DVD means only hardcore fans will sit through its two hours , it 's also quite well done . " The release debuted at number 33 on the Billboard 200 and the top ten in Canada and the European Top 100 Albums chart . 
 = = Set list = = 
 " The Beast Within " ( Video Introduction ) ( contains elements of " El Yom ' <unk> ' Ala <unk> " ) 
 " Vogue " 
 " Nobody Knows Me " 
 " Frozen " 
 " American Life " 
 " Express Yourself " 
 " Burning Up " 
 " Material Girl " 
 " Hollywood " ( Remix ) ( Dancer / Video Interlude ) 
 " Hanky Panky " 
 " Deeper and Deeper " 
 " Die Another Day " 
 " Lament " 
 " Bedtime Story " ( Orbital Mix ) ( Dancer / Video Interlude ) 
 " Nothing Fails " 
 " Don 't Tell Me " ( contained elements of " Bitter Sweet Symphony " in most European shows ) 
 " Like a Prayer " 
 " Mother and Father " ( contains excerpts from " Intervention " ) 
 " Imagine " 
 " Into the Groove " ( contains elements of " Susan MacLeod " and " Into the Hollywood Groove " ) 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " ( ends with a reprise of " American Life " ) 
 " Crazy for You " 
 " Music " ( contains elements from " Into the Groove " ) 
 " Holiday " ( contains elements of " She Wants to Move " ) 
 Source : 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = John W. Campbell = 
 John Wood Campbell Jr . ( June 8 , 1910 – July 11 , 1971 ) was an American science fiction writer and editor . As editor of Astounding Science Fiction ( later called Analog Science Fiction and Fact ) from late 1937 until his death , he is generally credited with shaping the Golden Age of Science Fiction . 
 Isaac Asimov called Campbell " the most powerful force in science fiction ever , and for the first ten years of his editorship he dominated the field completely . " 
 As a writer , Campbell published super @-@ science space opera under his own name and moody stories under his primary and most famous pseudonym , Don A. Stuart . Campbell also wrote under the pen names Karl Van Kampen and Arthur McCann . He stopped writing fiction after he became editor of Astounding . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Campbell was born in Newark , New Jersey in 1910 . His father was a cold , impersonal , and <unk> electrical engineer . His mother , Dorothy ( née <unk> ) was warm but changeable of character and had an identical twin who visited them often and who disliked young John . John was unable to tell them apart and was frequently coldly rebuffed by the person he took to be his mother . 
 Campbell attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , where he was befriended by the eminent mathematician Norbert Wiener ( who coined the term cybernetics ) . He began writing science fiction at age 18 and sold his first stories quickly . From January 1930 to June 1931 , Amazing published six of his short stories , one novel , and six letters . Thus he was a well @-@ known pulp writer at 21 – but he had failed German and MIT had dismissed him . After one year at Duke University , he graduated with a Bachelor of Science in physics in 1932 . 
 Campbell and Dona Stewart married in 1931 . They divorced in 1949 and he married Margaret ( Peg ) Winter in 1950 . He spent most of his life in New Jersey and died at home . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 Editor T. O 'Conor Sloane lost Campbell 's first manuscript that he accepted for Amazing Stories , entitled " Invaders of the Infinite " . " When the Atoms Failed " appeared in January 1930 , followed by five more during 1930 in that monthly and in Amazing Stories Quarterly , also edited by Sloane . Three were part of a space opera series featuring the characters Arcot , Morey , and Wade , and a " complete novel " in the series , " Islands of Space " , was the cover story in the Spring 1931 Quarterly . During 1934 – 35 a serial novel , The Mightiest Machine , ran in Astounding Stories , edited by F. Orlin Tremaine , and several stories featuring lead characters Penton and Blake appeared from late 1936 in Thrilling Wonder Stories , edited by Mort Weisinger . 
 The early work for Amazing established Campbell 's reputation as a writer of space adventure . When in 1934 he began to publish stories with a different tone he wrote as Don A. Stuart , a pseudonym derived from his wife 's maiden name . 
 From 1930 until the later part of that decade , Campbell was prolific and successful under both names . Three significant stories published under the pseudonym are " Twilight " ( Astounding , November 1934 ) , " Night " ( Astounding , October 1935 ) , and " Who Goes There ? " ( Astounding , August 1938 ) . " Who Goes There ? " , about a group of Antarctic researchers who discover a crashed alien vessel , complete with a malevolent shape @-@ changing occupant , was filmed as The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) , The Thing ( 1982 ) , and again as The Thing ( 2011 ) . It was published in Astounding almost a year after Campbell became its editor and it was his last significant piece of fiction , at age 28 . 
 Campbell held the amateur radio call sign <unk> , and wrote many articles on electronics and radio for a wide range of magazines . 
 Between December 11 , 1957 , and June 13 , 1958 , he hosted a weekly science fiction radio program called Exploring Tomorrow . The scripts were written by authors such as Gordon R. Dickson and Robert Silverberg . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Tremaine hired Campbell to succeed him as the editor of Astounding from its October 1937 issue . Campbell was not given full authority for Astounding until May 1938 , but had been responsible for buying stories somewhat earlier . He began to make changes almost immediately , instigating a " mutant " label for unusual stories , and in March 1938 changing the title from Astounding Stories to Astounding Science @-@ Fiction . 
 Lester del Rey 's first story , in March 1938 , was an early find for Campbell , and in 1939 , he published such an extraordinary group of new writers for the first time that the period is generally regarded as the beginning of the " Golden Age of Science Fiction , " and the July 1939 issue in particular . The July issue contained A. E. van Vogt 's first story , " Black Destroyer , " and Asimov 's early story " Trends " ; August brought Robert A. Heinlein 's first story , " Life @-@ Line " , and the next month Theodore Sturgeon 's first story appeared . 
 Also in 1939 , Campbell started the fantasy magazine Unknown ( later Unknown Worlds ) . Although Unknown was canceled after only four years , a victim of wartime paper shortages , the magazine 's editorial direction was significant in the evolution of modern fantasy . 
 Campbell is widely considered to be the single most important and influential editor in the early history of science fiction . The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction wrote : " More than any other individual , he helped to shape modern sf . " After 1950 , new magazines such as Galaxy Science Fiction and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction moved in different directions and developed talented new writers who were not directly influenced by him . Campbell often suggested story ideas to writers ( including , famously , " Write me a creature that thinks as well as a man , or better than a man , but not like a man " ) , and sometimes asked for stories to match cover paintings he had already bought . 
 Campbell had a strong formative influence on Asimov and eventually became a friend . Asimov said of Campbell 's influence on the field : " By his own example and by his instruction and by his <unk> and persisting insistence , he forced first Astounding and then all science fiction into his mold . He abandoned the earlier orientation of the field . He demolished the stock characters who had filled it ; eradicated the penny dreadful plots ; extirpated the Sunday @-@ supplement science . In a phrase , he blotted out the purple of pulp . Instead , he demanded that science @-@ fiction writers understand science and understand people , a hard requirement that many of the established writers of the 1930s could not meet . Campbell did not compromise because of that : those who could not meet his requirements could not sell to him , and the carnage was as great as it had been in Hollywood a decade before , while silent movies had given way to the talkies . " 
 The most famous example of the type of speculative but plausible science fiction that Campbell demanded from his writers is " Deadline , " a short story by Cleve Cartmill that appeared during the wartime year of 1944 , a year before the detonation of the first atomic bomb . As Ben Bova , Campbell 's successor as editor at Analog , wrote , it " described the basic facts of how to build an atomic bomb . Cartmill and Campbell worked together on the story , drawing their scientific information from papers published in the technical journals before the war . To them , the mechanics of constructing a uranium @-@ fission bomb seemed perfectly obvious . " The FBI descended on Campbell 's office after the story appeared in print and demanded that the issue be removed from the newsstands . Campbell convinced them that by removing the magazine " the FBI would be advertising to everyone that such a project existed and was aimed at developing nuclear weapons " and the demand was dropped . 
 Campbell was also responsible for the grim and controversial ending of Tom Godwin 's famous short story " The Cold Equations " . Writer Joe Green recounted that Campbell had " three times sent ' Cold Equations ' back to Godwin , before he got the version he wanted ... Godwin kept coming up with ingenious ways to save the girl ! Since the strength of this deservedly classic story lies in the fact that the life of one young woman must be sacrificed to save the lives of many , it simply would not have the same impact if she had lived . " 
 = = Views = = 
 = = = Slavery = = = 
 Green wrote that Campbell " enjoyed taking the ' devil 's advocate ' position in almost any area , willing to defend even viewpoints with which he disagreed if that led to a livelier debate . " As an example , he wrote , Campbell " pointed out that the much @-@ maligned ' peculiar institution ' of slavery in the American South had in fact provided the blacks brought there with a higher standard of living than they had in Africa ... I suspected , from comments by Asimov , among others – and some Analog editorials I had read – that John held some racist views , at least in regard to blacks . " Finally , however , Green agreed with Campbell that " rapidly increasing mechanization after 1850 would have soon rendered slavery obsolete anyhow . It would have been better for the USA to endure it a few more years than suffer the truly horrendous costs of the Civil War . " 
 In a June 1961 editorial called " Civil War Centennial , " Campbell argued that slavery had been a dominant form of human relationships for most of history and that the present was unusual in that anti @-@ slavery cultures dominated the planet . He wrote , " It 's my bet that the South would have been integrated by 1910 . The job would have been done – and done right – half a century sooner , with vastly less human misery , and with almost no bloodshed ... The only way slavery has ever been ended , anywhere , is by introducing industry ... If a man is a skilled and competent machinist – if the lathes work well under his hands – the industrial management will be forced , to remain in business , to accept that fact , whether the man be black , white , purple , or polka @-@ dotted . " 
 According to Michael Moorcock , " He also , when faced with the Watts riots of the mid @-@ sixties , seriously proposed and went on to proposing that there were ' natural ' slaves who were unhappy if freed . I sat on a panel with him in 1965 , as he pointed out that the worker bee when unable to work dies of misery , that the <unk> when freed went to their masters and begged to be enslaved again , that the ideals of the anti @-@ slavers who fought in the Civil War were merely expressions of self @-@ interest and that the blacks were ' against ' emancipation , which was fundamentally why they were indulging in ' leaderless ' riots in the suburbs of Los Angeles . " 
 = = = Smoking = = = 
 Campbell was a heavy smoker throughout his life and was seldom seen without his customary cigarette holder . In the Analog of September , 1964 , nine months after the Surgeon General 's first major warning about the dangers of cigarette smoking had been issued on January 11 , Campbell ran an editorial , " A <unk> to Tobacco " that took its title from the similarly named anti @-@ smoking book by James I of England . In it , he stated that the connection to lung cancer was " esoteric " and referred to " a barely <unk> possible correlation between cigarette smoking and cancer . " He claimed that tobacco 's calming effects led to more effective thinking . 
 However , in a one @-@ page piece about automobile safety in the Analog dated May , 1967 , Campbell wrote of " people suddenly becoming conscious of the fact that cars kill more people than cigarettes do , even if the <unk> <unk> were completely right ... " 
 = = = <unk> and fringe politics = = = 
 In the 1930s Campbell became interested in Joseph Rhine 's theories about ESP ( Rhine had already founded Parapsychology Laboratory at Duke University when Campbell was a student there ) , and over the following years his growing interest in parapsychology would be reflected in the stories he published when he encouraged the writers to include these topics in their tales , leading to the publication of numerous works about telepathy and other psionic abilities . His increasing tendencies would eventually start to isolate and alienate him from some of his own writers . He wrote favorably about such things as the " Dean drive " , a device that supposedly produced thrust in violation of Newton 's third law , and the " Hieronymus machine " , which could supposedly amplify psi powers . 
 In 1949 , Campbell also became interested in Dianetics . He wrote of L. Ron Hubbard 's initial article in Astounding that " It is , I assure you in full and absolute sincerity , one of the most important articles ever published . " He also claimed to have successfully used <unk> techniques himself . 
 Asimov wrote : " A number of writers wrote pseudoscientific stuff to ensure sales to Campbell , but the best writers retreated , I among them . ... " Elsewhere Asimov went on to further explain , " Campbell championed far @-@ out ideas ... He pained very many of the men he had trained ( including me ) in doing so , but felt it was his duty to stir up the minds of his readers and force curiosity right out to the border lines . He began a series of editorials ... in which he championed a social point of view that could sometimes be described as far right ( he expressed sympathy for George Wallace in the 1968 national election , for instance ) . There was bitter opposition to this from many ( including me – I could hardly ever read a Campbell editorial and keep my temper ) . " 
 = = Assessment by peers = = 
 Damon Knight described Campbell as a " portly , bristled @-@ haired blond man with a challenging stare . " " Six @-@ foot @-@ one , with <unk> features , he presented a formidable appearance , " said Sam Moskowitz . " He was a tall , large man with light hair , a <unk> nose , a wide face with thin lips , and with a cigarette in a holder forever clamped between his teeth , " wrote Asimov . 
 Algis Budrys wrote that " John W. Campbell was the greatest editor SF has seen or is likely to see , and is in fact one of the major editors in all English @-@ language literature in the middle years of the twentieth century . All about you is the heritage of what he built " . 
 Asimov said that Campbell was " talkative , opinionated , quicksilver @-@ minded , overbearing . Talking to him meant listening to a monologue ... " Knight agreed : " Campbell 's lecture @-@ room manner was so unpleasant to me that I was unwilling to face it . Campbell talked a good deal more than he listened , and he liked to say outrageous things . " 
 British novelist and critic Kingsley Amis dismissed Campbell brusquely : " I might just add as a sociological note that the editor of Astounding , himself a deviant figure of marked ferocity , seems to think he has invented a psi machine . " 
 British SF novelist Michael Moorcock , as part of his Starship Stormtroopers editorial , claimed Campbell 's Stories and its writers were " wild @-@ eyed <unk> to a man , fierce anti @-@ socialists " with " [ stories ] full of crew @-@ cut wisecracking , cigar @-@ chewing , competent guys ( like Campbell 's image of himself ) " , who had success because their " work reflected the deep @-@ seated conservatism of the majority of their readers , who saw a Bolshevik menace in every union meeting " . He viewed Campbell as turning the magazine into a vessel for right @-@ wing politics , " by the early 1950s ... a crypto @-@ fascist deeply philistine magazine pretending to intellectualism and offering idealistic kids an ' alternative ' that was , of course , no alternative at all " . 
 SF writer Alfred Bester , an editor of Holiday Magazine and a sophisticated Manhattanite , recounted at some length his " one demented meeting " with Campbell , a man he imagined from afar to be " a combination of Bertrand Russell and Ernest Rutherford . " The first thing Campbell said to him was that Freud was dead , destroyed by the new discovery of Dianetics , which , he predicted , would win L. Ron Hubbard the Nobel Peace Prize . Campbell ordered the bemused Bester to " think back . Clear yourself . Remember ! You can remember when your mother tried to abort you with a button hook . You 've never stopped hating her for it . " Bester commented : " It reinforced my private opinion that a majority of the science @-@ fiction crowd , despite their brilliance , were missing their marbles . " 
 Campbell died in 1971 at the age of 61 in Mountainside , New Jersey . At the time of his sudden death after 34 years at the helm of Analog , Campbell 's quirky personality and eccentric editorial demands had alienated a number of his most illustrious writers to the point that they no longer submitted works to him . 
 Asimov remained grateful for Campbell 's early friendship and support . He dedicated The Early Asimov ( 1972 ) to him , and concluded it by stating that " There is no way at all to express how he meant to me and how much he did for me except , perhaps , to write this book evoking , once more , those days of a quarter century ago " . 
 His final word on Campbell , however , was that " in the last twenty years of his life , he was only a diminishing shadow of what he had once been . " Even Heinlein , perhaps Campbell 's most important discovery and a " fast friend , " eventually tired of him . 
 Poul Anderson wrote that Campbell " had saved and regenerated science fiction " , which had become " the product of hack <unk> " when he took over Astounding . " By his editorial policies and the help and encouragement he gave his writers ( always behind the scenes ) , he raised both the literary and the intellectual standard anew . Whatever progress has been made stems from that renaissance " . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Shortly after Campbell 's death , the University of Kansas science fiction program – now the Center for the Study of Science Fiction – established the annual John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel and also renamed after him its annual Campbell Conference . The World Science Fiction Society established the annual John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer . All three memorials became effective in 1973 . 
 The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Campbell in 1996 , in its inaugural class of two deceased and two living persons . 
 Campbell and Astounding shared one of the inaugural Hugo Awards with H. L. Gold and Galaxy at the 1953 World Science Fiction Convention . Subsequently they won the Hugo Award for Best Professional Magazine seven times to 1965 . 
 = = Works = = 
 This shortened bibliography lists each title once . Some titles that are duplicated are different versions , whereas other publications of Campbell 's with different titles are simply selections from or <unk> of other works , and have hence been omitted . The main bibliographic sources are footnoted from this paragraph and provided much of the information in the following sections . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 The Mightiest Machine ( 1947 ) 
 The Incredible Planet ( 1949 ) 
 The Black Star Passes ( 1953 ) 
 Islands of Space ( 1956 ) 
 Invaders from the Infinite ( 1961 ) 
 The Ultimate Weapon ( 1966 ) 
 = = = Short story collections and omnibus editions = = = 
 Who Goes There ? ( 1948 ) 
 The Moon is Hell ( 1951 ) 
 Cloak of Aesir ( 1952 ) 
 The <unk> ( 1966 ) 
 The Best of John W. Campbell ( 1973 ) 
 The Space Beyond ( 1976 ) 
 The Best of John W. Campbell ( 1976 ) ( <unk> from 1973 version ) 
 A New Dawn : The Don A. Stuart Stories of John W. Campbell , Jr . ( 2003 ) 
 = = = Edited books = = = 
 From Unknown Worlds ( 1948 ) 
 The Astounding Science Fiction Anthology ( 1952 ) 
 Prologue to Analog ( 1962 ) 
 Analog I ( 1963 ) 
 Analog II ( 1964 ) 
 Analog 3 ( 1965 ) 
 Analog 4 ( 1966 ) 
 Analog 5 ( 1967 ) 
 Analog 6 ( 1968 ) 
 Analog 7 ( 1969 ) 
 Analog 8 ( 1971 ) 
 = = = Nonfiction = = = 
 Editorial Number Three : " Letter From the Editor " , in A Requiem for Astounding ( 1964 ) 
 Collected Editorials from Analog ( 1966 ) 
 The John W. Campbell Letters , Volume 1 ( 1986 ) 
 The John W. Campbell Letters with Isaac Asimov & A.E. van Vogt , Volume II ( 1993 ) 
 = = = Memorial works = = = 
 Memorial works ( Festschrift ) include : 
 Astounding : The John W. Campbell Memorial Anthology ( 1973 ) edited by Harry Harrison 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 John W. Campbell as host of the Mutual Broadcasting System 's Exploring Tomorrow ( 1957 – 58 ) 
 = = = Biography and criticism = = = 
 John W. Campbell Jr. biography at the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame 
 Astounding : The Campbell Years by Frederik Pohl 
 “ John W. Campbell , Jr . ” by Ben Bova , Analog June 2015 ( thousandth issue ) 
 = Chhinnamasta = 
 Chhinnamasta ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> , <unk> , " She whose head is severed " ) , often spelled Chinnamasta , and also called <unk> and Prachanda Chandika , is one of the Mahavidyas , ten Tantric goddesses and a ferocious aspect of Devi , the Hindu Divine Mother . Chhinnamasta can be easily identified by her unusual iconography . The nude self @-@ decapitated goddess , usually standing or seated on a copulating couple , holds her own severed head in one hand , a scimitar in another . Three jets of blood spurt out of her bleeding neck and are drunk by her severed head and two attendants . 
 Chhinnamasta is a goddess of contradictions . She symbolises both aspects of Devi : a life @-@ giver and a life @-@ taker . She is considered both a symbol of sexual self @-@ control and an embodiment of sexual energy , depending upon interpretation . She denotes death , temporality and destruction as well as life , immortality and recreation . The goddess conveys spiritual self @-@ realization and the awakening of the kundalini – spiritual energy . The legends of Chhinnamasta emphasise her self @-@ sacrifice – sometimes coupled with a maternal element – sexual dominance , and self @-@ destructive fury . 
 Though Chhinnamasta enjoys patronage as part of the Mahavidyas , her individual temples – mostly found in Eastern India and Nepal – and individual public worship by lay worshippers are rare . However , she remains a popular Tantric deity , worshipped by Tantrikas , yogis and world renouncers . 
 Chhinnamasta is recognised by both Hindus and Buddhists . She is closely related to Chinnamunda – the severed @-@ headed form of the Tibetan Buddhist goddess Vajrayogini . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Chhinnamasta is popular in Tantric and Tibetan Buddhism , where she is called Chinnamunda ( " she with the severed head " ) . Chinnamunda is the severed @-@ head form of goddess Vajrayogini ( or Vajravarahi , a ferocious form of Vajrayogini ) , who is depicted similarly . 
 Buddhist texts recount the birth of the Buddhist Chinnamunda . One tale tells of <unk> 's disciples , two <unk> sisters , <unk> and <unk> , who cut their heads , offered them to their guru , and then danced . The goddess Vajrayogini also appeared in this form and danced with them . Another story recalls how princess <unk> , who was a previous incarnation of a devotee of Padmasambhava , cut off her head as a punishment from the king and roamed with it in the city , where citizens extolled her as Chinnamunda @-@ Vajravarahi . 
 In the early decades of the 20th century , the scholar B. Bhattacharyya studied various texts such as the Buddhist <unk> ( 1156 CE ) , the Hindu <unk> , and <unk> ( late 16th century ) . He determined that the Hindu Chhinnamasta and Buddhist Chinnamunda were the same goddess , in spite of the fact that the former wears a serpent as a sacred thread and has an added Rati @-@ Kamadeva couple in the icon . In the <unk> , the goddess is called <unk> ( " all @-@ awakened " ) , and is attended by <unk> and <unk> ; in the Hindu Tantrasara , she is called <unk> ( " all @-@ accomplished " ) , and is accompanied by attendants Dakini , <unk> , and Varnini . In the <unk> , she is called <unk> ( " all @-@ enlightened " ) ; her attendants retain their Buddhist names . Bhattacharyya concluded that the Hindu Chhinnamasta originated from the Buddhist Chinnamunda , who was worshipped by at least the 7th century . 
 While Bhattacharyya 's view is mostly undisputed , some scholars such as <unk> attribute Chhinnamasta to Vedic ( ancient Hindu ) antecedents . S. <unk> says that the Vedic goddess Nirrti 's functions were inherited by Kali , Chamunda , <unk> , and Chhinnamasta . Hindu literature first mentions her in the <unk> Shakta Maha @-@ bhagavata Purana ( c . 950 CE ) and Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana . Elizabeth A. Benard says that whatever her origins may be , it is clear that Chhinnamasta / Chinnamunda was known in the 9th century and worshipped by Mahasiddhas . Though essentially agreeing with Bhattacharyya 's view , Karel R. van <unk> goes further and associates the iconography of Chhinnamasta with the Tantric goddesses Varahi and Chamunda . 
 David Kinsley agrees with the Buddhist origin theory , but sees other influences , too . According to Kinsley , the concept of ten Mahavidyas cannot be earlier than the 12th century . Ancient Hindu goddesses , who are depicted nude and headless or faceless , may have also influenced the development of Chhinnamasta . These goddesses are mainly depicted headless to focus on the display of their sexual organs , thus signifying sexual vigour , but they do not explain the self @-@ decapitation theme . The beheading and rejoining motif also appears in the tale of the goddess Renuka . 
 Other Hindu goddesses which might have inspired Chhinnamasta are the malevolent war goddess <unk> and the South @-@ Indian hunting goddess Korravai . <unk> , sometimes described as a Matrika ( " mother goddess " ) , is nude , dishevelled , wild , and awful in appearance . She is mentioned in the scriptures Vishnu Purana and Bhagavata Purana , often as a foe of the god Vishnu . The ferocious , wild Korravai is the goddess of war and victory . Both goddesses are linked to battlefields ; Chhinnamasta is not . Kinsley points out that while there are several bloodthirsty , nude , and wild goddesses and <unk> in Hindu mythology , Chhinnamasta is the only goddess who displays the shocking self @-@ decapitation motif . 
 = = Legends and textual references = = 
 Chhinnamasta is often named as the fifth or sixth Mahavidya , with hymns identifying her as a fierce aspect of Devi , the Supreme Goddess . Kinsley says three Mahavidyas – Kali , Tara , and Chhinnamasta – are prominent among Mahavidya depictions and lists , but that Chhinnamasta , whose individual worship is rare , barely has an independent existence outside the group . The Guhyatiguhya @-@ Tantra equates god Vishnu 's ten avatars with the ten Mahavidyas ; the man @-@ lion incarnation Narasimha is described to have arisen from Chhinnamasta . A similar list in Mundamala equates Chhinnamasta with <unk> . 
 Chhinnamasta appears in two distinct set of legends : the origin myths of Mahavidyas as a group and those explaining the genesis of Chhinnamasta as an individual goddess . 
 = = = = Mahavidyas as a group = = = = 
 In a story from the Shakta Maha @-@ Bhagavata Purana and the <unk> Purana , which narrates the creation of all Mahavidyas including Chhinnamasta , Sati , the daughter of Daksha and the first wife of the god Shiva , feels insulted that she and Shiva are not invited to Daksha 's yagna ( " fire sacrifice " ) and insists on going there , despite Shiva 's protests . After futile attempts to convince Shiva , the enraged Sati assumes a fierce form , transforming into the Mahavidyas , who surround Shiva from the ten cardinal directions . As per the Shakta Maha @-@ bhagavata Purana , Chhinnamasta stands to the right of Shiva , interpreted as the east or the west ; the <unk> Purana describes her as appearing to the rear of Shiva in the west . 
 Similar legends replace Sati with Parvati , the second wife of Shiva and reincarnation of Sati or Kali , the chief Mahavidya , as the wife of Shiva and origin of the other Mahavidyas . While Parvati uses the Mahavidyas to stop Shiva from leaving her father 's house , Kali enlightens him and stops him , who was tired of living with her , from leaving her . 
 The Devi Bhagavata Purana also mentions the Mahavidyas as war @-@ companions and forms of the goddess Shakambhari . 
 = = = = As an individual goddess = = = = 
 The Pranotasani Tantra narrates two tales of Chhinnamasta 's birth . One legend , attributed to the Narada @-@ <unk> , tells how once , while bathing in Mandakini river , Parvati becomes sexually excited , and turns black . At the same time , her two female attendants Dakini and Varnini ( also called Jaya and Vijaya ) become extremely hungry and beg for food . Though Parvati initially promises to give them food once they return home , the merciful goddess beheads herself with her nails and gives her blood to satisfy their hunger . Later , they return home after Parvati rejoins her head . 
 The other version , from the Pranotasani Tantra and attributed to <unk> @-@ tantra , is narrated by Shiva . He recounts that his consort Chandika ( identified with Parvati ) was engrossed in coitus with him in reverse posture , but became enraged at his seminal emission . Her attendants Dakini and Varnini rose from her body . The rest of the tale is similar to the earlier version , although the river is called <unk> , the day of Chhinnamasta 's birth is called <unk> , and upon seeing the pale Parvati , Shiva becomes infuriated and assumes the form of <unk> Bhairava . This version is retold in the Shaktisamgama @-@ tantra , in which Chinnamasta forms a triad with Kali and Tara . 
 An oral legend tells how the goddess Prachanda @-@ Chandika appeared to aid the gods in the god @-@ demon war , when the gods prayed to the Great Goddess <unk> . After slaying all demons , the enraged goddess cut off her own head and drank her own blood . The name Prachanda @-@ Chandika also appears as a synonym of Chhinnamasta in her hundred @-@ name hymn in the Shakta @-@ pramoda . Another oral legend relates her to the Samudra manthan ( Churning of the Ocean ) episode , where the gods and demons churned the milk ocean to acquire the amrita ( the elixir of immortality ) . Chhinnamasta drank the demons ' share of the elixir and then beheaded herself to prevent them from acquiring it . 
 The central themes of the mythology of Chhinnamasta are her self @-@ sacrifice – with a maternal aspect ( in the Pranotasani Tantra versions ) or for the welfare of the world ( in the Samudra manthan oral version described above ) – her sexual dominance ( second Pranotasani Tantra version ) , and her self @-@ destructive fury ( in the first oral legend ) . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The iconography of Chinnamasta is described in the Tantrasara ( late 16th century ; <unk> section ) , the <unk> Tantra , the Shakta @-@ pramoda ( 19th century ; <unk> section ) , and the <unk> ( 1589 CE ) . 
 Chhinnamasta is described as being as red as the hibiscus flower or as bright as a million suns . She is usually depicted as red or orange in complexion and sometimes as black . She is depicted mostly nude ; however , she is so posed that her genitals are generally hidden or a multi @-@ hooded cobra or jewellery around the waist covers them . She is depicted as being young and slim . She is described as a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old girl with full breasts , adorned with lotuses or having a single blue lotus near her heart . Sometimes , she is partially or fully clothed . 
 The goddess carries her own severed head – sometimes on a platter or in a skull @-@ bowl – in her left hand . Though no legend mentions a specific weapon for the beheading , she holds a <unk> , a scimitar or knife or scissor @-@ like object in her right hand . Though generally depicted with two arms , manifestations of the goddess with four arms also exist . While her own severed head and the sword appear in two of her hands , the implements in the remaining arms vary : a scissor @-@ like object , a skull @-@ bowl collecting the dripping blood from her head or blood stream from her neck or a severed head , sometimes identified as that of god Brahma . 
 Chhinnamasta may have a lolling tongue . Her hair is loose and dishevelled and sometimes decorated with flowers . Alternately , in some images , her hair is tied . Additionally , she is described as three @-@ eyed , with a jewel on her forehead , which is tied to a snake or a crown on the severed head . The crescent moon may also adorn her head . Chhinnamasta is depicted wearing a serpent as a sacred thread and a garland of skulls / severed heads and bones , along with other various gold or pearl ornaments around her neck . Bangles and waist @-@ belt ornaments may be also depicted . She may also wear a snake around her neck and serpentine earrings . Three streams of blood spring from her neck , one entering her own mouth , while the others are drunk by her female yogini companions , who flank her . 
 Both of the attendants – Dakini to her left and Varnini to her right – are depicted nude , with matted or dishevelled hair , three @-@ eyed , full @-@ breasted , wearing the serpentine sacred thread and the garland of severed heads , and carrying the skull @-@ bowl in the left hand and the knife in the right . Sometimes , the attendants also hold severed heads ( not their own ) . While Dakini is fair , Varnini is red @-@ complexioned . In other depictions , both are depicted blue @-@ grey . Sometimes , her attendants are depicted as skeletons and drinking the dripping blood from Chhinnamasta 's severed head , rather than her neck . The attendants are absent in some depictions . 
 With her right leg held straight and her left leg bent a little ( the <unk> stance ) , Chhinnamasta stands in a fighting posture on the love @-@ deity couple of Kamadeva ( Kama ) – a symbol of sexual lust – and his wife Rati , who are engaged in copulation with the latter usually on the top ( <unk> @-@ rati sex position ) . Kamadeva is generally blue @-@ complexioned , while Rati is white . Below the couple is a lotus with an inverted triangle , and in the background is a cremation ground . The Chhinnamasta Tantra describes the goddess sitting on the couple , rather than standing on them . Sometimes , Kamadeva @-@ Rati is replaced by the divine couple of Krishna and Radha . The lotus beneath the couple is sometimes replaced by a cremation pyre . The coupling couple is sometimes omitted entirely . Sometimes Shiva – the goddess 's consort – is depicted lying beneath Chhinnamasta , who is seated squatting on him and copulating with him . Dogs or jackals drinking the blood sometimes appear in the scene . Sometimes Chhinnamasta is depicted standing on a lotus , a grass patch , or the ground . 
 Another form of the goddess in the Tantrasara describes her seated in her own navel , formless and invisible . This form is said to be realised only via a trance . Another aniconic representation of the goddess is her yantra , which figures the inverted triangle and lotus found in her iconography . 
 The scholar van <unk> notes that the iconography of Chhinnamasta has the elements of heroism ( vira rasa ) and terror ( <unk> rasa ) as well as eroticism ( <unk> rasa ) in terms of the copulating couple , with the main motifs being the offering of her own severed head , the spilling and drinking of blood , and the trampling of the couple . 
 Chhinnamasta 's popular iconography is similar to the yellow @-@ coloured severed @-@ head form of the Buddhist goddess Vajrayogini , except for the copulating couple – which is exclusive to the former 's iconography – and Chhinnamasta 's red skin tone . 
 = = Symbolism and associations = = 
 = = = Goddess of paradoxes = = = 
 Chhinnamasta is a goddess of contradictions : dichotomies of giver and taker , subject and object , and food and eater dissolve in her iconography . Most of her epithets listed in her <unk> ( name @-@ hymn ) convey marvel and fury ; few names are erotic and peaceful , which are contrary to Chhinnamasta 's fierce nature and appearance . Her thousand name @-@ hymn echoes paradoxes ; she is Prachanda @-@ Chandika ( " the powerfully fierce one " ) as well as <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " the prime giver of all <unk> or bliss " ) . Her names convey the idea that though she is fierce at first appearance , she can be gentle upon worship . 
 While other fierce Hindu goddesses like Kali depict severing the heads of demons and are associated with ritual self @-@ decapitation , Chhinnamasta 's motif reverses the ritual head @-@ offering , offering her own head to the devotees ( attendants ) in order to feed them . Thus , she symbolises the aspect of the goddess as a giver , like Annapurna , the goddess of food , and Shakambhari , the goddess of vegetables , or a maternal aspect . The element of self @-@ sacrifice is the symbol of " divine reciprocation " by the deity to her devotees . As a self @-@ sacrificing mother , she symbolises the ideal Indian woman ; however , her sexuality and power are at odds with the archetype . She subdues and takes the life @-@ force of the copulating divine couple , signifying the aspect of the life @-@ taker , like Kali . 
 Chhinnamasta 's serpentine ornaments indicate asceticism while her youthful nude ornamented body has erotic overtones . Like all Hindu goddesses , she is decked in gold finery , symbol of wealth and fertility . 
 = = = Destruction , Transformation and Recreation = = = 
 The scholars P. Pal and H. Bhattacharya equate Chhinnamasta with the concept of sacrifice and renewal of creation . Chhinnamasta sacrifices herself , and her blood – drunk by her attendants – nourishes the universe . One invocation to her calls her the sacrifice , the sacrificer , and the recipient of the sacrifice , with the severed head treated as an offering . This paradox signifies the entire sacrificial process , and thus the cycle of creation , dissolution , and re @-@ creation . 
 Chhinnamasta is " a figure of radical transformation , a great yogini " . She conveys the universal message that all life is sustained by other forms of life , and destruction and sacrifice are necessary for the continuity of creation . The goddess symbolises pralaya ( cosmic dissolution ) , where she swallows all creation and makes way for new creation , thus conveying the idea of transformation . The Goddess is said to assume the form of Chhinnamasta for destruction of the universe . Chhinnamasta is considered a fearsome aspect of the Goddess and is included among the Kalikula ( " family of Kali " ) goddesses . She is said to represent Transformation and complements Kali , who stands for Time . Her hundred @-@ name hymn and thousand @-@ name hymn describe her fierce nature and wrath . The names describe her as served by ghosts and as gulping blood . She is pleased by human blood , human flesh , and meat , and worshipped by body hair , flesh , and fierce mantras . 
 The head offering and subsequent restoration of the head signify immortality . The dichotomy of temporality and immortality is alluded to by the blood stream drunk by Chhinnamasta 's head – interpreted as amrita ( elixir of life ) and the serpent , which sheds its skin without dying . The skull and several head garlands signify her victory over Time and fear of Death . Chhinnamasta 's black complexion denotes destruction ; her depiction as red or orange denotes life . By drinking the blood , she appears as the Saviour , who drinks the negativity of the world and transforms it to benevolent energies ; in this interpretation , the blood is seen in negative light rather than amrita . 
 Chhinnamasta signifies that life , death , and sex are interdependent . Her image conveys the eternal truth that " life feeds on death , is nourished by death , necessitates death , and that the ultimate destiny of sex is to perpetuate more life , which in turn will decay and die in order to feed more life " . While the lotus and the lovemaking couple symbolise life and the urge to create life , giving a life @-@ force to the beheaded goddess , the blood flowing from the goddess conveys death and loss of the life @-@ force , which flows into the mouths of her devotee yoginis , nourishing them . 
 = = = Self @-@ realization and Awakening of Kundalini = = = 
 The head is celebrated as a mark of identity as well as source of the seed . Thus , the self @-@ decapitation represents removal of maya ( illusion or delusion ) , physical attachment , false notions , ignorance , and egoism . The scimitar also signifies severance of these obstacles to moksha ( emancipation ) , jnana ( wisdom ) , and self @-@ realization . The goddess also denotes discriminating perception . Chhinnamasta allows the devotee to gain a consciousness that transcends the bonds of physical attachment , the body , and the mind by her self @-@ sacrifice . One interpretation suggests that her three eyes represent the sun , the moon , and fire while another links the third eye to transcendental knowledge . Unlike other Hindu deities who are depicted facing the devotee , Chhinnamasta generally looks at herself , prompting the devotee to look within him- or herself . 
 The Chhinnamasta icon is also understood as a representation of the awakening of the kundalini – spiritual energy . The copulating couple represent the awakening in the Muladhara chakra , which corresponds to the last bone in the spinal column . The kundalini flows through the central passage in the body – the Sushumna <unk> and hits the topmost chakra , the Sahasrara at the top of head – with such force that it blows her head off . The blood spilling from the throat represents the upward @-@ flowing kundalini , breaking all knots ( <unk> ) – those things which make a person sad , ignorant and weak – of the chakras . The severed head is " transcendent consciousness " . The three blood streams represent the flow of nectar when the kundalini unites with Shiva , who resides in the Sahasrara . The serpent in her iconography is also a symbol of the kundalini . 
 Another interpretation associates <unk> , Varnini , and Chhinnamasta with the three main subtle channels ( nadis ) – Ida , Pingala , and Sushumna , respectively – flowing free . The goddess is generally said to be visualised in one 's navel , the location of the <unk> chakra where the three nadis unite , and symbolises consciousness as well as the duality of creation and dissolution . 
 The ability to remain alive despite the beheading is associated with supernatural powers and the awakening of the kundalini . The Earl of <unk> ( 1925 ) compared <unk> to India , beheaded by the British , " but nevertheless preserving her vitality unimpaired by drinking her own blood " . 
 = = = Control over or embodiment of sexual desire = = = 
 Chhinnamasta standing on a copulating couple of Kamadeva ( literally " sexual desire " ) and Rati ( " sexual intercourse " ) is interpreted by some as a symbol of one 's control of sexual desire , while others interpret the goddess as being the embodiment of sexual energy . 
 Her names , such as Yogini and <unk> ( " one who has control of Kama " ) , convey her yogic control over sexual energy . Her triumphant stance trampling the love @-@ deity couple denotes victory over desire and samsara ( the cycle of birth , death , and rebirth ) . 
 Images in which Chhinnamasta is depicted sitting on Kamadeva @-@ Rati in a non @-@ suppressive fashion suggest that the couple is giving sexual energy to the goddess . Images where Shiva is depicted in coitus with Chhinnamasta are associated with this interpretation . Chhinnamasta 's names like <unk> ( " goddess of desire " ) and <unk> ( " one who is engrossed in the realm of Rati – [ copulation or sexual desire ] " ) and the appearance of <unk> – the common seed syllable of Kamadeva and Krishna – in her mantra support this interpretation . Her lolling tongue also denotes sexual hunger . 
 The inverted triangle , found in Chhinnamasta 's iconography as well as in her yantra , signifies the womb ( yoni ) and the feminine . The goddess is often prescribed to be visualised in the centre of the inverted triangle in the navel . It also signifies the three gunas and three shaktis ( powers ) – <unk> ( " will @-@ power " ) , <unk> ( " action " ) , and jnana ( wisdom ) . The goddess is called Yoni @-@ mudra or Yoni @-@ <unk> , accessible through the yoni . 
 = = = Other symbolism and associations = = = 
 Chhinnamasta 's nudity and <unk> symbolise her integrity and " <unk> " . Her names like <unk> ( " victorious in war " ) celebrate her as the slayer of various demons and her prowess in battle . Her nakedness and dishevelled hair denote rejection of societal values and her rebellious freedom , as well as her sensual aspect . 
 The triad of the goddess and the two yoginis is also philosophically cognate to the triad of patterns , " which creative energy is felt to adopt " . Besides the nadis , Chhinnamasta , Varnini and Dakini also represent the guna trinity : sattva ( purity ) , rajas ( energy ) , and tamas ( ignorance ) . While discussing Mahavidya as a group , Chinnamasta is associated with rajas ( in the Kamadhenu @-@ Tantra and the Maha @-@ nirvana @-@ Tantra ) or sattva ( based on her lighter complexion ) . 
 While the goddess is a mature sixteen @-@ year old who has conquered her ego and awakened her kundalini , the attendants are described as spiritually immature twelve @-@ year olds who are sustained on the goddess 's blood and have not become liberated from the delusion of duality . In portrayals where the goddess 's hair is tied like a matron and her attendants have free @-@ flowing hair like young girls , the goddess is treated as a motherly figure of regal authority and power ; the tied hair and <unk> represent contrasting ideas of controlled and uncontrolled nature , respectively . 
 Chhinnamasta 's association with the navel and her red complexion can be connected to the fire element and the sun while the lotus in her iconography signifies purity . 
 = = Worship = = 
 While she is easily identified by most Hindus and often worshipped and depicted as part of the Mahavidya group in goddess temples , Chhinnamasta 's individual cult is not widespread . Though her individual temples and public worship of her are rare , Chinnamasta is an important deity in Tantric worship . She enjoys active worship in eastern India and Nepal . Her individual worship is mainly restricted to heroic Tantric worship by Tantrikas ( a type of Tantric practitioner ) , yogis , and world renouncers . The lack of worship of Chhinnamasta by lay worshippers is attributed by Kinsley to her ferocious nature and her reputation for being dangerous to approach and worship . 
 = = = Goals of worship = = = 
 Tantric practitioners worship Chhinnamasta for acquiring siddhis or supernatural powers . Chhinnamasta 's mantra <unk> <unk> <unk> aim <unk> hum hum phat svaha is to be invoked to attract and subjugate women . Her mantra associates her with syllables denoting beauty , light , fire , spiritual self @-@ realization , and destruction of delusion . The Shakta @-@ pramoda and the <unk> recommend the use of her mantra to obtain wealth and auspiciousness . Another goal of her worship is to cast spells and cause harm to someone . Acarya Ananda Jha , the author of the Chinnamasta Tattva , prescribes her worship by soldiers as she embodies self @-@ control of lust , heroic self @-@ sacrifice for the benefit of others , and fearlessness in the face of death . In a collective prayer to the Mahavidyas in the Shakta Maha @-@ bhagavata Purana , the devotee prays to emulate Chhinnamasta in her generosity to others . Other goals common to worship of all Mahavidyas are : poetic speech , well @-@ being , control of one 's foes , removal of obstacles , ability to sway kings , ability to attract others , conquest over other kings , and , finally , moksha ( salvation ) . 
 = = = Modes of worship = = = 
 The Tantric texts Tantrasara , Shakta @-@ pramoda , and Mantra @-@ <unk> give details about the worship of Chhinnamasta and other Mahavidyas , including her yantra , mantra and her meditative / iconographic forms ( <unk> ) . In her puja , her image or her yantra is worshipped , along with her attendants . The heterodox offerings of Panchamakara – wine , meat , fish , parched grain , and coitus – along with mainstream offerings such as flowers , light , incense , etc . , are prescribed for her worship . A fire sacrifice and repetition of her stotra ( hymn of praise ) or her nama @-@ stotra ( name @-@ hymn ) are also prescribed in her worship . The Shakta @-@ pramoda has her sahasranama ( 1000 name @-@ hymn ) as well as a compilation of her 108 names in a hymn . 
 Tantric texts tell the worshipper to imagine a red sun orb – signifying a yoni triangle – in his own navel . The popular form of Chhinnamasta is imagined to reside in the orb . The Tantrasara cautions a householder @-@ man to invoke the goddess only in " abstract terms " . It further advises that , if woman invokes Chhinnamasta by her mantra , the woman will become a <unk> and lose her husband and son , thereby becoming a perfect yogini . <unk> @-@ tantra prescribes her worship only by the left @-@ handed path ( Vamamarga ) . The Mantra @-@ <unk> declares that such worship involves having sexual intercourse with a woman who is not one 's wife . The Shakta @-@ pramoda tells the same , adding fire sacrifices , wine , and meat offerings at night . The best time to propitiate her is said to be the fourth quarter of the evening , that is , midnight . 
 Some hymns narrate that Chinnamasta likes blood and thus is offered blood sacrifices at some shrines . The Shaktisamgama @-@ tantra says that only brave souls ( <unk> ) should follow Vamamarga worship to the goddess . The Shakta @-@ pramoda warns that improper worship will have severe consequences : Chhinnamasta would behead such a person and drink his blood . It further stipulates that worship of Chhinnamasta is to be followed by householders and renouncers . The <unk> Tantra mentions that Shiva or his fierce form , Bhairava , be worshipped as Kabandha ( " headless trunk " ) as the goddess 's consort in her worship . 
 Chinnamasta is often worshipped at midnight along with the other Mahavidyas at Kali Puja , the festival of Kali . However , householders are cautioned not to worship her . The <unk> area of Cuttack district and the 86 Palli <unk> of Kolkata have unique traditions of worshipping Chinnamasta , instead of Kali , on Kali Puja . 
 = = = Temples = = = 
 The <unk> ( " She who fulfills one 's wishes " ) , Himachal Pradesh temple of <unk> , is one of the Shakti Peethas and is where the goddess Sati 's forehead ( <unk> ) fell . Here , Chhinnamasta is interpreted as the severed @-@ headed one as well as the <unk> @-@ one . The central icon is a pindi , an abstract form of the Goddess . While householders worship the goddess as a form of the goddess Durga , ascetic sadhus view her as the Tantric severed @-@ headed goddess . 
 Another important shrine is the Chhinnamasta Temple near <unk> in Jharkhand , where a natural rock covered with an <unk> ( eight @-@ metal alloy ) <unk> ( cover ) is worshipped as the goddess . Though well @-@ established as a centre of Chhinnamasta by the 18th century , the site is a popular place of worship among tribals since ancient times . Kheer and animal sacrifice are offered to the goddess . 
 A shrine dedicated to Chhinnamasta was built by a Tantric sadhu in the Durga Temple complex , Ramnagar , near Varanasi , Uttar Pradesh , where <unk> worship her using corpses . Kanpur , Uttar Pradesh , has a shrine of the goddess that is open only three days a year , around Chaitra Navaratri . There are Chhinnamasta shrines on the hill in Nandan Parvat near <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> , West Bengal . Her shrine is also situated in the Kamakhya Temple complex , Assam , along with other Mahavidyas . In Bengal , Chinnamasta is a popular goddess . The goddess <unk> , a popular goddess in Odisha , is often identified with Chhinnamasta . 
 Chhinnamasta 's shrines are also found in Nepal 's Kathmandu Valley . A shrine in the <unk> Narayan Temple holds a 13th @-@ century icon of Chinnamasta . A chariot festival in the Nepali month of Baishakh is held in honour of the goddess . In the fields near the temple sits a small shrine to Chhinnamasta . A temple of the goddess in Patan built in 1732 contains her images in different postures and enjoys active worship . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Katsuragi = 
 Katsuragi ( <unk> ) was the third and final Unryū @-@ class aircraft carrier of the Imperial Japanese Navy built during World War II . Named after Mount Katsuragi , in Nara Prefecture , and completed late in the war ; she never embarked her complement of aircraft and spent the war in Japanese waters . The ship was badly damaged in a July 1945 airstrike by American carrier aircraft on Kure Naval Base . Repaired after the end of the war , Katsuragi was then used as a repatriation transport for a number of months , bringing Japanese soldiers and civilians back to Japan from overseas locations . She was scrapped in Japan beginning in late 1946 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The last purpose @-@ built Japanese carrier construction during World War II was a group of vessels based on an improved Hiryū design , but with individual units differing in detail reflecting the changing circumstances as the conflict in the Pacific approached its conclusion . Katsuragi was ordered 25 June 1942 , under the provisional name of # 5003 , as part of the Kai @-@ Maru 5 Program of 1942 . This was a massive naval construction program intended to replace losses suffered at the Battle of Midway and focused on aircraft and aircraft carriers . The ship was one of 16 Unryū @-@ class aircraft carriers planned , although only three were completed before the end of the war . 
 Katsuragi had the same hull design as Hiryu . She had a length of 227 @.@ 35 meters ( 745 ft 11 in ) overall . She had a beam of 22 meters ( 72 ft 2 in ) and , at deep load , a draft of 7 @.@ 93 meters ( 26 ft 0 in ) . She displaced 22 @,@ 535 tonnes ( 22 @,@ 179 long tons ) at deep load . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 576 officers and men . When acting as a flagship she had a total of 1 @,@ 600 crewmembers . 
 A shortage of turbines and boilers led to machinery of the same type as that used in the Akizuki @-@ class destroyer being used in Katsuragi . These consisted of four geared steam turbine sets with a total of 104 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 78 @,@ 000 kW ) driving four shafts , each fitted with a 3 @.@ 75 @-@ meter ( 12 @.@ 3 ft ) propeller . Steam was provided by eight Kampon Type B water @-@ tube boilers with a working pressure of 30 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 942 kPa ; 427 psi ) at 350 ° C ( 662 ° F ) . The ship had a designed speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) , but during sea trials on 12 October 1944 , she reached 32 @.@ 71 knots ( 60 @.@ 58 km / h ; 37 @.@ 64 mph ) at the light displacement of 18 @,@ 144 long tons ( 18 @,@ 435 t ) . Katsuragi carried 3 @,@ 671 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 613 long tons ) of fuel oil although no data on her range is known . She had two funnels on the starboard side , each angled below horizontal . They were fitted with a water @-@ cooling system to reduce the turbulence caused by hot exhaust gases . 
 = = = Flight deck arrangements = = = 
 Katsuragi 's flight deck was 216 @.@ 9 meters ( 711 ft 7 in ) long and had a maximum width of 27 meters ( 88 ft 7 in ) . A small island was mounted well forward on the starboard side and contained the ship 's bridge and air operations control center . It was fitted with a small tripod mast that mounted one of the ship 's radar <unk> . The ship was designed with two superimposed hangars that were served by two aircraft elevators , each 14 by 14 meters ( 46 by 46 ft ) ; the center elevator as used in Hiryū was deleted to simplify construction and reduce stress in the hull . The elevators had a maximum capacity of 7 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) and took 19 seconds to go from the lower hangar to the flight deck . Katsuragi was fitted with hydraulically operated Type 3 arresting gear with nine cables . She also mounted three Type 3 crash barricades . No aircraft catapult was fitted . The ship mounted a retractable crane on the starboard side of the flight deck , just aft of the rear elevator . 
 The ship 's air group was originally intended to consist of 12 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , plus three in storage , 27 Aichi D3A Val dive bombers , plus three in reserve , and 18 Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers ( plus two in crates ) . Katsuragi 's hangars could not accommodate so many aircraft so eleven planes were planned to be permanently carried on the flight deck . In 1943 the air group was revised to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A7M " Sam " fighters ( + 2 in storage ) , 27 Yokosuka D4Y " Judy " dive bombers and six Nakajima C6N " Myrt " reconnaissance aircraft . Of these , the C6Ns were intended to be carried on the flight deck . When the ship commissioned in 1944 , neither the A7M nor the C6Ns were yet in service , so the air group was reconfigured to consist of 27 Zeros , 12 D4Ys , three of which were to be the reconnaissance version , and nine Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers . By this time , however , the shortage of carrier @-@ qualified aircrew was such that they were ordered to operate from shore bases and Katsuragi never embarked her air group . Katsuragi carried 397 @,@ 340 liters ( 87 @,@ 400 imp gal ; 104 @,@ 970 U.S. gal ) of aviation gasoline for her aircraft . 
 = = = Armor , armament and sensors = = = 
 Katsuragi 's waterline armored belt was made from New Vickers Non @-@ Cemented armor 25 to 100 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Her deck armor above the magazines that consisted of 56 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) of <unk> armor . The ship 's machinery spaces and auxiliary machinery rooms had two layers of Ducol steel , each 25 mm thick , to protect them . Above engine and boiler rooms , the lower deck consisted of 25 mm of CNC2 armor . The deck over the rear auxiliary machinery space was 42 mm ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) of CNC2 armor while the lower platform deck over the forward auxiliary machinery space consisted of 56 mm of CNC2 . The upper hangar deck served as the ship 's strength deck and it consisted of five layers of Ducol steel , a total 115 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) in thickness . Katsuragi 's aviation gasoline tanks were fore and aft of the auxiliary machinery spaces and were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of Ducol steel in two layers while the deck above them consisted of 25 mm of CNC2 armor . The sides , bottom and top of the steering gear compartment consisted of 56 mm of <unk> armor . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm Type 89 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in twin mounts . Their sponsons were positioned to allow them some measure of cross @-@ deck fire . Katsuragi was also equipped with 22 triple 25 mm Type 96 and thirty single Type 96 AA gun mounts , most on sponsons along the sides of the hull . These guns were supplemented by six 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . For defense against submarines , the carrier was fitted with six depth charge throwers and carried between six and ten depth charges for them . 
 Two Type 94 high @-@ angle fire @-@ control directors , one on each side of the ship , were fitted to control the Type 89 guns . Each director mounted a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder . Six Type 95 directors controlled the 25 mm guns and the 12 cm rocket launchers . Early warning was provided by two Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 air search radars . One of these was mounted on the top of the island while the other retracted into the port side of the flight deck , between the two elevators . In addition , Katsuragi had two smaller Type 3 , Mark 1 , Model 3 air search radars , one mounted on the tripod mast on the island and the other on the aft starboard retractable radio mast . She also had two radar detectors : a metric Type E @-@ 27 and a centimetric Model 3 system . The ship had a Type 93 sonar and two Type 0 hydrophones with which to search for submarines . Before the end of the war , a Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 4 surface fire @-@ control radar was installed . In addition , a Type 14 early warning radar , ordinarily land @-@ based , was mounted for trials aboard ship . 
 = = Service = = 
 Katsuragi 's keel was laid down by the Kure Naval Arsenal in Kure , Hiroshima , on 8 December 1942 . She was launched on 19 January 1944 and completed on 15 October 1944 . The ship was transferred among a number of ports on the Inland Sea until she arrived in Kure on 15 February 1945 and she was ordered to be camouflaged . Her flight deck was disguised with fake trees , houses and roads ; however , her anti @-@ aircraft batteries remained fully manned . Her intended air group , Air Group 601 , was committed to the Battle of Iwo Jima about that same time . On 19 March , the ship was attacked by aircraft from Task Force 58 and lightly damaged by several rocket hits ; one man was killed and three wounded in the attack . Five days later , the ship was semi @-@ permanently moored at the island of <unk> in Kure harbor and extensively camouflaged . On 20 April , Captain Toshio Miyazaki was appointed commanding officer of Katsuragi . 
 Aircraft from USN Task Force 38 attacked the ship on 24 July as part of a major raid on Kure and the Inland Sea , but she was only hit once . A 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bomb struck one of the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft mounts on the port side . Thirteen men were killed and five wounded , but the bomb did little other damage . A second raid on 28 July did far more damage to the ship as a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) bomb penetrated the flight deck and detonated in the upper hangar , between the elevators . The explosion blew out a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) section of the port hangar wall and the walls of the upper hangar deck were bulged and perforated multiple times . The flight deck between the elevators was bulged up and buckled ; one section of the flight deck out was blown out and flung over to starboard to land across the funnels . Only 13 men were killed ( including her executive officer ) and another 12 men were wounded during the attack . 
 Katsuragi survived the war without sustaining any further damage , and was designated as a Special Transfer Ship on 2 October and then assigned to repatriation duty on 13 October after the necessary repairs were made . Her crew at this time consisted only of 12 officers , one warrant officer , and 40 petty officers and crewmen , with Captain Miyazaki still in command . The damage from the July attack was only repaired enough to allow the hangar deck to house some 5 @,@ 000 returning soldiers and civilians and the ship began her first voyage outside Japanese waters on 19 December . One this first voyage , she called upon Minamidaitojima , Rabaul and Australia . Upon her return , further repairs were necessary to make her rain @-@ tight . These were completed by 15 January 1946 and she made a number of trips in early 1946 to bring back Japanese <unk> before being placed on standby in April . Katsuragi was stricken from the Navy List on 15 November and transferred to the Home Ministry for disposal five days later . Scrapping of the ship began on 22 December 1946 at the Hitachi Zosen facility in Osaka @-@ Sakurajima and was completed on 30 November 1947 . 
 = Be Here Now ( album ) = 
 Be Here Now is the third studio album by the English rock band Oasis , released on 21 August 1997 by Creation Records . Oasis had achieved worldwide success with their 1994 debut album Definitely Maybe and 1995 follow up ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? . The third album was highly anticipated by both fans and music critics . Oasis ' management company , Ignition , were aware of the dangers of overexposure , and before release sought to control the media 's access to the album . The campaign included limiting pre @-@ release radio airplay and forcing journalists to sign gag orders . The tactics resulted in the alienation of both the press and many industry personnel connected with the band , and fueled large @-@ scale speculation and wide publicity within the British music scene . 
 On the first day of release , Be Here Now sold over 424 @,@ 000 copies , becoming the fastest @-@ selling album in British chart history , while initial reviews were overwhelmingly positive . Retrospectively , however , the album is viewed by many music journalists and fans and by most members of the band as over @-@ indulgent and bloated . Q magazine , which gave the album a five @-@ star review on its release , admitted in 2007 that Be Here Now is often thought of as " a disastrous , overblown folly — the moment when Oasis , their judgement clouded by drugs and blanket adulation , ran aground on their own sky @-@ high self @-@ belief . " The album 's producer Owen Morris said the recording sessions were marred by arguments and drug abuse , and that the band 's only motivations were commercial . As of 2008 , the album had sold eight million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the summer of 1996 , Oasis were widely considered , according to guitarist Noel Gallagher , " the biggest band in the world ... bigger than , dare I say it , fucking God . " The commercial success of the band 's two previous albums had resulted in media frenzy and an ubiquity in the mainstream press that was in danger of leading to a backlash . Oasis members were by then being invited to functions at 10 Downing Street by Prime Minister Tony Blair and holidaying with Johnny Depp and Kate Moss in Mick Jagger 's villa in Mustique . During their last stay on the island , Noel wrote the majority of the songs that would make up Oasis 's third album . He had suffered from writer 's block during the previous winter , and has since admitted he wrote only a single guitar riff in the six months following the release of ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? . After a few weeks " idling " , he disciplined himself to a routine of songwriting where he would go " into this room in the morning , come out for lunch , go back in , come out for dinner , go back in , then go to bed . " Noel has later said about the album " ... most of the songs were written before I even got a record deal , I went away and wrote the lyrics in about two weeks . " 
 In August 1996 , the band performed two concerts before crowds of 250 @,@ 000 at Knebworth House , Hertfordshire , while more than 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 fans had applied for tickets . The dates were to be the zenith of Oasis 's popularity , and both the music press and the band realised it would not be possible for the band to equal the event . By this time however , there was much instability and internal conflict emerging between the band members . On 23 August 1996 , vocalist Liam Gallagher refused to sing for an MTV Unplugged performance at London 's Royal Festival Hall , pleading a sore throat . Though he did attend the concert , he spent the evening heckling Noel from the upper level balcony . Four days later , Liam declined to participate in the first leg of an American tour , complaining that he needed to buy a house with his then girlfriend Patsy Kensit . He re @-@ joined the band a few days after for a key concert at the MTV Video Music Awards in New York , but intentionally sang off @-@ key and spat beer and saliva during the performance . The following day , The Sun led with the front page headline " America sickened by obscene Liam 's spitting rampage . " Amongst much internal bickering , the tour continued — with Liam — to Charlotte , North Carolina , where Noel finally lost his patience with his brother and announced he was leaving the band . He later admitted " If the truth be known , I didn 't want to be there anyway . I wasn 't prepared to be in the band if people were being like that to each other . " Although Noel rejoined Oasis a few weeks later , the band 's management and handlers were worried . With an album 's worth of songs already demoed , the general feeling among the Gallaghers was that they should record as soon as possible . Their manager , Marcus Russell , said in 2007 that " in retrospect , we went in the studio too quickly . The smart move would have been to take the rest of the year off . But at the time it seemed like the right thing to do . If you 're a band and you 've got a dozen songs you think are great , why not go and do it . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording began on 7 October 1996 at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios in London . Its producer Owen Morris described the first week as " fucking awful " , and suggested to Noel that they abandon the session : " He just shrugged and said it would be all right . So on we went . " Liam was under heavy tabloid focus at the time , and on 9 November 1996 was arrested and cautioned for cocaine possession following a bender at the Q Awards . A media frenzy ensued , and the band 's management made the decision to move to a studio less readily accessible to paparazzi . 
 The Sun 's showbiz editor Dominic Mohan recalled of the period : " We had quite a few Oasis contacts on the payroll . I don 't know whether any were drug dealers , but there was always a few dodgy characters about . " Oasis 's official photographer Jill <unk> felt the media 's focus , and was preyed upon by tabloid journalists living in the flat upstairs from her : " They thought I had the band hiding in my flat . " In paranoia , Oasis cut themselves off from their wider circle . According to Johnny Hopkins , the publicist of Oasis 's label Creation Records , " People were being edged out of the circle around Oasis . People who knew them before they were famous rather than because they were famous . " Hopkins likened the situation to a medieval court , complete with kings , courtiers and jesters . As he explained , " [ o ] nce you 're in that situation you lose sight of reality . " 
 On 11 November 1996 , Oasis relocated to the rural Ridge Farm Studios in Surrey . Though the band reconvened with more energy , the early recordings were compromised by the drug intake of all involved . Morris recalled that " in the first week , someone tried to score an ounce of weed , but instead got an ounce of cocaine . Which kind of summed it up . " Noel was not present during any of Liam 's vocal track recordings , typifying the high drama surrounding the sessions . Morris thought that the new material was weak , but when he voiced his opinion to Noel he was cut down : " [ So ] I just carried on shovelling drugs up my nose . " Noel , wanting to make the album as dense and " colossal " feeling as possible , layered multiple guitar tracks on several of the songs . In many instances he dubbed ten channels with identical guitar parts , in an effort to create a sonic volume . Creation 's owner Alan McGee visited the studio during the mixing stage ; he said , " I used to go down to the studio , and there was so much cocaine getting done at that point ... Owen was out of control , and he was the one in charge of it . The music was just fucking loud . " 
 = = Music = = 
 As with Oasis ' previous two albums , the songs on Be Here Now are generally anthemic . The structures are traditional , and largely follow the typical verse – chorus – verse – chorus – middle eight – chorus format of guitar @-@ based rock music . Reviewing for Nude as the News , Jonathan Cohen noted that the album is " virtually interchangeable with 1994 's Definitely Maybe or its blockbuster sequel , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? " , while Noel had previously remarked that he would make three albums in this generic style . Yet the songs on Be Here Now differ in that they are longer than previous releases ; an extended coda brings " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " to almost eight minutes , while " All Around the World " contains three key changes and lasts for a full nine minutes . The tracks are more layered and intricate than before , and each contains multiple guitar overdubs . While Morris had previously stripped away layers of overdubs on the band 's debut Definitely Maybe , during the production of Be Here Now he " seemed to gleefully encourage " such excess ; " My Big Mouth " has an estimated thirty tracks of guitar overdubbed onto the song . A Rolling Stone review described the guitar lines as composed of " elementary riffs . " There was some experimentation : " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " contains a slowed down loop from N.W.A 's " Straight Outta Compton " , while " Magic Pie " features psychedelically arranged vocal harmonies and a mellotron . According to Noel , " All I did was run my elbows across the keys and this mad jazz came out and everyone laughed . " The album 's production is dominated by top @-@ end high frequency tones , and according to Uncut 's Paul Lester , its use of treble is reminiscent of both late 1980s Creation Records bands such as My Bloody Valentine , and The Stooges ' famously under @-@ produced Raw Power . 
 The vocal melodies continue Noel 's preference for " massed @-@ rank sing @-@ alongs " , although Paul Du Noyer concedes that not all are of the " pub @-@ trashing idiot kind " of previous releases . At the time of release , Q 's Phil Sutcliffe summarised the lyrics of Be Here Now as a mixture of " hookline optimism , a swarm of Beatles and other ' 60s references , a gruff love song to Meg , and further tangled expressions of his inability / unwillingness to express profound emotions . " 
 The lyrics were elsewhere described as " [ running ] the gamut from insightful to insipid " , although Du Noyer admitted that Noel is " [ to go by his lyrics ] something of a closet philosopher ... and often romantic to the point of big girl 's <unk> . " While the tracks " Don 't Go Away " and " The Girl in the Dirty Shirt " were described as unabashedly sentimental , Du Noyer went on to observe that " there is compassion and sensitivity in these tracks that is not the work of oafs . " Du Noyer conceded that Noel often tied himself up in " cosmic knots " , but had " written words that sound simple and true , and are therefore poetic without trying to be . " Lester read song titles such as " Stand by Me " and " Don 't Go Away " as a series of demands , both to members of his private life and his public audience . 
 Du Noyer praised Liam 's vocal contributions and described his " Northern punk whine " as " the most distinctive individual style of our time . " Lester alluded to Liam as Noel 's " mouthpiece " , although he qualified that Liam is the " voice of every working @-@ class boy with half a yen to break out and make it big . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 When Alan McGee , Creation 's publicist Johnny Hopkins , and marketing executive Emma Greengrass first heard Be Here Now at Noel Gallagher 's house , each had their doubts about its artistic value , but kept their doubts to themselves . One Creation employee recalled " a lot of nodding of heads , a lot of slapping of backs . " McGee later admitted to having strong misgivings at first : " I heard it in the studio and I remember saying ' We 'll only sell seven million copies ' ... I thought it was too confrontational . " However , in an interview with the music press a few days later he predicted the album would sell twenty million copies . McGee 's hyperbole alarmed both Oasis and their management company Ignition , and both immediately excluded him from involvement in the release campaign . Ignition 's strategy from that point on centred on an effort to suppress all publicity , and withheld access to both music and information from anybody not directly involved with the album 's release . Fearful of the dangers of over @-@ hype and bootlegging , their aim was to present the record as a " regular , everyday collection of tunes . " To this end they planned a modest marketing budget , to be spent on subdued promotional activities such as street posters and music press adverts , while avoiding mainstream instruments such as billboard and TV advertising . According to Greengrass " We want to keep it low key . We want to keep control of the whole mad thing . " 
 However , the extent that Ignition were willing to go to control access to the album generated more hype than could normally have been expected , and served to alienate members of both the print and broadcast media , as well as most Creation staff members . When " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " was planned as the first single , Ignition decided on a late release to radio so as to avoid too much advance exposure . However , three stations broke the embargo , and Ignition panicked . According to Greengrass : " we 'd been in these bloody bunker meetings for six months or something , and our plot was blown . ' Shit , it 's a nightmare ' . " BBC Radio 1 received a CD containing three songs ten days before the album 's release , on condition that disc jockey Steve Lamacq talked over the tracks to prevent illegal copies being made by listeners . The day after Lamacq previewed the album on his show , he received a phone call from Ignition informing him that he would not be able to preview further tracks because he didn 't speak enough over the songs . Lamacq said , " I had to go on the air the next night and say , ' Sorry , but we 're not getting any more tracks . ' It was just absurd . " According to Creation 's head of marketing John Andrews , " [ The campaign ] made people despise Oasis within Creation . You had this Oasis camp that was like ' I 'm sorry , you 're not allowed come into the office between the following hours . You 're not allowed mention the word Oasis . ' It was like a fascist state . " One employee recalled an incident " when somebody came round to check our phones because they thought The Sun had tapped them . " 
 When Hopkins began to circulate cassette copies of the album to the music press a few weeks later , he required that each journalist sign a contract containing a clause requiring that the cassette recipient , according to Select journalist Mark Perry , " not discuss the album with anyone — including your partner at home . It basically said don 't talk to your girlfriend about it when you 're at home in bed . " The Mail on Sunday wrote of Russell " [ He ] has a mind like a steel trap and the organisational skills of Winston Churchill . " Reflecting in 1999 , Greengrass admitted : " In retrospect a lot of the things we did were ridiculous . We sit in [ Oasis ] meetings today and we 're like ' It 's on the Internet . It 's in Camden Market . Whatever ' . I think we 've learned our lesson . " According to Perry : " It seemed , particularly once you heard the album , that this was cocaine grandeur of just the most ludicrous degree . I remember listening to " All Around the World " and laughing — actually quite <unk> — because it seemed so ridiculous . You just thought : Christ , there is so much coke being done here . " 
 = = = Album cover = = = 
 The cover image was shot in April 1997 at Stocks House in Hertfordshire , the former home of Victor Lownes , head of the Playboy Clubs in the UK until 1981 . It shows the band standing outside the hotel surrounded by various props , at the centre is a Rolls Royce floating in a swimming pool . Photographer Michael Spencer Johns said the original concept involved shooting each band member in various locations around the world , but when the cost proved prohibitive , the shoot was relocated to Stocks House . Spencer remarked that the shoot " degenerated into chaos " , adding that " by 8 pm , everyone was in the bar , there were <unk> all over the set , and the lighting crew couldn 't start the generator . It was Alice in Wonderland meets Apocalypse Now . " Critics have tried to read into the selection of the cover props , Johns said Gallagher simply selected items from the BBC props store he thought would look good in the picture . Two props considered were an inflatable globe ( intended as a homage to the sleeve of Definitely Maybe ) and the Rolls Royce , suggested by Arthurs . The release date in each region was commemorated on the calendar pictured on the sleeve ; Harris said the dating " [ encouraged ] fans to believe that to buy a copy on the day it appeared was to participate in some kind of historical event . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Be Here Now was released in the UK on 21 August 1997 . The release date had been brought forward out of Ignition 's fear that import copies of the album from the United States would arrive in Britain before that country 's designated street date . Worrying that TV news cameras would interview queuing fans at a traditional midnight opening session , Ignition forced retailers to sign contracts pledging not to sell the record earlier than 8 : 00am . However , when the album did go on sale , the cameras showed up regardless , just in time to record the initially slow trade . It was not until lunch time that sales picked up . By the end of the first day of release , Be Here Now sold over 424 @,@ 000 units and by the end of business on Saturday of that week sales had reached 696 @,@ 000 , making it , at the time , the fastest @-@ selling album in British history . The album debuted at number two on the Billboard charts in the United States , but its first week sales of 152 @,@ 000 — below expected sales of 400 @,@ 000 copies — were considered a disappointment . 
 Contemporaneous reviews of Be Here Now were , in John Harris 's words , unanimous with " truly amazing praise . " According to Harris , " To find an album that had attracted gushing notices in such profusion , one had to go back thirty years , to the release of Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . " While Q magazine described the album as " cocaine set to music " , most early reviews praised the record 's length , volume and ambition . Reviews in the British music press for Oasis ' previous album ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? had been generally negative . When it went on to become , in the words of Select editor Alexis Petridis , " this huge kind of Zeitgeist defining record " the music press was " baffled " . Realising they had got it wrong the last time , Petridis believes the initial glowing reviews were a concession to public opinion . 
 By the end of 1997 , Be Here Now had sold eight million units worldwide . However , the sales volume was largely gained in the first two weeks of release , and once the album was released to UK radio stations the turnover tapered off . Buyers realised that the album was not another ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? , and by 1999 , Melody Maker reported that it was the album most sold to second @-@ hand record stores . In the 2003 John Dower @-@ directed documentary Live Forever : The Rise and Fall of Brit Pop , music critic Jon Savage pinpointed Be Here Now as the moment where the Britpop movement ended . Savage said that while the album " isn 't the great disaster that everybody says " , he noted that " [ i ] t was supposed to be the big , big triumphal record " of the period . Q expressed similar sentiments , writing , " So colossally did Be Here Now fall short of expectations that it killed Britpop and ushered in an era of more ambitious , less overblown music " . Irish Times journalist Brian Boyd wrote : " Bloated and over @-@ heated ( much like the band themselves at the time ) , the album has all that dreadful braggadocio that is so characteristic of a cocaine user . " Reflecting in 2007 , Garry Mulholland admitted , " the fact that nothing could have lived up to the fevered expectations that surrounded its release doesn 't change the facts . The third Oasis album is a loud , lumbering noise signifying nothing . " 
 The Gallagher brothers hold differing opinions about the album . As early as July 1997 , Noel was " talking down " Be Here Now in the music press , describing the production as " bland " , and remarking that some of the tracks were " fucking shit " . In Live Forever : The Rise and Fall of Brit Pop , he dismissed the album , and blamed its faults on drugs and the band 's indifference during recording . He suggested that the people unsatisfied with the record simply sell it . In contrast , Noel noted that his brother " thinks it fucking rocks . " In the same documentary , Liam defended the record , and said that " at that time we thought it was fucking great , and I still think it 's great . It just wasn 't Morning Glory . " In 2006 , Liam said of Noel , " If he didn 't like the record that much , he shouldn 't have put the fucking record out in the first place ... I don 't know what 's up with him but it 's a top record , man , and I 'm proud of it — it 's just a little bit long . " 
 The album was included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Noel Gallagher . 
 " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " – 7 : 43 
 " My Big Mouth " – 5 : 02 
 " Magic Pie " – 7 : 19 
 " Stand by Me " – 5 : 56 
 " I Hope , I Think , I Know " – 4 : 22 
 " The Girl in the Dirty Shirt " – 5 : 49 
 " Fade In @-@ Out " – 6 : 52 
 " Don 't Go Away " – 4 : 48 
 " Be Here Now " – 5 : 13 
 " All Around the World " – 9 : 21 
 " It 's Gettin ' Better ( Man ! ! ) " – 7 : 00 
 " All Around the World ( Reprise ) " – 2 : 08 
 = = = 2016 reissue = = = 
 As part of a promotional campaign entitled " Chasing the Sun " , the album will be re @-@ released on 7 October 2016 . The 3 @-@ disc deluxe edition includes remastered versions of the album and seven b @-@ sides from the three UK singles . Bonus content includes demos , the Mustique sessions , live tracks , and a 2016 remix of " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Oasis 
 Liam Gallagher – vocals 
 Noel Gallagher – lead guitar , vocals 
 Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs – rhythm guitar , acoustic guitar 
 Paul McGuigan – bass guitar 
 Alan White – drums , percussion 
 Additional musicians 
 Mark Coyle – backwards parts on " D 'You Know What I Mean ? " 
 Johnny Depp – slide guitar on " Fade In @-@ Out " 
 Mark Feltham – harmonica on " All Around the World " 
 Mike Rowe – keyboards 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Soviet cruiser Kaganovich = 
 Kaganovich ( Russian : <unk> ) was a Project 26bis2 Kirov @-@ class cruiser of the Soviet Navy that was built during World War II . She was built in Siberia from components shipped from European Russia . She saw no action during the war and served into the Cold War . She was renamed Lazar Kaganovich in 1945 to distinguish her from Lazar 's disgraced brother Mikhail Kaganovich . Her post @-@ war career was generally uneventful , although her superstructure was badly damaged by a Force 12 typhoon in 1957 . She was renamed Petropavlovsk ( Russian : Петропавловск ) in 1957 . Sources disagree on her fate ; some say that she was converted into a floating barracks in 1960 and later sold for scrap while another says that she was simply sold for scrap in 1960 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Kaganovich was 187 m ( 613 ft 6 in ) long at the waterline , and 191 @.@ 2 m ( 627 ft 4 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 17 @.@ 66 m ( 57 ft 11 in ) and had a draft between 5 @.@ 88 to 6 @.@ 3 m ( 19 ft 3 in to 20 ft 8 in ) . Kaganovich displaced 8 @,@ 400 tonnes ( 8 @,@ 267 long tons ) at standard load and 10 @,@ 040 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 881 long tons ) at full load . Her geared steam turbines produced a total of 126 @,@ 900 shaft horsepower ( 94 @,@ 629 kW ) on trials , but she fell somewhat short of her designed speed of 37 knots , only reaching 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) , on trials , because she was over 1 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 181 long tons ) overweight . She normally carried 650 tonnes ( 640 long tons ) of fuel oil , 1 @,@ 331 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 310 long tons ) at full load and 1 @,@ 714 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 687 long tons ) at overload . This gave her an endurance of 5 @,@ 590 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 350 km ; 6 @,@ 430 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) with overload fuel . 
 Kaganovich carried nine 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) 57 @-@ caliber B @-@ 1 @-@ P guns in three electrically powered MK @-@ 3 @-@ 180 triple turrets . The turrets were very small ; they were designed to fit into the limited hull space available and were so cramped that their rate of fire was much lower than designed — only two rounds per minute instead of six . The guns were mounted in a single cradle to minimize space and were so close together that their shot dispersion was very high because the muzzle blast from adjacent barrels affected each gun . Unlike her half @-@ sisters built in European Russia , her secondary armament initially consisted of eight single 85 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) 90 @-@ K dual @-@ purpose anti @-@ aircraft guns . Kaganovich 's initial light AA armament is unknown , although her sister ship Kalinin 's initially consisted of six semi @-@ automatic 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 21 @-@ K AA guns with 600 rounds per gun , ten fully automatic 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 70 @-@ K AA guns with a thousand rounds per gun , and six DK 12 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) machine guns with 12 @,@ 500 rounds per gun . During the 1950s her light anti @-@ aircraft armament was replaced by nine powered 37 mm V @-@ 11 mounts . 
 Six 533 @-@ millimeter ( 21 in ) 39 @-@ Yu torpedo tubes were fitted in two triple mountings , one on each side . She received the Lend @-@ Lease ASDIC @-@ 132 sonar system , which the Soviets called Drakon @-@ 132 , as well as the experimental Soviet Mars @-@ 72 system . 
 Kaganovich 's radar suite is unknown , but it is likely she was equipped with a mix of Soviet and British and American Lend @-@ Lease radars . At some point during the 1950s her radars were replaced by modern Soviet @-@ built radars ; Gyuys for air search , Rif for surface search , Zalp for main @-@ armament gunnery and Yakor ' for anti @-@ aircraft gunnery . 
 = = Service = = 
 Kaganovich was one of the Project 26bis2 cruisers , the third pair of the Kirov @-@ class cruisers . She was larger and had a more powerful anti @-@ aircraft armament than her half @-@ sisters . She was assembled at Shipyard 199 , Komsomolsk @-@ on @-@ Amur , from components built at the Shipyard 198 ( Marti South ) in Nikolayev . She was laid down on 12 August 1938 , launched from drydock on 7 May 1944 and was officially accepted into the Pacific Fleet on 6 December 1944 after being towed down the Amur River to Vladivostok . She was still incomplete on this date and the official report of all work completed was not signed until 29 January 1947 . Her construction was prolonged by late deliveries from western factories . For example , her propellers had to be shipped from Leningrad after it had been surrounded by the Germans in September 1941 and her propeller shafts had to be removed from the Barrikada factory in Stalingrad before it was destroyed by the Germans in 1942 . Another problem was the collapse of nine girders supporting the roof of Dock 8 onto the ship in early December 1942 . 
 She was renamed Lazar Kaganovich in 1945 to disassociate her from Lazar 's disgraced brother Mikhail Kaganovich . She remained inactive during the Soviet invasion of Manchuria in 1945 . She spent the post @-@ war period on routine training missions . She was renamed Petropavlovsk on 3 August 1957 after Lazar Kaganovich was purged from the government after an unsuccessful coup against Nikita Khrushchev that same year . Her superstructure was badly damaged by a Force 12 typhoon on 19 September 1957 . Sources disagree on her fate ; one says that she was converted into a floating barracks on 6 February 1960 and later sold for scrap while another says that she was simply sold for scrap on 6 February 1960 . 
 = Lost and Running = 
 " Lost and Running " is a song by Australian rock group Powderfinger . It was released as the first single from the group 's sixth studio album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . It is the band 's twenty @-@ second single and peaked at No. 5 on the Australian chart , the group 's second highest charting single after " My Happiness " . It made its radio debut on 13 April on Triple J and was released to wide radio play and the band 's MySpace on 16 April 2007 . The single was officially released on 12 May 2007 . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 " Lost and Running " was the first song recorded at Sunset Sound , Los Angeles , as part of Powderfinger 's Dream Days at the Hotel Existence recording sessions . The song was also one of the first to be written during the group 's two @-@ year hiatus . The band worked with Rob Schnapf for the sessions . Lead singer Bernard Fanning said in April 2007 that the song was more positive than many other Powderfinger works , stating " the music is quite up and hopeful sounding and has a breezy feel to it " . 
 = = Musical structure and style = = 
 The song 's time goes through a pattern throughout its entirety of one 4 : 4 bar , one 2 : 4 bar and then two 4 : 4 bars . In writing " Lost and Running " , the band was influenced by bands that they have cited as being influences on their music from early on , including David Bowie , The Rolling Stones and Neil Young . In an interview with The Courier Mail , Fanning noted that the song was a very simple one , stating " the actual style of song is quite different as it has very little movement . There are literally only three chords in the song . " " He notes that the song 's premise is reflective on how the group approached the recording of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , in that they were unsure of what they wanted to do with the album . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Lost and Running " was directed by Damon Escott and Stephen Lance of Head Pictures . The video clip premiered in Australia on 21 April 2007 . 
 The video features Bernard Fanning , the band 's lead vocalist , walking around dressed as a hotel porter , pushing a hotel luggage trolley as he walks through a hotel ( actually Brisbane City Hall ) singing . As he walks through , he passes the other members of Powderfinger . He eventually walks out of the hotel and finds himself on a country road which was filmed halfway between Toowoomba and Dalby . In this scene a large chandelier can be seen , continuing the theme from the cover art of the single . There are also a few shots of the band playing the song as a group intercut with the " dramatic " scenes . 
 = = Release = = 
 Having reunited after a two and a half year hiatus , new releases from Powderfinger was highly anticipated . The group announced their intention to release the single in April 2007 in a blog on their MySpace . Following this , the single was released to radio on 13 April and on the band 's MySpace music player on 16 April . The CD single was then released on 12 May . In its week of release , the single reached its peak position of No. 5 on Australia 's ARIA Singles Chart . It also became one of the most popular songs on Australian radio . 
 In support of its release as a single , the music video for " Lost and Running " was included on a special edition DVD of its album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence and was the twelfth track on the DVD , dubbed the " Twelfth Man " , a cricketing term . All other tracks on the DVD were music videos from throughout the band 's career . 
 The song was performed on television on Australian variety show Rove on 17 June 2007 . Powderfinger also performed the song with the Sydney Gospel Choir on 28 October 2007 at the ARIA Music Awards of 2007 , as it was nominated for Single of the Year . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Lost and Running " was earned a mixed response from reviewers . Kathy McCabe of The Daily Telegraph noted that it 's " an instant singalong anthem which should prove a crowd favourite " . McCabe also comments on the band 's application of their influences stating that they have " taken a vial of sonic essence from their favourite artists and skilfully distilled the parts into a Powderfinger whole . " The song was rated 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 . 
 Meanwhile , Matthias Scherer of <unk> described the song as boring and inoffensive , questioning " Who knew the music scene down under was in this serious a state . " 
 Sputnikmusic contributor James Bishop stated that the song was an example of Powderfinger trading the " youthful " songs of their past albums for " more mature , earthly cuts " . He also noted the Rolling Stones influence , and said the song contained a " laidback approach and simple acoustic charm " . Bishop noted that the song divided many long @-@ time fans , who in his opinion " mostly didn ’ t get it " , and summarised by calling the song catchy . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 " Lost and Running " is Powderfinger 's second highest charting single , second only to their 2000 release " My Happiness " , which gained international attention . " Lost and Running " reached its peak position of No. 5 on the ARIA Singles Chart on 27 May 2007 , its week of release , however failed to chart internationally . It remained in the charts for thirteen consecutive weeks , but re @-@ entered the charts at No. 46 on 11 November following the group performing the song at the 2007 ARIA Music Awards . The song failed to chart in New Zealand . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 " Lost and Running " was nominated for two ARIA Music Awards in 2007 ; Single of the Year and Best Video , however both awards were won by Silverchair for their song " Straight Lines " . " Lost and Running " was the 27th most played song on Australian radio in 2007 , and reached No. 15 on the Triple J Hottest 100 , 2007 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = The Whitebrook = 
 The Whitebrook , formerly known as The Crown at Whitebrook , is a restaurant with rooms in Whitebrook , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south @-@ south @-@ east of Monmouth , Monmouthshire , Wales , near the River Wye and the border with England . The building is thought to date from the 17th century and by the 19th century it was used as a roadside inn . Its restaurant was run by Chef Patron James Sommerin until 2013 ; it gained a Michelin star in 2007 . It contains eight double rooms and a 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) garden . On 7 March 2013 , it closed because of financial difficulties ; at the time it had the longest held Michelin star in Wales . Critics praised the food under Sommerin , but have criticised the difficulty in finding the restaurant . It re @-@ opened in October 2013 under new chef and owner Chris Harrod , and regained the Michelin star in 2014 . Harrod serves a menu using locally produced meat and vegetables along with foraged ingredients such as <unk> , hedge bedstraw and pennywort . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Whitebrook is a restaurant with rooms located 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south @-@ south @-@ east of Monmouth in Monmouthshire , Wales . It is near the River Wye and the border with England . It is located on a minor road running between <unk> and the <unk> road at <unk> . The restaurant can seat up to 34 customers , and the kitchen is run by four staff plus Harrod . In addition to the restaurant itself , there are eight double rooms ; as of 2016 , four had been recently renovated . They each look out over either the adjoining garden or the valley . It had previously operated with a further bedroom under the previous owner . There is also a apartment onsite for the manager of the premises . The building has an adjoined garden of 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) . 
 = = = Menu = = = 
 The menu under Chris Harrod is seasonal , using locally produced meat and vegetables . Tasting menu dishes include asparagus which comes from the nearby Wye Valley , while turbot from Cornwall is used . There are foraged items included in the menu , such as hedge bedstraw and pennywort . Charlock is served with crab , while hogweed is used in an asparagus based dish . He uses foams on dishes , including on a Jerusalem artichoke starter comprising caramelized artichokes with goat 's curd , <unk> mushrooms and Parmigiano @-@ Reggiano . 
 Another dish which highlights local vegetables is a salt baked turnip side which accompanies duck . Harrod explained " Turnips don 't deserve their unloved image , they add a wonderful freshness to a dish . " The signature of the restaurant is a suckling pig themed dish , incorporating a pork shoulder which is cooked over two days in a bain @-@ marie , served with shallot and <unk> . This is accompanied by a croquette made from pig 's head and a pork cutlet with celeriac , pear , sorrel and cauliflower mushrooms . The restaurant serves breakfast to residents staying in the rooms , which includes <unk> Farm produced sausages and bacon . 
 = = History = = 
 The restaurant claims that the building dates from the 17th century , although little is known of its history . The village of Whitebrook developed as a centre of water @-@ powered industry , with <unk> and later paper mills . The Whitebrook was run as a roadside inn by the Seaward family , and later the Ricketts family , in the second half of the 19th century . 
 It remained in use as a small public house , until it was extensively refurbished and reopened as a high quality restaurant . It was awarded a coveted Michelin star in 2007 , one of thirteen newly starred restaurants in the UK in that year 's Guide . In 2010 , Martin <unk> joined Crown restaurants as executive chef of the group which oversaw both the Crown at Whitebrook and the Crown at Celtic Manor . That same year , it won a Gold Award from Visit Wales for the rooms on site . As of 2011 it was one of only four establishments in Wales to hold a Michelin star . During the same year , it was named the Welsh Restaurant of the Year by the AA . In 2012 , it was ranked as the 27th best restaurant in the UK by the Good Food Guide with a score of seven out of ten . 
 It closed on 7 March 2013 due to financial difficulties ; twenty staff were reported to have lost their jobs . The closure was blamed on recent poor weather , and on economic circumstances . In April 2013 , the building was marketed for sale for £ 850 @,@ 000 or for a yearly lease with an upfront payment of £ 50 @,@ 000 . At the time it had been the longest standing Michelin starred restaurant in Wales . 
 In August 2013 , it was announced that it would reopen in October under a new chef @-@ owner , Chris Harrod . Harrod had previously worked under Raymond Blanc at two Michelin starred restaurant Le Manoir aux Quat <unk> . He had been looking for a restaurant with rooms to purchase , having originally thought to look for one in the Chiltern Hills where they could be added . Harrod said that " I went and had a look and was amazed to find that the Crown at Whitebrook ticked all the boxes for what I was looking for . It had the location , the quality suppliers and I knew straight away that I had been looking in the wrong place . " The Crown at Whitebrook reopened the following October , and gained a new Michelin star under the new team in the 2014 list . In February 2015 , the restaurant was renamed to The Whitebrook . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Under Sommerin = = = 
 Victor Lewis @-@ Smith reviewed the restaurant for The Guardian in 2005 , thought that a spring onion risotto accompaniment to a pan fried seabass tasted so good that it would have been sufficient as a main course itself and was also quite pleased that crêpe <unk> was served on a trolley for table side service . Claire Ogden visited the restaurant for the Metro newspaper shortly after it was first awarded a Michelin star in 2007 . She thought that a John Dory main course was " pristine " , and overall thought that the star was well deserved . The only negative thing she had to say about the experience was a toffee foam served on top of a pear <unk> which she described as " flimsy @-@ flavoured " . It was named the best restaurant in Britain by Les <unk> later that year . The critic from the Western Mail stated in 2008 that " the menu is short and to the point , with around five choices for each course . The wine list is huge , an insurmountable challenge for me but another 's utopia . " However , he remarked that the main course was " genuinely brilliant food " and deserving of its Michelin star . 
 It was awarded the wine award for Wales by The Automobile Association in 2008 . Matthew Fort of The Guardian described its location in 2009 , " The Crown is not the easiest place in the world to find . It lies off a narrow lane winding between steepling , canopied hills in an odd corner between Monmouth and Chepstow . In spite of its lost world location , the Crown has been a beacon of gastronomic adventure for at least 30 years – those with long memories will recall Stephen Bull carving out his reputation here . " He said of the food , " There is clearly a distinctive palate at work here . In lesser hands , such a meal could be not so much a car crash as a multiple pile @-@ up , but it is not , because the ingredients are handled with originality , assurance and , more importantly , a keen sense of pleasure . " 
 = = = Under Harrod = = = 
 Tony Naylor , writing for The Guardian in 2016 , said that the menu featured unusual ingredients which complement each other resulting in " astonishing depths of flavour " . But he added that not all dishes were as good as each other , saying that a broccoli amuse @-@ bouche had akin to " a car veering on to a motorway ’ s rumble strips " . The Whitebrook has retained the Michelin star through to 2016 , which it first earned under Harrod in 2014 . 
 = Spindizzy ( video game ) = 
 Spindizzy is an isometric computer game released for several 8 @-@ bit home computer formats in 1986 by Electric Dreams Software . It features action and puzzle game elements . Players must navigate a series of screens to explore a landscape suspended in a dimensional space . Development was headed by Paul Shirley , who drew inspiration from Ultimate Play The Game games that feature an isometric projection . 
 The game was successful in the United Kingdom and was well received by the video game press . Reviewers praised its visuals and design , but criticized its audio . Similarities were drawn to Marble Madness , which was released in arcades two years earlier . Spindizzy was followed by a 1990s sequel titled Spindizzy Worlds . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Spindizzy is an action and puzzle game played from an isometric perspective . Players can view the playing field from four angles , and rotate between them . The game takes place in a fictional landscape of interconnected stages suspended in a dimensional space . The player controls a probe called a Gyroscopic Environmental Reconnaissance And Land @-@ Mapping Device ( <unk> ) , via keyboard commands or a joystick . The craft is able to transform — and modify its mobility as a result — between three configurations : a ball , an inverted square pyramid , and a gyroscope . Players navigate the probe through the stages to explore the world within a time limit . The time limit can be extended by collecting power jewels scattered through the world and is decreased by falling off a stage . Stages feature ramps , corridors , and other obstacles that hinder the player from quickly traversing them . The game ends when time expires or the world is completely explored . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Spindizzy was developed by Paul Shirley of British video game developer Electric Dreams Software . He was primarily inspired by Ultimate Play The Game games that feature an isometric projection , but was also influenced by the gameplay of the 1984 arcade game Marble Madness . Shirley created an interpreted script to generate the game 's levels . The script allowed him to design a large number of stages using <unk> of storage . The game was originally released for the Commodore 64 and Amstrad CPC . It was later ported to Atari 8 @-@ bit , ZX Spectrum , and Apple II computers . Spindizzy cartridges were promoted as prizes in magazine contests upon its release . American video game company Activision published the game in the United States as part of its " Electric Dreams " series . John Sanderson programmed the Apple II version ; Shirley was unaware of the port 's existence until the mid @-@ 1990s . Spindizzy was later re @-@ released as part of an Activision compilation . The company sold Spindizzy 's compilation rights not long after obtaining them , which reduced the amount of royalties to Shirley and Electric Dreams . Shirley eventually severed the contract with Activision , citing late royalty payments among other actions he disagreed with . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Spindizzy sold well in the United Kingdom . Shirley described the game 's marketing life as short and attributed that to Activision 's business practices . James Hague of <unk> Games commented that Spindizzy could have been an " all @-@ time classic " had it received a proper marketing campaign . The game was well received by video game journalists upon its release . Zzap ! 64 awarded Spindizzy a Gold Medal . Tony Hetherington of Computer Gamer listed it as one of the essential Spectrum titles of 1986 . 
 Praise from reviewers focused on the game 's visuals and design , while criticism focused on the audio . Three of Zzap ! 64 's reviewers — Julian Rignall , Gary Liddon , and Gary Penn — called the graphics " amazing " , well @-@ executed , and " varied " ; but they described the audio as sparse . Rignall and Penn complimented the challenging gameplay and commented that its addictiveness outweighed any frustration experienced while playing . The three summarized by urging readers to purchase the game . Computer Gamer reviewer Mike Roberts praised Spindizzy 's gameplay , but mentioned that the screen 's orientation can require a period of adjustment , particularly when using a joystick . Crash 's reviewer called Spindizzy " one of the most addictive " ZX Spectrum games , noting its innovative use of shape changing , multiple view angles , and speed control . The audio was seen as lacking compared to the rest of the game , but was still described as good . Phil South of Your Sinclair gave the game high marks for graphics , playability , value for money , and addictiveness . He praised the ability to change viewpoints and the realistic movements of the character sprite . He also lauded the speed and quality of the graphics . 
 More than a decade later , reviews still praised the game . Allgame editor Ryan Glover called Spindizzy an " innovative puzzler " that prompts players to fully explore it . Saying that the game successfully mixed infuriating moments with brilliant design , Darran Jones of Retro Gamer called Spindizzy a " timeless classic " . The magazine rated Spindizzy the second best game with an isometric perspective , citing its presentation and stage designs . Reviewers drew comparisons to Marble Madness , which was ported to home platforms the same year . Roberts called Spindizzy the " best ' marble ' game yet " , and Charles Ardai of Computer Gaming World called it " a thoroughly enjoyable game " superior to Marble Madness . South described Spindizzy as the " closest thing yet to Marble Madness " on the ZX Spectrum , while Liddon said that any similarities to Marble Madness were coincidental . Many publications commented that the game was obviously inspired by Marble Madness . Over 25 years after its release , Retro Gamer called the game " intensely devious and addictive " and added that " Spindizzy 's only enemy was yourself " . 
 Spindizzy 's isometric design partially inspired Glenn <unk> during the development of the 1989 title Populous . Activision released a sequel titled Spindizzy Worlds for Amiga and Atari ST computers in 1990 . The game features similar gameplay , but improved graphics and larger playing fields . It was later ported to the Super Nintendo Entertainment System by ASCII , which Shirley disapproved of and considered it a " disaster " . He took legal action over the span of several years to obtain royalty information and payments . 
 = USS Wadsworth ( DD @-@ 60 ) = 
 USS Wadsworth ( Destroyer No. 60 / DD @-@ 60 ) was a Tucker @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named for Alexander Scammel Wadsworth . 
 Wadsworth was laid down by the Bath Iron Works of Bath , Maine , in February 1914 and launched in April 1915 . The ship was a little more than 315 feet ( 96 m ) in length , nearly 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) abeam , and displaced 1 @,@ 060 long tons ( 1 @,@ 080 t ) . She was armed with four 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) guns and had eight 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes . Wadsworth 's geared steam turbine power plant was a successful prototype that greatly influenced U.S. destroyer designs after 1915 . 
 After her July 1915 commissioning , Wadsworth served on the neutrality patrol off the east coast and in the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Wadsworth was the flagship of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Wadsworth reported several encounters with U @-@ boats in the first months overseas . She was transferred to Brest , France , in March 1918 , and spent the remainder of the war there . 
 Upon returning to the United State at the end of 1918 , Wadsworth underwent a five @-@ month overhaul . She served as a plane guard for the Navy 's transatlantic flight attempt by four Navy @-@ Curtiss flying boats in May . After two years in reduced commission in August , Wadsworth was reactivated in May 1921 . She was decommissioned in June 1922 , and spent nearly 14 years in reserve at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in January 1936 , sold in June , and scrapped in August . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Wadsworth was authorized in 1913 as a part of the Tucker class which , like the related O 'Brien class , was an improved version of the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized in 1911 . Construction of the vessel was awarded to Bath Iron Works of Bath , Maine , which laid down her keel on 23 February 1914 . Fourteen months later , on 29 April 1915 , Wadsworth was launched by sponsor Juanita Doane Wells . The ship was named after Commodore Alexander Scammel Wadsworth ( 1790 – 1851 ) , a U.S. Navy officer during the War of 1812 and later the Navy 's Inspector of Ordnance . As built , Wadsworth was 315 feet 3 inches ( 96 @.@ 09 m ) in length and 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) abeam and drew 9 feet 2 inches ( 2 @.@ 79 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 060 long tons ( 1 @,@ 080 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 205 long tons ( 1 @,@ 224 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Unlike the rest of the Tucker @-@ class ships — which had differing arrangements of steam turbines and reciprocating engines for cruising — Wadsworth was designed with what became the main United States prototype installation of her two Curtis geared steam turbines . According to Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 , the mechanical design for Wadsworth had a " considerable effect " on post @-@ 1915 U.S. destroyer designs . As installed , the steam turbines could generate 17 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) and move the ship at speeds up to 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) , though Wadsworth reached a top speed of 30 @.@ 67 knots ( 56 @.@ 80 km / h ) during her trials . 
 Wadsworth 's main battery consisted of four 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) / 50 Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 pounds ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 @-@ pound ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 feet per second ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yards ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . 
 Wadsworth was also equipped with eight 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . The General Board of the United States Navy had called for two anti @-@ aircraft guns for the Tucker @-@ class ships , as well as provisions for laying up to 36 floating mines . From sources , it is unclear if these recommendations were followed for Wadsworth or any of the Tucker ships . 
 = = Early career = = 
 USS Wadsworth was commissioned into the United States Navy at the Boston Navy Yard on 23 July 1915 under the command of Lieutenant Commander Joseph K. Taussig . After trials and torpedo firing drills out of Newport , Rhode Island , the destroyer took up duty off the New England coast line in October . Her duty included patrols to insure America 's neutrality vis @-@ a @-@ vis the year @-@ old European war . On 7 January 1916 , she departed Provincetown , Massachusetts , to join in the annual Fleet maneuvers in the Caribbean . After a stop at Norfolk , Virginia , she reached the West Indies at Culebra Island on 15 January and began a three @-@ month round of war games , drills , and exercises . During her stay in the Caribbean , she visited Guantanamo Bay , Guacanayabo Bay , Manzanillo , and Santiago — all in Cuba . On 10 April , she left Guantanamo Bay to steam north , stopped at New York for a five @-@ week stay , and returned to Newport on 21 May . Wadsworth resumed operations along the New England coast , and the succeeding year passed in much the same way as had its predecessor — summer operations along the northeastern coast followed by Fleet maneuvers in the Caribbean . 
 At the completion of her second round of winter Fleet maneuvers in the spring of 1917 , Wadsworth returned north as far as Hampton Roads . As America 's entry into World War I approached , she and her sister destroyers began patrolling the Norfolk – Yorktown area to protect the naval bases and ships there against potential incursions by German submarines . 
 = = World War I = = 
 On 6 April 1917 , while Wadsworth was at anchor with the rest of the Fleet at Yorktown , the United States entered World War I. Wadsworth moved to New York almost immediately to prepare for the voyage to Europe and war service . On 24 April , she departed New York for Europe , as the flagship of Commander Joseph K. Taussig , commanding Division 8 , Destroyer Force , the first six @-@ ship destroyer division dispatched to United Kingdom . She led Porter , Davis , Conyngham , McDougal , and Wainwright into Queenstown , Ireland , on 4 May and began patrolling the southern approaches to the Irish Sea the next day . 
 Wadsworth 's first summer overseas proved to be the most eventful period of her wartime service . She sighted her first U @-@ boat on 18 May , less than two weeks after she began patrols out of Queenstown . Though the destroyer sped to the attack , the submarine dove and escaped . Three days later , Wadsworth picked up some survivors from HMS Paxton which had been torpedoed and sunk the preceding day . On 7 June , the destroyer caught a glimpse of another enemy submarine just before it submerged and escaped . Between 24 and 27 June , Wadsworth served as part of the escort for the first American troop convoy to reach Europe . Though she scored no definitely <unk> successes against German submarines , the destroyer made depth charge attacks on four separate occasions in July and a gunfire attack in one other instance . The first two depth @-@ charge attacks , on 10 and 11 July , returned no results whatsoever , and the gun attack on 20 July was similarly unrewarding . However , after sighting a double periscope the following day , Wadsworth made another depth @-@ charge attack . During that attack , one of the explosions seemed much stronger than those from the other charges she dropped . Moreover , a patch of reddish @-@ brown material rose to the surface . Although it seemed certain that the destroyer had damaged a submarine , no conclusive evidence was found to prove this possibility . 
 Wadsworth made her fourth depth charge attack on a U @-@ boat on 29 July . At about 17 : 25 , she dropped several charges in what appeared to be the wake of a submarine proceeding submerged . The conjecture that a U @-@ boat was damaged was supported by the appearance of a large amount of heavy oil on the surface following the attack . Just before 23 : 00 , the warship attacked another supposed submarine wake . It was too dark to evaluate the results ; but , not long thereafter , Trippe struck a submerged metallic object which caused her to list 10 ° temporarily . Later , Wadsworth 's wireless operator intercepted messages sent by a German submarine over a period of about half an hour which suggested that Wadsworth may have damaged a submarine , although as with the depth @-@ charge attack of 21 June , no definite proof was forthcoming . Early in August , the destroyer concluded her summer of peak activity by escorting the first United States merchant convoy on the last leg of its voyage to Europe . During the mission , on the 16th , the destroyer dropped a barrage on what was thought to be a submarine . 
 For the remainder of the war , her encounters with the enemy were infrequent . In fact , her next submarine contact did not occur until 17 December and , like those before , resulted in no definite damage to the enemy . Although the opening months of 1918 brought no new U @-@ boat contacts , Wadsworth worked hard escorting convoys and patrolling British waters . 
 Early in March 1918 , she received a change in assignment . On the 4th , she arrived in Brest , France , whence she operated for the remainder of the war . During that assignment , she recorded only two scrapes with German submarines : the first on 1 June and the second on 25 October . In each case , she dropped depth charges , but could produce no solid proof of damage to the enemy . The war ended on 11 November 1918 when Germany accepted Allied armistice terms . 
 = = Later career = = 
 On 31 December 1918 , Wadsworth stood out of Brest to return to the United States and reached Boston , Massachusetts , on 9 January 1919 . Following an extended overhaul , she put to sea on 1 May to serve as one of the picket ships stationed at intervals across the ocean for the transatlantic flight of four Curtiss NC flying boats , one of which , NC @-@ 4 , successfully completed the feat . The destroyer returned home and operated on the east coast through the summer of 1919 . On 29 August , Wadsworth was placed in reduced commission at Philadelphia where she remained almost two years . On 9 May 1921 , the destroyer returned to active service along the east coast . 
 Just over a year later , on 3 June 1922 , Wadsworth was decommissioned at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . The ship remained in reserve there until 7 January 1936 when her name was struck from the Naval Vessel Register . She was sold for scrapping on 30 June 1936 and was broken up the following August . 
 = Teigan Van Roosmalen = 
 Teigan Van Roosmalen ( born 6 April 1991 ) is an Australian Paralympic S13 swimmer . She is legally blind and deaf . She has a swimming scholarship from the Australian Institute of Sport . Her events are the 100 m breaststroke , 200 m individual medley , 50 m and 100 m freestyle . She competed at the 2011 Para Pan Pacific Championships in Edmonton , where she won a gold medal in the S13 400 freestyle event . She competed at the 2008 Summer and 2012 Summer Paralympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Van Roosmalen was born in Bateau Bay , New South Wales on 6 April 1991 . She " is legally blind and deaf , with cysts pushing on her optic nerve causing blackouts in one eye . " This is a result of Usher syndrome and retinitis pigmentosa . She has a brother involved with the surfing community , and has competed at the Australian Surf Titles . In 2009 , she was working towards earning her Higher School Certificate . She is a professional swimmer . As of January 2012 , she is attending the Canberra Institute of Technology , where she is studying massage therapy . 
 Van Roosmalen was photographed by Central Coast Express Advocate photographer Troy Snook , whose picture of her finished second in the Northern region in the 2010 Community Newspaper Association Awards . A photograph of her has graced the front of the 2006 Central Coast telephone book . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Van Roosmalen is an S13 and S15 swimmer , with a swimming scholarship from the Australian Institute of Sport . Her events are the 100 m breaststroke , 200 m individual medley , 50 m and 100 m freestyle . She has trained with Ellie Cole . As of January 2012 , " She is ranked No.2 in the world in the 100 m breaststroke , fourth in the 200 m IM , fifth in the 100 m freestyle and sixth in the 50 m freestyle . " In 2010 , she was ranked first in the world in the 100 m breaststroke . Her Australian Institute of Sport coach is Graeme Carroll . At the Australian Institute of Sport , she changed her training and went from focusing on the butterfly to the medley and breaststroke events . Her home pool is <unk> Aquatic . When she trains there , she is coached by Kim Taylor . She also competes in able bodied swimming events . 
 Van Roosmalen started swimming in 1997 and first represented Australia at the 2005 <unk> in Melbourne . In 2007 , she set an Australian age record and won a gold medal at the Arafura Games in the 100 m butterfly event . In 2007 , she also competed at the Australian Short Course Championships . In 2008 , she competed at the IPC Swimming World Cup and took home a set of bronze medals . In 2009 , she competed at the New South Wales Country swimming championships where she came away with four gold medals . That year , she also competed at the Paralympic World Cup in Manchester , England . She finished eleventh in the Women ’ s MD 100 Freestyle event with a personal time of 1 : 06 @.@ 97 , less than a second behind Ellie Cole . She finished ninth in the Women ’ s MD 100 Breaststroke event with a personal best time of 1 : 29 @.@ 76 . She finished third in the Women ’ s S13 100 Butterfly event with a personal best time of 1 : 08 @.@ 24 . At the 2008 Beijing Games , she competed in six events and did not win a medal . 
 In 2010 , Van Roosmalen competed at the Australian short course championships , which were held in Brisbane , Queensland . She won three medals at the competition , but also re @-@ injured her shoulder . She also competed at the 2010 IPC Swimming World Championships held in Eindhoven , the Netherlands in the S11 @-@ 13 events , but did not win any medals , the only Australian at the competition to do so . She had a time of 4 : 59 @.@ 67 in the women 's 400 m freestyle S13 event , where she finished fourth . In the 50m freestyle S13 event , she finished fifth , setting a personal best with a time of 29 @.@ 97 . A shoulder injury almost prevented her from competing in the competition , with a question regarding her participation because of the necessity of a medical clearance until such a time that she boarded the plane to depart Australia . She competed at the 2011 Para Pan Pacific Championships in Edmonton , Alberta , where she finished first in the S13 400 freestyle event , her first medal finish at a major international competition . In January 2012 , she competed at the Australian Deaf Games in Geelong , Victoria . She finished first in the 100m Butterfly Women 's Open event with a games record time of 1 @.@ 09 @.@ 68 . She finished first in the 50m Breaststroke Women 's Open event with a time of 39 @.@ 82 . She finished third in the 100m Backstroke Women 's Open event with a time of 1 @.@ 17 @.@ 28 . She was credited with having the " Outstanding Swim of the Meet " by the Games 's organisers . 
 Van Roosmalen competed at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in six different swimming events , qualifying for the finals in four events . In the process , she set several personal best times . At the games , she participated in a re @-@ run of the 400m S13 freestyle final because of an equipment malfunction . She competed at the Australian championships on 15 March 2012 in order to qualify for the games . She was successful , and swam in four events , finishing sixth in the 50m freestyle - S13 , seventh in the 100m freestyle - S13 and the 100m breaststroke - SB13 , and sixth in the 200m metre individual medley SM13 . 
 Competing at the 2013 IPC Swimming World Championships in Montreal , Canada , Van Roosmalen won four bronze medals in the Women 's 200 m Individual Medley SM13 , Women 's 100m Butterfly S13 , Women 's 100m Breaststroke SB13 and Women 's 100m Backstroke S13 . 
 At the 2015 IPC Swimming World Championships , Glasgow , Scotland , she finished fifth in the Women 's 100m Backstroke S13 , sixth in the Women 's 100m Breaststroke SB13 and seventh in the Women 's 50m Freestyle S13 and Women 's 200m Individual Medley SM13 . 
 = = = Personal best times = = = 
 The following are van Roosmalen 's personal best times as of 16 September 2012 : 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 2008 , Van Roosmalen was named the Central Coast Young Achiever winner . In February 2009 , she was named the Express Advocate Young Achiever . A picture of her appears in the Powerhouse Museum ’ s Wall of Fame . In 2011 , she received a Sport Achievement Award from the Australian Institute of Sport . 
 = 2006 FA Community Shield = 
 The 2006 FA Community Shield was a football match played between Liverpool and Chelsea on 13 August 2006 at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff , the annual FA Community Shield contested between the winners of the Premier League and FA Cup . Chelsea were appearing in the competition for the sixth time , while Liverpool were making their 21st appearance . It was the final Community Shield to be held at the Millennium Stadium following the reconstruction of Wembley Stadium . 
 Chelsea qualified for the match as a result of winning the 2005 – 06 Premier League , which was their second successive league championship . Liverpool entered the competition after winning the 2005 – 06 FA Cup against West Ham United . The match finished 3 – 3 and was decided by a penalty shootout , which Liverpool won 3 – 2 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 56 @,@ 275 , Liverpool took the lead early in the first half when John Arne Riise scored . Chelsea responded when new signing Andriy Shevchenko scored before the end of the half . Both sides had chances to win the match in the second half , but a Peter Crouch goal late in the half ensured Liverpool won the match 2 – 1 , to win the Shield for the 15th time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Community Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 , it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . Wembley Stadium acted as the host of the Shield from 1974 . Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium was hosting the Shield for the sixth and final time ; it took over as the venue for the event while Wembley Stadium underwent a six @-@ year renovation between 2001 and 2006 . 
 Chelsea qualified for the Community Shield by winning the Premier League — their second successive championship . They finished eight points clear of second @-@ placed Manchester United . Chelsea beat Liverpool in both their league meetings during the season . A 4 – 1 win away at Liverpool 's home ground Anfield , was followed by a 2 – 0 victory in the corresponding fixture at their home ground , Stamford Bridge . The sides met in the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup , a match Liverpool won 2 – 1 to progress to the final . A 3 – 2 victory by Liverpool in a penalty shootout , after the 2006 FA Cup Final finished 3 – 3 with West Ham United , ensured the club 's participation in the match . 
 Chelsea were appearing in the Community Shield for the sixth time and were the holders , after beating Arsenal 2 – 1 in the 2005 edition . Including this victory they had won the competition three times , in 1955 and 2000 . In contrast , Liverpool were appearing in their 21st match in the competition . They had won eight outright ( 1966 , 1976 , 1979 , 1980 , 1982 , 1988 , 1989 , 2001 ) , shared five ( 1964 , 1965 , 1974 , 1977 , 1986 , 1990 ) and lost six ( 1922 , 1971 , 1983 , 1984 , 1992 , 2002 ) . This was the first meeting between the two sides in the competition . 
 The match would normally be the first of the season for both clubs , however as a result of finishing third in the Premier League , Liverpool were entered into third qualifying round for the UEFA Champions League . They won the first of two legs against Israeli team Maccabi Haifa 2 – 1 , courtesy of goals from new signings Craig Bellamy and Mark González . In addition to the signings of Bellamy and González , Liverpool had also purchased defender Fábio Aurélio and midfielder Jermaine Pennant . Chelsea had also brought in a number of players , despite winning successive league titles . Foremost among them was striker Andriy Shevchenko , who signed for a club record £ 30 million from A.C. Milan , Manager José Mourinho was adamant that he would fit into the club 's style of play : " Everybody knows him as a player , tactically he can play in the Chelsea system no doubt . " 
 Chelsea were expected to start their new signings Shevchenko and Michael Ballack , however they would be without midfielder Claude Makélélé , who had been allowed extra time to recover from playing for France in the 2006 FIFA World Cup . They would be without goalkeeper Petr Čech and midfielder Joe Cole , who had knee and shoulder injuries respectively . Liverpool were expected to be without striker Robbie Fowler and defender Aurélio for the match , who were suffering from knee and calf injuries respectively . Manager Rafael Benítez stated ' we would rather wait until next weekend ' , before playing the pair . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Chelsea lined up in a 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 formation while Liverpool , who kicked off the match , lined up in a 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 . Within nine minutes Liverpool had taken the lead . Defender John Arne Riise ran with the ball from his own half and hit a shot from 25 yards ( 23 m ) , which beat Chelsea goalkeeper Carlo Cudicini . Chelsea midfielder Ballack received the first booking of the match in the 7th minute after he kicked Liverpool midfielder Momo Sissoko , and his partner Frank Lampard was given a yellow card eight minutes later for kicking Boudewijn Zenden . Liverpool almost extended their lead in the 22nd minute , when Paulo Ferreira 's pass to Cudicini caught him unaware , however the ball went wide of the Chelsea goal and out for a corner . Chelsea made the first substitution of the match in the 26th minute when debutant Salomon Kalou replaced the injured Ballack . Cudicini kept the score at 1 – 0 in the 42nd minute , when he made saves to deny González and then a subsequent Peter Crouch shot . Chelsea scored two minutes later when Lampard passed the ball cross @-@ field to striker Shevchenko who controlled the ball on his chest and shot past Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina to level the score at 1 – 1 . 
 The first chance of the second half fell to Liverpool , but midfielder Zenden sent his shot wide of the Chelsea goal . The first substitution of the half came in the 54th minute , when Chelsea replaced Geremi with Wayne Bridge . A minute later , they had two chances to take the lead . Reina saved a shot by Didier Drogba and from the resulting corner , he saved a Shevchenko header . Liverpool made their first substitutions of the match minutes when Aurélio , Steven Gerrard and Xabi Alonso replaced González , Zenden and Pennant respectively . Alonso received a yellow card two minutes after coming on for a challenge on Michael Essien . Two more substitutions were made in the coming minutes with Chelsea replacing Arjen Robben with Lassana Diarra and Bellamy replacing Luis García for Liverpool . Diarra was shown a yellow card soon after for a foul on Alonso . The resulting free @-@ kick saw Alonso pass the ball to Aurélio , but his subsequent pass to Bellamy was blocked . 
 Chelsea had the best of the chances after this , with Shevchenko controlling a long pass with his chest before passing to Kalou , but his subsequent attempt went wide of the Liverpool goal . Then two minutes later Shaun Wright @-@ Phillips , who had replaced Drogba , ran down the righthand side of the pitch . He passed the ball to Kalou , but he was unable to pass to Shevchenko in the Liverpool penalty area , after being blocked by the Liverpool defence . Minutes later , Liverpool took the lead when Bellamy advanced down the left hand side of the pitch with the ball , his pass found Crouch , who headed into the Chelsea goal to make it 2 – 1 . The lead was almost extended minutes later , as a Gerrard pass found Aurélio in the Chelsea penalty area , but his shot was saved by Cudicini . Chelsea had a final chance in stoppage time from a Lampard free @-@ kick , but the ball was cleared from the Liverpool penalty area by Sissoko . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool manager Benítez was confident that victory in the match would provide his side with a boost ahead of their opening match of the 2006 – 07 Premier League with Sheffield United : " This will give us a lot of confidence I am sure , to play one of the best sides in the world and to beat them , this should give us more confidence going into what will be an interesting season . " He also defended his decision to players such as Gerrard and Alonso on the bench : " It was my idea to start with the players that had the most fitness and have played the most minutes . Then I wanted to bring the other players on towards the end . It worked and it showed that we have a great squad – better than last season . " Crouch , scorer of the winning goal , was also confident the result would boost the Liverpool squad : " There is a bit of rivalry between the sides and it is great to get an early one over them . Make no bones about it , this is a big game to win and it certainly could give us a psychological edge this season . " 
 Chelsea manager Mourinho was primarily concerned with the fitness of his squad in the aftermath of the match , in particular Ballack , who was substituted with an injury early in the match : " He had a kick in the muscle and he couldn 't run but I hope he will be back soon , we have quite a few players not in condition and we need players back , so I hope it 's not a big deal . " He felt that the fitness of the two squads was the decisive factor in the match : " Today our bench was not very good , with some kids , Liverpool could inject fresh blood at the same time as some of my players became really tired . They were broken . They were in better condition than us , you could see the difference between Frank Lampard and Sissoko . " Mourinho was also unconcerned about his team 's form heading into the start of the season : " Liverpool had more intensity and pace , qualities that make a team better . They had that and we didn 't . We had a big percentage of the ball possession , but Liverpool defended with intensity and looked dangerous when they counter @-@ attacked . I keep saying they are a difficult team to beat and they can go to every game with an ambition to win . They are a good team but over 10 months of competition we will be there . " 
 = I Always Feel Like Somebody 's Watchin ' Me = 
 " I Always Feel Like Somebody 's Watchin ' Me " is the third episode of the sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 105th episode overall . It was written by Tony Phelan and Joan Rater , and directed by Michael Pressman . The episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on October 1 , 2009 . In the episode , the physicians of Seattle Grace struggle to maintain their jobs as the hospital merges with Mercy West . Further storylines include Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) working under Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , and Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) returning to work full @-@ time , too quickly after her surgery . 
 Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle , Washington , filming primarily took place in Los Angeles , California . Adrienne Barbeau and James Frain made their first guest appearances , while Sarah Utterback , Mark Saul , and Molly Kidder reprised their roles as guest stars . The episode 's title refers to the song " I Always Feel Like " , by American hip hop group <unk> . " I Always Feel Like Somebody 's Watchin ' Me " opened to generally positive critical reviews , with Chyler Leigh ( Dr. Lexie Grey ) ' s and Oh 's performance praised in particular . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 15 @.@ 69 million Americans , and garnered a 6 @.@ 1 / 16 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking third for the night in terms of viewership . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) tries to convince pediatric surgeon Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) to place her on her service , to which she agrees to . A trauma victim is brought into the emergency room , with the surgical residents all trying to impress the superior physicians , in hope that their job will be preserved , come the merger . Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) returns to full @-@ time work quickly after her cancer treatment , showcasing an auburn wig . 
 Dr. Lexie Grey is assigned to the trauma victim , and while transferring blood to the operating room , she slips while running . Dismayed with the merger , Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) condemns the chief of surgery Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) for initiating it , only to be yelled at . Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) is optimistic , assuring everyone that they will keep their jobs . A patient , Jodie Crawley ( Adrienne Barbeau ) , and her son with schizophrenia , Tom ( James Frain ) , is brought into the hospital with a moving growth inside her stomach , claimed to be an alien by her son . 
 Yang expresses difficulty connecting with the children on pediatrics , to Robbins ' disappointment . Tom becomes frightened when he notices Lexie is not wearing a name tag , so her attacks her and runs away . His mother is subsequently diagnosed with an abdominal aortic aneurysm , for which requires surgery , and Tom falls down the stairs , for which also requires surgery . Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) returns to the hospital , and informs Robbins that Yang is just sucking up . The Crawley 's are uneasy about agreeing to surgery , but Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) convinces them that it is the right thing to do . An obstetrics and gynecology resident accidentally cuts off a baby 's arm during a caesarian section , but it is healed by plastic surgeon Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , Robbins , and Yang . Stevens assists Shepherd with a five @-@ hour craniotomy , and Karev is fearful that she cannot handle it , although she is ultimately able to complete the surgery . At the conclusion of the episode , human resources sends out an email notifying Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) and Dr. Steve Mostow ( Mark Saul ) ' s wife Megan ( Molly Kidder ) , that they have been fired . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Tony Phelan and Joan Rater , and directed by Michael Pressman . David Greenspan edited the episode , and Donald Lee Harris served as production designer . The episode 's title refers to the song " I Always Feel Like " , by American hip hop group <unk> . Featured music includes Gossip 's " Pop Goes the World " and Ingrid Michaelson 's " The Chain " . 
 Rater intended the theme of the episode to be " paranoia " , elaborating : " After Richard dropped the bomb that the hospital would be merging with Mercy West , we knew that this episode would have to deal with people 's paranoia . Because merger means change . And change means fear . And the worst kind of fear is the kind that lives in your head . The dark thoughts . The paranoia . The worst case scenarios that you play out that usually don 't come true . And with Richard holing himself up inside his office , it 's just a breeding ground for rumor , fear and paranoia . So , when we started talking about this episode , the theme of paranoia emerged pretty quickly . " All storylines in the episode were inspired by Rater 's friend base , including the story on schizophrenia . She offered her insight : 
 " My inspiration for the story of Tom and Jodie came from a kid I knew growing up named Jon . I babysat for him . His mom , Barbara and my mom are friends . We went on vacations with their family . And he grew up and became a paranoid schizophrenic . My mom recently told me a story that when Jon ( who ’ s now 30 ) needs a haircut , Barbara is unavailable all day for golf or bridge because she never knows how long it will take for Jon to find a barber shop he ’ s okay with . She has to drive from barbershop to barbershop , waiting for him to get a ' good feeling ' about one . It might happen right away , it might take all day . And she 's patient and kind and she just does it because she 's his mother . I was really moved when my mom told me this story because I know these people and I know how painful this has been for her but how she just handles it , with dignity and humor . I can just picture the scene in the car as she pulls up to yet another one , " Well , Jon ? " I can totally see her trying to talk him into giving one a try . And I can see him wanting to do it , to please her , but ultimately being too afraid and telling her they have to try another one . I can just picture the front seat of that car , so full of love and disappointment and fear as they negotiate this very mundane thing that for them has become anything but mundane . Then the story became what it became , with Tom choking Lexie , and falling down the stairs creating a real dilemma for Jodie . And the idea of Bailey pricking her finger to show Tom that she 's human , she 's a mother and she 's a doctor and she 's human , that idea came from Krista [ Vernoff ] , but the original inspiration was the complicated love that I 've witnessed between these family friends . " 
 At the conclusion of the episode , several physicians played a game of baseball to cheer up . Rater called it " her favorite scene " , explaining : " I loved the scene where Owen , Derek and Mark take Cristina , Meredith and Lexie to the baseball field . This is one of the first times Owen has seen Cristina 's intensity . And I love that he makes her leave the hospital , focus on something else . That 's why he 's so good for her . The scene was actually inspired by Shonda saying , let 's do a scene where they 're all playing baseball . But when I finally saw it , it makes me want to write more scenes like that , with our doctors outside of the hospital , little glimpses of them in real life . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 " I Always Feel Like Somebody 's Watchin ' Me " was first broadcast on October 1 , 2009 in the United States on ABC . The episode was viewed by a total of 15 @.@ 69 million Americans , down 1 @.@ 34 % from the previous episode " Goodbye " , which garnered 17 @.@ 03 million viewers . In terms of viewership , " I Always Feel Like Somebody 's Watchin ' Me " ranked third for the night , just behind CBS 's juggernauts CSI and The Mentalist . The episode did not win in viewership , but its 6 @.@ 1 / 16 Nielsen rating ranked first in its 9 : 00 Eastern time @-@ slot and the entire night , for both the rating and share percentages of the key 18 – 49 demographic , beating out CSI , The Mentalist , Private Practice , and The Office . Although its rating won for the night , it was a decrease from the previous episode , which garnered a 6 @.@ 7 / 17 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was generally well received among television critics . Steve Marsi of TV Fanatic called Yang being on pediatrics " an epic fail " , but praised the humor given by Oh . He also called Lexie 's storyline " endearing and sad to watch " , writing that overall , the episode was " classic Grey 's Anatomy " . PopSugar gave a positive review of the episode , writing : " Derek and Mark seem to be the only ones who are keeping their cool . " However , they also felt that Meredith was " out of <unk> " , commenting : " Though Meredith also kept it together , her optimism is so out of character that it can only be chalked up to the crisis , and even she recognizes it . " While Yang was on pediatric service , she impersonated a bear , and PopSugar called her voice " priceless " . They were also positive about Stevens ' storyline , saying : " At first it seemed super annoying but was pretty sweet by the end of the episode . " PopSugar also enjoyed Lexie 's storyline , commenting that " she proves her worth in the end " . 
 Cinema Blend 's Amanda Krill said Stevens ' wig looked like a " Stepford Wives wig " , adding : " Everyone has a hard time not looking at it . She 's still a cancer patient , but she knows that her job is on the line just like everyone else 's . Everyone is working round the clock , showing up at every call , and the Chief is acting like a maniacal overlord . " Krill also enjoyed Oh 's performance as Yang , writing : " Cristina dealing with children is almost laughable – and actually provides a chuckle or two in this tense episode . Miss C thinks she is striking gold by moving to <unk> , because she will be able to do all types of surgery , and on little people , which makes the surgery harder , which is of course , better . Things don 't turn out as planned , though , when she realizes kids are a little more resilient than their adult counterparts . And then Callie outs her to Arizona – in the she doesn ’ t really like kids sense of outing . " Krill enjoyed Wilson 's performance as Bailey , in addition to Dane 's , writing : " He wins the best line of the show with ' That ’ s how I know my job is safe , Yang – I reattach babies arms . ' " 
 Michael Pascua of The Huffington Post disliked Stevens ' wig , writing : " Izzie 's wig looked horrible . She looked exactly like her mother Robbie and that 's not a compliment . I loved Cristina 's Stepford wife joke and how everyone , including Derek , couldn 't help but stare at her hair . Yet , no one had the balls to tell her it was bad . " Pascua also enjoyed Leigh 's performance as Lexie , commenting : " This was one episode I felt that Lexie was a genuine character . She still maintained that book @-@ smart ability to repeat facts ( like the merger cases ) and shows a command of medical situations . " He too found Oh 's bear voice comical , adding : " I laughed when Cristina attempted to do her voice for Mr. Bear because you knew that she didn 't know what she was doing . " Pascua was shocked with the departure of <unk> ' character , writing : " I can 't believe that they cut Nurse Olivia . I understand that she wasn 't really around , but having her as a tertiary character was nice . It was kind of ass @-@ y of the chief not to personally tell these people that they were being cut , but it made Derek look really chivalrous . " 
 = French ironclad Victorieuse = 
 Victorieuse ( Victorious ) was the second ship of the La Galissonnière class of wooden @-@ hulled , armored corvettes built for the French Navy during the 1870s . Her construction was delayed for years and the navy took advantage of the extended construction time to upgrade her armament in comparison to the lead ship , La Galissonnière . Unlike her sisters , Victorieuse did not see any combat although she participated in the pacification of the Marquesas Islands in 1880 . She was condemned in 1900 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The La Galissonnière @-@ class ironclads were designed as faster , more heavily armed versions of the Alma @-@ class ironclads by Henri Dupuy de Lôme . They used the same central battery layout as their predecessors , although the battery was lengthened 4 meters ( 13 ft 1 in ) to provide enough room to work the larger 240 @-@ millimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns . Victorieuse and her sister ship Triomphante were modified by Sabattier who reduced the number of screws from two to one to improve their sailing qualities , added an 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) bow chaser under the forecastle and increased the caliber and number of the secondary armament . 
 Victorieuse was 76 @.@ 85 meters ( 252 ft 2 in ) between perpendiculars and had a beam of 14 @.@ 88 meters ( 48 ft 10 in ) . She had a mean draft of 6 @.@ 3 meters ( 20 ft 8 in ) and displaced 4 @,@ 150 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 080 long tons ) . Her crew numbered between 352 and 382 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Victorieuse had a single vertical compound steam engine driving a single propeller . Her engine was powered by four oval boilers . During sea trials her engine produced 2 @,@ 214 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 651 kW ) and the ship reached 12 @.@ 75 knots ( 23 @.@ 61 km / h ; 14 @.@ 67 mph ) . She only carried 330 metric tons ( 320 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 2 @,@ 740 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 070 km ; 3 @,@ 150 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Victorieuse was also ship @-@ rigged with three masts and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 730 square meters ( 18 @,@ 600 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Victorieuse mounted four of her six 240 @-@ millmeter Modèle 1870 guns in the central battery on the battery deck . The other two 240 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , sponsoned out over the sides of the ship , just forward of the funnel . A 194 @-@ millimeter chase gun was fitted under the forecastle . Victorieuse 's secondary armament of six 138 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) guns was also mounted on the upper deck . 
 The armor @-@ piercing shell of the 19 @-@ caliber 240 @-@ millmeter gun weighed 317 @.@ 5 pounds ( 144 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 15 @.@ 41 long tons ( 15 @.@ 66 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 624 ft / s ( 495 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 14 @.@ 4 inches ( 366 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 20 @-@ caliber 194 @-@ millimeter gun fired an armor @-@ piercing , 165 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) shell while the gun itself weighed 7 @.@ 83 long tons ( 7 @.@ 96 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 739 ft / s ( 530 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 138 @-@ millimeter gun was 21 calibers long and weighed 2 @.@ 63 long tons ( 2 @.@ 67 t ) . It fired a 61 @.@ 7 @-@ pound ( 28 @.@ 0 kg ) explosive shell that had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 529 ft / s ( 466 m / s ) . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 The ship also mounted four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss 5 @-@ barrel revolving guns . They fired a shell weighing about 500 g ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) at a muzzle velocity of about 610 m / s ( 2 @,@ 000 ft / s ) to a range of about 3 @,@ 200 meters ( 3 @,@ 500 yd ) . They had a rate of fire of about 30 rounds per minute . Victorieuse also received several towed Harvey torpedoes . 
