 = = = Armor = = = 
 The La Galissonnière @-@ class ships had a complete 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wrought iron waterline belt , approximately 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) high laid over 650 millimeters ( 26 in ) of wood . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of wrought iron backed by 520 millimeters ( 20 in ) of wood and the ends of the battery were closed by bulkheads of the same thickness . The barbette armor was 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The unarmored portions of their sides were protected by thin iron plates . 
 = = Service = = 
 Victorieuse was laid down at Toulon on 5 August 1869 and launched on 18 November 1875 . While the exact reason for such prolonged construction time is not known , the budget for the French Navy was cut after the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 and the French dockyards had not been reformed with working practices more suitable for the industrial age . The ship was commissioned for her sea trials on 12 November 1876 and she was placed in reserve in Toulon after they were completed . She was recommissioned as the flagship of the Pacific Squadron on 17 August 1878 under the command of Rear Admiral <unk> du Petit @-@ Thouars . The ship participated in the pacification of the Marquesas Islands in 1880 , which had been conquered by the admiral 's uncle Abel Aubert Dupetit Thouars forty years before . Victorieuse returned to Toulon on 23 May 1881 . 
 The ship was recommissioned as the flagship of the China Squadron on 1 December 1881 under the command of Rear Admiral Meyer . She was relieved by her sister La Galissonnière in April 1884 . She became flagship of the Levant Squadron after she arrived in France , but was in bad shape and soon placed in reserve at Cherbourg . Victorieuse became the flagship of Rear Admiral Barrera , second @-@ in @-@ command of the Northern Squadron on 10 February 1892 . The ship was on summer maneuvers off the Iberian coast in July 1893 . Two years later she became the flagship of Rear Admiral Ménard . She was initially condemned in May 1897 , but this was reversed so she could convoy torpedo boats to Bizerte . That plan was later cancelled and Victorieuse was paid off in 1899 , becoming guardship of the outer harbor at Brest until finally condemned the following year . 
 = St. Charles Bay = 
 St. Charles Bay is an inlet of Aransas Bay in Aransas County , Texas . It is flanked by Lamar peninsula on the west and Blackjack peninsula on the east . The bay hosts a valued ecosystem for the endangered whooping crane , and is a prime location for birding and fishing . Goose Island State Park and the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge are located along the bay 's shores , attracting nature enthusiasts year @-@ round . 
 The nomadic Karankawa Indians used the bay for hunting before the arrival of Europeans , but no major human settlements were ever established . The unincorporated community of Lamar on Live Oak Peninsula is the only substantial community that borders the bay . The cities of Rockport and Fulton on the main Aransas Bay are located only a few miles away , and the bay is usually considered a part of the collective Rockport @-@ Fulton area . The bay is roughly 150 miles southeast of San Antonio and about 40 miles northeast of Corpus Christi . 
 = = History = = 
 St. Charles Bay was the domain of the Karankawa Indians before the arrival of European settlers . The Spanish referred to the bay as Laguna del <unk> , which translated to the Lagoon of the Brigantine . The name is the likely the source of <unk> Lake , found at the bay 's head . The name derived from a Spanish vessel that was being used to transfer money to Texas to bribe Mexican soldiers at Goliad and San Antonio in 1818 . It was caught in an Aransas Bay storm that swept the ship into the waters of St. Charles Bay , landing in a creek at its base . Supposedly , the ship was abandoned in the surrounding prairie ( Fagan ranch near Tivoli , Texas ) , and its parts used by area settlers ( later determined to be the Fagan family ) to build homes . 
 The first major settlement on St. Charles Bay was Lamar , founded in 1839 by James W. Byrne . The town was named for Mirabeau B. Lamar , who was elected as President of Texas the previous year . The settlers aimed to compete with Aransas City on the adjacent Live Oak Peninsula . After a customhouse was moved from Aransas City , at the behest of President Lamar , Aransas City declined and Lamar grew into a prosperous port and salt producer . It was bombarded and destroyed by the Union during the American Civil War , leaving only the ruins of a Catholic chapel and a few homes . Shortly thereafter , the town was rebuilt . By 1915 , a post office , school , hotel , ranches and twenty @-@ five homes had been constructed at the site . By 1970 , 150 people lived in the town and by 2000 , it had 1 @,@ 600 residents . It remains an unincorporated community of Aransas County . 
 = = Features = = 
 St. Charles Bay is shaped laterally from south to north , and is located on the Texas Coastal Plain between the Lamar and Blackjack peninsulas . Its mouth opens into Aransas Bay between Goose Island and Blackjack Point , but is nearly cut off by islands and reefs that stretch across it . North of Blackjack Point to Bird Point , is an extension called the East Pocket , which forms an <unk> at the tip of Blackjack peninsula . Beyond the East Pocket are mudflats , included in the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge . North of Bird Point , the shore continues northward , passing the La Punta Windmill . Further north , past a large tidal swamp , Egg Point juts into the bay , above which an inlet forms the Bill Mott Bayou . Past several more swamps , Little Devil Bayou and Big Devil Bayou are formed , separated by Indian Head Point . Past the Mille Dietrich Point , the <unk> Windmill and Bayou are found , as the bay narrows in width . The northernmost point is located slightly to the east and meets at the mouth of the small Twin Creek . A narrow strip of marshland and a dam , separates St. Charles Bay from the similarly shaped <unk> Lake , which continues to the northeast , and is fed by <unk> Creek . Past Twin Creek , the shore curves to the southwest to a small opening , that forms the mouth of Salt Creek . Further south , the shore is largely marsh , until reaching the rather large mouth of <unk> Creek . From there , the shore forms a straight line southeast to the Big Sharp Point , from which a gas well can be seen in the bay . South of Big Sharp Point is Little Sharp Point , which forms on the edge of a swamp . From this point , the shore curves back to the southwest to a swamp , where a lagoon is located further inland . South of this , is the large oak tree known as the " Big Tree " , in Goose Island State Park . Further south are several piers which jut into the bay , below which Halls Point is formed . Directly south of Halls Point is Goose Island , back at to the confluence with Aransas Bay . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 Saint Charles Bay serves as a habitat for approximately 300 species of birds . Birders venture to the site between November and March , when the creatures winter near the bay . The endangered whooping crane , the largest bird in North America , is the most highly prized sight as only a few hundred remain , including three families on St. Charles Bay . The bird was near extinction in the early 20th century , as only two flocks between Canada and Texas remained . The population increased following the organization of the Aransas Migratory Waterfowl Refuge in 1937 , after the Federal government purchased the land of the St. Charles ranch from San Antonio oilman Leroy G. Denman , using funds from commemorative stamps . The Refuge later became known as the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge . <unk> cranes are also protected by Goose Island State Park , which was established by the State of Texas in 1931 . Other birds that migrate to the bay include the sandhill crane , American white pelican , brown pelican , roseate spoonbill , great blue heron and Canada goose . The blue crab and other shellfish , help sustain the bird population . Thirty seven species of mammals are found on Blackjack peninsula , including white @-@ tailed deer , nine @-@ banded armadillos and collared peccaries . The spotted seatrout and redfish are the common finfish that reside in the bay . While trout are generally found in the bay 's deeper waters , redfish live in shallow waters ; their tail fins can be spotted above the surface during the peak summer and fall months . The bay also supports a healthy population of American alligators , which reside in shallow waters . Signs alert visitors to be careful . 
 = = Industry = = 
 During the 19th century salt evaporation ponds were dug in tidal marshes around the bay , producing salt for condiments and to be used as a preservative for meats . Today , due to the bay 's location , east of Goose Island State Park and west of the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge , very little industry can be found . No industrial plants are located on the bay 's shore , but a few gas and oil wells are present . The Continental Oil Company is allowed to obtain oil and gas from the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge as part of the purchase of St. Charles Ranch . Goose Island offers a few piers and campgrounds facing the bay , which encourage tourism . The privately owned St. Charles Bay Hunting Club is also found in this area , and allows hunting , boating and fishing on the bay , while striving to protect the ecosystem . The lack of coastal winds also attracts tourists interested in kayaking and <unk> , however , boating is hindered by the general shallowness of the bay and the abundance of oyster reefs . Shellfish production is approved throughout the bay , but shrimping is prohibited due to the classification of St. Charles Bay as a nursery bay . 
 = 2003 Food City 500 = 
 The 2003 Food City 500 was the sixth stock car race of the 2003 NASCAR Winston Cup Series . It was held on March 23 , 2003 , before a crowd of 160 @,@ 000 , in Bristol , Tennessee , at Bristol Motor Speedway , one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races . The 500 @-@ lap race was won by Kurt Busch of the Roush Racing team after starting from ninth position . Matt Kenseth finished in second and Bobby Labonte came in third . 
 Although Ryan Newman won the pole position , he was immediately passed by Jeff Gordon at the start of the race . Twenty @-@ eight laps later Rusty Wallace became the leader of the race . Gordon reclaimed the lead on lap 34 and led the most laps with 174 . Jimmy Spencer passed Gordon for the lead on lap 161 , and kept the position for a total of 139 laps . After the final pit stops , Busch became the leader of the race and maintained the position to lead a total of 116 laps , and to win his first race of the season . There were seventeen cautions and eleven lead changes among seven different drivers during the course of the race . 
 The race was Busch 's first win in the 2003 season , as well as fifth of his career . The result advanced Busch to second in the Drivers ' Championship , one hundred and thirty @-@ eight points behind Kenseth , and nine ahead of Tony Stewart . Ford maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , eight ahead of Chevrolet , and eighteen ahead of Pontiac , who bumped Dodge to fourth place , with thirty races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Food City 500 was the sixth scheduled stock car race of the 2003 NASCAR Winston Cup Series , out of 36 . It was held on March 23 , 2003 in Bristol , Tennessee , at Bristol Motor Speedway , one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Richmond International Raceway , Dover International Speedway , Martinsville Speedway , and Phoenix International Raceway . Its standard track at Bristol Motor Speedway is a four @-@ turn short track oval that is 0 @.@ 533 miles ( 0 @.@ 858 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked from twenty @-@ four to thirty degrees , while both the front stretch ( the location of the finish line ) and the back stretch are banked from six to ten degrees . 
 Before the race , Matt Kenseth led the Drivers ' Championship with 760 points , with Tony Stewart in second place with 703 points . Michael Waltrip and Dale Earnhardt Jr. were third and fourth with 698 and 634 points respectively , with Kurt Busch and Ricky Craven were tied for fifth place with 617 points . Dave Blaney , Jimmie Johnson , Joe Nemechek and Johnny Benson Jr. rounded out the top ten . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Ford was leading with 36 points , five points ahead of their rivals Chevrolet . Pontiac , with 24 points , was five points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third place . Busch was the race 's defending champion . 
 Ahead of the event , Speedway Motorsports unveiled an extended backstretch grandstand which added 43 @,@ 826 to the track 's capacity . Spectators at the track also planned a " patriotic rally " which showed support to troops serving in the Iraq War . This caused Speedway Motorsports to employ extra security during the event . NASCAR subsequently announced that a contingency plan was being prepared that included arrangements for travel and extra security for the next three races in the season . The United States Government gave its consent to NASCAR and the other professional sporting associations to resume with their normal schedules . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — one on Friday and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 120 minutes , while the second and final sessions ran for 45 minutes . Jeff Gordon was fastest in the first practice session with a time of 15 @.@ 149 seconds , ahead of Sterling Marlin in second and Ryan Newman in third . Ken Schrader ( with a lap of 15 @.@ 178 ) was fourth fastest , and Mike Skinner placed fifth . Busch , Kenny Wallace , Earnhardt , Jimmy Spencer and Nemechek rounded out the session 's top @-@ ten drivers . During the session , Jeff Green and Jamie McMurray both made contact with the wall , and both were required to switch to back @-@ up cars for qualifying . Robby Gordon also hit the wall , after spinning sideways . 
 Although forty @-@ five drivers were entered in the qualifier ; according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure , only forty @-@ three could race . Ryan Newman clinched his second pole position of the season , with a time of 14 @.@ 908 . The time made a new track record , and became the first lap set under 15 seconds in the Winston Cup Series . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Jeff Gordon . Schrader qualified third , Rusty Wallace took fourth , and Bill Elliott started fifth . Skinner , Spencer , Earnhardt , Busch and Stewart completed the top ten positions . The two drivers who failed to qualify for the race were Larry Foyt and Hermie Sadler . After the qualifier Newman said , " That 's the most amazed I 've ever been after a qualifying run to go that fast and not <unk> it . We picked up over a quarter of a second from practice , and that 's just unheard of at Bristol . " 
 On Saturday morning , Kenseth was fastest in the second practice session with a lap of 15 @.@ 683 seconds , ahead of Newman in second and Ward Burton in third . Busch was fourth quickest , and Rusty Wallace took fifth . Jeff Burton managed sixth . Kyle Petty , Mark Martin , Jack Sprague and Nemechek followed in the top ten . During the final practice session , Busch was fastest with a time of 15 @.@ 701 . Stewart and Jeff Gordon followed in second and third with times of 15 @.@ 722 and 15 @.@ 723 . Dave Blaney was fourth fastest , ahead of Earnhardt and Craven . Kenseth was seventh fastest , Martin eighth , Jerry Nadeau ninth , and Ward Burton tenth . The session was temporarily suspended when Marlin spun on the track , but managed to not to collide with the barriers . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the sixth of a total of thirty @-@ six in the 2003 season , and the 2,000th in the Winston Cup Series , began at 1 : 00pm EST and was televised live in the United States on Fox . At the start of the race , weather conditions were sunny . Reverend Mike <unk> , of the Vansant Church of Christ in Vansant , Virginia , began pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation . Country music singer Rebecca Lynn Howard performed the national anthem , and representatives of the United States Armed Forces commanded the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , McMurray had to move to the rear of the grid because of him changing his engine . 
 Jeff Gordon accelerated faster than Newman off the line , getting ahead of him by the first turn . Rusty Wallace passed Newman for the second position one lap later . On lap three , the first caution was given when Robby Gordon made contact with Petty , forcing him to spin sideways . Kenny Wallace also made contact with Ricky Rudd , but escaped with minor damage . None of the drivers made pit stops during the caution . Jeff Gordon led the field back up to speed at the restart . Jeremy Mayfield made contact with the wall on lap nine , and suffered a flat front right tire . Five laps later , a collision involving Dave Blaney , Michael Waltrip and Dale Jarrett prompted the second caution . Waltrip 's car suffered heavy damage to the rear end of his car . 
 Almost immediately after the lap 20 restart , a collision between Casey Mears and John Andretti which collected Todd Bodine caused the third caution . Andretti 's car sustained major damage to the front end . The race restarted on lap 29 , with Rusty Wallace claiming the lead . One lap later , Busch and Stewart passed Schrader for seventh and eighth respectively . Earnhardt moved into third after passing Skinner on lap 33 . One lap later , Jeff Gordon reclaimed the first position . On the 42nd lap , Earnhardt passed Rusty Wallace for second . Twelve laps later , Tony Raines stopped on track due to an engine failure , and the fourth caution was given as a result . All of the leaders elected to make pit stops during the caution . 
 Jeff Gordon maintained his lead at the restart , followed by Terry Labonte and Green . Stewart made contact with Newman , and collected Craven which prompted the fifth caution on lap 68 . Behind the trio , Steve Park hit the rear of Johnson , causing the latter to spin sideways . Most drivers stayed on track during the caution , allowing Jeff Gordon to remain the leader on the restart . Skinner fell to eighth after being passed by Busch and Earnhardt on the 75th lap . Five laps later , Earnhardt passed Busch to claim sixth . On lap 85 , Skinner fell from eighth to twelfth position . Kenseth , who started the race in thirty @-@ seventh , had moved up thirty @-@ four positions to third by lap 91 . By the 111th lap , Jeff Gordon had maintained a half second lead over Terry Labonte . Thirteen laps later , Spencer and Stewart passed Kenseth for fourth and fifth respectively . 
 The pace car came out for the sixth caution on lap 136 , after Skinner collided with the wall and his car caught fire . During the caution , all of the leaders elected to make pit stops . Jeff Gordon led on the restart , followed by Nemechek and Spencer . On the 150th lap , the seventh caution came out , after Sprague spun 180 degrees when he attempted to pass Benson and the two made contact . Jeff Gordon led on the restart , although he was passed by Skinner on lap 161 . After starting the race in twenty @-@ eighth , Kevin Harvick moved to sixth position by lap 169 . Eleven laps later , Sprague spun sideways , prompting the eighth caution . During the caution , some of the leaders chose to make pit stops . Jeff Gordon led on the restart . 
 On the 198th lap , Jeff Burton made contact with Earnhardt , collecting Johnson , with all three cars escaping with minor damage . The ninth caution was prompted on the next lap , after Martin was sent spinning sideways from contact with Bill Elliott . Mears spun sideways before the caution was given . During the caution , some of the leaders elected to make pit stops . Harvick was the leader at the restart , followed by Spencer and Terry Labonte . Robby Gordon collided with the wall on lap 210 , damaging his car and fell to twelfth position . Four laps later , Sadler passed Marlin for eighth . Spencer passed Harvick to reclaim the lead on the 217th lap . Nadeau spun sideways , prompting the tenth caution one lap later . Spencer maintained his lead at the lap 224 restart . On lap 226 , Rudd and Bobby Labonte spun sideways , causing the eleventh caution . 
 The race restarted on lap 241 . Two laps later , a multi @-@ car collision occurred at turn one when Brett Bodine made contact with Terry Labonte , collecting Kenny Wallace , Robby Gordon , Petty and Schrader , prompting the twelfth caution . Spencer remained the leader at the restart . On lap 256 , McMurray spun sideways after contact with Robby Gordon and Ward Burton , causing the thirteenth caution . Stewart also made contact with Rudd , while Bobby Labonte spun sideways and managed to keep off the barriers . The race restarted on lap 263 . On lap 265 , Earnhardt lost two positions after being passed by Johnson , Jeff Gordon and Kenseth . Eighteen laps later , Kenseth passed Jeff Gordon for the fifth position . By the 300th lap , Kenseth passed Johnson for third . On lap 315 , Busch moved into the fifth position after passing Jeff Gordon . 
 Green flag pit stops began on lap 327 when Harvick made a pit stop . Kenseth passed Spencer to claim the first position on the 341st lap . Spencer lost another position to Busch four laps later . On lap 348 , Bobby Labonte moved into fifth position after passing Johnson . Eleven laps later , Busch passed Kenseth to claim the lead . On the 367th lap , Earnhardt began to run out of fuel and made a pit stop one lap later . Bobby Labonte claimed the first position off Busch eleven laps later . On lap 390 , the fourteenth caution was prompted , after Jarrett collided with the wall . Schrader spun before the caution came out and damaged the front end of his car . The race restarted on lap 404 , with Busch reclaiming the first position . On lap 407 , the fifteenth caution was given , after Petty spun sideways . Busch remained the leader at the restart , ahead of Bobby Labonte and Rudd . Kenseth passed Biffle for fifth on lap 420 . 
 Five laps later , the sixteenth caution was prompted , when Ward Burton made contact with Robby Gordon coming off turn four and collected Petty who spun into the barriers at turn one . Busch led the field back up to speed on the lap 439 restart . On the <unk> lap , Kenseth passed Rudd to claim third position . Nine laps later , Biffle passed Rudd for fourth position . Martin was spun in front of the race leaders on lap 470 , but managed to continue . Three laps later , the pace car came out for the seventeenth and final caution , which was caused by Nemechek making contact with Stewart , ( who just before made contact with Andretti ) because of reduced visibility as Martin spun on track . Busch remained the leader at the lap 482 restart . Two laps later , Bobby Labonte was passed by Kenseth for second . On the <unk> lap , Rudd reclaimed fourth position off Biffle . Busch crossed the finish line on lap 500 to win his first race of the 2003 season . Kenseth finished second , ahead of Bobby Labonte in third , Rudd in fourth , and Biffle in fifth . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Busch appeared in victory lane to celebrate his first win of the season in front of 160 @,@ 000 people who attended the race . Busch also earned $ 162 @,@ 790 in race winnings . Afterward , his crew chief Jimmy <unk> praised his performance , " Kurt Busch is awesome , so awesome . He gets up on the wheel and drives the hell out of that race car , and he made a call today that won him the race . " Kenseth was happy with his second @-@ place finish , commenting , " I feel lucky . Started provisional here at Bristol and coming home second . So , it was a great race . Me and Bobby had to go there a little at the end , and I got my fender knocked in there a little . I was hoping I could make a run at Kurt before that happened . But , it was a good race . It 's always physical out there , and we didn 't have a scratch on the car there until right at the end , so it was pretty good . " 
 Bobby Labonte was happy with finishing third , commenting , " I got spun out twice and finished third . " It 's a great day . How much greater could you want it to get ? " Spencer , who led 139 laps of the race , was candid about his performance , " It should have been a first , but the Sirius Dodge boys are doing a good job . I wouldn 't trade ' em . We made some mistakes , but we 'll get better . " Mears , who was involved in the lap 20 collision with Andretti and Todd Bodine , commented , " I don 't know what happened . I was just going through the gears taking my time and it looked like somebody up front may have missed a shift or somebody may have got into somebody else . " Terry Labonte , who was part of the race 's biggest crash when Bodine made contact with him on lap 243 , said that , " Any time you 're in a race with a Bodine , you 're liable to get in a wreck , and I did . " 
 During the race , Jerry Nadeau and Ryan Newman were involved in a battle for position that resulted in the two colliding on the 219th lap . Once Nadeau returned to pit road , he was talking out of anger to Newman 's team personnel about the incident . Once the argument ended , Nadeau commented , " It 's a shame . It was a great car for us , the U.S. Army Pontiac . Damn lapped @-@ car can 't use his head . I don 't know what Ryan ( Newman ) was thinking . He just kept coming down , kept coming down . " Newman argued , " It looked to me like the 11 ( Bodine ) got into the back of the 01 ( Nadeau ) on that one deal . " Kyle Petty , who was involved in the crash on lap 425 , was taken to the circuit 's infield medical center , and later taken for a precautionary visit at the Bristol Regional Medical Center to undergo medical evaluations . Petty 's crash was measured at <unk> , and he suffered injuries to his ribs and abdomen . Petty was replaced by former CART driver Christian Fittipaldi for the next round , the Samsung / Radio Shack 500 at the Texas Motor Speedway . 
 The race result left Kenseth leading the Drivers ' Championship with 935 points . Busch , who finished first , moved to second on 797 , nine points ahead of Stewart and eleven ahead of Waltrip . Earnhardt Jr. fell to fifth with 749 points . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Ford maintained the lead with 45 points . Chevrolet remained second on 37 points . Pontiac followed with 27 points , four points ahead of Dodge in fourth . Having increased his points lead , Kenseth said that he was happy and he would not change his driving style because of this change . He also added that his team would " have another six to eight months " before they would start to worry about their rivals making a challenge for the championship . The race took three hours , twenty @-@ five minutes and twenty @-@ two seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was <unk> of a second . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. = 
 Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , or simply Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , is an American television series created for ABC by Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon , and Maurissa Tancharoen , based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. ( Strategic Homeland Intervention , Enforcement , and Logistics Division ) , a fictional peacekeeping and spy agency in a world of superheroes . It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise . The series is produced by ABC Studios , Marvel Television , and Mutant Enemy Productions , with Jed Whedon , Tancharoen , and Jeffrey Bell serving as showrunners . 
 The series revolves around the character of Phil Coulson , with Clark Gregg reprising his role from the film series , and his team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents , who must deal with various unusual cases and enemies , including Hydra and the Inhumans . Joss Whedon began developing a S.H.I.E.L.D. pilot following the success of his film Marvel 's The Avengers , and Gregg was confirmed to reprise his role in October 2012 . The series was officially picked up by ABC in May 2013 , and also stars Ming @-@ Na Wen , Brett Dalton , Chloe Bennet , Iain De Caestecker , and Elizabeth Henstridge , with Nick Blood , Adrianne Palicki , Henry Simmons , and Luke Mitchell joining in later seasons . Prosthetic makeup is created with Glenn Hetrick 's Optic Nerve Studios , while Legacy Effects contributes other practical effects . The visual effects for the series are created by FuseFX , and have been nominated for multiple awards . Several episodes directly crossover with films or other television series set in the MCU , while other characters from MCU films and Marvel One @-@ Shots also appear throughout the series . 
 The first season originally aired from September 24 , 2013 , to May 13 , 2014 , while the second season aired from September 23 , 2014 , to May 12 , 2015 . A third season premiered on September 29 , 2015 , concluding on May 17 , 2016 . In March 2016 , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was renewed for a fourth season , scheduled to premiere on September 20 , 2016 . After starting the first season with high ratings but mixed reviews , the ratings began to drop while reviews improved . This led to much lower but more consistent ratings , as well as more consistently positive reviews in the subsequent seasons . Several characters created for the series have since been introduced to the comic universe and other media , while a spin @-@ off series , centered on Blood and Palicki 's characters Lance Hunter and Bobbi Morse and titled Marvel 's Most Wanted , received a pilot order in August 2015 ; it was ultimately passed on in May 2016 . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The first season sees S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Phil Coulson putting together a small team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents to handle strange new cases . They investigate Project Centipede and its leader , " The Clairvoyant " , eventually uncovering that the organization is backed by Hydra , which has infiltrated S.H.I.E.L.D. In the second season , following the destruction of S.H.I.E.L.D. , now @-@ Director Coulson and his team look to restore trust from the government and public while dealing with Hydra , a faction of anti @-@ superhuman S.H.I.E.L.D. agents , and the newly revealed Inhumans ( who possess special abilities ) . During the third season , Coulson begins a secret mission to assemble the Secret Warriors , a team of Inhumans , as Hydra restores its ancient Inhuman leader Hive to power . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson : 
 A S.H.I.E.L.D. agent who oversees many of the division 's field operations . In April 2013 , Gregg agreed to join the series after hearing Whedon 's explanation for Coulson 's resurrection , following the character 's death in The Avengers , which he called " fascinating " and " true to the world of the comics and mythology " . On whether the resurrected Coulson would be the same as before he died , Gregg said that the character had to have changed in some way , but he may not understand how much he has changed . Gregg said that he approached Coulson 's promotion to Director of S.H.I.E.L.D. as being his dream job , which at the same time forced the character to adopt a more sensible and level @-@ headed attitude , such as that of Nick Fury . 
 Ming @-@ Na Wen as Melinda May : 
 A S.H.I.E.L.D. ace pilot and weapons expert , nicknamed " the Cavalry " . Joss Whedon had the character , who was originally listed with the name Agent Althea Rice on casting sheets , " rolling around in his head " for a long time . In preparation for the role , Wen was given some background stories about the character but was not told how she gained her reputation or came to be the character that she is . Wen found it challenging to play a character who is respected by those around her , even though the audience doesn 't know why , and stated that she eventually learned to use personal experiences where she had been " scarred or ... greatly disappointed " to try and relate to the character . Talking about May 's reasons for staying with S.H.I.E.L.D. , Wen explained that it is more her loyalty and platonic love for Coulson than any feelings about S.H.I.E.L.D. that make her stay . 
 Brett Dalton as Grant Ward and Hive : 
 Ward is a Hydra agent who poses as a S.H.I.E.L.D. black ops specialist . From the conception of the series it was decided that he would be a traitor , with Jed Whedon explaining that they wanted to have " infiltration based on betrayal " on a small scale to represent the same thing happening on a massive scale , and to make the Hydra reveal more personal for the characters . Following the death of his Hydra superior , John Garrett , Dalton explained that he felt that Ward was always loyal to Garrett rather than Hydra , and so without Garrett would become more of a wildcard , eventually accepting his position as an antagonist to S.H.I.E.L.D. He is killed by Coulson in season three , and his body is possessed by the ancient Inhuman Hive . Austin Lyon portrays a young Ward . 
 Chloe Bennet as Daisy " Skye " Johnson / Quake : 
 An Inhuman hacktivist and S.H.I.E.L.D. recruit who eventually becomes an agent with the ability to sense vibrations and create earthquakes . When the character of Skye was introduced to the series , it was always intended that she would be the MCU version of Johnson , as Tancharoen explained , " there are always the series of clearances " , but the executive producers always wanted Skye to become someone else , and Daisy Johnson was the main character that they wanted . Bennet felt that the character was someone who would wear her heart on her sleeve , but she also has some control over her emotions . Talking about the changes to the character after it was revealed that she was Daisy Johnson and an Inhuman , Tancharoen noted that the discovery would have consequences for the character 's relationships , especially with Coulson . During the third season , the character no longer goes by " Skye " , and by the end is known as " Quake " to the public . 
 Iain De Caestecker as Leo Fitz : 
 An agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. who specializes in engineering , especially weapons technology . De Caestecker , in describing the character , said that " He ’ s quite passionate about what he does .... [ but ] he doesn ’ t really understand emotions as much " . Fitz has a lot of interaction with Simmons in the series , with De Caestecker explaining that " they ’ ve got this kind of weird chemistry together , and they just kind of fit each other in a very weird way . " Following injuries the character receives at the end of the first season , the series began to deal with brain trauma , as De Caestecker explained that he and the writers did a lot of research to not trivialize it and to always be respectful towards it . 
 Elizabeth Henstridge as Jemma Simmons : 
 A S.H.I.E.L.D. biochemist who specializes in life sciences ( both human and alien ) . Henstridge described her character as " intelligent and focused and curious ... she ’ s got a wonderful relationship with Fitz . They kind of bounce off each other . " Talking about Fitz and Simmons being separated over the course of the series , Henstridge noted that it " brings a whole new dynamic just to them as characters in discovering what it 's like to have to be independent " since they have been basically inseparable since meeting . On the harsher side of Simmons seen later in the second season , after the reveal of the Inhumans and the subsequent death of Agent Triplett ( B.J. Britt ) , Henstridge said that Simmons has " always been very mathematical in a way .... She 's had a traumatic event and she 's gone straight back to what she knows of trying to make everything black and white . " 
 Nick Blood as Lance Hunter : 
 A mercenary before agreeing to join S.H.I.E.L.D. On his character joining the cast in the second season , Blood explained " Lance doesn ’ t really care that much of what people think of him .... He doesn ’ t bow down to the etiquette of the S.H.I.E.L.D. hierarchy . " He later elaborated that the character feels very independent , so would probably not want to admit no longer feeling like an outsider . Also , " he doesn 't have too much respect for authority and titles ... if Coulson does something he respects , that 's all good . If he doesn 't , he 's going to say something . " On Hunter 's on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship with Bobbi Morse , Blood said , " there is a lot of truth in it of those relationships you have where it 's kind of , ' can 't live with each other , can 't kill each other ' " . 
 Adrianne Palicki as Bobbi Morse : 
 Hunter 's ex @-@ wife and an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. who spent time undercover within Hydra . Palicki , a comic fan , was approached by the showrunners specifically for the part during season two , and at first hesitated to take the role given that she likely could not play another MCU character if she did . Palicki already had martial arts and gun training , but had to learn to use the character 's signature arnis sticks , and noted similarities between Morse 's fighting style and that of Scarlett Johansson 's Black Widow from the MCU films . Bell , in response to a question on whether Morse had more secrets than those revealed during the second season , stated that " she and Hunter have been keeping secrets from one another , evidently for years " and something about her is that she seems to be more loyal to an idea than anything else , so what may seem in the short term as a betrayal by her is usually for what she sees as the greater good . 
 Henry Simmons as Alphonso " Mack " MacKenzie : 
 A S.H.I.E.L.D. mechanic with a distrust of the alien and superhuman . On the different dynamic that a mechanic brings to the S.H.I.E.L.D. team , Simmons felt that his character would not have to deal with the same stress the other agents do by having to go into dangerous situations constantly . He felt that Mack is more worried about getting his job done away from the field , because he wants to contribute . About Mack 's stance on violence , Simmons confirmed that Mack does not like violence , but will do " what he has to do . " 
 Luke Mitchell as Lincoln Campbell : 
 An Inhuman with the ability to manipulate electrical charges . Regarding the character 's introduction as a human @-@ looking Inhuman , Bell explained that the series already featured " a guy with no eyes " and " a woman who now is covered in thorns " but , like the X @-@ Men , there are also Inhumans who are " just attractive people with powers " , and so Campbell represents them in the series . On casting Mitchell , Bell said " Luke just really impressed us .... [ he ] had a nice quality , and we felt he might be a good person to sort of usher Skye into this other world . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After The Walt Disney Company purchased Marvel Entertainment in 2009 , they announced that a Marvel Television division was being formed . In the following months , various pilots based on comics from Marvel 's catalog went into development . In July 2012 , Marvel Television entered into discussions with ABC to make a new series set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , though at that point it was undecided what it would be . The series was described as " ' a kernel of an idea ' with a number of scenarios being explored , including a high @-@ concept cop show . " The next month , it was announced that Marvel 's The Avengers director Joss Whedon , creator of other popular television shows such as Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Firefly , would be involved in the series ' development . 
 In August 2012 , ABC ordered a pilot for a series called S.H.I.E.L.D. to be written and directed by Joss Whedon , with Jed Whedon and Maurissa Tancharoen also writing . Disney CEO Bob Iger greenlit the series after watching the Marvel One @-@ Shot short film Item 47 . In April 2013 , ABC announced that the series would be titled Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and it was officially picked up for a full season in May 2013 . The series was renewed for a second season in May 2014 , a third in May 2015 , and a fourth in March 2016 . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Jed Whedon , Tancharoen , and Jeffrey Bell act as the series ' showrunners , and supervise all creative decisions , with Joss Whedon having assisted them before he started work on Avengers : Age of Ultron . Bell explained that while one person is writing a script , two others can be breaking stories , so that a story can be broken every few weeks . If the executive producers sign off on a story , one of the writers then produces an outline , gets notes on it from the showrunners , writes a full script , gets notes on it from ABC and the production crew , and then goes to set to produce the episode . 
 In January 2013 , Joss Whedon deflected any direct influences from other series , such as the efforts of Fox Mulder and Dana Scully in The X @-@ Files , and explained that while the show would involve people with powers and the spectacle of science @-@ fiction storytelling , it would focus on " the peripheral people ... the people on the edges of the grand adventures . " On the balance between creating new material and drawing from existing mythology , Bell noted that telling stories that can entertain both Marvel fans and non @-@ Marvel fans is challenging , and that for the series they try to add nods to the MCU films or the comics in a way that works well on its own for all viewers , but could also mean more for a fan . On where the series can draw from the comics , Jed Whedon explained that there are areas of the comics that the series is not allowed to go to , and that ultimately they only use the comics for inspiration in generating their own story . Tancharoen elaborated that , " We ’ re always going to be inspired and influenced by the comics , but of course on the show , we ’ ll always be doing our spin to it . " 
 About comparisons between the scope of the series and that of the films , Bell said that ABC and Marvel had been very generous with the series ' budget , and that the production could not complain for a network series , but that it was nothing compared to the films or even series like Game of Thrones . He explained that the series does attempt to create " Marvel moments " as best it can , but pointed out that some of the more memorable moments from the films are smaller , character moments — something that works really well on television — so the series strives for those when it cannot afford more scope and scale . Jed Whedon elaborated that they look at a sequence and try to keep only what is required to tell the story , so " If a monster is landing on a car , instead of showing the whole monster leaping through the skyline , we want to be in the car with the character having that experience . " 
 Following Samuel L. Jackson 's cameo in an ' end tag ' at the end of " 0 – 8 – 4 " , Bell explained that the series would consistently be using these extra scenes at the end of episodes . " Sometimes it 'll be funny , sometimes it 'll be a mythology thing , ... or an extra little reveal about ... the episode , " Bell explained , and compared them to the post credits scenes of the MCU films . 
 In September 2015 , Bell looked back on the first two seasons and talked about the challenges of and changes in the series . He noted the negative reception from fans concerning the low number of recognizable characters like Coulson , but pointed out that fans seemed to have grown to like the series ' original characters as they had been developed over time . He explained that with the increasing amount of characters and complex relationships in the series , having different pairings and building new emotional relationships was important , and stated that " whether it ’ s a quiet moment or in action , we [ hope to ] deepen the audience ’ s love and concern , and hopes for these characters . " Bennet likened the end of the third season to " the end of the first book of S.H.I.E.L.D. [ The third season ] finale feels like the end of something bigger and the beginning of a whole new tone for the show . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In October 2012 , a casting sheet for five lead roles was sent out . At the New York Comic Con , Joss Whedon , Kevin Feige , and Clark Gregg announced that Gregg would be reprising his role as agent Phil Coulson from Iron Man , Iron Man 2 , Thor , The Avengers , and the Marvel One @-@ Shots in the pilot , and would " headline " the series . Actress Ming @-@ Na Wen was cast as Melinda May . The next month , Elizabeth Henstridge and Iain De Caestecker were cast as Jemma Simmons and Leo Fitz , respectively , while newcomer Brett Dalton was cast as Grant Ward . In December , Chloe Bennet was chosen out of more than 400 actresses to play Skye , the sixth and final regular for the first season ; the character is revealed in the second season to be Daisy Johnson , and no longer goes by " Skye " starting with the third . 
 At San Diego Comic @-@ Con 2014 , Nick Blood was announced as cast in the role of Lance Hunter for the second season , while the character of Bobbi Morse was revealed to be appearing . That August , Henry Simmons joined the cast as Alphonso " Mack " MacKenzie , in a recurring role , and Adrianne Palicki was cast as Morse in a guest role , to appear in the season two episode " A Hen in the Wolf House " , with the potential to return . The next month , the entire first season principal cast were confirmed to be regulars for the second season , along with Blood . Palicki joined them with the season two episode " Aftershocks " . In February 2015 , Luke Mitchell was cast as Lincoln Campbell , in a recurring role . 
 All season two principal cast members returned for the third season , with Simmons and Mitchell joining them , promoted from their recurring roles . In October 2015 , the ancient Inhuman Hive was introduced ; for the second part of season three , it possesses the corpse and retains the memories of Grant Ward , who is again portrayed by Brett Dalton . Blood and Palicki left the main cast following the season three episode " Parting Shot " , to star in the spin @-@ off show Marvel 's Most Wanted . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 = = = = Costumes = = = = 
 Betsy <unk> was the costume designer for the pilot , but left the series due to film commitments . Assistant costume designer Ann Foley took over for subsequent episodes , and worked closely with Tancharoen to create " very strong , different characters " whose " looks evolve along with the show . " Foley watched every MCU film , paying special attention to The Avengers , and was also inspired by such films as Skyfall and Mission Impossible : Ghost Protocol . Foley also brought on concept artists Phillip <unk> Jr. and Josh Shaw to assist with the design process . 
 After reading each script , Foley would do her own research , before discussing the look of the episode with the writers . She then studies the comics , general fashion , and history to get a look that is recognizable to fans , but fits into the more realistic world of the series . Costumes are either custom made or bought , and the actors are brought in for fittings before filming . This process was often challenging due to the series ’ eight @-@ day @-@ per @-@ episode schedule . Foley stated that all costumes take a similar amount of time to create , whether they are based on the comics or not . Marvel CCO Joe Quesada is involved in the approval process when costuming preexisting characters . 
 The costumes go through a natural evolution in the series . There is a shift at the end of the first season to a darker look , and all the characters have " definitely grown up " during the second season . In the third season there is another shift , " from the ragtag group of soldiers and scientists to [ a ] more precise militaristic outfit " . Despite this increasing darkness in the costumes , Foley intended to define each character as they are introduced and to have them always be recognizable and identifiable . On the variety of costumes created for each character , Foley pointed out that she prefers to have set pieces in the characters ' " closets " , as " it ’ s not a fashion show " . For example , " a guy like Ward isn ’ t going to have twenty jackets in his closet . He is going to have one that he uses all of the time . " 
 = = = = Practical effects = = = = 
 Prosthetic makeup for the series is designed in conjunction with Glenn Hetrick of Optic Nerve Studios . Hetrick began work on the series with the second season , to create Raina 's Inhuman look , and returned for the third season to design and create the more " unique " -looking Inhumans such as Lash . Practical effects and props for the series are created by Legacy Effects , who have also worked on the MCU films . Work on the series by Legacy includes Daisy Johnson 's gauntlets for the third season . 
 = = = = Title sequence = = = = 
 The third season introduces a new title sequence for the series , replacing the one that appeared in the first two seasons . The title sequence in " 4 @,@ 722 Hours " is drastically different from the design introduced for the third season , with the series ' title in the episode 's typeface silently fading onto the screen over the back drop of the planet Simmons is stranded on . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production for the pilot took place almost entirely in Los Angeles to accommodate Joss Whedon 's schedule , while the rest of the series is primarily filmed in Culver City , California . Additional filming has also taken place around the world , including in Paris , France , Stockholm , Sweden , and Old San Juan , Puerto Rico . The series is filmed on Arri Alexa cameras , with David Boyd serving as director of photography on the pilot , and Feliks Parnell , Jeff <unk> , and Allan Westbrook doing so throughout the rest of the series . Garry Brown is the second unit director for the series , with stunts coordinated by Tanner Gill . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 FuseFX serves as the lead visual effects vendor for Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , with additional work by <unk> , Cosa , <unk> <unk> , Lion VFX , and Synaptic . There are typically 2000 visual effects shots per season , with 10 to 12 days to work on the effects for one episode once background plates have been received from filming . Mark <unk> serves as visual effects supervisor for the series . David Altenau was the in @-@ house supervisor at FuseFX for " Pilot " through episode eight , with Kevin <unk> taking over for subsequent episodes . VFX producer Andrea D 'Amico joined the team at FuseFX to work on the series in December 2015 . Two separate production management and creative teams were established to work on the show , and producers , compositors and various artists were able to alternate episodes . This was important because most of the episodes had to be worked on concurrently , either two or three at a time . Typical effects for the series include the creation of character @-@ driving effects animation , photo @-@ realistic vehicles , CG set extensions , pyrotechnics , and atmospheric effects . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Bear McCreary confirmed that he would compose music for the series in July 2013 . Unlike on some of his previous scores , ABC and Marvel allowed McCreary to work with a full symphonic orchestra , typically featuring 50 or 70 players . Complex synthesizer programming was also used , to give the score " a modern edge " . McCreary composes on average 30 minutes of music per episode . Creating the main theme for the series , which McCreary also saw as Coulson 's theme , was a process which took a lot of collaboration with the executive producers , who wanted a specific sound — " something big , that ... belonged in the Marvel Cinematic Universe " but also " intimate because these aren 't superheroes , these are regular people . " McCreary had to work harder to make the theme heard , given that the show does not have a traditional title sequence . In September 2014 , McCreary announced that there were plans for an Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. soundtrack , which was released digitally a year later by Marvel Music on September 4 , 2015 , and on CD on October 9 . Featuring music from the first two seasons , the soundtrack was written and produced by McCreary and Steven <unk> , with the album produced by Joe Augustine with McCreary . 
 All music composed by Bear McCreary . Notes next to each track indicate which episode ( s ) it was featured in . 
 = = = Marvel Cinematic Universe tie @-@ ins = = = 
 In July 2013 , Jed Whedon said the series would work in tandem with the Marvel films , both past and upcoming , to weave in between the films , and to " try to make them more rewarding on both ends . " In March 2014 , Bell stated at the show 's PaleyFest panel that the producers and the writers are able to read the screenplays for upcoming MCU films to know where the universe is heading , which allowed them to form a general plan for the show through the end of a third season . Elaborating on where the series is allowed to go , Bell later pointed out that there are not many superheroes in the MCU films , so the series cannot introduce new superheroes and abilities every episode in that universe or " suddenly [ Avengers : Age of Ultron ] is a very different movie . " 
 Jed Whedon explained that each Marvel project is intended to standalone first before there is any interweaving , and noted that the series has to work with the film division and be aware of their plans so as not to interfere when introducing someone or something to the universe . Bell elaborated that this was preferable so that people who do not watch the films can still follow the series , and vice versa . He stated that " ABC and Marvel both want the series to be able to make sense on its own " , but that it was beneficial for the films to have the series fill in any " gaps " for them , due to having to be " big " and moving " quickly through a lot of huge pieces " , unlike television which has time to deal with more nuances . In January 2016 , Joss Whedon noted that this process " unfortunately just means the TV show gets , you know , leftovers . " He stated that , for example , the series ' creative team initially wanted to use Loki 's scepter from The Avengers but were unable due to Whedon 's plans for it in Age of Ultron . 
 The series ' first tie @-@ in episode with the Marvel Cinematic Universe is " The Well " , which takes place after the events of Thor : The Dark World . Another tie @-@ in takes place in the episodes " End of the Beginning " and " Turn , Turn , Turn " , which revolve around the events of Captain America : The Winter Soldier . This led to a retooling of the series . Flashback sequences in " Shadows " and " The Things We Bury " featuring Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter tie into the Agent Carter television series . The events of " The Frenemy of My Enemy " and " The Dirty Half Dozen " lead up to the opening sequence of Avengers : Age of Ultron , while " Scars " deals with the aftermath of that film . The third season follows similar themes to the film Captain America : Civil War , focusing on powered people and the different responses to them , leading up to the episode " Emancipation " , which takes place after the film and shows how its events affect the series ' powered characters . 
 The episode " T.A.H.I.T.I. " introduces the Kree alien race to the MCU , members of which play a significant role in Guardians of the Galaxy . This begins a storyline that recurs throughout the series , and introduces Inhumans to the MCU , with Jed Whedon saying that it was something " in the works " for a long time , as Marvel Studios has plans for an Inhumans film , and this would be " one of the first instances where we get to start planting the seeds on the show before the film . " Gregg noted in January 2016 that the " writer and director [ of the Inhumans film ] will have free rein to do what they want to do with the Inhumans , but hopefully there 'll be some way that our Inhumans connect to that . " The third season introduces the concept of the Secret Warriors , with new Inhuman characters inspired by the comic of the same name , while also <unk> the history of Hydra in the MCU , tying it into the Inhumans storyline . Additionally , the season introduces the concept of Life Model <unk> . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. airs in the United States on ABC , and has been licensed in 155 countries and territories . For its first season , the series aired on Tuesdays at 8 pm EST . Starting with the second season , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. aired on Tuesdays at 9 pm EST . For its fourth season , the series will move to the 10 pm time slot on Tuesdays . MyNetworkTV was awarded the syndication rights to the series , to begin broadcasting it in September 2016 . 
 CTV announced in June 2013 that they hold the broadcast rights for Canada . That August , it was confirmed that Channel 4 would air the series in the United Kingdom , which they did for the first two seasons before it moved to E4 for the third . In Australia , the series aired on Seven Network for the first two seasons , before moving to <unk> starting with the third . In New Zealand , the show airs on TV2 . 
 For the second and third seasons , the series broadcast each season in two blocks , with a season of Agent Carter airing in between . Bell explained that this decision was made following the challenge of producing 22 episodes for the first season to be aired over 36 – 40 weeks , which meant having repeats and " losing momentum " . Instead , Agent Carter took up much of that gap in a row , leaving the back half of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s season to run uninterrupted . This format allows the producers and writers to approach each season in two parts , each with distinct stories connected by carried @-@ over elements . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Social media accounts for the series were set up in January 2013 , months before ABC officially ordered it , " a rarity for a pilot " . By May 17 , 2013 , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was the top new show of the television season in terms of social media activity , with the series ' official Twitter account having over 46 @,@ 000 followers and its official Facebook page having close to half a million likes . Many cast and crew members " live tweet " each episode , with J. August Richards noting that this brings instant feedback from viewers , and allows the crew to " watch the audience take that journey " in real time . 
 For the final six episodes of the first season , Marvel began the " Marvel ’ s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. : The Art of Level Seven " initiative , in which a different image was released each Thursday before a new episode , depicting a first look at a key event from the upcoming episode . Bell stated that the initiative was a way to tie the series back to its comics roots , and was thought of at the beginning of the first season . The production team tried to pair specific artists to the teaser posters based on their previous work and how it connected to the themes and emotion of the intended episode . For the second season , the series returned as " The Art of Evolution " , with an image for each of the final twelve episodes of the season . 
 At San Diego Comic @-@ Con 2014 , Marvel Custom Solutions and Lexus released a limited single @-@ issue comic tie @-@ in titled Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. : The Chase , set between the Season 1 episodes " Seeds " and " <unk> " The comic was written by George Kitson , with art by Mirko <unk> , Neil Edwards , and Mirco <unk> . 
 A five @-@ part web series titled Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. : Double Agent , also sponsored by Lexus , was released from March 4 to May 6 , 2015 on ABC.com. The web series follows a newly hired Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. production assistant , who acts as a double agent for the " Mastermind " , portrayed by Stan Lee . Cast and crew members from the series , such as Gregg , also appear , with viewers having the ability to vote in an online poll after each episode to guess where the double agent would go in the next episode ; votes entered viewers in a drawing to win prizes from the set of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Double Agent was nominated for Outstanding Digital Series at the 27th Producers Guild Awards . Another Lexus @-@ sponsored five @-@ part web series , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. : Academy , released from March 9 to May 4 , 2016 . In Academy , three Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. fans compete to play an agent in that series . Members of the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. cast also appear . All three fans ultimately made cameo appearances in the third season finale . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The complete first season was first released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on September 9 , 2014 , with the complete second season released on September 18 , 2015 , as an Amazon.com exclusive . On Netflix , the first season became available for streaming on November 20 , 2014 , the second season on June 11 , 2015 , and the third season on June 16 , 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In the United States , the premiere episode of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. earned a 4 @.@ 7 / 14 rating in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic , with 12 @.@ 12 million total viewers , making it the biggest network drama debut in four years . Though the series debuted to strong ratings against its competition , NCIS , its ratings declined considerably over the following two months , though it remained Tuesday 's top show among men 18 – 49 , and overall was the No. 3 show among upscale young adults behind Modern Family and The Big Bang Theory . It also enjoyed DVR recordings that , according to TV Guide , were " through the roof " . 
 In March 2016 , Alisha Grauso of Forbes discussed the series and its ratings , describing the show as having " never quite been the ratings hit for ABC that the network had hoped it would be ... It ’ s hard enough to write a film script that fits within the continuity of the larger Marvel Cinematic Universe , even harder to do it with a full @-@ length TV season that must act as connective tissue to the larger world while still being its own thing . " Grauso opined that the series ' ratings may improve if it either focused on trying to be the best series it could be ( with less connections to the films , like the Marvel @-@ Netflix shows ) or on just being " support and tie @-@ in to the world of the Avengers " . " The end result for either scenario , " Grauso concluded , " Is that , hopefully , ratings move up and stay up . In the first case , fans might be lost by the disconnect from the MCU , but a stronger storyline and more consistent writing would bring them and new fans back . In the second scenario , fans would tune in every week for fear of missing out on a bit of story that ’ s important to the larger world . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 86 % approval rating with an average rating of 8 out of 10 based on 43 reviews for the first season . The website 's consensus reads , " Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is sure to please comic book fans , but the strong ensemble and brisk pacing help to make this better @-@ than @-@ average superhero show accessible to non @-@ fanboys as well . " Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 74 out of 100 based on 33 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " The second season received more positive critical reception than the first season , and scored a 94 % approval rating with an average score of 7 @.@ 2 out of 10 on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 17 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. relaxes into itself during its sophomore season , mitigating the show 's growing pains by focusing on characters while amping up narrative thrills . " The third season has a 100 % approval rating with an average score of 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 12 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Still evolving in its third season , Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. further hits its stride with a blend of thrills , humor , and heart . " 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The way that the series is affected by the events of Captain America : The Winter Soldier has been called " miraculous " , with Terri Schwartz at Zap2it writing " the fact that the movie so influenced the show is game @-@ changing in terms of how the mediums of film and television can be interwoven " , while Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times stated that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. " faces a future of perpetual re @-@ invention , and that puts it in the exhilarating first car of television 's roller @-@ coaster ride toward possible world domination . " The fact that the series also depicts the rebuilding of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the MCU has also been highlighted , with Merrill Barr , reviewing " Beginning of the End " for Forbes , saying " what Marvel ’ s daring to say with this season finale is ' everything we do matters , and you need to pay attention to all of it . ' " 
 The series ' introduction of the Inhumans was seen by Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club as making Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. an essential part of the MCU and Marvel Studios ' plans , with the connections between the series and the films previously having always been reactive on the series ' behalf , with " stuff " happening in the films , and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. dealing with the fallout of it . However , the series would now be " making things happen , and these events will clearly impact the future of the MCU " . Barr wrote that the series " does a most excellent job of standing on its own two feet in a way we ’ ve never seen it do before . Come the final frame [ of the second season finale ] , all anyone — Marvel fan or otherwise — will be asking is when season three begins . " 
 The third season 's paralleling of themes from Captain America : Civil War was called " topical and relevant " and " downright eerie " by The A.V. Club 's Alex McCown and Screen Crush 's Kevin Fitzpatrick . McCown compared the series ' approach to setting up " a world distrustful of superpowers " to the real life events surrounding <unk> Bundy and Donald Trump 's 2016 presidential campaign , and said that " S.H.I.E.L.D. is taking full advantage of its medium in order to tell the story the upcoming Captain America film can ’ t : A full and fraught exploration of the need to protect freedom and privacy , even for those with extraordinary abilities . " Fitzpatrick added that this " topical bent ... made for a great angle to build up that world mentality without feeling particularly subservient to the movies . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Atlantic named " 4 @,@ 722 Hours " one of the best television episodes of 2015 . 
 = = Potential spin @-@ off = = 
 By April 2015 , Marvel was developing a spin @-@ off series of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. The series , which was being developed by Bell and writer Paul Zbyszewski , would be based on storylines occurring at the end of the second season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and would receive its own pilot rather than a backdoor pilot . Though Palicki and Blood were reportedly in final discussions to headline the potential new series , ABC passed on the project by May 7 , 2015 , when they announced their series renewals and cancellations , and new series pickups . 
 In August 2015 , the spin @-@ off series received new life as a reworked series , titled Marvel 's Most Wanted , with a pilot order . Bell and Zbyszewski once again developed the series , while also serving as co @-@ writers of the pilot , executive producers , and showrunners , with Jeph Loeb also attached as executive producer . The series would still focus on Morse and Hunter , with Palicki and Blood both attached , and was described as " a new take focusing on the same duo and their continuing adventures . " 
 Bell and Zbyszewski worked together on the characters ' storyline for the third season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , preparing them to move over to the spin @-@ off , with Bell explaining that it would set up Most Wanted by defining exactly who the characters are , such as Hunter and his lack of loyalty to S.H.I.E.L.D. and to ideologies — " nothing specific about the show , it ’ s just who Hunter is . " In March 2016 , Bell stated that while Hunter and Morse are " on S.H.I.E.L.D. , we want to take advantage of who they are , and give the audience as much of their relationship with one another , and with other people , as possible . We are aware that there is a potential imminent end , and so they won ’ t be neglected . " 
 Hunter and Morse are written off the series in the episode " Parting Shot " , both leaving S.H.I.E.L.D. , as Palicki and Blood " physically had to go leave to shoot the pilot .... they had to stop being on S.H.I.E.L.D. and get ready for the pilot and then shoot the pilot and all of that , so it didn 't make sense for us to have all these episodes with them and then not have them in two or three episodes , and then go , ' Oh , we were just over here , ' and then come back and go away again . " On whether they could return to the series at some point , Bell said , " I can 't answer that , but I can say it would be kind of cheating to make Mack cry like that [ in the episode ] only to buy it back — not that we haven 't brought characters back from the dead . We want to earn stuff . " In May 2016 , the spin @-@ off series was passed on by ABC once again . 
 = = Other media = = 
 At the 2014 San Diego Comic Con International , Marvel Comics announced an ongoing series titled S.H.I.E.L.D. , to be set in the mainstream Marvel Universe and written by Mark Waid , beginning December 2014 . Featuring art by a rotating group of artists including Carlos Pacheco , Alan Davis , and Chris Sprouse , the series is led by Agent Phil Coulson , and sees the canonical introduction of the characters Melinda May , Jemma Simmons , and Leo Fitz — who originated from the television series — to the Marvel comics universe , who Waid noted would be given " the Marvel Universe spin . " Waid described the series as " done @-@ in @-@ one . Coulson and his team have a mission , and if we need someone for a mission , everyone in the Marvel Universe is available as a potential Agent . " Waid added that though the comic does not share events with the television series , it will maintain the characters ' relationships and personalities . Marc Guggenheim relaunched the comic as Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. for Marvel Comics ' All @-@ New , All @-@ Different Marvel line , and introduced the television series ' character Grant Ward to the Marvel comic universe in May 2016 . 
 In September 2015 , it was announced that Phil Coulson , Daisy Johnson / Quake , Deathlok , Melinda May , Bobbi Morse , Lincoln Campbell , Sif , Raina and Gordon would appear in the Marvel Future Fight mobile role @-@ playing video game . Their inclusion in the game was done to promote the start of the third season , as well as to allow Marvel to " extend storylines and build on backstories to engage fans in a brand @-@ new experience , " according to Marvel Games creative director Bill <unk> . In March 2016 , De Caestecker and Henstridge reprised their roles as Fitz and Simmons , respectively , in the episode " Lizards " , of the animated series Ultimate Spider @-@ Man vs the Sinister 6 . In the episode , Fitz and Simmons run a course that the series ' main characters take . Also in the month , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. downloadable content was revealed for Lego Marvel 's Avengers . The content consisted of a mission based " on the events leading up to the season two finale " , which involved facing Jiaying and Daisy in Afterlife while rescuing agents , as well as going up against Gordon and Cal Johnson who have occupied the S.H.I.E.L.D. Helicarrier . The content includes the playable characters Daisy Johnson , Leo Fitz , Agent Koenig , Melinda May , Bobbi Morse , Jemma Simmons , Cal Johnson / Mr. Hyde , Deathlok , Gordon , Grant Ward , Jiaying , Lincoln , and Raina , as well as the airplane ' The Bus ' . Ming @-@ Na Wen reprised her role as Melinda May to provide new dialogue for the content . 
 = Some Girls ( Rachel Stevens song ) = 
 " Some Girls " is a synthpop song written by Richard X and Hannah Robinson for British singer Rachel Stevens . It was included in the 2004 re @-@ release of Stevens ' debut album , Funky Dory , and her second studio album , Come and Get It . The song 's music features a schaffel beat influenced by glam rock , and its lyrics describe a pop singer who performs sexual favours in her efforts to achieve stardom . 
 The song was released as a charity record for Sport Relief on 12 July 2004 ( see 2004 in music ) . It received positive reviews from music critics . The single was commercially successful , reaching number two on the UK Singles Chart . Paul Weiland directed the accompanying music video , in which Stevens leads a parade of women out of the sewers and down the streets of London . American dance musician Henri released a cover version of " Some Girls " as a single in 2006 . 
 The song was recognised as the Best Pop Record of 2004 through the Popjustice £ 20 Music Prize . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 " Some Girls " was written by producer Richard X and songwriter Hannah Robinson . They spent several days working on the song , with girl group Girls Aloud in mind as potential performers . Warp Records and Simon Fuller of 19 Entertainment contacted Richard X by email to ask that he give the song to Geri Halliwell or Stevens , respectively , to record . He agreed to have Stevens record the song after Richard Curtis asked about using the song for Sport Relief 2004 . Richard X later stated that he was surprised Sport Relief chose such a sexually suggestive song . When Halliwell found out that the writers were having Stevens record the song , she locked herself in her car in an attempt to change their minds , and she later wrote Richard X a love song . The aftermath of the decision for Stevens to record the song became the subject of another song written by Richard X and Robinson , " Me Plus One " from Annie 's 2004 album Anniemal . While recording with Stevens , Richard X decided to get spoken soundbites from her to make an extended version for the single 's B @-@ side . To fit the song 's glam sound , he asked her questions about the Winter of Discontent , to which Stevens reacted with " bemusement and terror . " 
 The lyrics of " Some Girls " describe a pop singer 's dreams of stardom . She performs fellatio on a man promising to make her a star . Stevens stated that she had not interpreted the lyrics to be about oral sex when she recorded the song . Richard X explained that he wanted to illustrate how the music industry treats people , so he and Robinson based some of the song 's lines on anecdotes that they had heard . 
 The song uses Richard X 's " icy " synthpop sound . The synthesizer used was a Fairlight CMI Series <unk> previously owned by pop group the Thompson Twins . It also features the German schaffel beat popularized by glam rock . Reviewers compared the song 's glam @-@ influenced sound to T.Rex 's 1971 single " Hot Love " and the work of Adam Ant . They also noted similarities between " Some Girls " and the more recent electronic glam music on Goldfrapp 's 2003 album Black Cherry . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Some Girls " received positive reviews from music critics . PopMatters included it in its " Best Music of 2004 " selection , where Adrien Begrand commented that " Stevens might have no singing voice to speak of , but did she ever score a slice of pop genius with her single ' Some Girls ' , on which the ever @-@ crafty Richard X brazenly hijacks a contagious German schaffel beat and tarts it up with a killer hook in the chorus that never , ever leaves your head " . In his review for The Guardian , Alexis Petridis referred to the song as " remarkable " for turning Stevens ' detached vocal delivery into a strength . 
 Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times stated that Richard X 's production allowed Stevens ' vocals to " [ melt ] into the icy beat " . Ranking " Some Girls " the twentieth best single of 2004 , Pitchfork Media listed the song twenty @-@ fourth on its " Top 50 Singles of 2004 " & # 258 on the " Top 500 songs of the 2000s " , with Scott Plagenhoef praising its " sharp production " and " Adam Ant @-@ esque ' whoa 's " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Some Girls " was commercially successful in the United Kingdom . It debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart . The Shapeshifters ' " Lola 's Theme " kept the song from topping the chart ; noting the song 's lyrics about an exasperated singer whose " dreams of number one last forever " , The Guardian remarked that the song 's chart performance was " as if [ it were ] following a script " . 
 BBC Radio 1 and 2 added " Some Girls " to their C playlists in late June 2004 , and in early July , Radio 1 moved the song to its B playlist . The song quickly picked up airplay and was the most played song for the week of 24 July . " Some Girls " remained on the UK Singles Chart for twelve weeks . The song ended the year as the fortieth best @-@ selling single in the UK . Largely due to the success of " Some Girls " , Funky Dory re @-@ entered the UK Albums Chart at number thirteen in August 2004 , selling 14 @,@ 561 copies that week . The song was somewhat less successful in Ireland , where it debuted at number fifteen . It peaked at number thirteen after four weeks and remained on the chart for a total of twelve weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was written by Richard Curtis and directed by Paul Weiland . It was filmed at Borough Market in South London . Athletes Colin Jackson , Pat Cash , and Audley Harrison make appearances in the music video . 
 The video opens with shots of a dank underground sewer . Stevens and a group of women walk through the sewer and put on sunglasses before climbing out of manholes and shafts . A large crowd of women , with Stevens leading them , parades down the streets as men observe the spectacle . The women begin spraying each other with bottles of water , before Stevens returns to the sewer . Throughout the video , sequences of Stevens and a group of backup dancers performing in the sewer are shown . 
 The video received heavy play from MTV Hits and The Box . Richard X strongly disapproved of the music video . In an interview with the NME , he stated , " That video is crap " , and he briefly commented on his official website that seeing it " made [ him ] want to give up [ his ] life " . 
 = = Track list and formats = = 
 Rachel Stevens enhanced CD single 
 " Some Girls " – 3 : 33 
 " Spin That Bottle " – 3 : 23 
 " Some Girls " ( The Sharp Boys Hot Fridge vocal ) – 8 : 35 
 " Some Girls " ( CD @-@ ROM video ) 
 Remixes 
 " Some Girls " ( Richard X Extended Mix ) 
 " Some Girls " ( Europa XL Dub ) 
 " Some Girls " ( Europa XL Vocal Mix ) 
 Henri CD maxi single 
 " Some Girls " ( The Alumni Radio Mix ) – 3 : 29 
 " Some Girls " ( Norty Cotto Champagne Club Mix ) – 7 : 33 
 " Some Girls " ( Norty Cotto Dub Mix ) – 6 : 35 
 " Some Girls " ( Norty Cotto Dance Radio Mix ) – 3 : 40 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Other versions = = 
 In 2006 , American dance vocalist Henri covered " Some Girls " as a follow @-@ up to her 2005 debut single , a cover version of Cher 's 2002 song " When You Walk Away " . Her version did not achieve mainstream success . It did , however , reach number six on the U.S. Billboard Hot Dance Club Play and remain on the chart for fifteen weeks . A club mix , dub , and radio edit by Norty Cotto are included on the CD maxi single release . 
 Former Pussycat Dolls member Kaya Jones recorded a version of " Some Girls " and released it as a promotional single in March 2012 . She later included it for her debut album , which was released April 3 , 2012 . 
 = Fertilisation of Orchids = 
 Fertilisation of Orchids is a book by English naturalist Charles Darwin published on 15 May 1862 under the full explanatory title On the various contrivances by which British and foreign orchids are fertilised by insects , and on the good effects of intercrossing . Darwin 's previous book , On the Origin of Species , had briefly mentioned evolutionary interactions between insects and the plants they fertilised , and this new idea was explored in detail . Field studies and practical scientific investigations that were initially a recreation for Darwin — a relief from the drudgery of writing — developed into enjoyable and challenging experiments . Aided in his work by his family , friends , and a wide circle of correspondents across Britain and worldwide , Darwin tapped into the contemporary vogue for growing exotic orchids . 
 The book was his first detailed demonstration of the power of natural selection , and explained how complex ecological relationships resulted in the coevolution of orchids and insects . The view has been expressed that the book led directly or indirectly to all modern work on coevolution and the evolution of extreme specialisation . It influenced botanists , and revived interest in the neglected idea that insects played a part in pollinating flowers . It opened up the new study areas of pollination research and reproductive ecology , directly related to Darwin 's ideas on evolution , and supported his view that natural selection led to a variety of forms through the important benefits achieved by cross @-@ fertilisation . Although the general public showed less interest and sales of the book were low , it established Darwin as a leading botanist . Orchids was the first in a series of books on his innovative investigations into plants . 
 The book describes how the relationship between insects and plants resulted in the beautiful and complex forms which natural theology attributed to a grand designer . By showing how practical adaptations develop from cumulative minor variations of parts of the flowers to suit new purposes , Darwin countered the prevailing view that beautiful organisms were the handiwork of a Creator . Darwin 's painstaking observations , experiments , and detailed dissection of the flowers explained previously unknown features such as the puzzle of Catasetum , which had been thought to have three completely different species of flowers on the same plant . In addition , they produced testable predictions including his then @-@ controversial proposal that the long nectary of Angraecum sesquipedale meant that there must be a moth with an equally long proboscis . This was confirmed in 1903 when Xanthopan morgani praedicta was found in Madagascar . 
 = = Background = = 
 Charles Darwin grew up with an interest in natural history , and as a student at the University of Cambridge he became a pupil and close friend of botany professor John Stevens Henslow . The year he graduated , Darwin was given a supernumerary position as a gentleman naturalist and geologist on the second voyage of HMS Beagle , a trip that lasted five years . By the time he returned in October 1836 , he had doubts about the doctrine that species were fixed and unchanging . Within months , experts informed him that specimens he had collected were separate species , not just varieties , and the patterns he saw inspired the inception of his theory of natural selection in 1838 . Darwin began editing and publishing the expert reports , collected in the Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle , at the same time as writing a series of books on geology , the first of which was The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs . His " species work " was his " prime hobby " , a background to this writing , but it evolved into an extensive research programme during the twenty years before he published his theory . 
 = = = Insect fertilisation of plants = = = 
 Darwin 's speculations on the origin of species convinced him that cross @-@ fertilisation played an important role in keeping specific forms consistent . He rejected the doctrine that the characteristics of a species were static , and was aware from animal husbandry that inbreeding could lead to changes , often deleterious . He thought that natural <unk> through cross @-@ fertilisation would keep wild species homogenous yet vigorous . Cross @-@ fertilisation would confer an evolutionary advantage by spreading favourable changes throughout a reproductive community . His ideas were contrary to the common supposition that plants were usually self @-@ fertilising , and so every summer Darwin investigated the contribution of insect pollination to the cross @-@ pollination of flowers . 
 In the summer of 1841 Charles and Emma Darwin moved from the turmoil of London to the countryside , to Down House , a quiet former parsonage in the village of Downe . He wrote , " The flowers are here very beautiful " . Darwin followed the recommendation of his friend , the leading botanist Robert Brown , and read Das <unk> Geheimnis der Natur im Bau und in der <unk> der <unk> ( The Secret of Nature in the Form and Fertilisation of Flowers Discovered ) . The little known book , published in 1793 by Christian Konrad Sprengel but never translated into English , introduced the idea that flowers were created by God to fulfill a teleological purpose : insects would act as " living brushes " to cross @-@ fertilise plants in a symbiotic relationship . This functional view was rejected and mostly forgotten , as it contradicted the common belief that flowers had been created for beauty , and were generally self @-@ fertilising . For Darwin , the concept of evolution gave new meaning to Sprengel 's research into the mechanisms for cross @-@ fertilisation . He welcomed its support for his supposition that cross @-@ fertilisation in flowering plants tended to allow their offspring to avoid possible disadvantages resulting from self @-@ fertilisation , and by 1845 he had verified many of Sprengel 's observations . 
 A favourite walk took the Darwin family to a spot above the quiet Cudham valley , teeming with orchids including <unk> , Neottia , Fly Orchids and Musk Orchids . They called this place " Orchis Bank " , and the whole family became involved in Darwin 's researches . Darwin observed orchids every summer , but in twenty years , only on two occasions ( when he noticed butterflies " sucking O. pyramidalis and <unk> " ) did he see insects visiting flowers . In 1854 , Darwin began to work full @-@ time on the origin of species . He examined orchids and counted how often one or both pollinia ( pollen masses ) had been removed from their flowers , indicating that they had been visited by insects . He experimented with insect pollination to investigate whether , by cross @-@ fertilising field crops such as Fabaceae , they would yield more vigorous offspring , and published letters about his inconclusive results in The Gardeners ' Chronicle in 1857 and 1858 . He next applied Sprengel 's methods to empirical research on orchids . Despite delays caused by recurring illness , he made progress on writing his planned " Big Book " on evolution , but when Alfred Russel Wallace 's letter prompted joint publication of both of their theories of natural selection in 1858 , Darwin quickly wrote On the Origin of Species as an abstract of his theory , published on 22 November 1859 . In this book , he gave credence to Sprengel 's ideas on the advantages of " intercrossing " , and noted : " Many of our <unk> plants absolutely require the visits of moths to remove their pollen masses and thus to fertilise them " . He introduced his new concept , the process of coevolution , describing the co @-@ adaptation of bumblebees and red clover , and speculating " how a flower and a bee might slowly become , either simultaneously or one after the other , modified and adapted in the most perfect manner to each other , by the continued preservation of individuals presenting mutual and slightly favourable deviations of structure " . This was a theme he developed in his orchid book . 
 = = Botany as recreation = = 
 After On the Origin of Species was published , Darwin became involved in producing revised editions as well as working on Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication as the first part of his planned " Big Book " . By the spring of 1860 he had tired of the grind of writing , and needed something fresh and interesting to study . During a family visit to relatives at <unk> , he was searching for orchids when he noticed a sundew . He collected it and tried to feed it insects , thus beginning a long @-@ term study of insectivorous plants . He investigated other botanical questions raised by his ideas of natural selection , including the advantages of sexual dimorphism in <unk> , and the adaptive mechanisms that ensure cross @-@ pollination in orchids . As an enthusiastic practical scientist , such investigations gave him a strong sense of personal enjoyment . He relished pitting his wits against nature , and following lucky hunches . His theory was a way of looking at the world , enabling him to find creative solutions to problems that traditional approaches could not solve . He later wrote , " I am like a gambler , & love a wild experiment . " 
 Around the end of April 1860 , Darwin discussed insect pollination with his friend Joseph Dalton Hooker , and mentioned the bee orchid . Darwin corresponded with Hooker 's assistant Daniel Oliver , the senior curator at Kew Gardens , who became a follower of Darwin 's ideas . At the start of June , Darwin wrote to The Gardeners ' Chronicle asking for readers ' observations on how bee or fly orchids were fertilised . His letter described the mechanisms for insect fertilisation he had discovered in common British orchids , and reported his experimental observations that pollen masses were removed from Orchis morio and Orchis mascula plants in the open , but left in their pouches in adjacent plants under a glass bell jar . He wrote to American botanist Asa Gray that he had been " so struck with admiration at the contrivances , that I have sent notice to Gardeners Chronicle " , and made similar enquiries of other experts . 
 Darwin became engrossed in meticulous microscopic examination , tracing the complicated mechanisms of flowers that attracted insects by their nectar so that the insects transported pollen to cross @-@ pollinate other plants , and on 19 July he told Hooker , " I am intensely interested on subject , just as at a game of chess . " In September , he " dissected with the greatest interest " and wrote , " The contrivances for insect fertilisation in Orchids are multiform & truly wonderful & beautiful . " By October , he had " a large mass of notes with many new facts " , but set them aside " convinced that I ought to work on Variation & not amuse myself with interludes " . 
 = = = Research and draft = = = 
 During 1861 , botany became a preoccupation for Darwin , and his projects became serious scientific pursuits . He continued his study of orchids throughout the summer , writing to anyone who might be able to supply specimens he had not yet examined . Field naturalists , botanists , and country gentry sent specimens from across the British Isles . Darwin also tramped around the countryside with tin cans and biscuit boxes , collecting specimens which his gardeners potted up for him . His family joined in , and neighbours contributed to the research . As he had only a cold greenhouse , a friend on the other side of the village who had a hot @-@ house allowed him to use that , and offered the services of his gardener to look after the delicate specimens . Darwin 's aim was to show how the complex structures and life cycles of the plants could be explained by natural selection rather than by the handiwork of God ; he saw the huge variety of flowers as a collection of ad hoc evolutionary adaptations . In June he described his examination of bee orchids as a passion , and his findings on insect fertilisation of orchids as " beautiful facts " . 
 There were several replies to Darwin 's enquiry in The Gardeners ' Chronicle seeking evidence to support his idea that pollen masses attached themselves to a convenient place on an insect 's back or head , usually its proboscis , to transport the pollen to another flower . One envelope appeared to be empty when it arrived at Down House , but when he looked further before discarding it he found several insect mouthparts with pollen masses attached . To help their daughter Henrietta convalesce from illness , the Darwins arranged to spend two months in Torquay . Darwin wrote : 
 I have , owing to many interruptions , not been going on much with my regular work ( though I have done the very heavy jobs of variation of Pigeons , Fowls , Ducks , Rabbits Dogs & c ) but have been amusing myself with miscellaneous work . — I have been very lucky & have now examined almost every British Orchid fresh , & when at sea @-@ side shall draw up rather long paper on the means of their fertilisation for Linn . <unk> & I cannot fancy anything more perfect than the many curious contrivances . 
 He sought advice on obtaining the exotic South American Catasetum , to see it eject pollen masses , as " I am got intensely interested on subject & think I understand pretty well all the British species . " They went to Torquay on 1 July , and Darwin began writing his Orchid paper . By 10 August , he feared his paper would run " to 100 M.S. folio pages ! ! ! The beauty of the adaptations of parts seems to me unparalleled ... I marvel often as I think over the diversity & perfection of the contrivances . " 
 The family returned to Downe on 27 August , and Darwin again wrote to the Gardeners ' Chronicle appealing for assistance as he was " very anxious to examine a few exotic forms " . His requests to the wealthy enthusiasts who had taken up the fashionable pursuit of growing rare orchids brought large numbers of specimens . These would be a test of his theory : previously aspects such as coloration of plants and animals had often been regarded as having no adaptive function . For example , Thomas Henry Huxley was strongly influenced by German idealism and in 1856 had asked if it was " to be supposed for a moment that the beauty of colour and outline ... are any good to the animals ? ... Who has ever dreamed of finding an utilitarian purpose in the forms and colours of flowers ... ? " Darwin had , and in the orchids he tackled the most difficult case . His ideas would transform the way naturalists thought about coloration . 
 The completed Orchis paper came to 140 folio pages , and Darwin decided against presenting it at the Linnean Society of London , thinking of publishing a pamphlet instead . He offered the draft to John Murray who agreed to publish it as a book . Although Darwin feared a lack of public interest , he hoped it would serve to " illustrate how Natural History may be worked under the belief of the modification of Species " . In discussions with Asa Gray about natural theology , he wrote that " it really seems to me incredibly monstrous to look at an orchid as created as we now see it . Every part reveals modification on modification . " 
 As a popular and acceptable activity , botany had been taken up by many middle class ladies , and Darwin included these botany enthusiasts in his correspondence . On the recommendation of John Lindley , Darwin wrote to Lady Dorothy Nevill , who responded generously by sending numerous exotic orchids , and requested a signed photograph of him to hang in her sitting room next to portraits of her other notable friends , including Hooker . 
 = = = Linnean Society paper = = = 
 The orchid book was delayed because of illness , but Darwin continued to " look at it as a hobby @-@ horse , which has given me great pleasure to ride " . He was particularly astounded by the long spur of the Angraecum sesquipedale flowers , one of the orchids sent by the distinguished horticulturist James Bateman , and wrote to Hooker " Good Heavens what insect can suck it [ ? ] " 
 By November , a specimen of the exotic South American Catasetum orchid Hooker had given to Darwin had shown its " truly marvellous " mechanism , by which it shot out a pollinium at any insect touching a part of the flower " with sticky gland always foremost " . This plant had astonished botanists in 1836 when Robert Hermann <unk> stated that he had seen one plant growing three distinct flowers which usually grew separately and had wrongly been categorised as three distinct genera , namely Catasetum <unk> , <unk> viridis , and <unk> barbatus . John Lindley had remarked that " such cases shake to the foundation all our ideas of the stability of genera and species . " One of Darwin 's correspondents told of delight at growing a beautiful specimen of <unk> barbatus imported from Demerara , then dismay when the plant flowered the next year as a simple Catasetum . 
 In view of this interest , Darwin prepared a paper on Catasetum as an extract from his forthcoming book , which was read to the Linnean Society of London on 3 April 1862 . Darwin solved the puzzle by showing that the three flowers were the male , female , and hermaphrodite forms of a single species , but as they differed so much from each other , they had been classified as different genera . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Darwin sent the incomplete manuscript to his publisher John Murray on 9 February 1862 , while he was still working on the last chapter . Although anxious that the book might not sell , he could " say with confidence that the M.S. contains many new & very curious facts & conclusions " . When the book was printed , he sent out presentation copies to all the individuals and societies who had helped him with his investigations , and to eminent botanists in Britain and abroad for review . 
 On 15 May 1862 the book was published under the full title of On the various contrivances by which British and foreign orchids are fertilised by insects , and on the good effects of intercrossing . In August , Darwin was " well contented with the sale of 768 copies ; I <unk> hope & expect that the remainder will ultimately be sold " , but the book sold slowly and less than 2 @,@ 000 copies of the first edition were printed . An expanded edition translated into French was published in Paris in 1870 , and in 1877 Murray brought out a revised and expanded second edition , with the shortened title The various contrivances by which orchids are fertilised by insects . This was also published by D. Appleton & Company of New York in 1877 , and a German translation was published in the same year . Despite being well praised by botanists , only about 6 @,@ 000 copies of the English editions had been sold by 1900 . 
 = = Content = = 
 Darwin set out a detailed study of common descent with modifications by expanding on the theme of coevolution between local populations of insects and flowering plants that he had briefly discussed in On the Origin of Species . He examined numerous ways in which orchids vary , showing how they had diverged and developed specialised pollen @-@ dispersal mechanisms . The intricate morphology and anatomy of each flower was carefully described . Apparently trivial details were examined in relation to natural selection to demonstrate how slight variations in similar structures of closely related flowers led to specialised modifications that provided various pollinators ( insects ) with different ways to cross @-@ fertilise . The mass of descriptive detail was a great achievement , but the result is demanding to read . 
 In the introduction , Darwin explained his aim of meeting complaints that detailed support for his theory was lacking in On the Origin of Species . He chose orchids for his subject as " amongst the most singular and most modified forms in the vegetable kingdom " in the hope of inspiring work on other species , and felt that " the study of organic beings may be as interesting to an observer who is fully convinced that the structure of each is due to secondary laws , as to one who views every trifling detail of structure as the result of the direct interposition of the Creator . " He gave due credit to previous authors who had described the agency of insects in fertilising orchids , and all who had helped him . 
 = = = British orchids = = = 
 In the first chapter Darwin described the British orchids he had studied , giving detailed explanations of their various mechanisms for transferring pollen to insects . The first mechanism described is that of Orchis mascula , which serves as an introduction to the explanation of other Orchidaceae . In the upper part of the flower a petal shelters the male organ which has two packages of pollen grains , held together by thin elastic threads . These pollen masses stand side by side and have stalks down to adhesive balls in a cup which keeps them moist and sticky . When an insect lands on the large projecting lower petal , the <unk> , and pushes its head and proboscis into the centre of the flower and down to the nectary , it breaks the cup and the adhesive balls attach the pollen masses to the front of the insect . As the insect flies off , each stalk rotates the pollen mass downwards and forwards so that when the insect lands on another flower the pollen masses attached to the insect pass under the male organ and leave pollen on the female organ , achieving cross fertilisation . Darwin envisaged : 
 A poet might imagine , that whilst the pollinia are borne from flower to flower through the air , adhering to a moth 's body , they voluntarily and eagerly place themselves , in each case , in that exact position in which alone they can hope to gain their wish and perpetuate their race . 
 This is followed by descriptions of the differences in the mechanisms of several other orchids . In Orchis pyramidalis , the adhesive balls are combined together into a strap or saddle shape , which curls round the thin proboscis of a moth or butterfly to attach to it the pair of pollen masses , illustrated in the book by figure 4 showing a moth 's head with seven pairs of pollen masses attached to its proboscis . 
 While the bee orchid showed adaptation for self @-@ fertilisation , its mechanism also enabled occasional cross @-@ fertilisation , creating the biological diversity that Darwin felt was needed for vigorous survival , which could not be provided by self @-@ fertilisation . As an example of " how beautifully everything is contrived " , Darwin described how he had found that in <unk> flowers the pollen is ready for collection before access is open for the female organ to receive pollen . At Torquay he had watched bees visiting spires of these flowers , starting at the bottom of the spire and working their way up to the topmost flowers . He speculated that if bees moved from top to top of the spires , the pollen clusters they collected from the most recently opened flowers would be wasted as the topmost flowers on the next spike would not be ready to receive pollen . A bee starting at the lowest flowers on the first spire it visited would continue up until it reached flowers that still had their pollen masses to attach to the bee , then would fly to the mature lower flowers on another plant , and fertilise them . By this co @-@ ordinated process , the bee would add " to her store of honey " while perpetuating the flowers " which will yield honey to future generations of bees " . 
 = = = Exotic orchids = = = 
 The book moves on to the various foreign orchids Darwin had received from others . His experiments showed that the " astonishing length " of the 111 ⁄ 2 inch ( 290 mm ) long nectary hanging from Angraecum sesquipedale flowers implied the need for an as yet unknown moth with a proboscis 10 – 11 inches ( 250 – 275 mm ) long to pollinate these flowers in Madagascar . He viewed this as the outcome of a coevolutionary race , writing that " there has been a race in gaining length between the nectary of the <unk> and the proboscis of certain moths " . This wastefulness is familiar in modern terms as the idea of an evolutionary arms race , but was disturbing to biologists of the time who believed that adaptations were the outcome of benevolent divine purpose . 
 Darwin described " the most remarkable of all Orchids " , Catasetum , and showed how in these flowers , " as throughout nature , pre @-@ existing structures and capacities [ had been ] utilised for new purposes " . He explained the mechanism in which the pollen masses of the pollinium were connected by a bent stalk or pedicel to a sticky disc kept moist at the back of the flower . When an insect touched an " antenna " projecting from the back of the flower , this released the bent pedicel which sprang straight and fired the pollinium , sticky disc first , at the insect . In experiments , Darwin had imitated this action using a whalebone spring . He vividly illustrated how the flower ejected the pollinium with considerable force : " I touched the <unk> of C. callosum whilst holding the flower at about a yard 's distance from the window , and the pollinium hit the pane of glass , and adhered to the smooth vertical surface by its adhesive disc . " 
 = = = Final chapter = = = 
 Darwin noted that the essential nectar , secreted to attract insects , seemed also in some cases to act as an excretion : " It is in perfect accordance with the scheme of nature , as worked out by natural selection , that matter excreted to free the system from superfluous or injuring substances should be utilised for purposes of the highest importance . " <unk> of the flowers of orchids showed them all to be based on " fifteen groups of vessels , arranged three within three , in alternating order " . He disparaged the idea that this was an " ideal type " fixed by the Omnipotent Creator , but attributed it instead to its " descent from some monocotyledonous plant , which , like so many other plants of the same division , possessed fifteen organs , arranged alternately three within three in five whorls ; and that the now wonderfully changed structure of the flower is due to a long course of slow modification , — each modification having been preserved which was useful to each plant , during the incessant changes to which the organic and the inorganic world has been exposed " . 
 Describing the final end state of the whole flower cycle as the production of seed , he set out a simple experiment in which he took a ripe seed capsule and arranged the seeds in a line , then counted the seeds in one @-@ tenth of an inch ( 2 @.@ 5 mm ) . By multiplication he found that each plant produced enough seeds to plant 1 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 000 m2 ) of ground , and the great grandchildren of a single plant could " carpet the entire surface of the land throughout the globe " if unchecked . 
 In conclusion , he felt that the book had " shown that Orchids exhibit an almost endless diversity of beautiful adaptations . When this or that part has been spoken of as contrived for some special purpose , it must not be supposed that it was originally always formed for this sole purpose . The regular course of events seems to be , that a part which originally served for one purpose , by slow changes becomes adapted for widely different purposes . " He was almost exasperated by the inventiveness of forms in nature ; " In my examination of Orchids , hardly any fact has so much struck me as the endless diversity of structure , — the prodigality of resources , — for gaining the very same end , namely , the fertilisation of one flower by the pollen of another . " His focus on detail was justified , as " The use of each trifling detail of structure is far from a barren search to those who believe in natural selection . " The " contrivances and beautiful adaptations " slowly acquired through slight variations , subjected to natural selection " under the complex and ever @-@ varying conditions of life " , far transcended the most fertile imagination . The mechanisms to transport the pollen of one flower or of one plant to another flower or plant underlined the importance of cross @-@ fertilisation : " For may we not further infer as probable , in accordance with the belief of the vast majority of the breeders of our domestic productions , that marriage between near relatives is likewise in some way injurious , — that some unknown great good is derived from the union of individuals which have been kept distinct for many generations ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Botanists responded favourably to the book immediately on its publication . Hooker told Darwin that the book showed him to be " out of sight the best Physiological observer & experimenter that Botany ever saw " , and was glad to note that two leading traditional botanists had accepted the concept of evolution ; " Bentham & Oliver are quite struck up in a heap with your book & delighted beyond expression " . Daniel Oliver thought it " very extraordinary " , and even Darwin 's old beetle @-@ hunting rival Charles Babington , by then professor of botany at the University of Cambridge and inclined to oppose natural selection , called it " exceedingly interesting and valuable ... highly satisfactory in all respects . The results are most curious and the skill shown in discovering them equally so . " George Bentham praised its value in opening " a new field for observing the wonderful provisions of Nature ... a new and unexpected track to guide us in the explanation of phenomena which had before that appeared so irreconcilable with the ordinary <unk> and method shown in the organised world . " 
 The book 's success in botanical circles was enhanced following Bentham 's public endorsement . In his presidential address to the Linnean Society on 24 May 1862 , Bentham praised the book as exemplifying the biological method , and said that it had nearly overcome his opposition to the Origin . In his address in 1863 he stated that " Mr Darwin has shown how changes may take place " , and described it as " an unimpeachable example of a legitimate hypothesis " in compliance with John Stuart Mill 's scientific method . This endorsement favourably influenced Miles Joseph Berkeley , Charles Victor Naudin , Alphonse Pyramus de Candolle , Jean Louis Quatrefages , and Charles <unk> . 
 In June 1862 , Darwin welcomed favourable reviews in the press and wrote to Hooker ; " Well my <unk> @-@ book is a success ( but I do not know whether it sells ) after cursing my folly in writing it " . He told his publisher , " The Botanists praise my Orchid @-@ book to the skies " , and to Asa Gray he said , " I am fairly astonished at the success of my book with botanists . " Darwin 's geologist friend Charles Lyell gave it enthusiastic praise : " next to the Origin , as the most valuable of all Darwin 's works . " However , the book attracted little attention from the general public , and in September Darwin told his cousin Fox , " Hardly any one not a botanist , except yourself , as far as I know , has cared for it . " The book baffled a general public more interested in controversy over gorillas and cavemen . There were some reviews in gardening magazines , but few natural philosophers or zoologists noticed the book , and hardly any learned appraisals appeared . 
 = = = Theological responses = = = 
 Although the book contradicted the prevailing natural theology and its teleological approach to design in nature , the Saturday Review thought that it would avoid the angry polemics aroused by On the Origin of Species . The Literary Churchman welcomed " Mr. Darwin 's expression of admiration at the contrivances in orchids " , only complaining that it was too indirect a way of saying " O Lord , how manifold are Thy works ! " ( Psalm 104 : 24 ) Darwin regarded these theological views as irritating misunderstandings , but wrote to Asa Gray describing his approach as a " flank movement on the enemy " . By showing that the " wonderful contrivances " of the orchid have discoverable evolutionary histories , Darwin was countering claims by natural theologians that the organisms were examples of the perfect work of the Creator . 
 There was considerable controversy surrounding Darwin 's prediction that a moth would be found in Madagascar with a long proboscis matching the nectary of Angraecum sesquipedale . An anonymous article in the Edinburgh Review of October 1862 by George Campbell , 8th Duke of Argyll , argued that Darwin 's wording implied purpose , and concluded that " We know , too , that these purposes and ideas are not our own , but the ideas and purposes of Another . " He considered Darwin 's explanations the " most unsatisfactory conjectures " , and raised obscure metaphysical objections while supporting a kind of creative evolutionism . Emma Darwin thought that although Argyll was " quite opposed " to Darwin 's views , " he praises the Orchids in such an enthusiastic way that he will do it a good turn " . Darwin was delighted to find that a well written article " smashing " Argyll 's review was by one of Darwin 's own nephews . 
 Argyll went on in his 1867 book The Reign of Law to cleverly ridicule Darwin 's ideas , particularly the prediction of a moth in Madagascar with a proboscis 10 – 11 inches ( 250 – 275 mm ) long . He believed that adaptations showed divine purpose , not a mindless evolutionary arms race . In his response Creation by Law later that year , Alfred Russel Wallace produced a detailed explanation of how the nectary could have evolved through natural selection , and stated that he had carefully measured moths in the British Museum , finding that the proboscis of <unk> <unk> from South America was 91 ⁄ 4 inches ( 235 mm ) long , and the proboscis of <unk> <unk> from tropical Africa ( since renamed Xanthopan morgani ) was 71 ⁄ 2 inches ( 190 mm ) long . An enquiry raised in 1873 was answered by Darwin 's friend Hermann Müller , who stated that his brother Fritz Müller had caught a sphinx moth in Brazil with a proboscis nearly 10 inches ( 250 mm ) long . Darwin 's anticipation was fully met in 1903 , when a subspecies of Xanthopan morgani was found in Madagascar with a proboscis about 12 inches ( 300 mm ) long , and was named Xanthopan morgani praedicta to celebrate this verification of a testable prediction made by Darwin on the basis of his theory of natural selection . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Michael <unk> has expressed the view that all studies of coevolution follow directly or indirectly from Darwin 's orchid book , which was also the origin of all work on the evolution of extreme specialisation . Its publication led almost immediately to research by many other naturalists into specialisation and coevolution , in some cases analysing other taxa . In his autobiography , Darwin modestly recalled how this work had revived interest in Christian Konrad Sprengel 's neglected ideas : 
 For some years before 1862 I had specially attended to the fertilisation of our British orchids ; and it seemed to me the best plan to prepare as complete a treatise on this group of plants as well as I could , rather than to utilise the great mass of matter which I had slowly collected with respect to other plants . My resolve proved a wise one ; for since the appearance of my book , a surprising number of papers and separate works on the fertilisation of all kinds of flowers have appeared ; and these are far better done than I could possibly have effected . The merits of poor old Sprengel , so long overlooked , are now fully recognised many years after his death . 
 Among the many prominent biologists who began research on coevolution , Hermann Müller was particularly interested in the evolutionary sequence in which insects and flowers became adapted to each other . Like Darwin , he began with the premise that flowers were adapted to ensure cross @-@ fertilisation , and added his own premise that most insects were not " limited by hereditary instinct to particular flowers " . On this basis , he developed the view that specialisation develops from the need for flowers to attract pollinating insects ( without making access too easy for non @-@ pollinators ) , and from the evolution of pollinators to adapt to changes in the location of rewards such as nectar . He found that Alpine flowers tended to be visited by bees at lower altitudes , and by butterflies at higher altitudes , beginning research on the idea that plants at different altitudes were specialised for different pollinators . By comparing related plant species that he thought had diverged in form from a common ancestor , and testing whether they were visited by butterflies or bees , he was the first to use a combination of morphological and ecological approaches to understand patterns in the evolution of interactions and specialisation . His brother Fritz Müller used similar methods when studying mimicry in Brazil . The early development of ideas on specialisation and coevolution became increasingly focused on the problem of mimicry ; Henry Walter Bates had initially raised this issue in a paper read to the Linnean Society of London in December 1861 in Darwin 's presence , and published in November 1862 . 
 Others basing their studies of reproductive ecology on Darwin 's evolutionary approach included Friedrich Hildebrand and Severin <unk> in Europe , Asa Gray and Charles Robertson in North America . In Italy , <unk> <unk> adopted the theory of descent but like Sprengel had a teleological approach and explained the mechanisms of flowers by the intervention of a " <unk> intelligence " . <unk> classified flowers on the basis of the pollinators they attracted , and coined many of the terms still in use such as pollination syndrome and <unk> . There was an enormous increase in knowledge during this period . In 1874 , Asa Gray paid tribute to Darwin 's work on orchids for explaining " all these and other extraordinary structures , as well as of the arrangement of blossoms in general , and even the very meaning and need of sexual propagation " . He credited Darwin with establishing the understanding that " Nature abhors close fertilization " . 
 By the end of the 19th century , there were so many uncritical and unproven speculations about floral mechanisms that floral ecology became discredited . In the 1920s , it was revived with further developments in detailed analyses of insects ' senses , led by researchers Frederic Clements , Karl von Frisch and others . Their experiments resulted in new information , including the discovery that some insects have ultraviolet vision , and findings involving bee learning and communication . Modern floral ecology has been reinvigorated by its relevance for evolutionary studies . 
 = = Further research by Darwin = = 
 Darwin had " found the study of orchids eminently useful in showing me how nearly all parts of the flower are <unk> for fertilisation by insects , & therefore the result of n. selection , — even most trifling details of structure " . His own interest in orchids and in fertilisation of plants by insects continued . Darwin had been given the use of a hot @-@ house at The Rookery on the other side of the village , and at the end of 1862 he was persuaded by this neighbour 's helpful gardener to have his own built at Down House as an extension to the existing cold lean @-@ to greenhouse . The gardener drew up plans , and Darwin investigated stoves and ventilation devices . When it was completed in February 1863 he asked Hooker for some plants from Kew Gardens , writing " I long to stock it , just like a school @-@ boy " , and sent his butler with a cart . When over 160 different plants were delivered , Darwin made apologetic remarks about depleting the national collection . He told Hooker " You cannot imagine what pleasure your plants give me ... Henrietta & I go & gloat over them . " Darwin 's life was changed by having a warm hothouse to spend time in before his walk round the <unk> , and in the 1870s he had several more hothouses built . The children later remembered this routine and the gardeners attending to Darwin 's experimental plants , as well as the way that Darwin used simple equipment for his experiments , dissecting and measuring plants and seeds . 
 A chance observation " thoroughly aroused " Darwin 's attention to a surprising decrease in vigour of the offspring of Linaria vulgaris following only one instance of self @-@ fertilisation , and after eleven years of experimental work he published The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom in 1876 as " a complement to the ' Fertilisation of Orchids , ' because it shows how important are the results of cross @-@ fertilisation which are ensured by the mechanisms described in that book . " He told a friend " I cannot endure doing nothing " , and resumed his work on orchids , assisted in his research by his son Francis Darwin . He corresponded about orchids with Fritz Müller , and almost completely rewrote the book with a considerable amount of new material , much of which was contributed by Müller . The revised edition was published in 1877 . 
 Francis Darwin described it as characteristic that his father delighted in the observations that preceded the publication of Fertilisation of Orchids , not the applause which followed it . He quoted one of his father 's last letters about orchids , written in 1880 : 
 They are wonderful creatures , these Orchids , and I sometimes think with a glow of pleasure , when I remember making out some little point in their method of fertilisation . 
 = = Commemoration of Darwin 's work on orchids = = 
 Kent Wildlife Trust manages Downe Bank , which is near Down House and was a favourite place of the Darwin family , who called it ' Orchis Bank ' because of the many wild orchids which grew there . It is now part of the ' Downe Bank and High Elms ' Site of Special Scientific Interest . Darwin 's observations of local orchids and their insect pollinators gave him the evidence for co @-@ evolution which provided the basis for the Fertilisation of Orchids . " Experts have identified " Orchis Bank " as the species @-@ rich setting encapsulated in the closing paragraph of On the Origin of Species , in which Darwin wrote : 
 It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank , clothed with many plants of many kinds , with birds singing on the bushes , with various insects flitting about , and with worms crawling through the damp earth , and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms , so different from each other , and dependent on each other in so complex a manner , have all been produced by laws acting around us . 
 Darwin 's home and its surroundings , including specifically " Orchis Bank " , have been called his landscape laboratory , and together were nominated in January 2009 for designation as a World Heritage Site . The bid was made by a partnership led by the London Borough of Bromley , which now includes Downe . It was included in the 39 proposed properties , but was not in the 21 new sites selected for the list . 
 The influence of Darwin 's work was commemorated in the Smithsonian Institution 's 15th Annual Orchid Show , Orchids Through Darwin 's Eyes , 24 January to 26 April 2009 . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 28 ( 1936 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 28 was a Type VIIA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . 
 Her keel was laid down on 2 December 1935 , by DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen . She was launched on 14 July 1936 , and commissioned into Kriegsmarine on 12 September 1936 , with Kapitänleutnant Wilhelm Ambrosius in command . Ambrosius was succeeded by nine other commanding officers over the next eight years . 
 U @-@ 28 conducted seven war patrols between 19 August 1939 and 15 November 1940 , all under the command of Kapitänleutnant Günter Kuhnke , sinking 13 ships totaling 56 @,@ 272 gross register tons ( GRT ) and damaging two others totaling 10 @,@ 067 GRT . 
 After her third patrol , U @-@ 28 became a training vessel and was used to bring new U @-@ boat crews up to standard . She was later sunk in an accident on 17 March 1944 and stricken on 4 August 1944 . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 U @-@ 28 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 1 April 1935 as part of the German Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles . Her keel was laid down in the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen as yard number 909 on 2 December 1935 . After about ten months of construction , she was launched on 14 July 1936 and commissioned into the Kriegsmarine as the third Type VIIA submarine on 12 September 1936 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Wilhelm Ambrosius . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Like all Type VIIA submarines , U @-@ 28 displaced 626 tonnes ( 616 long tons ) while surfaced and 745 t ( 733 long tons ) when submerged . She was 64 @.@ 51 m ( 211 ft 8 in ) in overall length and had a 45 @.@ 50 m ( 149 ft 3 in ) pressure hull . U @-@ 28 's propulsion consisted of two MAN 6 @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ stroke M 6 V 40 / 46 diesel engines that totaled 2 @,@ 100 – 2 @,@ 310 PS ( 1 @,@ 540 – 1 @,@ 700 kW ; 2 @,@ 070 – 2 @,@ 280 bhp ) . Her maximum rpm was between 470 and 485 . The submarine was also equipped with two Brown , Boveri & Cie GG UB 720 / 8 electric motors that totaled 750 PS ( 550 kW ; 740 shp ) . Their maximum rpm was 322 . These power plants gave U @-@ 28 a maximum speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) while surfaced and 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) when submerged . She had a range of 6 @,@ 200 nmi ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 100 mi ) while traveling at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) on the surface and 73 – 94 nmi ( 135 – 174 km ; 84 – 108 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) when submerged . 
 The U @-@ boat 's test depth was 220 m ( 720 ft ) but she could go as deep as 230 – 250 m ( 750 – 820 ft ) without having her hull crushed . U @-@ 28 's armament consisted of five 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes , ( four located in the bow and one in the stern ) . She could have up to eleven torpedoes on board or 22 TMA mines or 33 TMB mines . U @-@ 28 was also equipped with a C35 88 mm gun / L45 deck gun with 220 rounds . Her anti @-@ aircraft defenses consisted of one 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = First patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 28 's first war patrol took place from 19 August to 29 September 1939 . On 14 September , while sailing around the mouth of St George 's Channel , U @-@ 28 sank a 5 @,@ 000 ton freighter , which was her only success of the patrol . 
 = = = Second patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 28 's second war patrol took place from 8 November to 12 December 1939 . For this effort she was instructed to lay a minefield near the port city of Swansea . En route to Bristol , U @-@ 28 sank two ships ; the 5 @,@ 000 ton Dutch tanker MV <unk> and the 5 @,@ 100 ton British freighter SS Royston Grange . U @-@ 28 then laid her minefield and returned to port in Germany . While the minefield was not an immediate success , it sank the 9 @,@ 600 ton British freighter SS <unk> 60 days after it was laid . 
 = = = Third patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 28 's third sortie took place from 18 February to 25 March 1940 . She was instructed to lay mines off the British Naval Base at Portsmouth . After U @-@ 28 laid the minefield , she went on to sink two ships for 11 @,@ 200 tons . 
 = = = Fourth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 28 's fourth war patrol took place from 8 June to 7 July 1940 . She was sent to the Western Approaches and turned in an average performance of sinking three ships totalling 10 @,@ 300 tons . The Irish government sought an explanation from Germany for the sinking of the neutral Greek ship <unk> <unk> : " the entire cargo of which comprised grain for exclusive consumption in Éire " She was sailing from Rosario ( in Argentina ) to Cork with a cargo of wheat when she was torpedoed and sunk south @-@ west of Ireland at 43 ° 35 ′ N 11 ° 15 ′ W. 
 = = = Fifth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 28 's fifth war patrol took place from 11 August to 17 September 1940 and was one of Kuhnke 's most productive . In August , she sank two ships for 5 @,@ 500 tons . On 10 September , U @-@ 28 found and tracked Convoy OA 210 . In the darkness of early morning on 11 September , U @-@ 28 attacked the convoy and claimed two large freighters ( 13 @,@ 000 tons each ) sunk and caused damage to a 10 @,@ 000 ton tanker , bringing Kuhnke 's total for the patrol to five ships for 30 @,@ 000 tons . However , during the postwar analysis , he was only credited with sinking a 2 @,@ 000 ton Dutch freighter and damaging a 4 @,@ 700 ton British freighter ; which , combined with his earlier sinkings , brought his total to four ships for 9 @,@ 945 tons . On his return to Lorient Kuhnke was awarded the Knight 's Cross for his work . 
 = = = Sixth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 28 's sixth and final war patrol took her from Lorient back to Germany ; because of the heavy seas and foul weather , U @-@ 28 sank only half a ship for 2 @,@ 694 tons . ( U @-@ 28 and U @-@ 31 shared credit for the sinking of the SS <unk> ) . On 15 November 1940 , she returned to Germany and was turned over to the training command . Günter Kuhnke proceeded to command U @-@ 125 . 
 = = Fate = = 
 U @-@ 28 sank by accident on 17 March 1944 , at the U @-@ boat pier in Neustadt . During a training exercise , the boat had passed under a dummy freighter used for target practice . The commander @-@ in @-@ training failed to note the position of the stationary freighter , and the U @-@ boat 's conning tower was ripped off . Water flooded the control room , but the other compartments remained intact . The crew escaped by slowly equalizing the water pressure in the boat and swimming to the surface . The boat was raised in March 1944 , but was stricken on 4 August . The submarine 's crew suffered no casualties during her career . 
 = = Wolfpacks = = 
 U @-@ 28 took part in one wolfpack , namely : 
 Prien ( 12 – 17 June 1940 ) 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = The Man Who Never Lied = 
 " The Man Who Never Lied " is a song recorded by American band Maroon 5 for their fourth studio album Overexposed ( 2012 ) . It was written by Adam Levine , Brian West and Marius Moga and produced by Levine and Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy together with West under his production pseudonym <unk> . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , particularly for its chorus . Following the release of the album , due to strong digital downloads , the song peaked at number nine on the singles chart in South Korea with sales of 31 @,@ 977 digital copies . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In 2011 , Maroon 5 re @-@ released their third studio album Hands All Over . The lead single from the re @-@ issue of the album , " Moves Like Jagger " featured American recording artist Christina Aguilera and was a commercial success , managing to reach number @-@ one on 18 national charts including the US Billboard Hot 100 . In middle 2011 , the band started working on their following fourth studio album . One of the members of Maroon 5 , James Valentine spoke to Billboard and revealed their plans to release their fourth studio album in early 2012 . On March 22 , 2012 , the band posted a video on YouTube featuring numerous scenes from the band in the studio , recording the album . On July 17 , 2012 , the album was released under the title Overexposed . 
 " The Man Who Never Lied " was written by Maroon 5 's lead singer Adam Levine together with Brian West and Marius Moga . The song was produced by Levine together with Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy ; West provided additional production under his production name <unk> . " The Man Who Never Lied " was recorded at Conway Studios in Los Angeles by Noah Passovoy while Eric Eylands served as engineering assistant . Serban Ghenea mixed the song at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach together with John Hanes and Phil Seaford who served as mixing engineer and mixing assistant respectively . Passovoy also provided the programming and the keys , while West provided the guitar and additional programming . Additional keys and programming were assisted by Max Martin and Sam Farrar respectively . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " The Man Who Never Lied " is a pop song with a length of three minutes and 25 seconds . It is written in the key of D major , in common time , with a tempo of 116 beats per minute . Levine 's vocal range spans from the low note of A4 to the high note of B5 . Lyrically , the song finds the protagonist in a relationship trouble where he is playing a role of a good person : " I was the man who never lied ... but I couldn 't break your heart like you did yesterday . " According to Nate Chinen of The New York Times , in " The Man Who Never Lied " , Levine sings " about spoiling his perfect record of honesty to spare a quarreling lover some hurtful feelings . " Rob <unk> of Rolling Stone concluded that in the song , the singer confesses that the honesty is the worst policy . According to the reviewer , that 's a " dubious motto for real life – but it 's always a promising one for a pop <unk> . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Suzanne Byrne of RTÉ.ie concluded that " Lucky Strike " alongside " Daylight " , " The Man Who Never Lied " and " Love Somebody " are potential single releases . Jeremy Thomas of 411 Mania labeled the song together with " Payphone " and " One More Night " as " enjoyable numbers " that have potential for a " decent amount " of airplay . Bruce <unk> of The Citizen wrote that " The Man Who Never Lied " together with " One More Night " are evidence " that Maroon 5 have come up with something ( for now ) that they ’ ve embraced and are willing to run with . " In a review of Overexposed Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music wrote , the band had left " the strutting cockerel heat " of their 2004 single " This Love " for the " saturated rave bliss " of " Love Somebody " or " The Man Who Never Lied " ; an effect of the market they have chosen to contribute on . Billboard 's Chris Payne wrote that the song keeps the energy from " Lucky Strike " strong , and contains one of the most memorable choruses on Overexposed . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote that it feels " anonymous " despite its " stadium @-@ sized " chorus . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Conway Studios , Los Angeles , California ; mixed at Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Overexposed , A & M / Octone Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Overexposed , due to strong digital downloads " The Man Who Never Lied " debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number nine on June 24 , 2012 , with sales of 31 @,@ 977 digital copies . The next week , it fell to number 16 and sold additional 15 @,@ 452 copies . It stayed on the chart for total of eight weeks . 
 = = = Weekly = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end = = = 
 = Aubrey Koch = 
 Albert Aubrey ( Aub ) Koch , MBE ( 2 October 1904 – 21 June 1975 ) was a pioneering Australian military and civil pilot . He trained at Point Cook in 1926 , and following graduation accepted a Short Service Commission in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) as there were no places available in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) at the time . After four years service in Egypt and Palestine , he returned to Australia and was commissioned into the Citizen Air Force , flying with No. 1 Squadron at Laverton , where he gained flying instructor qualifications . Soon after , he was employed by Guinea Airways as an aircraft captain , and spent five years in Papua and New Guinea ( PNG ) , gaining fame as the rescuer of the Archbold expedition . Koch was transferred to the RAAF Active Reserve upon going to PNG . He joined Qantas a year before World War II broke out , employed predominantly on the Singapore route . He was unfortunate to be the captain of the only Qantas aircraft known to be shot down during that war , when the Short Empire flying boat Corio was lost off Timor ( Circe disappeared in 1942 , possibly also shot down , and Corinna was destroyed by enemy action on the water at Broome , Western Australia ) . Post war he was recruited by Lester Brain at the formation of Trans Australia Airlines ( TAA ) , specifically to be Senior Pilot <unk> Skymaster . At 45 , he retired from active flying to become Inspector of Safety and Accidents , TAA . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Aubrey Koch was born at Ulverstone , Tasmania on 2 October 1904 , the son of R. W. Koch , later the Building Surveyor of Hobart , and Elinor ( Burton ) Koch . He was educated at <unk> College Hobart , and began an Engineering Degree at the University of Tasmania . He was a keen rower , and was in the bow for the 1925 winning crew in the inter @-@ varsity eights in Brisbane . Aviation called , however , and he entered RAAF Point Cook for pilot training in 1926 , graduating at the end of the year . He was one of six graduates from his course selected for a Short Service Commission in the RAF . 
 Koch was initially sent to England for training and assessment , where he flew the Avro 504 , the Armstrong Whitworth <unk> , and the Bristol Fighter . He then accepted a posting to the Middle East , and was attached to No. 208 Army Cooperation Squadron , RAF , at Heliopolis , Egypt . There he was operational on the Bristol Fighter , and in August and September 1929 was involved in the suppression of the Hebron riots . Whilst on leave in Australia in 1929 , Koch met with Lieutenant Colonel Horace <unk> , Controller of Civil Aviation , who advised him to gain experience on larger aircraft . However , his application for posting to a twin @-@ engine squadron was refused . In May 1930 , the Squadron re @-@ equipped with Armstrong Whitworth Atlas . Koch was also allowed to convert to the Vickers Vimy at No. 216 Squadron , and flew as second pilot on Vickers Victoria aircraft . He returned to Australia at the end of 1930 , arriving in Melbourne on 15 December . In Egypt , Koch had continued his interest in rifle shooting and photography . 
 Employment in public transport aviation was difficult to find in 1931 , but Koch was able to continue flying with the Citizen Air Force at No. 1 Squadron , Laverton . He flew as second pilot without pay for Australian National Airways in 1931 , to gain experience , and was lucky not to be aboard the ill @-@ fated Southern Cloud , when family commitments prevented him taking his position . In mid @-@ 1933 he was appointed instructor with the Australian Aero Club , based at Essendon Aerodrome . In November 1933 , he was recruited by Guinea Airways as an aircraft captain , and was to spend the next five years in Papua and New Guinea . He flew the Junkers W 34 , the Junkers G 31 , and the Ford Tri @-@ Motor during this time , gaining much experience with sea operations when the <unk> was float equipped . He gained some fame from his efforts to deliver supplies to the second ( 1936 – 37 ) Archbold Expedition . The expedition had become isolated when its own aircraft was accidentally destroyed in Port Moresby harbour , and was thought to be camped in the Blucher Mountains near the headwaters of the Strickland River , low on supplies and without fuel for its generators . Koch , operating out of Mt Hagen in a Ford fitted with long range tanks , found the party and resupplied it by parachute with food and gasoline . Among his many photographs taken during this period are several of the last known days of Amelia Earhart at Lae aerodrome . He married Clarice Grant on 1 June 1933 , in Melbourne ; the couple were to have a daughter and two sons . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Koch finally achieved his ambition of joining what was then known as Qantas Empire Airways ( QEA ) with an appointment on 4 July 1938 . The Singapore service commenced on 2 August 1938 ( the westbound service was " officially " opened on 4 August ) . In the arcane language of QEA , he was promoted from " Extra Mate " to " Senior Mate " in October 1940 . This allowed him to fly as relief Captain on the Singapore service . He was soon promoted to " Master " , and in June 1943 to " Extra Master " . QEA was intimately involved in the war effort almost from its beginning , and in late 1940 was contracted to fly 19 <unk> Catalinas from Honolulu to Australia on behalf of the RAAF . By a convenience , the crews were regarded as civilians ( to meet American diplomatic niceties ) for this operation , but on other RAAF contracts , particularly to combat zones , they were seen as serving in the RAAF Reserve . Brain , Koch and P. G <unk> flew the final delivery flight of the Catalina ferry , arriving in Sydney on 24 October 1941 , for the first time via Suva , Fiji . This crew determined to commemorate their mission by flying the first Airmail delivery between Fiji and Australia , and to that end they had a large number of " First Day Covers " ( but without Airmail stamps ) endorsed by the Suva Post Office prior to departure , and by the Sydney Post Office on arrival ( some examples of what became collector 's items are held by the Qantas Museum ) . They also transported 200 pounds weight of ordinary mail on behalf of the Fiji postal authorities . This plan led to a serious contretemps with Pan American , which had the contract to convey the air mail from Fiji but was not due to start operations until 9 November 1941 . 
 Koch returned to the East Indies operation , and on 30 January 1942 , when in command of Corio , he was shot down off Timor by seven Japanese Zeros whilst carrying out a relief flight to Surabaya , Dutch East Indies . Of the eighteen people on board , five survived . Koch was wounded by gunfire in the left leg and left arm , and broke his right leg in the subsequent crash landing . Despite the injuries , he swam about five miles to the shore where he was looked after by local people , until the Dutch Navy found the survivors some days later , and rescued them with a Dornier flying boat . Some three weeks later , he was in Darwin hospital on the day of the first Japanese raid on Darwin . By good fortune , the QEA flying boat Camilla survived the raid , and Koch was flown to Sydney for treatment . 
 He was unfortunate again on 22 April 1943 when , in command of Camilla on an RAAF contract involving the transport of military personnel to Port Moresby , he found himself unable to proceed due to bad weather , and was forced to attempt a night landing on the open ocean when off the coast of New Guinea . Due largely to the inexperience of his co @-@ pilot , the aircraft broke up on landing , and 13 out of the 31 people on board did not survive . Koch spent about 18 hours in the sea before being rescued at the chance passage of a local steamer . A. B. Corbett , the Director @-@ General of Civil Aviation , recommended to his Minister that in view of the circumstances no Court of Inquiry be held — in effect Koch was exonerated . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 In 1946 , the Australian Government determined to nationalise commercial air operations in the belief that air transport was primarily a public service , but was prevented from doing so by a High Court decision . It therefore formed a government airline to compete with the private carriers , which was to be administered by the Australian National Airways Commission , and would operate as Trans Australia Airlines ( TAA ) . Lester Brain was headhunted from Qantas and was appointed General Manager of the new airline . One of his first appointments was that of Captain Aubrey Koch to be Senior Pilot <unk> Skymaster . Koch remained in this role for four years , retiring from active flying in September 1950 with in excess of 17 @,@ 000 flying hours , due to disabilities developed from his war injuries , and taking up the role of Inspector of Air Safety . In June 1955 he was appointed a Member of the Civil Division of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire , the citation being : " In recognition of Captain Koch 's long and distinguished service to civil aviation in Australia . " He finally retired in June 1961 , and settled at Mt Eliza , Victoria , where he died on 21 June 1975 . 
 = Long @-@ toed salamander = 
 The long @-@ toed salamander ( Ambystoma macrodactylum , Baird 1849 ) is a mole salamander in the family Ambystomatidae . This species , typically 4 @.@ 1 – 8 @.@ 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long when mature , is characterized by its mottled black , brown , and yellow pigmentation , and its long outer fourth toe on the hind limbs . Analysis of fossil records , genetics , and biogeography suggest A. macrodactylum and A. laterale are descended from a common ancestor that gained access to the western Cordillera with the loss of the mid @-@ continental seaway toward the Paleocene . 
 The distribution of the long @-@ toed salamander is primarily in the Pacific Northwest , with an altitudinal range of up to 2 @,@ 800 m ( 9 @,@ 200 ft ) . It lives in a variety of habitats , including temperate rainforests , coniferous forests , montane riparian zones , sagebrush plains , red fir forests , semiarid sagebrush , cheatgrass plains , and alpine meadows along the rocky shores of mountain lakes . It lives in slow @-@ moving streams , ponds , and lakes during its aquatic breeding phase . The long @-@ toed salamander hibernates during the cold winter months , surviving on energy reserves stored in the skin and tail . 
 The five subspecies have different genetic and ecological histories , phenotypically expressed in a range of color and skin patterns . Although the long @-@ toed salamander is classified as a species of Least Concern by the IUCN , many forms of land development threaten and negatively affect the salamander 's habitat . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 A. macrodactylum is a member of the Ambystomatidae , also known as the mole salamanders . The Ambystomatidae originated approximately 81 million years ago ( late Cretaceous ) from its sister taxon <unk> . The Ambystomatidae are also members of suborder Salamandroidea , which includes all the salamanders capable of internal fertilization . The sister species to A. macrodactylum is A. laterale , distributed in eastern North America . However , the species @-@ level phylogeny for Ambystomatidae is tentative and in need of further testing . 
 = = Description = = 
 The body of the long @-@ toed salamander is dusky black with a dorsal stripe of tan , yellow , or olive @-@ green . This stripe can also be broken up into a series of spots . The sides of the body can have fine white or pale blue flecks . The belly is dark @-@ brown or sooty in color with white flecks . Root tubercles are present , but they are not quite as developed as other species , such as the tiger salamander . 
 The eggs of this species look similar to those of the related northwestern salamander ( A. gracile ) and tiger salamander ( A. tigrinum ) . Like many amphibians , the eggs of the long @-@ toed salamander are surrounded by a gelatinous capsule . This capsule is transparent , making the embryo visible during development . Unlike A. gracile eggs , there are no visible signs of green algae , which makes egg jellies green in color . When in its egg , the long @-@ toed salamander embryo is darker on top and whiter below compared to a tiger salamander embryo that is light brown to grey above and cream @-@ colored on the bottom . The eggs are about 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) or greater in diameter with a wide outer jelly layer . Prior to hatching — both in the egg and as newborn larvae — they have balancers , which are thin skin protrusions sticking out the sides and supporting the head . The balancers eventually fall off and their external gills grow larger . Once the balancers are lost the larvae are distinguished by the sharply pointed flaring of the gills . As the larvae mature and metamorphose , their limbs with digits become visible and the gills are resorbed . 
 The skin of a larva is mottled with black , brown , and yellow pigmentation . Skin color changes as the larvae develop and pigment cells migrate and concentrate in different regions of the body . The pigment cells , called chromatophores , are derived from the neural crest . The three types of pigment chromatophores in salamanders include yellow xanthophores , black melanophores , and silvery <unk> ( or <unk> ) . As the larvae mature , the melanophores concentrate along the body and provide the darker background . The yellow xanthophores arrange along the spine and on top of the limbs . The rest of the body is flecked with reflective <unk> along the sides and underneath . 
 As larvae metamorphose , they develop digits from their limb bud protrusions . A fully metamorphosed long @-@ toed salamander has four digits on the front limbs and five digits on the rear limbs . Its head is longer than it is wide , and the long outer fourth toe on the hind limb of mature larvae and adults distinguishes this species from others and is also the etymological origin of its specific epithet : macrodactylum ( Greek makros 
 = long and <unk> = 
 toe ) . The adult skin has a dark brown , dark grey , to black background with a yellow , green , or dull red blotchy stripe with dots and spots along the sides . Underneath the limbs , head , and body the salamander is white , pinkish , to brown with larger flecks of white and smaller flecks of yellow . Adults are typically 3 @.@ 8 – 7 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) long . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The long @-@ toed salamander is an ecologically versatile species living in a variety of habitats , ranging from temperate rainforests , coniferous forests , montane riparian , sagebrush plains , red fir forest , semiarid sagebrush , cheatgrass plains , to alpine meadows along the rocky shores of mountain lakes . Adults can be located in forested understory , hiding under coarse woody debris , rocks , and in small mammal burrows . During the spring breeding season , adults can be found under debris or in the shoreline shallows of rivers , streams , lakes , and ponds . <unk> waters are often frequented . 
 This species is one of the most widely distributed salamanders in North America , second only to the tiger salamander . Its altitudinal range runs from sea level up to 2 @,@ 800 meters ( 9 @,@ 200 ft ) , spanning a wide variety of <unk> zones . The range includes isolated endemic populations in Monterey Bay and Santa Cruz , California . The distribution reconnects in northeastern Sierra Nevada running continuously along the Pacific Coast to Juneau , Alaska , with populations dotted along the Taku and Stikine River valleys . From the Pacific coast , the range extends longitudinally to the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Montana and Alberta . 
 = = Ecology and life cycle = = 
 = = = Eggs = = = 
 Like all amphibians , the life of a long @-@ toed salamander begins as an egg . In the northern extent of its range , the eggs are laid in lumpy masses along grass , sticks , rocks , or the mucky substrate of a calm pond . The number of eggs in a single mass ranges in size , possibly up to 110 eggs per cluster . Females invest a significant amount of resources into egg production , with the ovaries accounting for over 50 % of the body mass in the pre @-@ breeding season . A maximum of 264 eggs have been found in a single female — a large number considering each egg is approximately 0 @.@ 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 02 in ) in diameter . The egg mass is held together by a gelatinous outer layer protecting the outer capsule of individual eggs . The eggs are sometimes laid singly , especially in warmer climates south of the Canada and US border . The egg jellies contribute a yearly supply of biological material that supports the chemistry and nutrient dynamics of shallow @-@ water aquatic ecosystems and adjacent forest ecosystems . The eggs also provide habitat for water molds , also known as oomycetes . 
 = = = Larvae = = = 
 Larvae hatch from their egg casing in two to six weeks . They are born carnivores , feeding instinctively on small invertebrates that move in their field of vision . Food items include small aquatic crustaceans ( <unk> , copepods and ostracods ) , aquatic dipterans and tadpoles . As they develop , they naturally feed upon larger prey . To increase their chances for survival , some individuals grow bigger heads and become cannibals , and feed upon their own brood mates . 
 = = = Metamorphosis and juveniles = = = 
 After the larvae grow and mature , for at least one season ( the larval period lasts about four months on the Pacific coast ) , they absorb their gills and metamorphose into terrestrial juveniles that roam the forest undergrowth . Metamorphosis has been reported as early as July at sea level , for A. m. croceum in October to November and even January . At higher elevations the larvae may overwinter , develop , and grow for an extra season before metamorphosing . In lakes at higher elevations , the larvae can reach sizes of 47 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) snout to vent length ( SVL ) at metamorphosis , but at lower elevations they develop faster and metamorphose when they reach 35 – 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) SVL . 
 = = = Adults = = = 
 As adults , long @-@ toed salamanders often go unnoticed because they live a subterranean lifestyle digging , migrating , and feeding on the invertebrates in forest soils , decaying logs , small rodent burrows or rock fissures . The adult diet consists of insects , tadpoles , worms , beetles and small fish . Salamanders are preyed upon by garter snakes , small mammals , birds , and fish . An adult may live 6 – 10 years , with the largest individuals weighing approximately 7 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 26 oz ) , snout to vent lengths reaching 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) , and total lengths reaching 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Seasonal = = = 
 The life history of the long @-@ toed salamander varies greatly with elevation and climate . Seasonal dates of migration to and from the breeding ponds can be correlated with bouts of sustained rainfall , ice thaw , or snow melt sufficient to replenish the ( often ) seasonal ponds . Eggs may be spawned at low elevations as early as mid @-@ February in southern Oregon , from early January to July in northwestern Washington , from January to March in southeastern Washington , and from mid @-@ April to early May in Waterton Lakes National Park , Alberta . The timing of breeding can be highly variable ; of notable mention , several egg masses in early stages of development were found on July 8 , 1999 along the British Columbia provincial border outside Jasper , Alberta . Adults migrate seasonally to return to their natal breeding ponds , with males arriving earlier and staying longer than females , and some individuals have been seen migrating along snow banks on warm spring days . Gender differences ( or sexual dimorphism ) in this species are only apparent during the breeding season , when mature males display an enlarged or bulbous vent area . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The time of breeding depends on the elevation and latitude of the salamander 's habitat . Generally , the lower @-@ elevation salamanders breed in the fall , winter , and early spring . Higher @-@ elevation salamanders breed in spring and early summer . In the higher climates especially , salamanders will enter ponds and lakes that still have ice floating . 
 Adults aggregate in large numbers ( > 20 individuals ) under rocks and logs along the immediate edge of the breeding sites and breed explosively over a few days . Suitable breeding sites include small fish @-@ free ponds , marshes , shallow lakes and other still @-@ water wetlands . Like other <unk> salamanders , they have evolved a characteristic courtship dance where they rub bodies and release pheromones from their chin gland prior to assuming a copulatory mating position . Once in position , the male deposits a spermatophore , which is a gooey stalk tipped with a packet of sperm , and walks the female forward to be inseminated . Males may mate more than once and may deposit as many as 15 spermatophores over the course of a five @-@ hour period . The courtship dance for the long @-@ toed salamander is similar to other species of Ambystoma and very similar to A. <unk> . In the long @-@ toed salamander , there is no rubbing or head @-@ butting ; the males directly approach females and grab on , while the females try to rapidly swim away . The males clasp the female from behind the forelimbs and shake , a behavior called amplexus . Males sometimes clasp other amphibian species during breeding and shake them as well . The male only grabs with the front limbs and never uses his hind limbs during the courtship dance as he rubs his chin side to side pressing down on the female 's head . The female struggles but later becomes subdued . Males increase the tempo and motions , rubbing over the female 's nostrils , sides , and sometimes the vent . When the female becomes quite docile the male moves forward with his tail positioned over her head , raised , and waving at the tip . If the female accepts the males courtship , the male directs her snout toward his vent region while both move forward stiffly with pelvic undulations . As the female follows , the male stops and deposits a spermatophore , and the female will move forward with the male to raise her tail and receive the sperm packet . The full courtship dance is rarely accomplished in the first attempt . Females deposit their eggs a few days after mating . 
 = = = Energy storage and defense mechanisms = = = 
 In some lowland areas the adult salamanders will remain active all winter long , excluding cold spells . However , during the cold winter months in the northern parts of its range , the long @-@ toed salamander burrows below the frost @-@ line in a coarse substrate to hibernate in clusters of 8 – 14 individuals . While hibernating , it survives on protein energy reserves that are stored in its skin and along its tail . These proteins serve a secondary function as part of a mixture or concoction of skin secretions that is used for defense . When threatened , the long @-@ toed salamander will wave its tail and secrete an adhesive white milky substance that is noxious and likely poisonous . The color of its skin can serve as a warning to predators ( aposematism ) that it will taste bad . Its skin colors and patterns are diverse , ranging from a dark black to reddish brown background that is spotted or blotched by a pale @-@ reddish @-@ brown , pale @-@ green , to a bright yellow stripe . An adult may also drop part of its tail and slink away while the tail bit acts as a squirmy decoy ; this is called autotomy . The regeneration and regrowth of the tail is one example of the developmental physiology of amphibians that is of great interest to the medical profession . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 While the long @-@ toed salamander is classified as least concern by the IUCN , many forms of land development negatively affect the salamander 's habitat and have put new perspectives and priorities into its conservation biology . Conservation priorities focus at the population level of diversity , which is declining at rates ten times that of species extinction . Population level diversity is what provides ecosystem services , such as the keystone role that salamanders play in the soil ecosystems , including the nutrient cycling that supports wetland and forested ecosystems . 
 Two life @-@ history features of amphibians are often cited as a reason why amphibians are good indicators of environmental health or ' canaries in the coal mine ' . Like all amphibians , the long @-@ toed salamander has both an aquatic and terrestrial life transition and <unk> skin . Since they serve different ecological functions in the water than they do in land , the loss of one amphibian species is equivalent to the loss of two ecological species . The second notion is that amphibians , such as long @-@ toed salamanders , are more susceptible to the absorption of pollutants because they naturally absorb water and oxygen through their skin . The validity of this special sensitivity to environmental pollutants , however , has been called into question . The problem is more complex , because not all amphibians are equally susceptible to environmental damage because there is such a diverse array of life histories among species . 
 Long @-@ toed salamander populations are threatened by fragmentation , introduced species , and UV radiation . Forestry , roads , and other land developments have altered the environments that amphibians migrate to , and have increased mortality . Places such as Waterton Lakes National Park have installed a road tunnel underpass to allow safe passage and to sustain the migration ecology of the species . [ 2 ] The distribution of the long @-@ toed salamander overlaps extensively with the forestry industry , a dominant resource supporting the economy of British Columbia and the western United States . Long @-@ toed salamanders will alter migration behaviour and are affected negatively by forestry practices not offering sizable management buffers and protections for the smaller wetlands where salamanders breed . Populations near the Peace River Valley , Alberta , have been lost to the clearing and draining of wetlands for agriculture . Trout introduced for the sport fisheries into once <unk> lakes are also destroying long @-@ toed salamander populations . Introduced goldfish prey on the eggs and larvae of long @-@ toed salamanders . Increased exposure to UVB radiation is another factor being implicated in the global decline of amphibians and the long @-@ toed salamander is also susceptible to this threat , which increases the incidence of deformities and reduces their survival and growth rates . 
 The subspecies Ambystoma macrodactylum croceum ( Santa Cruz Long @-@ toed Salamander ) is of particular concern and it was afforded protections in 1967 under the US Endangered Species Act . This subspecies lives in a narrow range of habitat in Santa Cruz County and Monterey County , California . Prior to receiving protections , some few remaining populations were threatened by development . The subspecies is ecologically unique , having unique and irregular skin patterns on its back , a unique moisture tolerance , and it is also an endemic that is geographically isolated from the rest of the species range . Other subspecies include A. m. columbianum , A. m. krausei , A. m. macrodactylum and A. m. sigillatum . 
 = = Systematics and biogeography = = 
 = = = Evolutionary origins = = = 
 The ancestral origins for this species stem from eastern North America , where species richness of <unk> are highest . The following biogeographic interpretation on the origins of A. macrodactylum into western North America is based on a descriptive account of fossils , genetics , and biogeography . The long @-@ toed salamander 's closest living sister species is A. laterale , a native to northeastern North America . Ambystomatidae was isolated to the southeast of the mid @-@ Continental or Western Interior Seaway during the Cretaceous ( ~ 145 @.@ 5 – 66 Ma ) . While three other species of the Ambystomatidae ( A. tigrinum , A. <unk> , and A. gracile ) have overlapping ranges in western North America , the long @-@ toed salamander 's closest living sister species is A. laterale , a native to northeastern North America . It has been suggested that A. macrodactylum <unk> from A. laterale after the Paleocene ( ~ 66 – 55 @.@ 8 Ma ) with the loss of the Western Interior Seaway opening an access route for a common ancestor into the Western Cordillera . Once situated in the montane regions of western North America , species had to contend with a dynamic spatial and compositional ecology responding to the changes in altitude , as mountains grew and the climate changed . For example , the Pacific Northwest became cooler in the Paleocene , paving the way for temperate forest to replace the warmer tropical forest of the Cretaceous . A scenario for the splitting of A. <unk> and other western temperate species from their eastern counterparts involves Rocky Mountain uplift in the late Oligocene into the Miocene . The orogeny created a climatic barrier by removing moisture from the westerly air stream and dried the <unk> area , from southern Alberta to the Gulf of Mexico . 
 Ancestors of contemporary salamanders were likely able to disperse and migrate into habitats of the Rocky Mountains and surrounding areas by the Eocene . <unk> forests were established in western North America by the mid Eocene and attained their contemporary range distributions by the early Pliocene . The temperate forest valleys and montane environments of these time periods ( Paleogene to Neogene ) would have provided the physiographic and ecological features supporting analogs of contemporary Ambystoma macrodactylum habitats . The Cascade Range rose during the mid Pliocene and created a rain shadow effect causing the <unk> of the Columbia Basin and also altered ranges of temperate mesic ecosystems at higher elevations . The rise of the Cascades causing the <unk> of the Columbia Basin is a major biogeographic feature of western North America that divided many species , including A. macrodactylum , into coastal and inland lineages . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are five subspecies of long @-@ toed salamander . The subspecies are discerned by their geographic location and patterns in their dorsal stripe ; Denzel Ferguson gives a biogeographic account of skin patterns , morphology ; based on this analysis , he introduced two new subspecies : A. macrodactylum columbianum and A. m. sigillatum . The ranges of subspecies are illustrated in Robert <unk> 's amphibian field guides . 
 = = = Physical appearance ( phenotypes ) = = = 
 Summary of distinguishing skin patterns and morphological features for the subspecies include : 
 A. m. croceum 
 Orange dorsal color on tail breaking into patches along black body and into tiny dots on head , often absent anterior to eyes . Sides have whitish flecks . Number of costal grooves equals 13 . 
 A. m. columbianum 
 Yellow to tan dorsal stripe on black body , continuous blotches to spots along body ending in narrowed blotches with spot patterns distributed on the head . White flecks along the sides and underside remaining as separate small flecks . Number of vomerine teeth greater than 35 . 
 A. m. krausei 
 Yellow to tan dorsal stripe , continuous blotches to spots along body ending in widened blotches with spot patterns distributed on the head . White flecks along the sides and underside remaining as separate small flecks . Number of vomerine teeth equaling 32 . Number of costal grooves equals 12 . 
 A. m. sigillatum 
 Wax yellow to tan dorsal stripe forming spotty to irregular shaped blotches along body ending in dots or specks of dorsal color on head . Number of vomerine teeth equals 44 . Number of costal grooves equals 13 . 
 A. m. macrodactylum 
 Citrine , dull citrine , to tan dorsal stripe that is diffuse and continuous along grayish body . Pattern ending in diffuse specks of stripe color or absent on head and snout . White flecks on sides sometimes coming together to form larger flecks . Number of vomerine teeth equaling 33 , forming a distinguished transverse arc . Number of costal grooves equals 13 . 
 = = = Biogeography and genetics = = = 
 Mitochondrial DNA analysis identifies somewhat different ranges for the subspecies lineages . The genetic analysis , for example , identifies an additional pattern of deep divergence in the eastern part of the range . The spatial distribution of populations and genetics of this species links spatially and historically through the interconnecting mountain and temperate valley systems of western North America . The breeding fidelity of long @-@ toed salamanders ( philopatry ) and other migratory behaviours reduce rates of dispersal among regions , such as within mountain basins . This aspect of their behavior restricts gene flow and increases the degree and rates of genetic differentiation . Genetic differentiation among regions is higher in the long @-@ toed salamander than measured in most other vertebrate groups . Natural breaks in the range of dispersal and migration occur where ecosystems grade into drier xeric low @-@ lands ( such as prairie climates ) and at frozen or harsher terrain at high elevation extremes ( 2 @,@ 200 meters ( 7 @,@ 200 ft ) ) . 
 A. m. columbianum 
 Genetic evidence for the ' central ' subspecies ( A. m. columbianum ) suggests that it does not extend north into British Columbia , but is restricted to the Blue and Wallowa Mountains of central to northeastern sections of Oregon . Populations are restricted to these areas by the Snake River Canyon ( Idaho ) to the east and low dry or xeric lands in the Madras basin to the west . 
 A. m. macrodactylum 
 The ' coastal ' or ' western ' subspecies ( A. m. macrodactylum ) lineage extends north from northeastern California , across the Klamath Siskiyou Range , through the Willamette Valley , along the coastal mountain ranges , including the Cascade Mountains , and continuing north through British Columbia and up into Alaska . 
 A. m. croceum 
 The Santa Cruz long @-@ toed salamander ( A. m. croceum ) is most closely related to the ' coastal ' or ' western ' subspecies . This conclusion is the most parsimonious biogeographic explanation with nearest populations of A. m. macrodactylum separated by approximately 300 km across the Sacramento @-@ San Joaquin River Delta , California . The isolated endemic populations are listed as an endangered subspecies . Based on the biogeography and molecular clock calibrations , this subspecies may have been separated from the remainder of the distribution since the Miocene , molecular clock calibrations estimating 13 @.@ 9 million years of separation . 
 A. m. krausei 
 The ' eastern ' subspecies ( A. m. krausei ) range is distributed throughout the interior mountains , with the western extent of its range encroaching into the low @-@ land areas of the central interior plateau of Washington and British Columbia and the eastern extent of its range pushing through Rocky Mountain valleys into the lowland foothills and prairies of Montana and Alberta . 
 A. m. sigillatum 
 The traditional ' southern ' subspecies ( A. m. sigillatum ) does not register a mitochondrial genetic identity . This subspecies was identified by Ferguson as forming an <unk> with A. m. columbianum in south central Oregon . 
 Thompson and Russell found another evolutionary lineage that originates in a glacially restricted area of the Salmon River Mountains , Idaho . With the arrival of the Holocene interglacial , approximately 10 @,@ 000 years ago , the Pleistocene glaciers receded and opened a migratory path linking these southern populations to northern areas where they currently overlap with A. m. krausei and co @-@ migrated north into the Peace River ( Canada ) Valley . Ferguson also noted an intergradation in the same geographic area , but between the morphological subspecies A. m. columbianum and A. m. <unk> that run parallel to the <unk> and Selkirk ranges . Thompson and Russell suggest that this contact zone is between two different subspecies lineages because the A. m. columbianum lineage is geographically isolated and restricted to the central Oregon Mountains . 
 = Lewis and Clark Exposition dollar = 
 The Lewis and Clark Exposition dollar was a commemorative gold coin struck in 1904 and 1905 as part of the United States Government 's participation in the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition , held in the latter year in Portland , Oregon . Designed by United States Bureau of the Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber , the coin did not sell well and less than a tenth of the authorized mintage of 250 @,@ 000 was issued . 
 The Lewis and Clark Expedition , the first American overland exploring party to reach the Pacific Coast , was led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark . Between 1804 and 1806 , its members journeyed from St. Louis to the Oregon coast and back , providing information and dispelling myths about the large area obtained by the United States in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 . The Portland fair commemorated the centennial of that trip . 
 The coins were , for the most part , sold to the public by numismatic promoter Farran Zerbe , who had also vended the Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar . As he was unable to sell much of the issue , surplus coins were melted by the Mint . The coins have continued to increase in value , and today are worth between hundreds and thousands of dollars , depending on condition . The Lewis and Clark Exposition dollar is the only American coin to be " two @-@ headed " , with a portrait of one of the expedition leaders on each side . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Louisiana Purchase , by the United States from France in 1803 , more than doubled the area of the American nation . Seeking to gain knowledge of the new possession , President Thomas Jefferson obtained an appropriation from Congress for an exploratory expedition , and appointed his private secretary , Meriwether Lewis , to lead it . A captain in the United States Army , Lewis selected William Clark , a former Army lieutenant and younger brother of American Revolutionary War hero George Rogers Clark , as co @-@ leader of the expedition . Lewis and William Clark had served together , and chose about thirty men , dubbed the Corps of Discovery , to accompany them . Many of these were frontiersmen from Kentucky who were in the Army , as well as boatmen , and others with necessary skills . The expedition set forth from the St. Louis area on May 14 , 1804 . 
 Journeying up the Missouri River , Lewis and Clark met Sacagawea , a woman of the Lemhi Shoshone tribe . Sacagawea had been captured by another tribe and sold as a slave to Toussaint Charbonneau , a French @-@ Canadian trapper , who made her one of his wives . Both Charbonneau and Sacagawea served as interpreters for the expedition and the presence of the Native American woman ( and her infant son , Jean Baptiste Charbonneau ) helped convince hostile tribes that the Lewis and Clark Expedition was not a war party . A great service Sacagawea rendered the expedition was to aid in the purchase of horses , needed so the group could cross the mountains after they had to abandon the Missouri approaching the Continental Divide . One reason for her success was that the Indian chief whose aid they sought proved to be Sacagawea 's brother . 
 The expedition spent the winter of 1804 – 1805 encamped near the site of Bismarck , North Dakota . They left there on April 7 , 1805 and came within view of the Pacific Ocean , near Astoria , Oregon , on November 7 . After exploring the area , they departed eastward on March 23 , 1806 and arrived in St. Louis six months to the day later . Only one of the expedition members died en route , most likely of appendicitis . While they did not find the mammoths or salt mountains reputed to be in the American West , " these were a small loss compared to the things that were gained " . In addition to knowledge of the territories purchased by the US , these included the establishment of relations with Native Americans and increased public interest in the West once their diaries were published . Further , the exploration of the Oregon Country later aided American claims to that area . In gratitude for their service to the nation , Congress gave Lewis and Clark land grants and they were appointed to government offices in the West . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Beginning in 1895 , Oregonians proposed honoring the centennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition with a fair to be held in Portland , a city located along the party 's route . In 1900 , a committee of Portland business men began to plan for the event , an issue of stock was successful in late 1901 , and construction began in 1903 . A long drive to gain federal government support succeeded when President Theodore Roosevelt signed an appropriations bill on April 13 , 1904 . This bill allocated $ 500 @,@ 000 to exposition authorities , and also authorized a gold dollar to commemorate the fair , with the design and inscriptions left to the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury . The organizing committee was the only entity allowed to purchase these from the government , and could do so at face value , up to a mintage limit of 250 @,@ 000 . 
 Numismatist Farran Zerbe had advocated for the passage of the authorization . Zerbe was not only a coin collector and dealer , but promoted the hobby through his traveling exhibition , " Money of the World " . Zerbe , president of the American Numismatic Association from 1908 to 1910 , was involved in the sale of commemorative coins for over 20 years , beginning in 1892 . The Portland exposition 's authorities placed him in charge of the sale of the gold dollar . 
 Details of the preparation of the commemorative dollar are lost ; the Mint destroyed many records in the 1960s . Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber was responsible for the designs . 
 = = Design = = 
 Numismatic historians Don Taxay and Q. David Bowers both suggest that Barber most likely based his designs on portraits of Lewis and of Clark by American painter Charles Willson Peale found in Philadelphia 's Independence Hall . Taxay deemed Barber 's efforts , " commonplace " . The piece is the only American coin to be " two @-@ headed " , bearing a single portrait on each side . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his volume on American coinage , pointed out that some people liked the Lewis and Clark Exposition dollar as it depicted historic figures who affected the course of American history , rather than a bust intended to be Liberty , and that Barber 's coin presaged the 1909 Lincoln cent and the 1932 Washington quarter . Nevertheless , Vermeule deprecated the piece , as well as the earlier American gold commemorative , the Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar . " The lack of spark in these coins , as in so many designs by Barber or [ Assistant Engraver ( later Chief Engraver ) ] Morgan , stems from the fact that the faces , hair and drapery are flat and the lettering is small , crowded , and even . " According to Vermeule , when the two engravers collaborated on a design , such as the 1916 McKinley Birthplace Memorial dollar , " the results were almost oppressive " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Philadelphia Mint produced 25 @,@ 000 Lewis and Clark Exposition dollars in September 1904 , plus 28 more , reserved for inspection and testing at the 1905 meeting of the United States Assay Commission . These bore the date 1904 . Zerbe ordered 10 @,@ 000 more in March 1905 , dated 1905 . The Mint struck 35 @,@ 000 plus assay pieces in March and June in case Zerbe wanted to buy more , doing so in advance as the Philadelphia Mint shut down in the summer , but as he did not order more , the additional 25 @,@ 000 were melted . 
 The Lewis and Clark Exposition dollar was the first commemorative gold coin to be struck and dated in multiple years . A total of 60 @,@ 069 pieces were struck , from both years , of which 40 @,@ 003 were melted . According to numismatists Jim Hunt and Jim Wells in their 2004 article on the coin , " the poor reception afforded the coin at the time of issue virtually guaranteed their rarity for future generation " . 
 = = Aftermath and collecting = = 
 The Lewis and Clark Centennial and American Pacific Exposition and Oriental Fair opened in Portland on June 1 , 1905 . It was not designated as an international exposition , and did not draw much publicity – even within the United States . Nevertheless , two and a half million people visited the fair between Opening Day and the close on October 14 . Sixteen foreign nations accepted invitations from organizers to mount exhibits at the exposition . There was the usual broad array of concessions and midway attractions to entertain visitors . Among Americans who displayed exhibits at the fair were prominent cartoonist and animal fancier Homer Davenport and long @-@ lived pioneer Ezra Meeker . The exposition was one of the few of its kind to make a profit , and likely contributed to a major increase in Portland 's population and economy between 1905 and 1912 . 
 Funds from the sale of the coin were designated for the completion of a statue to Sacagawea in a Portland park . There was little mention of the dollar in the numismatic press . Q. David Bowers speculates that Dr. George F. Heath , editor of The Numismatist , who opposed such commemoratives , declined to run any press releases that Zerbe might have sent . Nevertheless , an article appeared in the August 1905 issue , promoting the exhibit and dollar . As it quotes Zerbe and praises his efforts , it was likely written by him . Zerbe concentrated on bulk sales to dealers , as well as casual ones at the fair at a price of $ 2 ; he enlisted Portland coin dealer D.M. Averill & Company to make retail sales by mail . There were also some banks and other businesses that sold coins directly to the public . Averill ran advertisements in the numismatic press , and in early 1905 , raised prices on the 1904 pieces , claiming that they were near exhaustion . This was a lie : in fact the 1904 @-@ dated coins sold so badly that some 15 @,@ 000 were melted at the San Francisco Mint . Zerbe had Averill sell the 1905 issue at a discounted price of ten dollars for six pieces . As he had for the Louisiana Purchase dollar , Zerbe made the coins available mounted in spoons or in jewelry . Little else is known regarding the distribution of the gold dollars . 
 The coins were highly unpopular in the collecting community , which had seen the Louisiana Purchase coin decrease in value since its issuance . Nevertheless , the value of the Lewis and Clark issue did not drop below issue price , but steadily increased . Despite a slightly higher number of coins recorded as extant , the 1905 issue is rarer and more valuable than the 1904 ; Bowers speculates that Zerbe may have held some pieces only to cash them in , or surrender them in 1933 when President Franklin Roosevelt called in most gold coins . The 1905 for many years traded for less than the 1904 , but by 1960 had matched the earlier version 's price and in the 1980s surpassed it . The 2014 edition of A Guide Book of United States Coins ( the Red Book ) lists the 1904 at between $ 900 and $ 10 @,@ 000 , depending on condition , and the 1905 at between $ 1 @,@ 200 and $ 15 @,@ 000 . One 1904 , in near pristine MS @-@ 68 condition , sold in 2006 at auction for $ 57 @,@ 500 . 
 Despite the relative failure of the coin issue , the statue of Sacagawea was duly erected in a Portland park , financed by coin sales . In 2000 , Sacagawea joined Lewis and Clark in appearing on an gold @-@ colored dollar coin , with the issuance of a circulating coin depicting her and her son . 
 = José Paranhos , Viscount of Rio Branco = 
 José Maria da Silva Paranhos , the Viscount of Rio Branco ( 16 March 1819 – 1 November 1880 ) was a politician , monarchist , diplomat , teacher and journalist of the Empire of Brazil ( 1822 – 1889 ) . Rio Branco was born in Salvador , in what was then the Captaincy of Bahia , to a wealthy family , but most of the fortune was lost after his parents ' deaths early in his childhood . 
 Rio Branco attended Brazil 's Naval School and became a midshipman in 1841 . Later that year he was enrolled in the Army 's Military Academy , eventually becoming an instructor there . Rather than continue to serve in the military , he became a politician in the Liberal Party . In 1845 , he was elected a member of the provincial house of representatives of Rio de Janeiro province , site of the national capital of the same name . Rio Branco rose to power within the province under the tutelage of Aureliano Coutinho , Viscount of Sepetiba — a veteran politician who held tremendous influence over the young and inexperienced Emperor Pedro II . He temporarily abandoned politics after Aureliano Coutinho 's fall from grace and the subsequent dissolution of the Liberal Party . 
 Rio Branco 's work in the press , highlighting threats posed by the armed conflicts in the Platine republics ( Argentina and Uruguay ) , attracted the attention of Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão , Marquis of Paraná , who invited him to act as secretary on a diplomatic mission to Montevideo . They were successful in forging alliances , which contributed to the eventual fall in 1852 of Juan Manuel de Rosas , an Argentine dictator who had declared war on Brazil . In 1853 Rio Branco joined the Marquis of Paraná 's Conservative Party as well as the cabinet over which the latter presided . He rose rapidly through the Conservative ranks during the early 1860s when many colleagues joined members of the defunct Liberal Party to form a new party . Rio Branco was sent to Uruguay in late 1864 , tasked with bringing a diplomatic end to the Uruguayan War . Although successful , he was abruptly dismissed from his post . In 1869 , he was recalled and dispatched to Paraguay , this time to negotiate an end to its war with Brazil . His successful efforts in concluding a peace with Paraguay were recognized , and Pedro II ennobled him , making him Viscount of Rio Branco ( Portuguese for " White River " ) . 
 In 1871 , Rio Branco became the President of the Council of Ministers ( Prime Minister ) for the first time . He would become the Council 's longest @-@ serving president , and his cabinet the second longest , in Brazilian history . His government was marked by a time of economic prosperity and the enactment of several necessary reforms — though they proved to be seriously flawed . The most important of these initiatives was the Law of Free Birth , which granted freeborn status to children born to slave women . Rio Branco led the government that enacted this law , and its passage increased his popularity . However , his government was plagued by a long crisis with the Catholic Church that had resulted from the expulsion of Freemasons from its lay brotherhoods . After more than four years heading the Cabinet , Rio Branco resigned in 1875 . Following a long vacation in Europe , his health swiftly declined and he was diagnosed with oral cancer . Rio Branco died in 1880 and was widely mourned throughout the country . He is regarded by most historians as one of Brazil 's greatest statesmen . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Paranhos was born on 16 March 1819 in Salvador , Bahia , at a time when Brazil was a kingdom united with Portugal . His parents were Agostinho da Silva Paranhos and Josefa <unk> de Barreiros . Agostinho Paranhos , along with his two brothers , migrated to Brazil during the first decade of the 19th century . He became a wealthy merchant and married Josefa , the Brazilian @-@ born daughter of one of Bahia 's long @-@ established families . Her family had roots in Porto , where Agostinho 's own family had originated . Agostinho remained loyal to Portugal at the time of Brazil 's Independence in 1822 , which resulted in his ostracism and the collapse of his business . 
 José Paranhos had a simple childhood without luxury . Though his parents were no longer rich , he did not experience poverty . In later life , José fondly remembered Bahia as the " native land " of his childhood . His father died when he was still a child and his mother followed a few years later . He and his younger brothers were left in a precarious position , since the remainder of Agostinho Paranhos 's fortune had been appropriated by a relative . The brothers were rescued by an uncle on their mother 's side , Eusébio Gomes Barreiros , who held the rank of a colonel in the Engineer Corps . Colonel Barreiros raised his sister 's children as his own and financed their education . An educated man , Barreiros had a strong influence on Paranhos 's upbringing , and in later years , his nephew always spoke respectfully about his uncle . 
 In 1835 , aged 14 , Paranhos was sent to the Imperial capital , Rio de Janeiro , to continue his studies . At the beginning of the following year he was admitted into the Naval Academy . To help support his education , Paranhos tutored his classmates . In 1841 , when he was 22 , he graduated with the rank of midshipman , enrolling in the Army 's Military Academy . He pursued a course in engineering and developed a penchant for mathematics . Prior to graduation from the Army Academy , he was promoted to second lieutenant in the Navy and became a substitute teacher in the Naval Academy . In 1842 , he married Teresa de Figueiredo Faria , whose family had also come from Porto in Portugal . 
 After Paranhos graduated from the Military Academy in 1843 as a second lieutenant in the engineer corps , he decided to return to civilian life and focus on his career as a teacher . He became a regular instructor at the Naval Academy during 1844 , conducting artillery classes . In 1845 , he was transferred from the Naval Academy to the faculty of the Military Academy teaching artillery , fortification , and later , mechanics . In addition to teaching , Paranhos also became a journalist , and by 1844 was working for newspapers which supported the Liberal Party . He remained a professor in the Military Academy and began teaching political economy , statistics and administrative law in 1863 . In 1874 , Paranhos became the dean of the newly created Engineering School ( today the Polytechnic School of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro ) , a civilian branch of the Military Academy 's engineering program . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 = = = Courtier Faction = = = 
 Paranhos ' writings for liberal newspapers attracted the attention of other Liberal Party members . He became a friend and protégé of Aureliano de Sousa e Oliveira Coutinho , later the Viscount of Sepetiba . At the time , Aureliano Coutinho was the most powerful figure in Brazilian national politics . He was the leader of the " Courtier Faction " , a group — sometimes considered a wing of the Liberal Party — which had established influence over the young and inexperienced Pedro II . Members of the faction included high @-@ ranking palace servants and notable politicians . 
 In 1844 , the Emperor appointed Aureliano Coutinho President ( governor ) of Rio de Janeiro province , the richest and most important province in Brazil . With Aureliano Coutinho 's patronage and strong political power base , Paranhos was elected in 1845 , at age 26 , to the Provincial Legislative Assembly — the provincial house of representatives . The following year , Aureliano Coutinho appointed him to be the provincial secretary , then vice @-@ president , and later acting president . In 1847 , Paranhos was elected as a general deputy , representing Rio de Janeiro in the national Chamber of Deputies . 
 The Courtier Faction lost favor in 1847 after it had dominated Brazilian politics for many years . As the Emperor physically matured and became more politically astute , he purged everyone linked to the group . Aureliano Coutinho , as the leader , was completely excluded from political life : " the result of an implicit , if unspoken ban imposed by Pedro II " . The monarch made it clear that he would no longer tolerate being influenced by political factions . From February 1844 through May 1848 , each of the four cabinets were entirely composed of Liberal Party members . Internal divisions within the Liberal Party impeded the projects designed to modernize Brazil , including education reform , construction of railroads and telegraph lines . 
 After the resignation of the last Liberal Cabinet , Pedro II invited the rival Conservative Party to form a new cabinet . With his party no longer in control , Paranhos lost much of his influence . The Liberal Party was not willing to accept its loss of power . The most radical faction of the Liberals in the province of Pernambuco , known as the Partido da Praia ( " Party of the Beach " ) , openly advocated a rebellion . Nominally Liberal , the praieiros were associated with the Courtier Faction . The proposed rebellion would be an attempt of this branch of the Courtier Faction to regain control of the government . The praieiros had little support , and public opinion was also against them . The group was unable to convince the vast majority of the population that a revolt would bring them any benefits . On 2 February 1849 , the limited uprising of the praieiros was completely defeated after attacking Recife , the capital of Pernambuco . Even though Paranhos had condemned it , the <unk> rebellion , combined with the downfalls of his patron and the Liberal Party , made a continued political career impossible . He turned his focus once again to his work in journalism . 
 = = = Platine War = = = 
 After leaving politics , Paranhos quit writing for liberal newspapers and became the editor of the politically neutral Jornal do Comércio ( " Commerce News " ) . He wrote a series of weekly articles from 1850 until the end of 1851 which were entitled " Letters to an absent friend " . The column dealt with subjects that included politics , Brazilian society and day @-@ to @-@ day life in the Brazilian capital . Paranhos 's articles soon began to focus on Brazil 's foreign policy , especially Argentina and Uruguay 's civil war . 
 Don Juan Manuel de Rosas , the dictator of Argentina , had assisted the separatist rebels in the Brazilian province of Rio Grande do Sul during the 1830s , and continued to attempt its annexation . In addition to the threat to Brazil 's territorial integrity , Rosas had ambitions to conquer Paraguay , Uruguay and Bolivia . Brazil 's Conservative Cabinet decided to form military alliances with the countries threatened by the dictator . On 4 September 1851 , Brazil 's army , commanded by Luis Alves de Lima e Silva ( then Count of Caxias ) , crossed the border into Uruguay . 
 Paranhos began to write articles in support of Brazil 's proactive foreign policy , which brought him close to the ruling Conservative party . The Minister of Foreign Affairs , Paulino Soares de Sousa ( later the Viscount of Uruguai ) , appointed the Conservative Party 's main leader , Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão ( later the Marquis of Paraná ) , as a special plenipotentiary diplomat for the Platine region . Unexpectedly , Carneiro Leão decided to take Paranhos as his secretary , passing over the more experienced members of Brazil 's diplomatic corps . On 23 October 1851 , both departed for Montevideo , the Uruguayan capital . 
 Carneiro Leão had a keen eye for spotting potential , and Paranhos — who had revealed himself a very capable man during his tenure as a Liberal politician in Rio de Janeiro province — had talents which could be put to use . As Carneiro Leão told Paranhos when justifying his choice of the young and inexperienced journalist : " I consulted no one about appointing you . What influenced my mind was your merit , which I prize : I hope , sir , that you will prove I got it right . " Paranhos was a handsome and charming man , tall at 1 @.@ 95 meters ( 6 ft 4 @.@ 8 in ) , with blue eyes and golden hair . Historian Jeffrey D. Needell remarked that in Paranhos , Carneiro Leão had " a man with marked literary skill , with a military background and unusually fine technical knowledge , with political instincts and proven political courage , and with a clear need for a new patron , with Aureliano [ Coutinho ] ' s recent eclipse " . That , along with cool @-@ headedness , outstanding oratory skills , inexhaustible energy , and a gifted and cultured mind , made him seem the ideal person for the post . 
 The two men arrived in Montevideo for negotiations on 2 November . On the 21st of the same month , Carneiro Leão signed a treaty of alliance with Uruguay and the rebel Argentine provinces of Entre Ríos and Corrientes . A Brazilian division , along with Uruguayan and Argentine rebel troops , invaded Argentina . On 3 February 1852 , the allies defeated an army led by Rosas , who fled to the United Kingdom . To Needell , Paranhos " quickly adapted his own skills to the necessities of the mission . He demonstrated not only the intelligence and verbal ability expected , but a surprisingly rapid grasp of the issues and the actors , handling the complications with élan , showing a flair for decision , a capacity for work , an eye for details , and an instinct for imposing himself that won Honório [ Hermeto ] ' s decided approval and , after some hesitation ( allegedly because Paranhos was a novice , to Paulino Soares 's way of thinking ) , the support of Paulino [ Soares ] . " An ally of Brazil against Rosas who went on to become President of Argentina in 1862 , Bartolomé Mitre would recall decades later that Paranhos had been the " soul " of the successful diplomatic mission headed by Carneiro Leão . 
 = = Into the Conservative Party = = 
 = = = Conciliation = = = 
 Paranhos was left behind when Carneiro Leão returned to Brazil , having been named Brazil 's diplomatic minister to Uruguay . Paranhos ' time in Uruguay allowed him to acquire an understanding of the dynamics characterizing Hispanic American nations of the period . Intermittent crises leading to and resulting from coups , government by dictators , political factionalism and civil wars were commonplace among these countries . A penchant for , and skill in , diplomacy became evident during his stay — as a pleased Viscount of Uruguai , still Minister of Foreign Affairs , noted in February 1853 : " In a general manner , I approve of what our diplomatic representatives do ; however , it almost always seems to me that , were I in their places , I would have done better . But with Dr. Paranhos that thought does not occur to me . Every time I read his communiqués , I tell myself : ' This is precisely what I would have done or said . ' " 
 On 6 September 1853 , Carneiro Leão was appointed President of the Council of Ministers and charged with organizing a new cabinet . Emperor Pedro II wished to advance an ambitious plan , which became known as " the Conciliation " . The goal of the Conciliation was to put an end to the periodic eruption of armed conflicts between political factions , such as had occurred in the Praieira rebellion . It had become usual for parties which had lost power in elections to seize back control using force . The Conciliation aimed to strengthen the role of parliament in settling the country 's political disputes . Both parties would be required to agree to rise above partisan politics and instead devote themselves to the common good of the nation . 
 The new President invited several Liberals to join the Conservative ranks and went so far as to name some as ministers . One of these was Paranhos , who took the Foreign Affairs portfolio . He was still in Montevideo when he learned that Carneiro Leão had succeeded in having him elected a general deputy in 1853 . The new cabinet , albeit highly successful , was plagued from the beginning by strong opposition from Conservative Party members who repudiated the new recruits from the Liberal side , believing that these did not truly share the party 's ideals and were mainly interested in gaining public offices . Despite the mistrust , Carneiro Leão demonstrated great resilience in fending off threats and overcoming obstacles and setbacks . 
 After the sudden and unexpected death of Carneiro Leão in September 1856 , his cabinet only managed to survive him by a few months . The Emperor , although critical of the way the Conciliation had been implemented , had learned to appreciate its merits and was eager that it continue . Pedro II 's support gave the Conciliation another chance , and allowed Paranhos to return to government once more as Foreign Minister on 12 December 1858 . The most pressing issue facing Paranhos was the Paraguayan government 's persistent refusal to allow Brazilian ships access to Mato Grosso province . At that time , the best and fastest way to reach that distant Brazilian province was to travel via the Atlantic and from there up the rivers which flow between the nations south of Brazil . One of the reasons for Brazil 's war against Argentina in 1851 was to assure the free passage of its ships . The crisis between Brazil and Paraguay had dragged on since Paranhos 's tenure as Foreign Minister in Carneiro Leão 's cabinet . On 12 February 1858 , Paranhos signed a treaty with Paraguay which allowed Brazilian ships unrestricted navigation of Paraguayan rivers . This prevented the outbreak of war — or at least deferred the conflict until 1864 . 
 = = = Rise of the Progressive League = = = 
 The ultraconservatives who opposed the Conciliation policy were led by the Viscount of Itaboraí , Eusébio de Queirós and the Viscount of Uruguai . These elder statesmen were of the same generation as the late Carneiro Leão and had taken the leadership of the Conservative Party after his death . Although conservative in name , they had repeatedly proven more progressive in many areas than their rivals , the Liberals . The Viscount of Uruguai had been Paranhos 's protector since the 1851 diplomatic mission and greatly influenced his protégé , who stood by the ultraconservatives . Paranhos managed to persuade Luis Alves de Lima e Silva ( who had been commander @-@ in @-@ chief during the Platine War , his colleague as War Minister in the Conciliation Cabinet , and later the Duke of Caxias ) to stay on the side of the Conservative Party 's old guard . 
 During the years following 1857 , none of the cabinets survived long . They quickly collapsed due to the lack of a majority in the Chamber of Deputies . The Conservative Party had split down the middle : on one side were the ultraconservatives , and on the other , the moderate conservatives . In the wake of Carneiro Leão 's cabinet , a new generation of politicians had emerged , eager to acquire more power inside the Conservative Party . Paranhos belonged to this younger age group . These men saw their path to the top ranks as being blocked by the Conservative elders , who would not easily relinquish control . 
 Remaining members of the Liberal Party , which had languished since the Praieira rebellion in 1849 , took advantage of the Conservative Party 's apparently impending dissolution to return to national politics with renewed strength . They delivered a powerful blow to the government when they managed to win several seats in the Chamber of Deputies in 1860 . The Emperor asked the Marquis ( later Duke ) of Caxias to head a new cabinet on 2 March 1861 . Caxias chose Paranhos as his Minister of Finance ( and interim Minister of Foreign Affairs ) , and he soon became the Marquis 's right hand . His influence became so great that the ministry became known as the " Caxias @-@ Paranhos Cabinet " . 
 The new government was faced with a major challenge : the Chamber of Deputies was divided into three groups : the ultraconservatives , the Moderates and the Liberals . Paranhos and Caxias named men who were either ultraconservatives or Moderates to the remaining portfolios , in an attempt to weaken the reinvigorated Liberal opposition and consolidate a workable governing majority . Despite successfully recruiting enough supporters from outside the party to form a government , the Cabinet was hobbled from the outset by its lack of internal unity . It was doomed when Paranhos 's friend and former colleague in the Conciliation Cabinet , José Tomás Nabuco de Araújo , delivered a speech advocating a merger of Moderate Conservatives and Liberals into a truly new political party . 
 So enthusiastically well @-@ received was this speech , that both groups voted together as a single , cohesive faction , leaving the government without a majority . The Cabinet requested that the Emperor dissolve the Chamber and call for new elections , but he refused . With no remaining alternative , the ministers resigned , and on 24 May 1862 Pedro II named a member of the Moderate @-@ Liberal coalition to form a new cabinet . The new political party , of which the majority of members were former Conservatives , was called the " Progressive League " . The new cabinet marked the end of 14 years of Conservative dominance in national politics . The defeat was not a total loss for Paranhos , since he was named lifetime Senator for Mato Grosso province by the Emperor in November 1862 , after having garnered the most votes in the provincial election . He took office as Senator on 5 March 1863 . 
 = = Diplomat = = 
 = = = Uruguayan War = = = 
 Another civil war had begun in Uruguay which pitted its political parties against one another . The internal conflict led to the murder of Brazilians and the looting of their Uruguayan properties . Brazil 's Progressive Cabinet decided to intervene and dispatched an army , which invaded Uruguay in December 1864 , beginning the brief Uruguayan War . 
 The dictator of Paraguay , Francisco Solano López , took advantage of the Uruguayan situation during late 1864 to establish his nation as a regional power . On 11 November of that year , he ordered a Brazilian civilian steamship seized , triggering the Paraguayan War . Then in December , the Paraguayan army invaded the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso ( currently the state of Mato Grosso do Sul ) . Four months later , Paraguayan troops invaded Argentine territory as a prelude to an attack upon the Brazilian province of Rio Grande do Sul . 
 What had seemed a simple military intervention of short duration led to a full @-@ scale war in South America 's southeast . The Progressive Cabinet named Paranhos plenipotentiary minister . His mission was to end the conflict with Uruguay so that Brazil could focus on the far more serious threat posed by Paraguay . He arrived in the Argentine capital , Buenos Aires , on 2 December 1864 . Paranhos signed a peace treaty with the Uruguayan government on 20 February 1865 , ending the war . Paranhos not only managed to bring about peace , but he concurrently forged an alliance between Brazil , Argentina and the Uruguayan rebels ( who formed Uruguay 's postwar government ) against Paraguay . The pact would later be officially signed as the Treaty of the Triple Alliance . 
 The Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Brazilian forces , Admiral Joaquim Marques Lisboa ( then Baron and later Marquis of Tamandaré ) , himself a Progressive , complained to the Brazilian Cabinet of the outcome engineered by Paranhos . By the time the peace treaty was concluded , the Uruguayan capital was under siege by Brazilian troops and under blockade by the Brazilian fleet . The admiral and the Cabinet were eager for an end to the conflict which would have resulted in a conquest of the enemy capital and a consequent boost in the popularity of the Brazilian government . Paranhos , however , had preempted such an outcome . As retaliation for the bloodless conclusion , he was fired from his post . Returning to Brazil , he defended himself in the Senate : " Say [ ... ] whatever you want about the diplomatic act of 20 February ; you will not be able to take away from me this grateful conviction : that through that solution I saved the life of 2 @,@ 000 fellow compatriots , [ and ] avoided the destruction of an important capital " . Nonetheless , he received accolades in Uruguay , Brazil and even Argentina for his accomplishment in engineering both an end to the war and the formation of the alliance . 
 = = = Paraguayan War = = = 
 From its inception , the Progressive League was plagued by internal conflict between Progressives ( former Moderate Conservatives ) and <unk> ( former Liberals ) . All of the cabinets formed by the League after 1862 were short @-@ lived . The Paraguayan invasion in 1864 led to a conflict far longer than expected , increasing tensions within the party . By 1868 , a rift had opened between the Marquis of Caxias ( then Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Brazilian forces in the war ) and the Progressive Cabinet . With its credibility for prosecuting the war now vanished , the Cabinet resigned and the Emperor called the Conservatives back into power on 16 July 1868 . Once again Paranhos — who was extraordinary member of the Council of State since 18 August 1866 — became Minister of Foreign Affairs . 
 The rise of the Conservative Party impelled the Progressives and <unk> to unify — something they had not been able to achieve while in power . The Progressive @-@ Historical coalition was rechristened as the Liberal Party ( the third bloc bearing this name in Brazil 's history ) . Its most radical wing would declare itself republican in 1870 — an ominous signal to the monarchy . 
 Paraguay 's capital , Asunción , was occupied on 1 January 1869 , and there was a widespread belief that the war was nearing an end . On 1 February 1869 , Paranhos departed for Asunción as plenipotentiary minister with the goal of concluding a peace treaty . Paranhos brought along his eldest son ( one of nine ) , José Maria da Silva Paranhos Júnior ( later Baron of Rio Branco ) , as his secretary . Their relationship would later break down due to an affair between the son and a Belgian actress which produced several children . Although the couple eventually resided together , they never married , and no formal acknowledgement was ever made of her existence or that of his children . Paranhos strongly disapproved of his son 's personal life , which was considered scandalous by 19th century Brazilian society . Long after his father 's death and after Brazil had become a republic , the junior Paranhos would go on to a distinguished career as Minister of Foreign Affairs . He has come to be regarded as one of the nation 's greatest heroes due to his pivotal role in securing the country 's international boundaries , and has been officially designated as the <unk> ( a type of " patron saint " ) of Brazilian Diplomacy . 
 The diplomatic mission arrived in Asunción on 20 February 1869 . Asunción was then a small town of unpaved streets and many buildings constructed of little more than straw . With Paraguayan dictator Francisco Solano López on the run , the country lacked a government . Paranhos had to create a provisional government which could sign a peace accord and recognize the border claimed by Brazil between the two nations . Even with Paraguay devastated , the power vacuum resulting from López 's overthrow was quickly filled by emerging domestic factions which Paranhos had to accommodate . According to historian Francisco Doratioto , Paranhos , " the then @-@ greatest Brazilian specialist on Platine affairs " , had a " decisive " role in creating a democratic Paraguayan government . Paraguay thus survived as an independent nation . Later , on 20 June 1870 , preliminary peace protocols were signed . The final peace treaty accepting Brazilian claims was signed in January 1872 . 
 While in Paraguay , Paranhos had to deal with another serious issue . Gaston d 'Orléans , Count of Eu — grandson of King Louis Philippe I of France and husband of Emperor Pedro II 's daughter and heir Dona Isabel — had succeeded Caxias as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Brazilian forces . After a brilliant beginning which included victories over the remnants of López 's army , the Count fell into depression . Paranhos became the unacknowledged , de facto commander @-@ in @-@ chief . López was found and killed on 1 March 1870 , bringing the war to an end . On 20 June 1870 the Emperor granted Paranhos the title of Viscount of Rio Branco ( " White River " , the name of a river that Paraguay claimed as its border with Brazil ) with the added <unk> ( " Greatness " ) distinction . After returning to Brazil , Rio Branco became an ordinary member of the Council of State on 20 October 1870 . 
 = = President of the Council of Ministers = = 
 = = = Longest @-@ serving prime minister = = = 
 While still in Paraguay , Rio Branco was recalled , having been told in advance that the Emperor intended to offer him the office of President of the Council of Ministers ( Prime Minister ) . Pedro II was maneuvering to pass a controversial bill which would immediately declare children born to slave women as free . The Empire which Rio Branco was asked to govern had undergone great changes since he had begun his career in politics . Decades of internal peace , political stability and economic prosperity had brought about a situation where everything " seemed set fair for the future " — although time would prove otherwise . The end of the war against Paraguay ushered in what is considered the " Golden Age " and apogee of the Brazilian Empire . Brazil 's international reputation for political steadiness , progressiveness and investment potential greatly improved and , with the exception of the United States , was unequalled by any other American nation . The economy began undergoing rapid growth , and immigration flourished . Railroad , shipping and other modernization projects were adopted . With an end to slavery on the horizon " and other reforms projected , the prospects for ' moral and material advances ' seemed vast . " 
 Pedro II planned a trip to Europe which would result in his absence for almost a year . In his place , his daughter and heir Isabel became Regent . Since she was young and inexperienced , Rio Branco could not rely on Imperial intervention to help push through passage of the Emperor 's anti @-@ slavery legislation . By this time , the Conservative elders were no more , and he had risen to lead the Conservative Party . Rio Branco formed his Cabinet on 7 March 1871 and it would last until 25 June 1875 — the second longest in the Empire 's history . Rio Branco became the longest @-@ serving prime minister . With a single exception , all ministers he appointed were young and inexperienced . Only one achieved prominence : João Alfredo Correia de Oliveira , who as President of the Council of Ministers would , on 13 May 1888 , secure passage of the law that extinguished the last vestiges of slavery in Brazil . 
 = = = Law of Free Birth = = = 
 The bill to set free all children born of slave women ( and thus limit the tenure of slavery to the lifetimes of those slaves then alive ) was introduced in the Chamber of Deputies on 12 May 1871 . It faced " a determined opposition , which commanded support from about one @-@ third of the deputies and which sought to organize public opinion against the measure . " According to historian José Murilo de Carvalho , Rio Branco " had to use all his extraordinary energy and leadership skills to convince the deputies " , as there was opposition from influential members of both the Conservatives and Liberals . He delivered 21 speeches , in both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate , advocating approval of the legislation . The abolition of slavery was strongly opposed by the ruling circles . Even Rio Branco had earlier opposed the proposal , fearing its impact on national stability , though after 1867 he became convinced the measure was necessary . 
 The legislation was only forced through the Chamber of Deputies by repeated use of cloture to move the process forward . Only in late August was the bill finalized and forwarded to the Senate for consideration . The Senate finally passed the measure on 27 September 1871 . Isabel signed the legislation on the following day , and it became known as the " Law of Free Birth " . According to historian Lidia Besouchet , at that moment " no one had more popularity than Rio Branco " anywhere in Brazil . Articles praising him and telling the story of his life and career appeared in newspapers in the United States , Argentina , the United Kingdom , France , Italy , Portugal , Spain , and other foreign nations . To Besouchet , its passage was the apogee of Rio Branco 's career . 
 Despite the accolades , the law 's passage had seriously damaged the long @-@ term prospects of the Empire . It " split the Conservatives down the middle , one party faction backed the reforms of the Rio Branco Cabinet , while the second — known as the <unk> [ <unk> ] — were unrelenting in their opposition " . The latter were ultraconservatives , led by Paulino José Soares de Sousa Jr . , the 2nd Viscount of Uruguai . The legislation , and Pedro II 's support for it , resulted in these ultraconservatives no longer being unconditionally loyal to the monarchy . 
 The Conservative Party had previously experienced serious division during the 1850s , when the Emperor 's complete support for the Conciliation policy gave rise to the Progressives . The difference then was that ultraconservatives who opposed Conciliation ( led by Eusébio , Uruguai and Itaboraí ) perceived the Emperor as being indispensable to the functioning of the political system : an ultimate and impartial arbiter when deadlock threatened . This new generation of ultraconservatives , unlike their predecessors , had no experience of the Regency and early years of Pedro II 's reign , when external and internal dangers threatened the nation 's existence . They had only known a stable administration and prosperity . The young politicians saw no reason to uphold and defend the Imperial office as a unifying force beneficial to the nation . Unbeknownst to Rio Branco and Pedro II , both had prepared the path to the Empire 's later downfall . 
 Reaching beyond the slavery issue , the Cabinet advanced several measures to address calls for political and administrative reform . However , all of these — including the Law of Free Birth — were only partially effective due to various loopholes . Although declared freeborn , children born to slave mothers were kept , even after the law 's enactment , under the control of slaveowners until age twenty @-@ one . It is true that " unable to reproduce itself , slavery would eventually disappear " , but the status quo was preserved for at least two decades . In effect , as historian Roderick J. Barman summarized it , the " law changed everything and it changed nothing " . Other reforms also had shortcomings . The police reform legislation of 1871 theoretically limited the police 's powers to imprison arbitrarily and protected civil liberties , although they generally ignored these constraints . 
 = = = Religious Question = = = 
 Meanwhile , the government had to deal with a serious and protracted crisis involving the Catholic Church . Catholicism was the state religion in Brazil , and there was a great degree of state control which had been inherited from Portuguese rule , this included the appointment of clergy . This situation led to a state of affairs where the Catholic clergy were seen as being understaffed , undisciplined and poorly educated , leading to a loss of moral authority and popular respect for the Church . There had been a series of measures aiming to weaken the authority of the Papacy over the Brazilian church including the suspension of the acceptance of novices into monasteries in 1856 and the introduction of a right of appeal to the crown over most church affairs in 1857 , neither of which were accepted by Rome . 
 The Imperial government wanted to reform the church and appointed a series of well educated , reforming bishops . Although these bishops agreed with the government on the need to reform , they did not share Pedro II 's views on the subservience of the Church to government and tended to be influenced by <unk> which emphasised loyalty to the Papacy over loyalty to the civil powers . 
 One of the new generation of bishops was the bishop of Olinda , Dom Vital . In 1872 , he expelled Freemasons from lay brotherhoods . All forms of Freemasonry had long been forbidden to all Catholics under pain of excommunication . 
 Rio Branco was grand master of the Grande Oriente do Brasil , the largest Brazilian Masonic body . It is not known exactly when or how Rio Branco became a Freemason , but he had been a member since at least 1840 . Brazilian Masonry was not seen as being as hostile to the church as Latin Freemasonry on the Continent of Europe . In the view of one historian , neither " the president of the Council nor his associates could be accused of atheism or hostility to religion " . 
 The government came down on the side of the Freemasons and against the church , ordering Dom Vital to rescind the interdict , which he refused . This refusal led to the bishops being tried before the Supreme Court of Justice of the Empire where in 1874 they were convicted and sentenced to four years of hard labor which was commuted to imprisonment without hard labor . Rio Branco explained in a letter written in August 1873 that he believed the government " could not compromise in the affair " since " it involved principles essential to the social order and to national sovereignty " . These actions aligned with his own views , but his convictions were bolstered by the Emperor 's identical conclusions . Pedro II regarded Rio Branco as his favorite politician and a second @-@ in @-@ command on whom he could rely . The Emperor played a decisive role by unequivocally backing the government 's actions in moving against the bishops . The lack of independence shown by Rio Branco in relation to Pedro II was strongly criticized by historian Roderick J. Barman , who believed that the Prime Minister only enforced policies that did not displease the Emperor or which had his full support . The trial and imprisonment of the two bishops was very unpopular , . 
 The imposition of the metric system resulted in demonstrations in the northeast during 1874 . Metric weights and measures were destroyed by peasants , and land and tax records were burned . The movement was called <unk> <unk> ( " Smash the <unk> " ) and did not have any lasting impact — although it illustrated popular dissatisfaction and was an embarrassment to the government . " 
 The <unk> <unk> riots were suspected of being condoned by priests , and together with the arrest of the bishops , drew attention to the Imperial government having become embroiled in a no @-@ win dispute . The crisis would only be smoothed over by the replacement of the Cabinet in September 1875 and the Emperor 's reluctant grant of a full amnesty to the bishops . Historian Heitor Lyra blamed Rio Branco and his Cabinet , both bishops and , primarily , Pedro II for the ordeal . All parties involved revealed a lack of tact , and their intransigence only caused harm — mostly to the monarchy itself . The main consequence of the crisis was that the clergy no longer saw any benefit in upholding Pedro II . Although they abandoned the Emperor , most eagerly awaited the accession of his eldest daughter and heir Isabel because of her <unk> views . 
 = = Later years and death = = 
 The Rio Branco Cabinet , increasingly divided , resigned in June 1875 after having served for four years . The Cabinet 's viability had been impaired by the ongoing crisis with the Catholic Church and an international financial crash that caused the failure of several Brazilian banks . The Emperor attempted , without success , to convince Paranhos to continue as head of the government . Paranhos replied in a letter : " Your Majesty knows that I wish to deliver my post to whoever is better to occupy it . If I have not become sick in public thus far , there is no doubt that I am tired . " Pedro II had no intention on naming the 2nd Viscount of Uruguai as Rio Branco 's replacement , to prevent the ultraconservative faction from coming to power . Instead , he called on the Duke of Caxias to head a new cabinet . 
 The Caxias Cabinet lasted for almost three years , until the Liberals took the reins in January 1878 . With the Conservative Party now the opposition , Rio Branco decided to undertake a one @-@ year tour of Europe , during which he visited most of its countries . He met Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom , King Umberto I of Italy , Pope Leo XIII and other leaders during this trip . Rio Branco also visited his eldest son , who was then living in Liverpool as a consul representing Brazil . He did not meet his son 's children , though it is not known whether he refused to meet them or whether his son did not present them . Upon his return to Brazil , Rio Branco was met with huge celebrations in each Brazilian port he visited : in Recife , in his native Salvador , and finally in Rio de Janeiro where he arrived on 30 July 1879 . 
 However , Brazil 's champion in the fight for the abolition of slavery was dying . While in Europe , the first symptoms of mouth cancer appeared . Rio Branco was a heavy smoker , and he would daily smoke up to thirty Cuban cigars specially imported for him from Havana . Until July 1880 , he was still making appearances in Parliament to deliver speeches , but after that date he no longer attended . Rio Branco still kept a close watch on political developments , however , and continued to appear at meetings of the Council of State . He had already retired from teaching in 1877 . 
 Until 30 October , he was still capable of speaking unhindered . His doctors performed several surgeries to no avail , and the cancer spread to his throat . One night , he suffered an agonizing attack of meningitis . In a fever @-@ induced delirium , Rio Branco said : " Do not disturb Slavery 's march [ toward its doom ] . " His last warning went unheeded , for rather than simply allowing slavery to slowly die out , the last remnants of slavery would be aggressively extinguished in 1888 by Princess Isabel and his former minister João Alfredo ( by then President of the Council ) . At 7 : 05 am on 1 November 1880 , Rio Branco died . His last words were : " I will confirm before God everything I have affirmed to men . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rio Branco 's death was met with consternation throughout the nation . Pedro II considered it , in his words , a " great loss to Brazil " . The day after his death , more than 20 @,@ 000 gathered in the streets of Rio de Janeiro to witness the grandiose funeral procession . He was honored with eulogies and gun salutes . 
 The abrupt abolition of slavery which Rio Branco had warned against eventually occurred eight years later . This resulted in the alienation of the second Viscount of Uruguai 's ultraconservative faction and powerful political interests . These formed a subversive alliance with republicans and discontented military officers which led to the overthrow of the Empire on 15 November 1889 . 
 Writing at the end of the 19th century , the Brazilian abolitionist leader Joaquim Nabuco said that Rio Branco was — of all the politicians who held the office during Pedro II 's reign — the most fitted to the post of President of the Council of Ministers . Nabuco considered him one of the greatest statesmen of the Empire . However , he also argued that as a leader , a lawmaker , and a creator of doctrines , there were many other politicians far better than Rio Branco . But unlike all the others , who were brilliantly accomplished in one or a few skills , but lacking in many others , Rio Branco was good — though unexceptional — in all . In other words , he was a competent generalist . Nabuco 's view was that due to Rio Branco 's lack of first @-@ rate abilities , he would not have been the best leader in troubled times — such as the anarchy which existed during Pedro II 's minority , or at the end of a period of chaos when strong action was needed to rebuild . Rio Branco was , however , the perfect choice in a time of peace and stability where his multiple skills could shine . His ability exactly fit the situation in Brazil when he became President of the Council of Ministers in 1871 . 
 According to historian Heitor Lyra , Rio Branco was the greatest politician of his time , with the only other at his level being the Marquis of Paraná . Historian José Murilo de Carvalho said that he was " without a doubt the most complete statesman of that time " . Ronaldo Vainfas wrote that Rio Branco was " the typical modernizing conservative , who implemented reforms preached by the liberals , thus emptying the political platform of the opposition . " 
 Historian Lidia Besouchet believed that he was " one of the [ monarchy 's ] main supports " and with his death — along with the deaths of other veteran politicians — the Empire began to collapse ( a view shared by other historians ) . Historian Hélio Vianna considered him " one of the most notable statesmen of the Empire " . Historian Roderick J. Barman had a far less laudatory view toward him , saying that although he had " success as a minister and a diplomat " , and as prime minister and during Pedro II 's absence , Rio Branco " had more than proved his capacities " in that he " did not possess , as had [ the Marquis of ] Paraná , the character and political standing to act independently of the Emperor . He was very much Pedro II 's agent . " 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles of nobility = = = 
 Viscount of Rio Branco on 20 June 1870 . 
 = = = Other titles = = = 
 Member of the Brazilian Council of State . 
 Member of the Brazilian Historic and Geographic Institute . 
 Honorary member of the British Anti @-@ Slavery Society . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Dignitary of the Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross . 
 Commander of the Brazilian Order of the Rose . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of Christ . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa . 
 Grand Cross of the French Légion d 'honneur . 
 Grand Cross of the Russian Order of the White Eagle . 
 Grand Cross ( 1st class ) of the Russian Order of St. Anna . 
 Grand Cross ( 1st class ) of the Austrian Order of Leopold . 
 Grand Cross of the Italian Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus . 
 Grand Cross of the Spanish Order of Charles III . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Aire and Calder Navigation = 
 The Aire and Calder Navigation is a river and canal system of the River Aire and the River Calder in the metropolitan county of West Yorkshire , England . The first improvements to the rivers above Knottingley were completed in 1704 when the Aire was made navigable to Leeds and the Calder to Wakefield , by the construction of 16 locks . Lock sizes were increased several times , as was the depth of water , to enable larger boats to use the system . The Aire below Haddlesey was bypassed by the opening of the Selby Canal in 1778 . A canal from Knottingley to the new docks and new town at Goole provided a much shorter route to the River Ouse from 1826 . The New Junction Canal was constructed in 1905 , to link the system to the River Don Navigation , by then part of the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation . 
 Steam tugs were introduced in 1831 . In the 1860s , compartment boats were introduced , later called Tom Puddings , from which coal was unloaded into ships by large hydraulic hoists . This system enabled the canal to carry at its peak more than 1 @.@ 5 million tons of coal per year , and was not abandoned until 1986 . To handle trains of compartments , many of the locks were lengthened to 450 feet ( 140 m ) . 
 Although much of the upper reaches are now designated as leisure routes , there is still significant commercial traffic on the navigation . 300 @,@ 000 tons were carried in 2007 , although most of the traffic is now petroleum and gravel , rather than the coal which kept the navigation profitable for 150 years . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Aire and Calder is a canalisation of the River Calder from Wakefield to Castleford , where it joins the branch from Leeds , which follows the River Aire . The Aire continues to flow eastwards to Bank Dole Junction , then continues in a north @-@ easterly direction to Haddlesey , from where it follows a winding course to join the River Ouse at Airmyn . The section below Haddlesey is no longer part of the navigation , as a derelict lock blocks access to the lower river . Instead , the Selby Canal flows northwards from Haddlesey to the Ouse at Selby . Below Dole Bank Junction , the Knottingley and Goole Canal flows <unk> to join the Ouse at Goole . From just before Newbridge , where the modern A614 road crosses the waterway , this branch of the navigation runs parallel to the Dutch River , an artificial channel built in 1635 to alleviate flooding caused by Cornelius Vermuyden 's original diversion of the River Don northwards to the River Aire in 1628 . 
 The Aire and Calder still fulfils its original purpose of linking Leeds and Wakefield with York and the Humber ( and thence the Trent ) , although the routes by which this is achieved have changed significantly . More recent canals now also make the Navigation a vital link in the English and Welsh connected inland waterway network . Beyond Leeds , the Leeds and Liverpool Canal carries boats over the Pennines . The Calder and <unk> Navigation , which connects to the Navigation at Wakefield , allows boats to reach the Huddersfield Broad and Narrow Canals , and the Rochdale Canal . The Selby Canal connects to the Ouse , from where boats can travel upstream to reach York , Boroughbridge and Ripon , or downstream to the River Derwent . Beyond Goole are the Humber and hence Hull , Immingham , and the North Sea . The Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation , which can be reached via the New Junction Canal , forms a link with Doncaster , Rotherham and Sheffield to the south west , and the tidal River Trent at Keadby to the east . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early 1600s , the River Aire was navigable to Knottingley , and boats carrying up to 30 tons traded on the river , which was tidal up to this point . The traders of Leeds were keen to have a navigable link to the town , to make easier the export of woollen cloth , but bills presented to Parliament in 1621 and 1625 had failed . William Pickering , who was mayor of Leeds , had made further attempts to obtain an act of Parliament for improvements to the river in 1679 , again without success . As the 1600s drew to a close , a number of bills were passed for other rivers , and there was general support for river navigations . A bill was drawn up in 1698 , with support from wool traders in Leeds and general merchants in Wakefield . John Hadley surveyed the Aire , and Samuel Shelton surveyed the Calder . Although the bill had a lot of support , it was opposed by the City of York , who feared that the River Ouse would be damaged by the scheme . 
 The parliamentary bill was hotly contested , and the House of Lords asked Trinity House to produce a report on the three rivers . This favoured the scheme , and in May 1699 the act of Parliament was granted . It named 18 undertakers , nine from the Corporation of Leeds , and nine " gentlemen of Wakefield " , who would oversee the improvements to the River Aire ( from the River Ouse at Airmyn via Castleford to Leeds ) and the River Calder ( from Castleford to Wakefield ) . The act gave them powers which included the creation of weirs bypassed by short " cuts " equipped with locks , the creation of a towpath , and the right to buy and demolish mills and weirs . John Hadley was engaged as the engineer immediately , and by 1704 the original work was completed , including 12 locks on the Aire between <unk> and Leeds and 4 on the Calder . The locks were 58 to 60 feet ( 17 @.@ 7 to 18 @.@ 3 m ) long by 14 @.@ 5 to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 4 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide with 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) depths over the sills . 
 Capital to fund the scheme had been raised separately by the Wakefield and Leeds committees . A complicated restructuring of the finances in 1721 fixed the nominal capital at £ 26 @,@ 700 . Regular dividends at 7 per cent were paid to the shareholders from 1718 , and the navigation was leased to various groups , who would be responsible for collection of tolls and repairs . The lease rose from £ 800 in 1704 to £ 2 @,@ 600 in 1729 , when receipts from each of the previous five years had averaged £ 6 @,@ 016 . The early trade consisted mainly of woollen goods from Leeds , Wakefield , Halifax and Bradford , with wool and corn from Lincolnshire and East Anglia travelling in the opposite direction . By the 1720s there were also significant quantities of coal . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Some development of the navigation occurred . In 1744 , the undertakers bought some land at Airmyn , and developed warehousing and wharfage there , as a more convenient point than Rawcliffe , where the water was shallower . In the 1760s , £ 13 @,@ 000 was spent on improvements and maintenance , with several weirs being rebuilt to improve the depth of water . There was a long @-@ running dispute with Arthur Ingram , who owned Knottingley mill , which started in 1731 , and was not finally resolved until 1776 , when the company bought both of Ingram 's mills . Despite this , the general profitability of the navigation led the undertakers to be complacent about its development . They asked John Smeaton to suggest improvements in 1771 , but the subsequent attempt to authorise such improvements was disputed in Parliament on the basis that the present navigation was totally inadequate . The recently finished Calder and <unk> Navigation proposed to build a canal from Wakefield to the Dutch River , which would bypass the Calder completely , and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal supported a Leeds to Selby canal , which would bypass the Aire . During 1772 , they asked Smeaton to survey a route to avoid the lower Aire , but his assistant , William Jessop actually carried out the work . He proposed a 7 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 67 km ) canal from Haddlesey lock to the Ouse at Newland . With Parliament not reaching a decision , they re @-@ worked their plan , which was now for a 5 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 45 km ) canal from Haddlesey to Selby , with a new cut from Ferrybridge to Beal , and improvements above Castleford . In 1774 the Leeds to Selby bill was rejected by Parliament , but the Aire and Calder bill was passed , with a few amendments . 
 Construction of the Selby Canal began in 1775 , and it was opened on 29 April 1778 . The new cut at Castleford opened in spring 1775 , while those at <unk> and Hunslet were finished in 1779 . <unk> cut was completed , but <unk> was not , as the company bought the mill there instead . All locks were replaced , and the total cost was over £ 60 @,@ 000 , of which around £ 20 @,@ 000 was for the Selby Canal . The navigation remained profitable , paying £ 9 @,@ 000 in dividends in 1775 , which had risen to £ 32 @,@ 000 by 1791 . Most traffic now used the Selby route , and the transhipment facilities at Airmyn were closed in 1779 . 
 Selby was the upper limit for seagoing ships at the time , and became a major transhipment port for the smaller boats using the canal . Canal boats were limited to about 60 tons , whereas ships of up to 200 tons could reach Selby . By 1800 , it was handling some 369 @,@ 780 tons of goods , and the support industries of ropemaking , <unk> and shipbuilding were expanding . 
 = = = Knottingley to Goole = = = 
 In 1817 , there was a proposal for an Aire and Don Canal , to connect Knottingley to the Dutch River at Newbridge , with a branch to Doncaster , and another for a Went and Wakefield Canal , to connect Cold <unk> on the Barnsley Canal to Newbridge on the Don . With revenue from tolls reaching £ 82 @,@ 092 in 1818 , which enabled a dividend of £ 54 @,@ 000 to be paid , the company was in a healthy state , and proposed their own route from Haddlesey to the Dutch River . The destination was then changed to Goole , and John Rennie was asked to survey the route . Those opposing the scheme were placated by a clause which ensured the Aire to Airmyn and the Selby Canal would be maintained . In July 1821 , Rennie proposed the construction of docks at Goole , rather than a lock into the river , and the company proposed that 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of water should be available . Rennie died in late 1821 , and George Leather took over as engineer . Construction at Goole started on 28 September 1822 , and the company eventually built much of the new town as well as the docks . 
 The canal and docks opened on 20 July 1826 . A barge lock , 72 @.@ 5 by 22 feet ( 22 @.@ 1 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) and a ship lock , 120 by 33 @.@ 7 feet ( 36 @.@ 6 by 10 @.@ 3 m ) , capable of taking vessels up to 400 tons , connected the extensive docks to the Ouse . The new section was 18 @.@ 7 miles ( 30 @.@ 1 km ) long , with locks at Ferrybridge , Whitley , <unk> and Goole . The connection to the Aire and the Selby canal was maintained by the lock at Bank Dole . Goole became an official port in 1827 , when it gained its own Customs facilities . The scheme had cost £ 361 @,@ 484 , of which £ 221 @,@ 350 had been borrowed , while the rest came from company resources . 
 Faced with yet another outside scheme which would bypass the navigation from Wakefield to Ferrybridge , the company looked at improvements which would give 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of water all the way to both Leeds and Wakefield . Thomas Telford surveyed both routes , and it became the basis for an act of Parliament which was passed in June 1828 . It included a clause to ensure that the Selby Canal was maintained with a depth of water of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) , and made provision for extensions to Goole docks . Work started on a new cut at Castleford and on the line to Leeds , but legal action over the Selby Canal meant that it had to be made deeper and wider in 1832 and 1833 . The Leeds line was completed in April 1835 , somewhat later than anticipated , as the banks were made more substantial , to cope with steam tugs , which would be introduced in due course . The seven locks above <unk> were all 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) wide . Improvements to the Calder to Wakefield took longer , as there were problems with floods filling the workings , difficulty with constructing foundations for an aqueduct which would carry the navigation over the River Calder at Stanley Ferry , and then in transporting the castings for the aqueduct to the site . The cost of the improvements ran to around £ 510 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Modernisation = = = 
 The Aire and Calder tried to work with the railways when they arrived in the 1840s , by making traffic agreements , but still suffered a significant drop in trade . Receipts dropped by one @-@ third between 1851 and 1856 . Thomas Hammond Bartholomew , the chief engineer , had been experimenting with steam power since 1813 , and steam paddle tugs had been operating on the system since 1831 . When he died in late 1852 , two @-@ thirds of the traffic was pulled by steam tugs . His son , William Hammond Bartholomew , replaced him and introduced tugs with propellers soon afterwards . These could tow ten keels , carrying 700 tons , but were held up at locks , as the keels had to be worked through one at a time . Between 1860 and 1867 , the locks from Goole to Castleford were extended to 206 by 22 feet ( 62 @.@ 8 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) to alleviate this . 
 In 1861 , Bartholomew met with the chairman , Warde @-@ Aldam , to propose a system of sectional boats , each consisting of six compartments , with a bow and stern section . The compartments or tubs would be unloaded into ships by a hydraulic hoist at Goole , which would lift them from the water and tip them over . Warde @-@ Aldam thought that such a system could carry 45 @,@ 000 tons of coal per year , and £ 13 @,@ 382 was allocated for three train boats , a hoist , and hydraulic machinery to control the hoist and the lock into the docks . By late 1864 , the prototypes were operational , with the stern section replaced by a pusher tug . Soon afterwards , extra compartments were ordered , as experience showed that a tug and seven compartments could fit into the larger locks . In 1874 , Warde @-@ Aldam noted that " ... the people now call them ' Tom Puddings ' from their wobbling gait . " The length of the trains increased to ten or eleven tubs , but such a train was difficult to steer from the rear , and so the tugs moved to the front and pulled the assembly . In 1880 they carried 151 @,@ 860 tons , and by 1913 there were 18 tugs , 1 @,@ 010 compartments , and 1 @,@ 560 @,@ 006 tons were carried , 33 times Warde @-@ Aldam 's original estimate . 
 After the First World War , another programme of improvements to the locks was carried out , extending the locks to 457 feet ( 139 m ) , which enabled trains of 19 compartments to operate regularly . Experiments with trains as long as 38 tubs were carried out , but the difficulty of splitting the train to pass through the locks meant that 19 was the usual maximum . The compartments continued until the late 1960s to carry around half a million tons of coal , long after most British canals had ceased to be used for commercial traffic , but the gradual demise of the coal industry led to compartment traffic ceasing in 1986 . 
 The 20th century saw two major phases of improvement . In 1905 , the New Junction Canal connected the Aire and Calder to the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation near Stainforth . It was funded by the Aire and Calder , with the Don Navigation eventually meeting half the cost . During the 1960s , the navigation underwent another modernisation scheme , in which the locks from Goole to Leeds were upgraded and enlarged to accommodate vessels conforming to the 600 @-@ tonne Euro @-@ barge standard . There is some variation in lock sizes , with the smallest being at <unk> , which is 203 by 22 feet ( 61 @.@ 9 by 6 @.@ 7 m ) with a water depth of 8 @.@ 4 feet ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) over the lock cill . Euro barges are 200 by 20 feet ( 61 @.@ 0 by 6 @.@ 1 m ) , and when fully loaded with 600 tonnes of cargo , have a draught of 8 @.@ 2 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) . Locks on the Wakefield section can accommodate vessels which are 195 by 17 @.@ 6 feet ( 59 @.@ 4 by 5 @.@ 4 m ) with a draught of 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) , though rigid vessels are constrained to 141 ft to enable turning at Wakefield while the locks below Castleford have three sets of gates , so that a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) section can be used , rather than the full 457 feet ( 139 m ) required by the compartment boats . 
 The main problem with upgrading the Wakefield branch was the dimensions of George Leather 's cast iron aqueduct over the River Calder at Stanley Ferry . Structural analysis showed that parts of the ironwork were overloaded , and so in 1981 a new concrete aqueduct was cast by John Laing Construction Ltd , on a site a little further upstream . The complete structure was then pushed into position by hydraulic jacks in a six @-@ day operation , after which the navigation was diverted over it , although the old aqueduct was left in place and can still be used . 
 Although coal mining was one of the main reasons for the success of the navigation , it has also brought problems , caused by subsidence . In March 1988 , the bank near Lemonroyd lock collapsed into St Aidan 's opencast mine , which then flooded . A significant factor was the presence of excavations below the opencast workings where lower coal seams had previously been mined . The failure resulted in some 780 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 600 @,@ 000 m3 ) of material , including the banks of the river and the canal , slipping into the workings , which then flooded to a depth of 230 feet ( 70 m ) , creating a lake which covered 250 acres ( 100 ha ) . An act of Parliament was obtained to allow 1 @.@ 9 miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km ) of new waterway to be constructed . The original locks at Kippax and Lemonroyd were replaced by a single lock at Lemonroyd . <unk> mining finally resumed ten years later , after the site had been pumped out , but the coal reserves are now exhausted , and the site forms a nature reserve , with wet grasslands , reedbeds and open water covering 740 acres ( 300 ha ) . 
 = = Traffic = = 
 A 20th @-@ century modification of the compartment boat system was used to feed the coal @-@ fired Ferrybridge " C " power station . Starting in 1967 , <unk> Hargreaves used trains of three tubs or coal pans , which were rigidly connected , and pushed by a tug when loaded . The trains were filled with coal using canalside chutes at the colliery and pushed to the power station , where a hoist lifted each pan from the canal and upturned it to drop its contents onto a conveyor belt . Nine tugs and 35 pans were employed , with each pan holding around 170 tonnes . By the time the final load left Astley colliery in December 2002 , 43 million tonnes had been delivered to Ferrybridge in this way . Experiments were made with trains of four pans , which allowed copper pipes to be carried on top of the coal for delivery to Goole , but this was short @-@ lived . Coal carrying came to an abrupt halt in 2003 when the St Aidan 's opencast mine was exhausted and the coal from Kellingley colliery was found to have levels of sulphur content high above the acceptable limit . During 2008 , three of the trains were used on the River Don , to transport 250 @,@ 000 tonnes of limestone from a quarry at Cadeby to <unk> . 
 British Waterways introduced a similar system in September 1974 . Called <unk> , for Barges Aboard <unk> , the system consisted of trains of barges , which were pushed by a tug , and which would be loaded between the twin hulls of a custom @-@ built delivery ship . The ship would then transport them across the North Sea to continental waterways , without their contents having to be transshipped . The concept failed after 18 months , as the dock workers at Hull blacklisted the entire British Waterways fleet , because they believed that the system would threaten their jobs . Most of the commercial traffic using the navigation now consists of petroleum tankers and gravel barges . 
 = = Leisure boating = = 
 The Aire and Calder was built for commercial freight , and although the volume carried has dropped significantly , particularly since coal deliveries to Ferrybridge power station by canal stopped , the navigation still carried 300 @,@ 000 tonnes of freight in 2007 , down from 1 @.@ 64 million tonnes in 2000 . The Leeds to Castleford section and much of the Wakefield branch are now mainly used as leisure routes , but below Castleford , the industrial nature of the waterway is more obvious , and pleasure boats must give way to commercial vessels . 600 tonne vessels , designed to make maximum use of the locks , produce considerable wash , and are not as manoeuvrable as a narrow boat . 
 Much of the ex @-@ industrial ( western ) part of the Navigation now has the appearance of a tree @-@ lined , gently @-@ twisting river . The eastern part of the Navigation , sometimes known as the Knottingley and Goole Canal , is rather different : it has long straight stretches , but mainly through flat land that has always been agricultural . Between Wakefield and Leeds , via Castleford , the Navigation is part of a circular cruising route or " ring " , formed by the Leeds & Liverpool and the Huddersfield or Rochdale canals . The Outer Pennine Ring utilises the Huddersfield Canal , while the North Pennine Ring uses the Rochdale Canal for the southern crossing of the Pennines . Beyond Castleford , boaters can travel on to Selby , York , Goole , Sheffield , and Keadby . With the possible restoration of the Barnsley Canal and the Dearne and Dove Canal , the section between Wakefield and the New Junction Canal might become part of a new " Yorkshire Ring " . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Coprinellus impatiens = 
 Coprinellus impatiens is a species of fungus in the Psathyrellaceae family . First described in 1821 , it has been classified variously in the genera Psathyrella , Pseudocoprinus , <unk> , and Coprinus , before molecular phylogenetics reaffirmed it as a Coprinellus species in 2001 . The fungus is found in North America and Europe , where the mushrooms grow on the ground in deciduous forests . The fruit bodies have buff caps that are up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , held by slender whitish stems that can be up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) tall . Several other Coprinopsis species that resemble C. impatiens may be distinguished by differences in appearance , habit , or spore morphology . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The species was first described in 1821 as Agaricus impatiens by Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in his Systema Mycologicum . In 1886 , Lucien Quélet transferred the species to <unk> ( a defunct genus now synonymous with Panaeolus ) and then to Coprinus a couple of years later in his Flore <unk> de la France . In 1936 , Robert Kühner segregated the genus Pseudocoprinus from Coprinus , including species that did not have deliquescent gills ( that is , gills that " melt " into liquid ) , and he included Coprinus impatiens in this generic transfer . He later changed his mind about the taxonomic separation of Coprinus and Pseudocoprinus . Gillet transferred the species to Psathyrella in 1936 . In 1938 Jakob Emanuel Lange published the new combination Coprinellus impatiens . Despite the taxonomic shuffling , the species was popularly known as Coprinus impatiens until 2001 , when a large @-@ scale phylogenetic analysis resulted in the splitting of the genus Coprinus into several smaller genera , and the authors confirmed the validity of the generic placement in Coprinellus . The specific epithet impatiens is derived from the Latin word for " impatient " . 
 A 2005 phylogenetics study proposed that C. impatiens was sister ( closely related on the phylogenetic tree ) to a large Psathyrella clade , and that consequently , the genus Coprinellus was polyphyletic . A later ( 2008 ) study suggested , however , that these results were due to an artifact of taxon sampling — not enough species were analyzed to adequately represent the genetic variation in the genera . The 2008 study demonstrated that Coprinellus , including C. impatiens , was monophyletic , descended from a common ancestor . In their analysis , C. impatiens was most closely related to C. <unk> , C. bisporus , C. <unk> , and C. <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of the fruit bodies is initially egg @-@ shaped , then conical to convex before flattening out , reaching diameters between 1 @.@ 8 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 71 to 1 @.@ 57 in ) . It has deep narrow grooves reaching almost as far as the center of the cap . The surface color is a pale buff , tawny or cinnamon towards the center , but the color loses intensity when the mushroom is dry . The flesh is whitish , thin , fragile and barely deliquescent ( auto @-@ digesting ) . The gills are initially buff , then turn grayish @-@ brown . They are either free from attachment to the stem , or adnexed , meaning only a small portion of the gill is attached . The stem is whitish , very slender , and more or less equal in width throughout its length , or slightly thicker at the base ; its dimensions are 7 to 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) by 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 08 to 0 @.@ 16 in ) thick . The stem surface of young specimens are pruinose — appearing to be coated with a minute layer of fine white particles ; this eventually is sloughed off , leaving a smooth or silky surface . The odor and taste of the fruit bodies are not distinctive . The gills of this species do not <unk> with age , or barely do so ; the fruit bodies tend to become more fragile with age . 
 The spore print is dark brown . The spores are smooth , ellipsoid or almond @-@ shaped , with a germ pore ; they measure 9 – 12 by 5 – 6 μm . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are four @-@ spored and <unk> ( the spores lie on several different levels , and mature at different times ) . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the gill edge ) are roughly spherical , 20 – 35 μm broad , or lageniform ( flask @-@ shaped ) , 36 – 64 by 10 – 15 μm , with the apex often rather acute , about 3 – 5 μm wide . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the gill face ) are absent in this species . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 Coprinellus disseminatus resembles C. impatiens , but may be distinguished by its slightly larger fruit body , somewhat deliquescent gills , and tendency to fruit in smaller groups on the ground , rather than on or around rotting wood . Also , C. disseminatus has smaller spores than C. impatiens , typically 6 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 7 by 4 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 8 μm . C. <unk> is similar to C. disseminatus but usually grows in groups on fallen branches , and has broader spores that measure 8 @.@ 3 – 10 @.@ 3 by 6 @.@ 7 – 8 @.@ 4 µm . C. <unk> usually grows in small dense clumps , has narrower spores ( typically 9 – 11 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 μm , and produces smaller fruit bodies . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Coprinellus impatiens is found in North America and Europe ( including Germany , Poland , and the Ukraine ) including northern Turkey . In the Pacific Northwest region of the United States , it is found in Oregon and Idaho . Fruit bodies grow solitarily , or rarely in small bundles , on forest litter in deciduous forests , especially ones dominated by beech . 
 = Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad = 
 The Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad ( reporting mark MPA ) , familiarly known as the " Ma and Pa " , was an American short @-@ line railroad between York and Hanover , Pennsylvania , formerly operating passenger and freight trains on its original line between York and Baltimore , Maryland , from 1901 until the 1950s . The Ma and Pa was popular with railfans in the 1930s and 1940s for its antique equipment and curving , picturesque right @-@ of @-@ way through the hills of rural Maryland and Pennsylvania . Reflecting its origin as the unintended product of the merger of two 19th @-@ century narrow gauge railways , the meandering Ma and Pa line took 77 @.@ 2 miles ( 124 km ) to connect Baltimore and York , although the two cities are only 45 miles ( 72 km ) apart in a straight line . 
 Passenger service was discontinued on August 31 , 1954 , and the section from Baltimore to Whiteford , Maryland ( just south of the Mason @-@ Dixon line demarcating the Pennsylvania @-@ Maryland border ) was abandoned in June 1958 . Most of the remaining original railroad line was abandoned by 1984 . The Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad acquired a former 19 @-@ mile ( 31 km ) Pennsylvania Railroad ( PRR ) branch line between York and Hanover in the 1980s , now operated by a successor corporation , York Railway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 19th @-@ century predecessors = = = 
 The Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad was formed from two earlier 19th @-@ century 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge railways : the Baltimore & Delta Railway , later the Baltimore & Lehigh Railway , and the York and Peach Bottom Railway , later the York Southern Railroad . Construction of the Baltimore & Delta Railway started in 1881 , and passenger trains between Baltimore and Towson , Maryland began on April 17 , 1882 . Later that year the company was merged into the Maryland Central Railroad . The line was extended northward to Bel Air , Maryland on June 21 , 1883 , and the following January , the line was completed to Delta , Pennsylvania . 
 In Pennsylvania , the Peach Bottom Railway was incorporated in 1871 . The railway 's Middle Division laid narrow gauge track between York and Red Lion by August 1874 and completed its line southward to Delta in 1876 . It went bankrupt in 1881 and was reorganized as the York and Peach Bottom Railway ( Y & PB ) in 1882 . The Y & PB merged with the Maryland Central Railway ( successor to the Maryland Central RR ) in 1891 , becoming the Baltimore and Lehigh , and the new company operated trains on the combined track between York and Baltimore . 
 Both railroads struggled with light freight traffic and financial difficulties in the 1890s . Because of their narrow gauge construction , the Baltimore & Lehigh Railway and York Southern Railroad could not interchange freight cars with other lines . The two companies finally converted to standard gauge between 1898 – 1900 and subsequently merged to form the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad on February 12 , 1901 . The result was the circuitous , 77 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 124 km ) " Ma and Pa " route between Baltimore and York , compared to the competing Pennsylvania Railroad 's more direct 56 @-@ mile ( 90 km ) distance between the two cities on its Northern Central Railway division . The completed line had grades up to 2 @.@ 3 percent and 55 sharp curves of 16 – 20 degrees ( most mainline railroads seldom exceed six degrees , and even the former Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad 's mainline through the Rocky Mountains does not exceed 12 degrees ) . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Following the merger , the Ma and Pa operated through passenger and freight trains between York and Baltimore , as well as local trains at each end of the line , hauling mail and express , slate , marble , anthracite coal , lumber , furniture , and agricultural products to market . Particularly on the Pennsylvania Division ( Delta – York ) , slate from Delta and manufactured goods from Red Lion and York were mainstays of the railroad 's outbound freight traffic in the early years . On the Maryland Division , inbound anthracite coal deliveries accounted for a significant volume of <unk> , along with milk from the many dairy farms in the area . One early morning train from Fallston boarded more than 1 @,@ 100 gallons of milk daily and was dubbed the " Milky Way " . The line was profitable and traffic volume was such that additional locomotives were necessary . 
 The Ma and Pa acquired two 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 Baldwin switchers in 1913 , # 29 and # 30 ( pictured ) , called " jewels of engines , in some respects the most attractive the road had " , by writer George Hilton in The Ma & Pa – A History of the Maryland & Pennsylvania Railroad . The next year , three 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 " <unk> " by Baldwin were added to the roster , providing more powerful locomotives for the Baltimore – York through freights . At its peak , the railroad had 16 locomotives and 160 pieces of rolling stock , with 573 employees . 
 With increasing competition from trucks and automobiles in the 1920s , passenger volume began to decline along with less @-@ than @-@ carload freight , such as milk from the many dairy farms along the Ma and Pa 's pastoral route . The Ma and Pa substituted more economical , self @-@ propelled gas @-@ electric passenger cars for steam @-@ powered passenger trains in 1927 – 1928 . <unk> freight volume increased in the 1920s , however , as more industries located along the line , and earnings were strong enough for the company to declare dividends in 1930 and 1931 . The Ma and Pa 's relative prosperity ended with the economic downturn during the Great Depression , which cut the railroad 's gross revenues by half from 1932 to 1935 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1930s , the Ma and Pa became an early favorite of railfans , attracted by its hilly , curving line through rural Maryland and Pennsylvania . The railroad offered several popular fan excursions pulled by its elderly steam locomotives . 
 Following the end of World War II , the Ma and Pa acquired four diesel locomotives for more economical operations , but traffic declined significantly . When the Ma and Pa 's mail contract was cancelled by the U.S. postal service , the railroad discontinued all passenger service on August 31 , 1954 . One person on the last passenger train recalled that many riders came from as far away as Boston , Massachusetts , and Washington , D.C. , to participate in the historic event , along with members of the National Railway Historical Society . The picturesque line 's last steam engine dropped its fire for the final time on November 29 , 1956 . 
 The lack of traffic on the railroad 's 44 @-@ mile ( 71 km ) Baltimore – Whiteford Maryland Division in the 1950s was particularly acute . One of the last major shipments to occur was Indiana limestone for the construction of Baltimore 's Cathedral of Mary Our Queen in 1956 . The Baltimore – Whiteford segment in Maryland was finally abandoned altogether on June 11 , 1958 , leaving only the stone abutments where the tracks crossed York Road in Towson on a steel girder bridge . A local group of history buffs placed a bronze plaque on the west abutment in 1999 , commemorating the departed railroad 's place in Towson history . 
 In the 1960s , the Ma and Pa Railroad continued to solicit business along its line for its remaining 34 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 56 @.@ 0 km ) Whiteford – York segment , almost entirely in Pennsylvania . In 1964 , it added a siding 905 feet ( 276 m ) long near Red Lion to serve a new cigar box factory . In 1971 , the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad was acquired by Emons Industries . Primarily hauling slate from a quarry at Delta , and furniture from a factory in Red Lion , the Ma and Pa 's Pennsylvania Division continued in operation until June 14 , 1978 , when the line was further 
 reduced to the 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) York – Red Lion section . The Red Lion freight station was closed on November 1 , 1980 ; when the Pennsylvania town 's furniture manufacturer shuttered its doors in 1984 , the Red Lion section of the railroad was also abandoned . 
 = = Currently = = 
 The Emons @-@ controlled Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad acquired 19 miles ( 31 km ) of a former PRR branch line between York and Hanover , Pennsylvania in the 1980s . In December 1999 , Emons merged its M & P subsidiary with another area short @-@ line , <unk> , forming the York Railway . In 2002 , Genesee and Wyoming gained control of the 42 @-@ mile ( 68 km ) York Railway , including the former M & P Railroad trackage between York – Hanover . The York Railway currently serves 40 online rail customers and connects with the Norfolk Southern and CSX railroads . 
 A small , 3 @-@ mile ( 5 km ) fragment of the original railroad line still exists between Laurel and Muddy Creek Forks in York County , Pennsylvania , maintained by the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad Preservation Society . Founded by enthusiasts and former employees in 1986 , the group has restored the Muddy Creek Forks station and also has a small collection of rolling stock there . The preserved Red Lion station is now a museum operated by the Red Lion Area Historical Society . Another section of the Ma and Pa 's old right @-@ of @-@ way was converted in 1998 to a rail trail in Harford County , Maryland . Now 6 miles ( 10 km ) long , the MA & PA Heritage Trail through Bel Air is used for hiking and biking . 
 In Baltimore , near Pennsylvania Station , Ma and Pa track remnants and the old roundhouse , freight shed , and yard shed are still extant . The Baltimore Streetcar Museum now operates in this area . 
 In York County , the Muddy Creek Bridge , Delta Trestle Bridge , and Scott Creek Bridge @-@ North were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1995 . 
 = Arthur Gilligan = 
 Arthur Edward Robert Gilligan ( 23 December 1894 – 5 September 1976 ) was an English cricketer who captained the England cricket team in 1924 and 1925 . In first @-@ class cricket , he played as an amateur , mainly for Cambridge University and Sussex , and captained the latter team between 1922 and 1929 . He captained England on nine occasions , winning four matches , losing four and drawing one . A fast bowler and hard @-@ hitting lower order batsman , Gilligan completed the double in 1923 and was one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year for 1924 . When his playing career ended , he held several important positions in cricket , including that of England selector and president of the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) . A popular figure within cricket , he was regarded as sporting and friendly . 
 Gilligan played cricket for Dulwich College before the First World War , then for Cambridge , twice winning his blue . After briefly playing county cricket for Surrey , he moved to Sussex in 1920 . Following a slow start to his county career , he rapidly improved and was appointed Sussex captain . He played for England on an overseas tour , and in partnership with Maurice Tate established a formidable bowling reputation . Appointed captain of England in 1924 , Gilligan was at the height of his form when he suffered a blow to his heart while batting that year . The strain affected his bowling , which was never as effective afterwards , but he still captained England in Australia during the 1924 – 25 season . The series was lost , but both he and his team were popular and respected . In following years he played less frequently ; he resigned as Sussex captain in 1929 and retired three years later . He subsequently became a writer , journalist and respected cricket commentator while maintaining his connections with Sussex . 
 During his playing days , Gilligan was a member of the British Fascists . He came to the notice of the Australian secret service during the 1924 – 25 MCC tour , and it is possible he helped to establish small fascist groups in Australia . It is unknown how long he remained a member , but the organisation practically ceased to exist by 1926 . As a captain , Gilligan was well @-@ liked by players and commentators , although many did not believe he was an effective tactician . Nevertheless , under his leadership , Sussex became an attractive , competitive team . He encouraged the search for young talent , and the players consequently discovered became the backbone of the club into the 1930s . As a fielder , he inspired his teams to become good fielding sides . In addition , as MCC captain of a team which toured India in 1926 – 27 , he encouraged Indians to take responsibility for their own cricket board instead of allowing white Englishmen to run Indian cricket , and lobbied the MCC to bestow Test match status on the Indian team . As MCC president , he played a part in the D 'Oliveira affair in 1968 . He died in 1976 , aged 81 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gilligan was born in Denmark Hill , an area of Camberwell in London . He was the second of three sons , all of whom played first @-@ class cricket , to Willie Austin Gilligan and Alice Eliza Kimpton . The family had a strong connection with Sussex ; Gilligan followed Sussex County Cricket Club as a child , and later played club cricket there . After attending Fairfield School , he joined Dulwich College in 1906 and remained there until 1914 . He established a sporting reputation in athletics and cricket . In the latter sport , he played in the school first eleven , as did his brothers ; in 1913 , all three boys played in the team . Gilligan played in the eleven between 1911 and 1914 and captained the side in his final two years . In 1914 , he came top of the school batting and bowling averages . Selected to play representative schools cricket at Lord 's Cricket Ground in 1914 , he took ten wickets in total and scored one fifty in the two matches . By the standards of school cricket , his pace was impressive , and Surrey invited him to play for their second eleven during the school holidays of 1913 and 1914 ; his father was a member of that county 's committee , and Gilligan qualified to play through his London birth . 
 In 1914 , Gilligan entered Pembroke College , Cambridge , but his life at the university was interrupted by the First World War . He fought in France with the Lancashire Fusiliers from 1915 , serving as Captain in the 11th battalion . When the war ended , Gilligan returned to Pembroke and resumed his cricket career . 
 = = Cricket at Cambridge = = 
 Following the war , Cambridge University suffered from a lack of quality bowling at the start of the 1919 cricket season . Consequently , Gilligan faced little competition for his place in the team and took 32 wickets at an average of under 27 in Cambridge matches , which critics considered a poor return . He made a bigger impression when , batting at number eleven in the order , he scored 101 against Sussex and shared a last @-@ wicket partnership of 177 in 65 minutes with John Naumann . A few days later , Gilligan won his blue — the awarding of the Cambridge " colours " to sportsmen — by appearing in the University Match against Oxford . On the last day of the three @-@ day match , he took five wickets for 16 runs in 57 deliveries to finish with bowling figures of six for 52 ( six wickets taken for 52 runs conceded ) . According to Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , this was the best bowling performance in the University Match for many years , although Cambridge lost the match . Towards the end of the season , Gilligan played three first @-@ class matches for Surrey and made a further appearance in a festival game , although he accomplished little with bat or ball . In all first @-@ class games in 1919 , he scored 231 runs at a batting average of 17 @.@ 76 and took 35 wickets at 31 @.@ 57 . At the end of the season , he changed counties ; his family connections in the area , and the presence of his brother Harold in the team , led him to register with Sussex . 
 Gilligan retained his position in the Cambridge team in 1920 and once more played against Oxford . In the University Match , he was ineffective with the ball as the damp conditions did not suit his style of bowling . At the end of the Cambridge term , Gilligan , playing as an amateur , made his Sussex debut . The Times later commented that in 1920 , Gilligan was " known as a fast but unreliable bowler , a dashing and vulnerable batsman and a mid @-@ off without his equal in England " . Wisden commented on his 1920 performance : " [ He ] remained stationary , doing nothing out of the common either as bowler or batsman for Cambridge , and proving a decidedly expensive bowler for Sussex " . In all first @-@ class cricket , he scored 624 runs at an average of 17 @.@ 33 and took 81 wickets at 23 @.@ 55 . Subsequently , Gilligan left Cambridge and joined Gilbert Kimpton & Co . , a general produce merchants in London in which his father was a senior partner . 
 = = Sussex cricketer = = 
 Gilligan played for Sussex throughout the 1921 season and according to Wisden " made a distinct advance " . His batting record was similar to the previous season , although he increased his number of wickets in the season to 90 at an average of 30 @.@ 64 . Wisden notes that his bowling was not statistically good , but that his biggest impact came in fielding , which was " brilliant in the extreme . He was described on all hands as the best mid @-@ off in England . " In 1922 , Gilligan assumed the Sussex captaincy from Herbert Wilson . The team 's results were not impressive , but Wisden said that the team were attractive to watch and excelled in fielding , in which Gilligan led by example . Gilligan later recalled that he received great support from George Cox , the senior professional in the team . Personally , Gilligan had his best season to date with bat and ball ; he scored 916 runs and took 135 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 75 . Based on his good form , he was selected in the prestigious Gentlemen v Players match at Lord 's . Appearing for the Gentlemen , a team of amateurs , his fielding in particular impressed commentators . He was selected in a further representative match , when he played for the " Rest of England " against Yorkshire , the County Champions . In the latter game , he took eight wickets in total . At the end of the season , Gilligan was included in the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) team to tour South Africa and play a Test series — at the time , England teams toured under the name and badge of the MCC . 
 On the tour of South Africa , MCC were led by Frank Mann . Gilligan was appointed as vice @-@ captain in preference to Percy Fender , who was much admired as a captain but not popular with the cricket authorities . Gilligan played in two of the five Tests , the first and last . His Test debut came on 23 December 1922 in a match which England lost . The team were more successful during his second appearance ; he took six wickets in the match , and his batting at a crucial stage of the match — he scored 39 not out in the second innings — was vital in a victory which gave the series to England 2 – 1 . In total , Gilligan took nine Test wickets at 22 @.@ 37 , and in all first @-@ class games , captured 26 wickets at an average of 22 @.@ 03 . 
 During 1923 , after returning to England , Gilligan had his best season in county cricket . He took 163 wickets at 17 @.@ 50 and scored 1 @,@ 183 runs at an average of 21 @.@ 12 to complete the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in a season for the only time in his career . With Maurice Tate , whose emergence as a pace bowler was encouraged by Gilligan , he established a bowling partnership which proved effective over the following two seasons . Gilligan scored two centuries and nine times took five or more wickets in an innings . As a result of his performances , he was named as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation noted that he was now " among the leading amateur cricketers of the day " , and was likely to play for England again . It concluded : " It is not claimed for Arthur Gilligan , by even his warmest admirers , that he can be classed among great fast bowlers , but he is a very good one , combining with the right temperament and tireless energy just the extra bit of pace that to many batsmen is so distasteful . " 
 = = England captain = = 
 Following heavy losses to Australia in two Test series immediately following the war , the England selectors needed to appoint a new captain . Frank Mann led the team during the tour of South Africa , the team 's only Tests between 1921 and 1924 . According to the cricket writer Alan Gibson , Mann was slightly too old to be a realistic candidate and his batting was not quite of the required standard . Other possibilities early in the season included Fender and Arthur Carr . Instead , the selectors appointed Gilligan as captain for the 1924 series against South Africa , in an attempt to assess whether he possessed the playing ability to justify his selection in the role . Cricket journalist E. W. Swanton writes that Gilligan was the favoured candidate of the influential Lord Harris , which may have assisted his appointment . Gibson describes Gilligan at the time as " 29 years old , an attractive , smiling personality " . Gilligan began the season very well . He and Tate , in the weeks approaching the first Test , established a reputation as the best opening bowlers in the world . At the time , the best batting teams in England were Surrey and Middlesex ; in consecutive matches , Gilligan and Tate dismissed these sides for 53 and 41 respectively . In the latter game , Gilligan took eight for 25 , and he and Tate bowled several county sides out for low scores . In the first Test match , on Gilligan 's debut as England captain , the pair bowled South Africa out for 30 runs . Gilligan took six wickets for seven runs , and Wisden reported that " He bowled very fast and with any amount of fire . Three times during the innings he took a wicket immediately after sending down a no ball " . When South Africa followed @-@ on , he took five for 83 , to finish the game with 11 wickets . England won the second Test , like the first , by an innings ; Gilligan took five wickets in the game , and by the end of June had 74 wickets in all first @-@ class matches at an average of 15 . At this stage , the press and public had great expectations of success for Gilligan and Tate on the forthcoming tour of Australia . 
 At the beginning of July , Gilligan played for the Gentlemen against the Players at the Oval . In the first innings , he was struck heavily over his heart by a delivery from Frederick Pearson ; it was obvious that he was hurt , and he was out shortly afterwards . Although the Gentlemen v Players match at the Oval was less prestigious than its Lord 's counterpart and generally mattered less to participants , Gilligan chose to bat the next day and scored a century batting at number 10 . Even so , the Gentlemen lost the game by six wickets . Gilligan was never again as effective a cricketer , and he later conceded that batting in the second innings was a mistake . It is likely that the strain of the innings did as much harm as the original blow , although Gibson later wrote that Gilligan 's subsequent long life suggests that he was not too badly hurt , and that it is unlikely too much damage was done . Nevertheless , Gibson concludes " there is no doubt that he was badly shaken up , and whatever the reason , the magic departed " . 
 Gilligan played in the next Test match , without much success , and for the Gentlemen at Lord 's . The effects of the injury then forced him to rest in the following weeks and he missed the fourth Test . When he returned for the final Test , he did not take any wickets and finished the Test series with 17 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 94 , placing him second in the England bowling averages behind Tate . He batted just three times in the series , scoring 77 runs at 25 @.@ 66 . England won the series 3 – 0 , and although South Africa had not proved to be a strong team , several England players — including Gilligan — had impressed commentators . Gilligan continued to take wickets in the latter stages of the season , but was less successful than before his injury . At the end of the season , he had 103 wickets at 19 @.@ 36 and 864 runs at 21 @.@ 07 . 
 By mid @-@ July , Gilligan had been named as captain of the MCC team to tour Australia at the end of the English cricket season , and was expected to be one of the leading bowlers . He had , however , faced some criticism of his captaincy . Two players in the England team during the South Africa series spoke out against his tactics : Cec Parkin published a highly critical article in the press and never played for England again ; George Macaulay clashed with Gilligan on the field during one Test . The consequent absence of both men from the tour substantially weakened the bowling strength of the team . Although Gilligan was generally popular for his cheerful and friendly approach , the press believed Fender to be the better captain . However , the cricket authorities at Lord 's disapproved of Fender 's unconventional tactics and approach . Journalists later revealed that , at some point in the season , the selectors had first asked Frank Mann to captain , but he was unable to accept the invitation . 
 = = Tour of Australia = = 
 = = = On the field = = = 
 Following his injury in 1924 , Gilligan could no longer bowl fast and had little influence on the 1924 – 25 tour of Australia ; his performances were hampered by further injuries . His best bowling figures of four for 12 came in the opening match and his only century came in the second game ; he passed fifty just once more on the tour . His leadership proved influential in one main respect . In previous series , Australia had been superior to England in the field , but according to Gibson , Gilligan " revolutionized the English fielding , a department in which they began to compare with Australia , for the first time since the war and possibly since the early 1900s . This had much effect on the England sides of the next few years " . However an Australian newspaper estimated that England dropped 21 catches in the five Tests , which may have impacted on the series result ; Australia won 4 – 1 . Other aspects of Gilligan 's leadership were less successful ; his captaincy lacked tactical sophistication , and the Australian captain Herbie Collins proved superior in this respect . According to Gibson , critics claimed that Gilligan " was too easygoing on the finer points of law " . In addition , his inexperience led to defeat in one warm @-@ up match that the MCC could have drawn , and commentators dismissed him as naive and easy @-@ going on the field . However , he was immensely popular with the Australian public and well @-@ liked by his team . Gibson , writing in 1979 , noted that Gilligan " was , and is , one of the most popular captains England have sent to Australia " . During the tour , Gilligan was the focus of a great deal of publicity . The periodical Cricket described him as " ' one of the most jovial personalities imaginable " , while former Australian Test captain Monty Noble wrote that Gilligan was the " type of man who , in the most unostentatious way , can do more than all the politicians and statesmen to cement the relations between the Homeland and the Dominions " . His sportsmanship , including his grace and cheerfulness in defeat , made him , according to Noble , a perfect English gentleman and an " Empire builder " . 
 After Australia won the first two Tests , Parkin , writing in England , once more criticised Gilligan 's leadership in the press and provoked a minor controversy by suggesting that Jack Hobbs should assume the captaincy . The third Test was much closer , although England were severely hampered by injuries to three bowlers , including Gilligan himself . These injuries may have affected the outcome of the series . Australia won by the small margin of 11 runs , though Gilligan helped to take his team close to victory with a restrained innings of 31 . England won the fourth Test , their first victory over Australia since the war , but lost the final game . Critics judged that the team played well , and despite the result did not suffer disgrace . Gibson notes that the tour " was successful in everything but victory , and this was sensed by the English public , who assembled in large numbers to welcome the side home " . In the Test series , Gilligan took 10 wickets at an average of 51 @.@ 90 and scored 64 runs at 9 @.@ 14 . Gibson judges that most of his wickets were good batsmen , and many bowlers had poor figures in a series that produced a large number of runs , so this record is not as poor as it appears . In all first @-@ class games on tour , Gilligan took 28 wickets at 38 @.@ 39 and scored 357 runs at 17 @.@ 85 . He did not play in any more Tests . 
 = = = Political concerns = = = 
 The MCC tour took place against a background of social disturbance in Australia . There were concerns within Australian society over the growing influence of communism and , according to the historian Andrew Moore , some commentators hoped that the tour would help to ease tension . It was expected that Gilligan 's influence and popularity would further assist this process . However , during the tour , the Australian secret service were informed by the London authorities that Gilligan and the MCC tour manager Frederick Toone were members of the British Fascists . Although the organisation never achieved the same level of influence in Britain as the British Union of Fascists , which formed in 1932 , the British Fascists were popular for a short time during the mid @-@ 1920s . The primary focus of the organisation was to oppose communism , but MI5 considered its threat serious enough to warrant placing leading members under surveillance . In addition , the British Foreign Office were aware that the British Fascists had established some links overseas . Moore suggests that it is possible that Gilligan and Toone used the tour as an opportunity to establish links in Australia . The team visited many parts of Australia and attended many social events which presented an opportunity to discuss politics . Shortly after the tour 's conclusion , the Commonwealth Investigative Branch uncovered evidence that the British Fascists had established chapters in several Australian cities , although they did not know how this had happened . Moore believes that " it may be totally coincidental that the Australian chapter of the British Fascists was established so soon after the MCC tour " , but is more likely that Gilligan and Toone brought Fascist literature to Australia for distribution . However , Moore writes that " the British Fascists ' Australian operations were small beer indeed " and of little consequence . 
 Gilligan gave further evidence of his political beliefs at the conclusion of the tour , when he wrote an article called " The Spirit of Fascism and Cricket Tours " for The Bulletin , a publication of the British Fascists . He wrote : " ' In ... cricket tours it is essential to work solely on the lines of Fascism , i.e. the team must be good friends and out for one thing , and one thing only , namely the good of the side , and not for any self @-@ glory " . Moore judges that the article was neither well written nor particularly persuasive , but notes that other writers at the time made the connection between sport , cricket , the ideology of the British Empire and Fascism . However , there is no evidence to say how long Gilligan maintained his connection with the British Fascists after the tour , nor if he did so at all . By 1926 , the organisation had split and faded from view . 
 = = Remaining cricket career = = 
 = = = Restricted by injury = = = 
 A recurrence of the effects of his injury in 1924 restricted Gilligan 's cricket in 1925 . Appearing in fewer games and bowling far less frequently than in previous seasons , he scored 542 runs at 15 @.@ 05 and took only eight wickets . He bowled in the first four games of the season , but in his remaining seventeen appearances played only as a batsman . In 1926 , he was more successful and his performances helped Sussex to rise from thirteenth to tenth in the County Championship . Playing more games , he scored 1 @,@ 037 runs at 30 @.@ 50 , the highest seasonal batting average of his career , and took 75 wickets at 20 @.@ 74 . That season , although no longer considered for a place in the England team himself , Gilligan joined the panel of Test selectors , and as a consequence missed some cricket for Sussex . He published a book on that summer 's tour by Australia called Collins 's Men . 
 = = = MCC tour of India = = = 
 During the winter of 1926 – 27 , with other candidates unavailable , Gilligan was chosen to captain an MCC team which toured India ; the side was not fully representative and did not play Test matches . In first @-@ class games , he scored three fifties and , bowling infrequently , took ten wickets on the tour . The team , the first to tour India under the colours of the MCC , was very successful . Gilligan left most of the day @-@ to @-@ day organisation to his vice @-@ captain , Raleigh Chichester @-@ Constable , and did not take his speech @-@ making duties particularly seriously . He nevertheless had several issues to deal with . One of his players , Jack Parsons , refused for religious reasons to play in any matches in which play took place on a Sunday ; Gilligan threatened to send him home but in the end he agreed to play on condition that he could leave early on a Sunday to attend religious services . Parsons was also openly critical of racial and social discrimination that he saw . Gilligan intervened at one point when his team 's professionals were excluded from some invitations in Calcutta and told their hosts that no @-@ one would attend the functions if the professionals were not included . Both the sporting and social programmes for the tour were demanding , and Gilligan wanted to attend most functions for fear of offending the European or Indian hosts . The team were left exhausted , necessitating the use of several reinforcements to the team , including the occasional use of English cricketers who were coaching in India , and on several occasions , the Maharajah of Patiala , who was a member of the MCC and entitled to play . 
 The tour was originally conceived to encourage cricket @-@ playing Europeans living in India . But as it was financed by the Maharajah of Patiala , the team played Indian sides , rather than the European sides envisaged by the tour 's organisers . Gilligan , in contrast to many Englishmen , was happy to play Indian teams and actively encouraged Indians to organise their own cricket rather than leave it up to white Englishmen . According to the cricket writer Mihir Bose , Gilligan , unlike others , " met Indians on terms of perfect equality " . He successfully encouraged the Indians to form their own cricket board and promised to make a case with the Lord 's authorities for India to become a Test playing team . He did so , and in 1929 India became a member of the Imperial Cricket Conference . Bose points out that Gilligan 's positive attitude towards Indians , and that of the MCC when granting India Test status , was markedly different from that of most Englishmen . In terms of the advancement of Indian cricket , Bose writes that " Gilligan 's influence was immense " . 
 = = = Final years as a cricketer = = = 
 Gilligan continued to play for Sussex until 1932 . In 1927 , he scored 828 runs at 27 @.@ 60 , but did not bowl in the first half of the season and took just 29 wickets at 24 @.@ 65 . The following season , he scored 942 runs at 26 @.@ 91 , including his last first @-@ class century , and took 76 wickets at 26 @.@ 27 . In 1929 , his final season as captain , he played only 12 times ; he did not score a fifty , averaged 7 @.@ 22 with the bat and took four wickets . He was frequently affected by injury ; his brother Harold captained Sussex in his absence and assumed the role full @-@ time in 1930 . Harold also took over as captain of an MCC team which toured New Zealand in the winter of 1929 – 30 when Gilligan withdrew owing to illness . Over the next three seasons , Gilligan appeared intermittently for Sussex and the MCC , but scored only one fifty and took just five wickets in total in that time . His last first @-@ class appearance was for H. D. G. Leveson Gower 's team against Oxford in 1932 . He later played several charity games during the Second World War , including some for Sussex and for the Royal Air Force . In all first @-@ class cricket , Gilligan scored 9 @,@ 140 runs at an average of 20 @.@ 08 and took 868 wickets at 23 @.@ 30 . In 11 Test matches , he scored 209 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 07 and took 36 wickets at 29 @.@ 05 , although 26 of these wickets came in the five Tests he played before his injury . As captain in nine Tests , he won four matches and lost four ; the remaining game was drawn . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 At the peak of his career , Gilligan was a fast bowler . He bowled with his arm quite low , but was very accurate ; his usual strategy was to aim at the stumps or to try to induce the batsmen to edge the ball to be caught in the slips . According to his Wisden obituary , he " regarded it as a cardinal sin to bowl short " . Following his injury , he could not reach his former speed and was reduced to medium pace . In this style , he continued to have some success at county level . His batting was based mainly around driving the ball . He batted low in the order , and tried to score quickly , particularly against fast bowling . Several of his centuries were scored against the most successful teams , and often in difficult situations . He excelled as a fielder ; his Wisden obituary stated : " At mid @-@ off he has had few rivals " . 
 As a captain , Gilligan was not tactically sophisticated but was adept at inspiring his players . His Sussex teams were not consistent but became attractive to watch ; under Gilligan 's direction the team ranked among the best fielding sides in England . The off side fielders were nicknamed the " ring of iron " . His Wisden obituary stated : " In two or three seasons by his insistence on fielding and on attacking cricket and by his own superb example he raised Sussex from being nothing in particular to one of the biggest draws in England . " According to The Times , Gilligan 's captaincy laid the foundations for the county 's relative success in the 1930s . In the official history of Sussex , writer Christopher Lee suggests : " The ten years from 1920 to the end of Gilligan 's captaincy in 1930 saw the <unk> of some of the most famous names in Sussex and England cricket . Gilligan himself was a mixture of amateur brilliance and professional thoroughness which inevitably brought about criticism . " 
 Gilligan also extensively coached and lectured around the county , spending time in the English winters raising the team 's profile . He encouraged the search for promising young cricketers , and most of the club 's professional cricketers during its successful years in the 1930s were discovered during Gilligan 's drive for new talent . Percy Fender believed that Gilligan allowed the team 's professionals a greater say in Sussex 's affairs than previously permitted . Fender wrote that Gilligan 's teams enjoyed playing under him and that Gilligan was one of the most popular captains in county cricket . Cricket writer R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow said : " With him there was no <unk> , no petty restraints , no mathematical cricket . He won or lost plumb straight " . Swanton wrote that " Gilligan was essentially a friendly man , hail @-@ fellow @-@ well @-@ met , and it is hard to think that in the world of sport he ever made an enemy . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gilligan married his first wife , Cecilia Mary Matthews , in April 1921 , but she successfully filed for divorce in October 1933 on the grounds of her husband 's infidelity . He married again in 1934 ; he met his second wife , Katharine Margaret Fox , on a skiing trip . 
 Following his retirement from cricket , Gilligan began to work in journalism . He wrote several cricket books , including a history of Sussex cricket in 1932 . He became one of the first radio cricket commentators , broadcasting in Australia on the 1932 – 33 Ashes series and covering subsequent visits of MCC teams to Australia for the Australian Broadcasting Commission . A popular and respected commentator , he established an on @-@ air partnership with former Australian batman Vic Richardson . In Gilligan 's obituary , Wisden observed " Gilligan was , as may be imagined , a master of the diplomatic comment if any tiresome incident occurred " . He was also a member of the BBC radio commentary team for Tests between 1947 and 1954 . In 1955 , he wrote a book , The Urn Returns , about the 1954 – 55 Ashes series , won by England . In England , he wrote about cricket for the News Chronicle . During the Second World War , Gilligan served in the Royal Air Force as a welfare officer ; he was commissioned a pilot officer and rose to the rank of squadron leader . 
 When his cricket career ended , Gilligan maintained his connection with Sussex , of which he was later made an Honorary Life Member . He served as chairman , patron and president of the county , and assisted many local clubs in the area . He gained a good reputation as a speaker and lecturer , and also developed an interest in golf in later years : he was president of the English golf union in 1959 , captain of the County Cricketers ' Golfing Society from 1952 until 1972 , and president of the latter organisation until his death . 
 An Honorary Life Member of the MCC , Gilligan served as MCC president from 1967 to 1968 . During his tenure , the MCC was involved in controversy over the non @-@ selection of Basil D 'Oliveira to tour South Africa . The South African government did not want D 'Oliveira in the England team on the grounds of his colour . Gilligan , in his capacity as MCC president , was aware of this having seen a private letter which communicated the explicit threat from the South African prime minister B. J. Vorster that the forthcoming tour would be cancelled if D 'Oliveira were selected . However , he and the others who saw the letter , G. O. B. Allen and Billy Griffith , respectively the MCC treasurer and secretary , kept this information to themselves . When the English selectors met to choose the team , Gilligan , Allen and Griffith were present to represent the MCC . A BBC programme in 2004 claimed that Gilligan pressured the selectors to leave out D 'Oliveira , but D 'Oliveira 's biographer Peter Oborne suggests that Allen carried far more influence at the meeting . He writes of Gilligan 's part in the affair : " It would be wrong to make too much of Gilligan 's embarrassing past . Given that presidents are appointed for only a year , it was a very strong president indeed who could impose his personality on the permanent MCC secretariat of Griffith and Allen , and Gilligan was not a strong president . " Initially D 'Oliveira was left out of the team , but when a player withdrew with an injury , the selectors added him as a replacement ; the South African government barred D 'Oliveira from taking part and the MCC cancelled the tour . 
 In 1971 , a stand named after Gilligan was opened at Hove Cricket Ground , but this was demolished in 2010 as part of a redevelopment . Gilligan died in Pulborough , Sussex , on 5 September 1976 , aged 81 . 
 = Benjamin Franklin High School ( New Orleans ) = 
 Benjamin Franklin High School is a public magnet high school in New Orleans , Louisiana , USA . Commonly nicknamed " Franklin " or " Ben Franklin " , this school should not be confused with Franklin High School in Franklin , Louisiana . Ben Franklin was founded in 1957 as a school for gifted children . In 1990 , it moved to its current location on the campus of the University of New Orleans ( UNO ) in the Lake Terrace / Lake Oaks neighborhood of Orleans Parish , near Lake Pontchartrain . The school was damaged by several feet of flood water due to Hurricane Katrina in the fall of 2005 , and efforts to reopen the school were covered by nationwide news agencies . Although the school is part of the Orleans Parish School District , it operates as a charter school under UNO . 
 Ben Franklin has a selective admissions process , and according to CBS News is a " magnet for the city 's smart and motivated students . " It has been named a Blue Ribbon School four times by the U.S. Department of Education , and was ranked 16 on the 2009 " America 's Best High Schools " list by U.S. News & World Report . The class of 2008 produced 17 National Achievement Semifinalists , the most of any school in the United States . 
 Ben Franklin is a member of the Louisiana High School Athletic Association and offers a variety of sports programs . Extracurricular activities are also offered in the form of performing arts , school publications , and clubs . Because of its selective admissions policies , the school was accused in 1996 of an admissions bias against African Americans . Notable alumni of the school include Wynton Marsalis , a Pulitzer Prize winning trumpeter . 
 = = History = = 
 Benjamin Franklin High School opened as a school for gifted children in 1957 under the direction of School Superintendent James F. Redmond and Principal Naomi <unk> . At the time , schools under the Orleans Parish School Board were segregated . In 1960 , Judge J. Skelly Wright of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana ordered the desegregation of New Orleans schools in Bush v. Orleans Parish School Board . In response to the order , 2 @,@ 000 youths surged through New Orleans streets in demonstrations against school integration on November 16 , 1960 . Only eight Franklin students were absent from class . A Time Magazine article later stated that Redmond 's " proudest memory of the first day of integration three weeks ago , when truancy was rife , is that ' my Franklin kids stuck with it . ' " 
 From its inception , Franklin was designed to be a public school for gifted students , and admissions requirements included having a 120 IQ . Following an appeal of Bush v. Orleans Parish School Board , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit stated in 1962 that Franklin was " one of the finest schools in the country for superior students " and suggested that African American students who met the school 's exacting admissions requirements be admitted . Under pressure from federal courts , Franklin became the first public high school in New Orleans to desegregate in 1963 . 
 For over 30 years the school was housed in the historic Carrollton Courthouse on Carrollton Avenue in Uptown New Orleans . Built in 1855 , the building had served as the Jefferson Parish Courthouse until the City of Carrollton was incorporated into New Orleans . By 1987 , the building had fallen into disrepair and lacked basic air conditioning . Despite these conditions , Franklin maintained a reputation as a place of academic excellence . 
 In the late 1980s , the Orleans Parish School Board leased land from the University of New Orleans ( UNO ) and built a larger and more modern campus for Ben Franklin . Ben Franklin moved to this current Lake Terrace / Lake Oaks campus during the 1989 – 1990 school year . The building was designed by E. <unk> <unk> Architects and received an honor award from the American Institute of Architects Gulf States Region in 1994 . Visitors to the school included President Bill Clinton , who spoke with Franklin students on April 30 , 1993 about his plans to create a National Service Initiative . 
 Ben Franklin is located near the London Avenue Canal . Like most other UNO buildings and New Orleans public schools , Ben Franklin was damaged by several feet of flood water due to Hurricane Katrina . The school was closed before the storm hit on August 29 , 2005 , and remained closed for several months . Over US $ 3 million in damage was caused by the storm . School administration , faculty , parents , students , alumni , and volunteers participated in a massive cleanup effort , without funding from and independent of the Orleans Parish School Board . The effort was chronicled by several nationwide news agencies . 
 After Katrina , Ben Franklin received support from across the nation and around the world . On December 8 , 2005 , the United States Ambassador to Germany , William R. Timken , Jr . , accepted a " Band of Friendship " from the students of Clay Oberschule , Ben Franklin 's official <unk> partner school in Berlin , Germany . Monetary contributions included $ 10 @,@ 000 from the government of France and a $ 70 @,@ 000 grant from the Laura Bush Foundation for America 's Libraries . The school re @-@ opened as a charter school on January 17 , 2006 , the 300th birthday of its namesake Benjamin Franklin . The re @-@ opening ceremony was held in the previously flooded @-@ out gym . The gym had been the most severely damaged structure on campus ; all of the floor tiles had to be removed and replaced , and the wind @-@ damaged ceiling had to be repaired . In 2007 , the school celebrated its 50th anniversary with a free reception . 
 = = Enrollment = = 
 An admissions test is required to apply to Ben Franklin . Enrollment is open to residents of Orleans Parish entering ninth , tenth , or eleventh grade . Students applying for tenth grade must have one credit in English , math , science , social studies , and foreign language . Students applying for 11th grade must have two credits in each of the listed courses . Admission is based on an applicant 's GPA and performance on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills or the Iowa Tests of Educational Development for reading , language , and mathematics . The Iowa Tests are administered at Ben Franklin . All students meeting the criteria for entrance into 9th grade are also required to pass the LEAP 21 exam ( Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21st Century Exam taken in 8th grade ) . Ben Franklin had 609 students during the 2009 @-@ 2010 school year . The demographics were 270 ( 44 @.@ 3 % ) Caucasian , 183 ( 30 % ) African American , 141 ( 23 @.@ 2 % ) Asian / Pacific Islander , 14 ( 2 @.@ 23 % ) Hispanic , and 1 ( 0 @.@ 02 % ) American Indian / Alaskan Native . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Ben Franklin features a college @-@ preparatory curriculum and an Advanced Placement ( AP ) Program . Students are required to complete a minimum of 24 academic units that includes 4 in English , 3 in foreign language , 4 in mathematics , 4 in science , 4 in social science , 2 in electives , 1 @.@ 5 in physical education , .5 in health , and starting with the class of 2012 , 1 credit in the arts . As of 2008 , the school offers 20 AP courses for students to earn college credit . A selection of elective courses are offered , including studio art , creative writing , music appreciation , and theater . The foreign language offerings are French , German , Spanish , Mandarin , and Latin . Students may also enroll concurrently at local universities and the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts ( NOCCA ) . The school is within walking distance of the UNO library , and students can obtain library cards through a " special borrowers " program . 
 According to CBS News , Ben Franklin is " one of the best public high schools in the country — a magnet for the city 's smart and motivated students . " Approximately 99 @.@ 5 % of each graduating class enters a four @-@ year college . Of the 162 students in the class of 2006 , 28 were National Merit Semifinalists , 7 were National Achievement Finalists , and 3 were Hispanic Scholars . The class of 2008 produced 17 National Achievement Semifinalists , the most of any school in the United States . For the class of 2005 , the mean SAT Verbal score was 645 , and the mean SAT Math score was 636 . The mean ACT composite score was 27 @.@ 2 . One hundred percent of Franklin students passed the Louisiana Graduate Exit Examination ( GEE ) in Spring 2006 , with a significant number achieving Advanced and Mastery level . 
 In the fall of 2005 , Ben Franklin was one of three high schools given a five star rating ( the highest possible ) by the Louisiana Department of Education , based on its School Performance Score ( SPS ) . The SPS is based on test scores from LEAP / GEE subject area tests in addition to " The Iowa Tests " results and attendance / dropout data . The following table displays the three schools , along with their respective SPS in 2005 . 
 In fall 2008 , the Louisiana Department of Education rated schools in Orleans Parish for the first time since Hurricane Katrina . With an SPS of 165 @.@ 2 , Ben Franklin again had the highest performance score in the state . 
 Benjamin Franklin High School was named a National Blue Ribbon School by the U.S. Department of Education in 1989 , 2003 , 2009 , and 2015 . It has been ranked by Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report as one of the top 50 public schools in the U.S. with regards to student test scores and advanced placement programs . Ben Franklin was listed as one of the elite public schools in the country by Newsweek in 2006 and 2007 . In 2008 and 2009 , Franklin was no longer listed as a " public elite " and instead ranked numbers 35 and 52 , respectively , on the complete Newsweek lists of " America 's Top Public High Schools . " Ben Franklin was also ranked 16 in the nation by U.S. News & World Report on its 2009 " America 's Best High Schools " list and was one of its featured stories . Additionally , 2 art and 12 academic Presidential Scholars have been selected from the school as of 2007 . The class of 2014 produced twenty @-@ five National Merit Semi @-@ finalists , fifteen National Achievement Semi @-@ Finalists , three National Hispanic Scholars and fifteen National Merit Commended Scholars . 17 Benjamin Franklin seniors named Finalists in the 2014 Competition for National Merit Scholarships . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
