 Meth mouth is very difficult to treat unless the patient stops using methamphetamine ; persistent drug use makes changes in hygiene or nutrition practices unlikely . Many drug users lack access to dental treatment , and few are willing to participate in such a course of action , often because of poverty . Those who are willing to seek dental treatment often resist discussing their drug use . Providing dental treatment to individuals who use methamphetamine can also be dangerous , because the potential combination of local anesthetic and methamphetamine can cause serious heart problems . There is also an increased risk of serious side effects if opioid medications are used in the patient 's treatment . 
 Treatment of meth mouth usually attempts to increase salivary flow , halt tooth decay , and encourage behavioral changes . Toothpaste with fluoride is very important to the restoration of dental health . Only prescription fluoride rinses can adequately treat the condition . <unk> , drugs that increase the amount of saliva in the mouth , can be used to treat dry mouth and protect against dental health problems . <unk> and <unk> are <unk> approved by the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) to treat low salivation caused by Sjogren 's syndrome and may have the potential to effectively treat dry mouth caused by methamphetamine use . 
 Education about oral hygiene for long @-@ term methamphetamine users is sometimes required . Changes in diet are often necessary for recovering drug users that are receiving dental treatment , and the use of sugar @-@ free gum may be beneficial . The consumption of water and the avoidance of beverages with a diuretic ( dehydrating ) effect can also help patients with meth mouth . 
 = = Uncertainty = = 
 There have not been any controlled studies on meth mouth , and several of its aspects are unclear . Although the condition has been popularized by media coverage and case reports , no systematic studies have been conducted to conclusively tie methamphetamine use to symptoms that are commonly described as meth mouth . There are few ties between dental scholars and those who study drug use , and it can be difficult for dental researchers to find methamphetamine users to study . 
 Whether the drug has a unique effect on dental health has been questioned by a few academics , who note that the long @-@ term use of several other drugs sometimes causes dental problems . Several academic reviews have contradicted this perspective , affirming meth mouth 's status as a discrete condition . In favor of its unique status , these reviews cite the differences between methamphetamine @-@ caused caries and those that occur for other reasons , such as cocaine use , as well as the scope of the tooth decay found in some long @-@ term methamphetamine users . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 Although most methamphetamine users lived in Asia in the early 2000s , the use of the drug increased dramatically in other parts of the world in that decade . In areas where use of the drug has become common , meth mouth is often widespread . The condition is expensive to treat and has strained public health resources , prompting concerns among dental authorities in several countries about the burden of treatment . 
 Images of meth mouth are usually considered disturbing and have been used in anti @-@ drug campaigns , even being placed on hoardings / billboards . The condition is often mentioned in media coverage of methamphetamine , and it has been included in media portrayals of drug abuse to demonstrate the scope of the drug 's effects or to provoke disgust in the audience . Opponents argue that the term is used to negatively stereotype methamphetamine users , and that it is falsely portrayed as inevitable or characteristic . 
 = Stained glass in Liverpool Cathedral = 
 There are two cathedrals in Liverpool , both of which contain notable stained glass . This article refers to the stained glass in the Anglican cathedral , rather than the Roman Catholic Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral . 
 The stained glass in Liverpool Cathedral all dates from the 20th century . The designs were planned by a committee working in conjunction with the architect of the cathedral , Giles Gilbert Scott , with the intention of forming an integrated scheme throughout the cathedral . A number of stained glass designers were involved in the scheme , but the major contributors came from James Powell and Sons ( Whitefriars Glass ) , in particular J. W. Brown , James Hogan , and Carl Edwards . 
 The subjects portrayed in the windows are numerous and diverse . They include scenes and characters from the Old and New Testaments , evangelists , church fathers , saints , and laymen , some famous , others more humble . The windows in the Lady Chapel celebrate the part that women have played in Christianity . The designs in the windows at the ends of the cathedral are based on canticles , the east window on the Te Deum laudamus , and the west window on the Benedicite . The earlier designs are dark , but the later windows are much brighter and more colourful . Much of the glass was damaged by bombing in the Second World War . The windows replacing them were based on the originals , but often using simpler and more colourful designs . 
 = = History = = 
 The foundation stone of Liverpool Cathedral was laid on 19 July 1904 , and it was completed in 1979 . Giles Gilbert Scott won the competition to design the cathedral , and a Stained Glass Committee under the chairmanship of Sir Frederick Radcliffe was established to organise the design of the stained glass in the windows . The architect worked with the committee initially to decide on " the main lines on which the design of the window should be based and the extent to which is to be of clear glass or coloured " . The committee then decided on the subjects to be depicted and , in discussion with the stained glass artist , agreed on the details of the design ; Scott was concerned from the outset that " the windows should not detract from the architecture " . The committee continued to work during the construction of the cathedral under a series of chairmen , whose discussions were often very detailed . The oldest windows in the cathedral are dark in colour , but with changes in manufacturing techniques from the 1930s , the later windows are much brighter and more colourful . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Lady Chapel = = = 
 The Lady Chapel was the earliest part of the cathedral to be built . There was a competition in 1907 to design the windows , which was won by James Powell and Sons , who commissioned J. W. Brown as designer . Brown had worked for Powell 's until 1886 and then worked freelance , but from 1891 he was " the firm 's preferred designer for prestigious projects " . As the chapel is dedicated to St Mary , they are based on the role that women have played in the history of Christianity . Running through all the windows is a scroll containing the words of the Magnificat . On the north side are holy women from the British Isles , and on the south side are mainly saints commemorated in the Prayer Book . The Lady Chapel was damaged by bombing on 6 September 1940 , and all the glass had to be replaced . The work was undertaken by James Hogan , who used simplified adaptations of the original designs . Following Hogan 's death in 1948 the work was continued by Carl Edwards ; the resulting windows are much brighter than the originals . The windows at the rear of the chapel and on the staircase were donated by the Girls ' Friendly Society , and were designed by Brown . Known as the " Noble Women " windows , they depict women who have made major contributions to society , including Elizabeth Fry , Grace Darling , and Kitty Wilkinson . 
 = = = Ambulatory and Chapter House = = = 
 The four windows in the ambulatory are the only designs in the cathedral by Burlison and Grylls , each depicting two saints from a nation of the British Isles . On the steps leading to the Chapter House is the only window in the cathedral by C. E. Kempe and Company . It commemorates the Woodward family , who were local corn merchants between 1803 and 1915 , and includes biblical references to corn and harvest . The Chapter House was donated by local Freemasons as a memorial to their members lost in the First World War . The windows were made by Morris & Co. and designed by Henry <unk> , reflecting the interests and traditions of the Freemasons . The windows were damaged in the Second World War and repaired by James Powell and Sons . 
 = = = East window = = = 
 The east window , designed by Brown , dominates the east end of the cathedral , rising above the reredos , and is based on the theme of the Te Deum laudamus . At the top of the window is the risen Christ , and around and below are members of the heavenly choir . Under this are four lancet windows , each representing one of the communities praising God . The left window represents ' the company of the apostles ' , with Saint Raphael at the top . Below are fourteen figures ; the twelve apostles , excluding Judas Iscariot but including Saint Matthias , with Saint Paul and Saint Barnabas . The next window commemorates ' the goodly fellowship of the apostles ' . At the top is Saint Michael , with fifteen figures below . These include Isaiah , Elijah , John the Baptist , Saint Athanasius , Saint Augustine , John Wycliffe , Thomas Cranmer , and John Wesley . The third window represents ' the noble army of martyrs ' , with Archangel Gabriel at the top . Below are fifteen Christian martyrs , starting with Saint Stephen . Underneath are Zechariah and the Holy Innocents , Saint Alban , Saint Oswald , and Saint Boniface . At the bottom are figures representing martyrs from Madagascar , Africa , Melanesia , and China . The lancet window on the right commemorates ' the holy church throughout all the world ' , with an angel , possibly Uriel , at the top . Underneath are various representations : King Alfred as a warrior , Dante as a poet , Fra Angelico as a painter , the musician J. S. Bach , the scientist Isaac Newton , and the physician Thomas Linacre . Other figures commemorate law , commerce , scholarship , and architecture . Also included are Christopher Columbus and Francis Drake . 
 = = = Choir aisles = = = 
 There are four main windows in the choir aisles , two on each side , and they are concerned with the four Gospels . The windows on the north side are original , but those on the south side were destroyed by bombing and were renewed . In the renewal , the central mullion of these windows was widened , and the design of the glass was simplified and made more vibrant . Each window , known by its predominant colour , shows the author of the gospel at the top with his symbol . Below are figures linked with the subject matter of the gospel . The windows on the north side are by Brown , the left window , the Sapphire window , represents Saint Matthew and shows a depiction of the Nativity on one side , and the Epiphany on the other . The ' Gold ' window commemorates Saint Luke and shows the Feeding of the Five thousand , and the Raising of Jairus ' daughter . The windows on the south side are by Hogan . The Ruby window represents Saint John and includes biblical scenes together with the Old Testament figures of Daniel , Ezekiel , Jonah , and Job . Saint Mark is in the Emerald window , with scenes of the Baptism of Jesus and the Transfiguration . Also included are the disciples Saint Simon and Saint Andrew , and the Old Testament figures , Noah , Zechariah , Enoch , and Malachi . At the east ends of the aisles are rose windows by Brown . The window in the north aisle relates to " journeys across the sea and undertaken in faith " , namely Moses crossing the Red Sea , Saint Paul 's journey to Rome , Saint Columba planting a cross on Iona , and missionaries of the Melanesian Mission landing in the Solomon Islands . The images in the rose window in the south aisle show instances of God 's power being demonstrated through water , namely Noah holding a model of the ark , Jesus calming the disciples in a storm , Jesus walking on water , and Saint Paul after his shipwreck in Malta . 
 = = = Central space = = = 
 The windows on the north and south sides of the central space were designed by Hogan ; each includes three tall lancet windows topped by a rose window . The area of glass in each window is 1 @,@ 800 square foot ( 170 m2 ) , the sill is 51 feet ( 15 @.@ 5 m ) above the level of the floor , and the top of the rose window is 156 feet ( 47 @.@ 5 m ) above floor level . The north window shows figures and themes from the Old Testament , with Moses with the Ten Commandments in the rose window . Below the figures include Adam and Eve , Noah , Solomon , prophets , and important characters from Israelite history . The south window depicts characters and scenes from the New Testament . The Holy Trinity is depicted in the rose window , below which are depictions of events including the Crucifixion and the Ascension , together with a variety of saints . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The War Memorial Chapel forming the northeast transept has as its themes the aftermath of the First World War , sacrifice and the risen life . The design of its window was started by Brown and completed by Hogan . It shows suffering and death , including a depiction of the Crucifixion . The original window by Brown was destroyed by bombing ; the window replacing it shows Christ with his arms outstretched in welcome at the top . Below are scenes of acts of compassion , including figures such as Saint Francis . The southwest transept forms the baptistry , and its window by Herbert Hendrie of Whitefriars depicts salvation , particularly through water and healing . The window in the northwest transept has the theme of the Church and the State . 
 = = = Nave aisles = = = 
 The six windows in the nave aisles deal with historical subjects , all but one designed by Carl Edwards . The exception is the west window on the south side , designed by William Wilson . This is the Bishops ' Window , and includes Nicholas Ridley , Hugh Latimer , and William Temple . The middle window is the Parsons ' Window , and depicts notable clergymen including Thomas Arnold ( with a rugby ball ) , Revd Peter Green , and Revd W. Farquhar Hook . The Layman 's Window includes tradesmen who worked on building the cathedral , members of the committees responsible , and a depiction of Giles Gilbert Scott . The Musicians ' Window contains composers , performers , and conductors who have played a part in the development of Anglican church music . The <unk> ' Window includes hymn writers such as C. F. Alexander and Cecil Spring Rice . Finally there is the Scholars ' Window , with theologians , philosophers , and biblical scholars . In the corner is the Very Revd Frederick Dwelly , the first dean of the cathedral . 
 = = = West window = = = 
 Following Scott 's death in 1960 it was decided to change the design of the west end of the cathedral , which had consisted of a small rose window and an elaborate porch . Frederick Thomas and Roger Pinkney , who had both worked with Scott , produced a simplified design that gave the opportunity for a large west window . Created by Carl Edwards and based on the theme of the Benedicite , the window consists of a round @-@ headed window at the top , and three tall lancet windows below . It covers an area of 1 @,@ 600 square foot ( 150 m2 ) , each lancet window being more than 52 feet ( 15 @.@ 8 m ) high . Revd Noel Vincent , the former canon treasurer of the cathedral , states that the top part of the window represents " the risen Christ in glory looking down ... in compassion on the world " , and the images beneath depict " all creation united in peace " . 
 = <unk> shark = 
 The pyjama shark or striped catshark ( Poroderma africanum ) is a species of catshark , and part of the family Scyliorhinidae , endemic to the coastal waters of South Africa . This abundant , bottom @-@ dwelling species can be found from the intertidal zone to a depth of around 100 m ( 330 ft ) , particularly over rocky reefs and kelp beds . With a series of thick , parallel , dark stripes running along its stout body , the pyjama shark has an unmistakable appearance . It is additionally characterized by a short head and snout with a pair of slender barbels that do not reach the mouth , and two dorsal fins that are placed far back on the body . It can grow up to a length of 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) long . 
 The pyjama shark is primarily nocturnal , spending most of the day lying motionless and hidden in a cave or crevice or among vegetation . It often forms groups , particularly during summer . This species is an opportunistic predator that feeds on a wide variety of fishes and invertebrates ; it favors cephalopods and frequents the spawning grounds of the chokka squid ( Loligo reynaudi ) . When threatened , it curls into a circle with its tail covering its head . Reproduction is oviparous , with females laying rectangular , dark brown egg cases two at a time year @-@ round . This small and harmless shark adapts well to captivity and is commonly displayed in public aquariums . It is often caught as a bycatch of commercial and recreational fisheries . Many are killed by fishers who regard them as pests . Although there are no data suggesting its numbers have declined , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the pyjama shark as Near Threatened because of expanding small shark fishery activities within its limited range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The pyjama shark was originally described as Squalus africanus by German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1789 , in the thirteenth edition of Systema Naturae . He did not designate a type specimen . In 1837 , Scottish physician and zoologist Andrew Smith created the new genus Poroderma for this species and the related leopard catshark ( P. pantherinum , at the time believed to be multiple species ) . In 1908 , the pyjama shark was made the type species of the genus by American zoologist Henry Weed Fowler . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 A bottom @-@ dwelling inhabitant of temperate inshore waters , the pyjama shark is found off South Africa , from Table Bay off Cape Town to north of East London . It is most abundant off the Western Cape , and may venture as far as Saldanha Bay in the west and KwaZulu @-@ Natal in the east ; old records from Mauritius , Madagascar , and Zaire are almost certainly erroneous . The pyjama shark is commonly encountered in very shallow intertidal and littoral waters no more than 5 m ( 16 ft ) deep , though in and around Algoa Bay it occurs at depths of 50 – 100 m ( 160 – 330 ft ) and has been reported to 108 m ( 354 ft ) . It favors rocky reefs and beds of <unk> kelp . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pyjama shark is the larger and thicker @-@ bodied of the two Poroderma species , growing to 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) long and 7 @.@ 9 kg ( 17 lb ) or more in weight . Both sexes grow to roughly the same maximum size . The head and snout are short and slightly flattened , with a narrowly parabolic outline when viewed from above or below . Each nostril is split into tiny incurrent and excurrent openings by a flap of skin in front ; the flap has a three @-@ lobed shape with the central lobe forming a long , conical barbel . The barbels are thicker than in the leopard catshark , and do not reach the mouth . The eyes are horizontally oval and placed rather high on the head , with rudimentary nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) and a thick ridge running underneath . The sizable mouth forms a broad arch , with short furrows extending from the corners onto both the upper and lower jaws ; the upper teeth are exposed when the mouth is closed . There are 18 – 25 and 14 – 24 tooth rows on either side of the upper and lower jaws , respectively . The teeth have a slender central cusp flanked by a pair of small cusplets ; those of adult males are slightly thicker than those of females . 
 The body is fairly compressed from side to side and tapers towards the tail . The two dorsal fins are placed far back : the first originates over the rear of the pelvic fins while the second originates over the midpoint of the anal fin . The first dorsal is much larger than the second . The pectoral fins are large and broad . The pelvic fins are lower than the pectorals but their bases are about equal in length . Adult males have a pair of short , thick claspers , with the inner margins of the pelvic fins partially fused over them to form an " apron " . The short and broad caudal fin has an indistinct lower lobe and a ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The skin is very thick and bears well @-@ calcified dermal denticles ; each denticle has an arrowhead @-@ shaped crown with three posterior points , mounted on a short stalk . The dorsal coloration is distinctive , consisting of 5 – 7 thick , parallel , dark stripes running from the snout to the caudal peduncle on a variably grayish or brownish background ; the stripes become broken near the tail and the belly . In some sharks , the main stripe on either side may fork behind the eye , the stripes may be split in two by lighter central lines , or one or more large dark spots may be present . The underside is pale , sometimes with light gray spotting , and clearly demarcated from the flank color . Young sharks resemble the adults , but may be much lighter or have much darker stripes . An albino specimen has been recorded from False Bay . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Rather slow @-@ swimming , the pyjama shark spends most of the day resting in caves or crevices or amongst kelp , emerging at night to actively forage for food . Many individuals may congregate at a single spot , particularly in summer . This species falls prey to larger sharks , and is one of the cartilaginous fish most frequently consumed by the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) . When threatened , it often curls into a circle with its tail covering its head , in a similar fashion to the shysharks ( Haploblepharus ) . Its eggs are fed upon by the whelks Burnupena papyracea and B. lagenaria , which can pierce the outer covering to extract the yolk within . Like other sharks , the pyjama shark maintains osmotic balance with the environment by regulating its internal concentration of urea and other nitrogenous wastes . Experiments have shown that the shark 's capacity for osmoregulation is dependent on how well it has fed . 
 The pyjama shark feeds on a wide variety of small animals , including bony fishes such as anchovies , gurnards , and hakes , hagfishes , smaller sharks and rays and their egg cases , crustaceans , cephalopods , bivalves , and polychaete worms ; it has also been known to scavenge on fish offal . Although it has a predilection for cephalopods , the dietary composition of this opportunistic predator generally reflects the locally available prey types . For example , in False Bay the Cape rock lobster ( Jasus lalandii ) is the most important food source , followed by cephalopods and then fish . <unk> sharks have been observed seizing and tearing off tentacles from octopus and cuttlefish with a twisting motion ; on one occasion three sharks were seen attacking an octopus simultaneously in this manner . During mass spawnings of the chokka squid ( Loligo vulgaris reynaudi ) , which occur unpredictably year @-@ round but peak from October to December , pyjama sharks deviate from their nocturnal habits and gather in substantial numbers inside the squids ' " egg beds " during daytime . The sharks conceal their heads amongst the egg masses , while their stripes break up the outlines of their bodies . As the female squid descend to the sea floor to attach their eggs , guarded by the males , they become vulnerable to the sharks ' ambush attacks . 
 An oviparous species , both male and female pyjama sharks seem to be reproductively active throughout the year . Adult females have a single functional ovary and two functional oviducts , with a single egg maturing in each at a time . The egg is contained in a tough , rectangular , dark brown capsule 9 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) long and 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) across , with long tendrils at the corners that enable the female to fasten the capsule to underwater structures such as algae stipes or gorgonians . Eggs maintained in aquariums hatch in approximately five and a half months , with the hatching shark measuring 14 – 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . Males and females begin to mature sexually at 78 – 81 cm ( 31 – 32 in ) and 79 – 83 cm ( 31 – 33 in ) long respectively , and all sharks are adult by a length of 89 cm ( 35 in ) . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Among the most common South African catsharks , the pyjama shark is harmless to humans and difficult to approach underwater . Because of its small size , attractive appearance , and hardiness , it is popularly exhibited by public aquariums . The aquarium trade supports a small fishery targeting this species and the similar leopard catshark . Large numbers of pyjama sharks are caught incidentally by commercial fisheries using longlines , gillnets , beach @-@ seines , and bottom trawls ; they are also readily hooked by recreational anglers , especially during the summer when they aggregate . Although edible , most are discarded while some are used for lobster bait . The toll taken by fishery bycatch is likely greatly underestimated , as many fishers who use line gear regard pajama sharks as pests that " steal " bait , and kill them before discarding them . 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed the pyjama shark as Near Threatened , citing its small distribution and a recent increase in fishing pressure on small sharks in the region . However , there is no evidence to suggest that its population has declined . There are no specific conservation measures in place for this species , though its range encompasses two marine reserves . The South African Sea Fisheries Research Institute is considering legally <unk> the pyjama shark , which would limit the degree to which it can be targeted by commercial fisheries . 
 = What 's Your Name ( Usher song ) = 
 " What 's Your Name " is a song by American recording artist Usher and features will.i.am. Written by Usher , will.i.am and Ryan Toby and produced by will.i.am , it was sent to radio on August 18 , 2008 as the fourth single from Usher 's fifth studio album , Here I Stand , and was later released as a compact disc single and digital download . " What 's Your Name " is a mid @-@ tempo electro dance song , and is based on new wave @-@ influenced synth riffs . Usher and will.i.am performed the song at the 2008 National Football League Kickoff game concert , and it was also used in a Sony Ericsson contest . 
 " What 's Your Name " received mixed reception from critics , with some commending its dance beat , while others noted it as the worst track from Here I Stand . The song entered the Australian Singles Chart and the Canadian Hot 100 ; it peaked at numbers ninety @-@ one and eighty @-@ four , respectively . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " What 's Your Name " was written by Usher , will.i.am and Ryan Toby , while it was produced by will.i.am and the vocals were produced by Kuk Harrell . The song was recorded by Jeremy Stevenson at Patchwerk Studios and Triangle Sound Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , and by will.i.am and Padraic Kerin at Ethernet Studios , Los Angeles , California . Dylan Dresdow mixed the record at <unk> Studios , Los Angeles . Usher explained to MTV News that the " lighthearted " song was written for his " younger , up @-@ and @-@ coming fans " . 
 " What 's Your Name " was sent to US contemporary hit radio on August 18 , 2008 , and to US rhythmic contemporary radio on August 25 . A compact disc single was released in Australia and New Zealand on September 13 , 2008 ; it featured " What 's Your Name " along with an instrumental version of the track . The single was also released the same day as a download in the two countries with the same track listing . Usher and will.i.am performed the song at the warmup concert for the 2008 National Football League Kickoff game on September 4 . Sony Ericsson used " What 's Your Name " in a customer competition to meet Usher . Contestants entered by sending videos of themselves singing twenty to sixty seconds of Usher 's parts of the song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " What 's Your Name " is an midtempo electro song , and bases its melody on thrusting new wave @-@ influenced synths . It contains a " whimsical " beat that utilizes sirens and wind instruments . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune compared the song 's synth riff to the music that was popular during the 1980s MTV generation , while John <unk> from The Plain Dealer noted its similarity to British duo the Eurythmics . Usher monotonously repeats the pick @-@ up line hook , " What 's your name ? " , and thereby pays homage to his bachelor history . The song 's lyrics describe " the feeling you get when you run into a woman that makes you speak gibberish " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Allmusic 's Andy Kellman noted the song as a highlight of Here I Stand , and compared it to " Yeah ! " ( 2004 ) . Chad Grischow from IGN also chose the song as one of the album 's best tracks , and called it appropriate for " a windows @-@ down spring car ride " . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine called the song " rubbery " and danceable and compared it to Timbaland 's work . The Washington Post 's Serena Kim praised will.i.am 's production and vocal appearance on " What 's Your Name " . Sara Berry called it " a sleek , edgy dance hit " . In his mixed review of the song , Waleed Hafeez from The National wrote , " ' What 's Your Name ' , produced by will.i.am , provides listeners with another club track , albeit an average one " . Dan Gennoe from Yahoo ! Music called the song " disjointed and ultimately <unk> " , noting that will.i.am may have lost his Midas touch . A writer for Stuff called " What 's Your Name " the worst song from Here I Stand , describing it as " downright awful " . " What 's Your Name " entered the Canadian Hot 100 at number eighty @-@ four on June 14 , 2008 , but fell off the chart the following week , and made no reappearance . " What 's Your Name " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number ninety @-@ one on September 22 , 2008 . The following week it moved to number one hundred , before slipping out of the chart . It peaked at number fifty @-@ one on the Australian Physical Singles Chart and lasted nineteen weeks in the chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " What 's Your Name " – 3 : 58 
 " What 's Your Name " ( instrumental ) – 3 : 58 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = Bangui = 
 Bangui ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ̃ <unk> ] ) , or <unk> in Sango , formerly written Bangi in English , is the capital and largest city of the Central African Republic . As of 2012 it had an estimated population of 734 @,@ 350 . It was established as a French outpost in 1889 and named after its location on the northern bank of the Ubangi River ( French : Oubangui ) ; the Ubangi itself was named from the <unk> word for the " rapids " located beside the settlement , which marked the end of navigable water north from Brazzaville . The majority of the population of the Central African Republic lives in the western parts of the country , in Bangui and the surrounding area . 
 The city forms an autonomous commune ( commune <unk> ) of the Central African Republic which is surrounded by the <unk> @-@ M 'Poko prefecture . With an area of 67 square kilometres ( 26 sq mi ) , the commune is the smallest high @-@ level administrative division in the country , but the highest in terms of population . The city consists of eight urban districts ( arrondissements ) , 16 groups ( groupements ) and 205 neighbourhoods ( quartiers ) . As the capital of the Central African Republic , Bangui acts as an administrative , trade , and commercial centre . It is served by the Bangui M 'Poko International Airport . The National Assembly , government buildings , banks , foreign enterprises and embassies , hospitals , hotels , main markets and the Ngaragba Central Prison are all located here . Bangui manufactures textiles , food products , beer , shoes and soap . Its Notre @-@ Dame Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangui . The city is also home to the University of Bangui , inaugurated in 1970 . 
 Bangui has been the scene of intense rebel activity and destruction during decades of political upheaval , including the current rebellion . As a result of political unrest , the city was named in 1996 as one of the most dangerous in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological studies in and around Bangui have yielded at least 26 ancient Iron Age sites that contain many metallurgical tools and objects , illuminating the pre @-@ European history of the city and surrounding area . The archaeological sites were added to the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List on 11 April 2006 in the Cultural category . The site closest to Bangui is <unk> @-@ <unk> , 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) from Independence Avenue , where archaeologists and conservation agencies have carried out studies . It is a paleo @-@ metallurgical site where several thousand shards of ceramics , iron tools , pottery , and an iron spatula weighing 9 kilograms ( 20 lb ) have been unearthed . Its dating , compared with similar sites in Nigeria and Sudan , could be close to the 9th century BC . 
 Bangui was founded by Albert <unk> and Alfred <unk> on June 26 , 1889 , in what was then the upper reaches of the French Congo , the present @-@ day Congo ( Brazzaville ) . The original site was 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south of the Ubangi rapids . Its territory was organized first into the territory of the Upper Ubangi ( Haut @-@ Oubangui ) and then as the separate colony of Ubangi @-@ Shari . The initial capitals of these areas were at les <unk> and Fort de <unk> further upstream , but the rapids at Bangui blocked them from direct communication along the river and caused the settlement there to grow in importance until , in 1906 , it was chosen as the new headquarters for the French administration . Bangui retained its importance as a military and administrative centre when the colony was folded into French Equatorial Africa and under both Vichy and Free French control during World War II . The French operated a radio transmitter in Bangui , which was described in 1932 as " the most remote radio station in Africa " . 
 The colony of Ubangi @-@ Shari received its autonomy in 1958 as the Central African Republic and this became independent from France in 1960 . In 1970 , President Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa inaugurated the University of Bangui . He established the national airline Air Centrafrique the following year and ordered the construction of two new luxury hotels in Bangui . With tensions mounting between Bangui and Paris as a result of Bokassa 's uncontrollable expenditures , western banks refused to lend him any more money . Relations with the French worsened still further in April 1974 , when <unk> <unk> 's body was discovered in a hotel room in Bangui . It was reported in the French media that she had been Bokassa 's mistress and that he was responsible for her murder . As a result , Bokassa banned imports of French newspapers and assumed control of the Agence France @-@ Presse office in Bangui . By 1975 , Bangui had a population of 300 @,@ 723 . 
 In March 1981 , widespread violence took place in Bangui following elections , after Operation Caban led the French to drop Bokassa ( who had begun to call himself Emperor Bokassa I ) , and replaced him with David Dacko . Opponents of the President met in Bangui and were forced to flee the country . After returning voluntarily to Bangui in the autumn of 1986 , Bokassa went on trial . Initially faced with the death penalty , in February 1988 he was instead sentenced to life imprisonment . His successor was General André Kolingba , army chief of staff of <unk> ’ s army , who took over control from the local French military on 1 September 1981 under the pretext that the country was heading towards civil war . Although he attempted to combat corruption and control the national economy , he was unable to achieve his reforms . By the middle of the 1980s the country ’ s economic situation had deteriorated as 80 % of the revenue went towards meeting the salaries of the staff . Under pressure from France and other western countries , Kolingba restored democracy in the country in 1991 with a multiparty government but elections could be held only three years later in August 1994 . During the elections , Ange @-@ Félix Patassé was elected to the post of president . Since he was from northern CAR , the southern group of Kolingba started a rebellion during 1996 . 
 In May 1996 , about 200 soldiers of the Central African Republic mutinied in Bangui , demanding salary increases and the abdication of Ange @-@ Félix Patassé . In the aftermath , the renegades plundered and killed more than 50 people . Following this , the French troops stationed in the country suppressed the rebellion and restored the dictatorial power . After being elected , President Patassé announced a national unity government in early 1997 . The Patassé government , the opposition parties , and religious groups signed the Bangui Agreements in January 1997 which were a series of measures designed to reconcile competing political factions , reform and strengthen the economy . The same year , the rebel troops refused a military base in Bangui and in June a new revolt broke out . 
 In view of frequent political unrest the city was named in 1996 as one of the most dangerous cities in the world . On 25 October 2002 , several towns in the country and later Bangui itself were attacked by the forces of General François Bozizé , backed with international support . Bozizé refused to accept an arrest warrant and " defected with about a hundred troops , engaged in street battles in the northern neighborhoods of Bangui ( traditionally supporting Patassé ) " and went north . Bozizé went into exile in Chad but his troops returned to Bangui and fighting continued . Peace @-@ keeping forces were ineffective , leaving Patassé isolated , and with support from Chad , Bozizé 's troops were successful in removing Patassé 's government . Patassé , who was returning from Niger after attending a conference , was not permitted to land in Bangui and he took asylum in Togo , and Bozizé seized power and suspended the constitution . An all @-@ party National Transitional Government was set up which functioned as an interim legislative body . However , the “ climate of distrust continued . ” 
 = = = 2013 rebellion = = = 
 In late 2012 , the Séléka coalition rebelled against his autocratic rule and entered the city . After capturing Bria , <unk> , and other important towns , they were on the verge of capturing Damara , the last strategic town before Bangui . France and the US refused to support the president and neighbouring countries reinforced the Central African Multinational Force ( <unk> ) . 
 In January 2013 , the rebels terminated their operations , hoping for a negotiated settlement . Following a ceasefire and a power @-@ sharing agreement , Séléka and Bozizé agreed to honour the rebel 's demands for the release of rebel prisoners and the expulsion of foreign troops from the country . The agreement allowed Bozizé to complete his term in office and to include members of Séléka in a new government . It was also agreed that fresh elections would be held in 2016 . The agreement was not honoured and the rebels captured Bangui on 23 March 2013 , forcing Bozizé to flee the capital . 
 As of early January 2014 , " around 500 @,@ 000 have fled their homes " in Bangui , " almost half the city 's population . " 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Bangui , close to the country 's southern border , lies on the northern banks of the Ubangi River just below a series of rapids that limit major commercial shipping upriver . The only major city located on the river , it covers an area of 67 square kilometres ( 26 sq mi ) . The navigable Ubangi River , with the backdrop of lush green hills , turns sharply south below Bangui and connects to the Congo River just south of the equator near Brazzaville as its chief northern tributary . The Ubangi river marks the border between the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo . The Congolese town of Zongo is situated across the river from Bangui . The river flows to the east of downtown Bangui . During the rainy season the discharge in the river is three times higher than during the rest of the year . The city was also known as La Coquette ( the beautiful city ) in the 1970s . 
 Close to the river , the city centre features a large arch dedicated to Bokassa as well as the presidential palace and the central market . Lying 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) further north , the heart of the residential area has the largest market and most of the nightlife . Many of those in the suburbs live in houses known as <unk> , built of mud bricks with a thatched roof . 
 The Bangui Magnetic Anomaly , one of the earth ’ s largest crustal anomalies and the largest in Africa , has its centre in Bangui . " It takes the form of a huge ellipse of 700 kilometres ( 430 mi ) x 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) , with its central point at 6 degrees north and 18 degrees east . It consists of three parts or segments , which comprise the northern , the southern and the central anomalies . The magnetic equator passes through the feature 's centre . Although it is well documented , the feature 's origins are not fully understood . 
 The Central African Republic is situated just north of the Equator with daily temperatures normally reaching at least 30 degrees Celsius . Bangui , close to the Equator in the south of the country is slightly hotter and wetter than the northern regions . It has a tropical savanna climate ( Köppen : Aw ) with dry winters . While the warm season is from 23 January to 18 March , the cold season lasts from 20 June to 27 August , when rainfall is frequently accompanied by thunderstorms . The city is bordered by thick tropical rainforests along the river banks . Several of its neighbourhoods are in low @-@ lying areas prone to recurrent flooding . Severe rains in June and July 2009 left 11 @,@ 000 people homeless . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 After the Central African Republic attained independence in 1960 , developmental activities began , and the urbanization of Bangui ensued . This is evidenced by the population growth from 279 @,@ 800 in 1975 to 427 @,@ 435 in 1988 to 524 @,@ 000 by 1994 @.@ and to 652 @,@ 000 in 2001 . Apart from the ethnic people of the country , the city is also home for a minority group of Greek , Portuguese and Yemeni traders , and also has a small community of French people . The Bangui resident community includes diamond traders from western Africa and Chad , traders from many African countries , and refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria . 
 The official languages of the country are French and Sango ; the latter ( originally a language from the Ubangi River region ) is spoken by 90 % of the population . Some of the other languages spoken are <unk> ( <unk> ) , Banda , <unk> , Sara , <unk> , Kare , and <unk> . Sango was simplified by Christian missionaries and is widely used to this day . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Bangui serves as an administrative , trade , and commercial centre . During the Second World War the country became wealthier as exports of rubber , cotton , coffee , uranium and diamonds increased . After the war , the employment of local people in mainstream administration led to the development of the country 's infrastructure , which increased trade while slowing the national movement for independence . 
 During David Dacko 's presidency from 1960 to 1966 , there was a significant increase in the production of diamonds . This occurred when the monopoly of the French concessionary companies was ended with a law allowing local citizens to dig for diamonds . After Dacko set up a diamond cutting factory at Bangui , diamonds became the country 's leading export . But by the end of his five year 's tenure , rampant corruption and financial indiscipline had resulted in workers being left unpaid and civil unrest ensued . Bokassa then seized power in a military coup in 1966 . Concurrently , Bangui also became the key centre for social and cultural activity in the region , when new institutions were established in the city . However , political turmoil in the country , rampant corruption , and the dictatorial rule of President Bokassa centred in the city , brought in economic recession in the 1970s exacerbated by a fall in international prices for its major exports . This caused impoverishment of the people and severe conflict , further compounded by refugees migrating from troubled neighbouring countries . 
 Bangui received its first bank in 1946 when a branch of the Bank of West Africa was established there . Arab sellers dominated the city , and it was historically an important centre for ivory trading . Bangui manufactures include textiles , food products , beer , shoes , and soap . The main exports are cotton , rubber , timber , coffee , and sisal . Because of the ongoing strife , unemployment hovered near 23 % in the city as of 2001 . Ngaragba Central Prison , the national prison for men is located in Bangui . As of 2007 , it had 476 inmates ; prison conditions are reported to be poor . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The old town of Bangui has retained its colonial town planning with wide boulevards leading towards central market square . Attractions in Bangui include Boganda Museum , Bangui Zoo , and the Presidential Palace , formerly the Bokassa Palace . Notre @-@ Dame Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangui . Boganda Museum ( Musée de Boganda ) has displays of traditional musical instruments , weapons , rural architectural features , ancient hunting tools , pottery , and also many religious antiques . It has a collection of bark cloth , the material used to cover Bokassa 's bed . 
 There are several hotels up to international standards . The Ledger Plaza Bangui on the outskirts claims to be a five @-@ star hotel , and has an outdoor swimming pool and tennis court . The National Hotel was established in 1970 with 30 rooms . Also of note are the Golf Palace Hotel , the Hotel du Centre with 72 rooms , JM Residence , the Oubangui Hotel , established in 1985 , and Hotel <unk> with 23 rooms . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Customs = = = 
 Polygamy is an accepted practice among men , but is not encouraged among women . When someone dies in Bangui , a representative from his or her village always attends the funeral . " This person is charged with indicating to the deceased the way back home so that the deceased may avenge himself and herself and demonstrate the power of the family " . The representative who attends the funeral also carries a little dust from the grave to the village , and gives it to the village 's holy medicine man so that he can ascertain the reasons for his death . 
 Most of the holidays in Bangui are festivals related to the Christian and Muslim faiths and are the same as those observed in other parts of the world . National holidays include independence day and the birthdays of Boganda and several other national heroes . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 The cuisine of CAR is referred to as <unk> and the staple diet in Bangui includes cassava , rice , squash , pumpkins and plantains served with a sauce and grilled meat . Okra or <unk> is a popular vegetable . Peanuts and peanut butter are widely used . Game is popular , as are the fish @-@ based dishes <unk> and <unk> . Manioc flour is used for preparing <unk> . There are three types of restaurants in Bangui . Some focus on foreign cuisine , such as ' <unk> des <unk> ' , ' La Tentation ' and ' L <unk> ' , which are orientated towards French food , and ' Ali Baba ' and ' Beyrouth ' , which serve Lebanese food . There are a large number of African restaurants , such as the " Madame M <unk> " , a favorite of the locals . A number of bars and street food stalls compliment Bangui 's culinary scene . Alcoholic beverages served are locally brewed beer , palm wine and banana wine . Non @-@ alcoholic beverages that are drunk include ginger beer . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Bangui ’ s artisans ’ market has traditional wares representing the art products from different regions of the country . Handicrafts include woven mats and baskets , wooden utensils of simple design , carved stools , pottery , musical instruments , tanned skins , and wood products . The <unk> , similar to a xylophone , is made out of the horns of animals . Innovative designs include butterfly wings stuck with gum on paper , and ebony and hardwood carvings of wood from the tropical region . Artwork also covers carved animals and human figures . The crafts center in Bangui provides training to about 100 students in artistic crafting in leather , ivory and ebony wares . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Bangui has a rich music tradition and showcases the country 's music . Its musicians also perform in many countries abroad . The Bangui band groups were influenced by <unk> in the 1980s . The innovative music is based on dance bands who have adopted the Congolese music with electronic support . The music is rhythmic and blends with the Congolese rumba ( <unk> ) , which was influenced by son <unk> , cha @-@ cha @-@ cha , and merengue . Popular Central African music groups or dance bands who perform in the city are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Cool Stars , Cannon Stars , and Super Stars . Bokassa , during his tenure as President , established a music recording studio in Bangui and employed musicians to sing his praise with songs extolling his qualities as an emperor and to develop his cult image among his people . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The popular sports are football ( soccer ) and basketball . Both men and women from Bangui and throughout the country have participated in the Olympic Games since 1968 as well as in many international events . The locals also organize boat races with hundreds of participants on the Ubangi River , which is a significant attraction . 
 = = Education = = 
 The French system of education is the norm and French is the language of teaching , although the Sango language is promoted in schools . A substantial percentage of the population is literate . Schooling is compulsory for children aged 6 to 14 . Bangui is home to the University of Bangui , founded in 1969 by President Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa who named it after himself ; it started functioning in 1970 . A public institution , the university provides non @-@ agricultural education in the Central African Republic . The other educational institutions are the National School of Arts and the Central School of Agriculture , in addition to many religious and technical schools . Since 1981 , the University Library has been located in a separate building that houses its science , literature , and law collections . The medical school of the university has its own library . The Université Palais des Sports complex is the largest sports complex in the city . 
 A school in the eastern part of the city , Lycée Charles de Gaulle , was established by the French and is named after President of France Charles de Gaulle . Several notable Africans , including writers such as <unk> <unk> , have studied in the city . <unk> studied at the Lycée des Rapides . 
 = = Religion = = 
 There is no state @-@ prescribed religion in the country . The religious groups in the urban centre of Bangui , in the order of their population representation , are the Christians which form the majority , Animists following ancient beliefs , and Muslims . The Cathedral of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception under the Roman Catholic Metropolitan Archdiocese of Bangui is located in Bangui . The archdiocese was established as the Apostolic Prefecture of Oubangui Chari on 8 May 1909 . Pope John Paul II visited Bangui in August 1985 . The seat of the archbishop is Notre @-@ Dame Cathedral in Bangui . Islam is the last in the order of religious beliefs with about 20 @,@ 000 Muslims in Bangui . However , prior to sectarian violence in the country , more than 100 @,@ 000 Muslims lived in the capital . The late president Bokassa converted to Islam as a political compulsion under the guidance of the then Libyan President Gaddafi . He also assumed the Muslim name of Sala Eddine Ahmed Bou Kassa , but it was short @-@ lived as he wanted a cathedral to be built in Bangui . The Church of Fatima and Notre Dame D 'Afrique are located in KM 5 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Bangui is the transport hub of the Central African Republic . As of 1999 , eight roads connected the city to other main towns in the country , Cameroon , Chad and South Sudan ; of these , only the toll roads are paved . During the rainy season from July to October , some roads are impassable . The road network in the city emanates from the Palace de la Republique . 
 River ferries sail from the river port at Bangui to Brazzaville and Zongo . The river can be navigated most of the year between Bangui and Brazzaville . From Brazzaville , goods are transported by rail to Pointe @-@ Noire , Congo 's Atlantic port . The river port handles the overwhelming majority of the country 's international trade and has a cargo handling capacity of 350 @,@ 000 tons ; it has 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) length of wharfs and 24 @,@ 000 square metres ( 260 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of warehousing space . 
 The first airstrip in Bangui was built between 1920 and 1925 . Bangui M 'Poko International Airport ( IATA airport code <unk> ) is located on 600 hectares ( 1 @,@ 500 acres ) of deforested land 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) off the Avenue of Martyrs to the north of the old town , between the <unk> Avenue and the University of Bangui . There are plans to connect Bangui by rail with the <unk> Railway which would be beneficial to the country . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 A general hospital is located in the eastern side of the city . Modern health care facilities exist only in Bangui but are poor , providing only minimal care . Wealthier citizens make use of private clinics . The risk of catching HIV in the city is reportedly high , and many truck drivers stopping in the city for sexual services pose a major risk of spreading the disease to other parts of the country . The risk of catching malaria in Bangui and pygmy camps is also much higher than in the rest of the country . 
 A conference of public health officials including representatives of the Centers for Disease Control and the World Health Organization was held in Bangui in October 1985 . The conference evolved a diagnostic definition of AIDS which came to be known as the Bangui definition for AIDS . The conference defined symptoms of AIDS in Africa as " prolonged fever for a month or more , weight loss of over 10 % and prolonged diarrhea " . The Bangui definition proved problematic as immune suppression can also be caused by malnutrition . 
 = = Media = = 
 Several periodicals and three daily newspapers are published in Bangui : E le <unk> , the country 's first newspaper , began publication in 1982 . The other main newspapers are Le <unk> , Le <unk> and L ’ Echo de Centrafrique . Most of the country 's institutions have offices in Bangui , including French ones such as Électricité de France ( EDF ) . 
 Radio stations operating in Bangui include Radio Centrafrique , Radio <unk> , Radio Notre @-@ Dame , Radio Voix de la paix , Radio <unk> Luka , RFI , Radio <unk> de la grace , Radio Linga FM , Africa no.1 , and Tropic FM . BBC World Service is the only English broadcasting station that is heard in the city on 90 @.@ 2 FM , as all other local channels broadcast in either French and / or Sango . For reliable news , the channel of UN run Radio <unk> Luka is on 100 @.@ 8 FM . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Élie <unk> , politician and prime minister 
 <unk> Enza <unk> , football player 
 <unk> Enza @-@ <unk> , football player 
 André Kolingba , president 
 <unk> <unk> , basketball player 
 Joachim N <unk> , archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangui 
 Nathalie <unk> , French tennis player 
 Romain Sato , basketball player 
 = Coinage Act of 1873 = 
 The Coinage Act of 1873 or Mint Act of 1873 , 17 Stat . 424 , was a general revision of the laws relating to the Mint of the United States . In abolishing the right of holders of silver bullion to have their metal struck into fully legal tender dollar coins , it ended bimetallism in the United States , placing the nation firmly on the gold standard . Because of this , the act became contentious in later years , and was denounced by people who wanted inflation as the " Crime of ' 73 " . 
 By 1869 , the Mint Act of 1837 was deemed outdated , and Treasury Secretary George Boutwell had Deputy Comptroller of the Currency John Jay Knox undertake a draft of a revised law , which was introduced into Congress by Ohio Senator John Sherman . Due to the high price of silver , little of that metal was presented at the Mint , but Knox and others foresaw that development of the Comstock Lode and other rich silver @-@ mining areas would lower the price , causing large quantities of silver dollars to be struck and the gold standard to be endangered . During the almost three years the bill was pending before Congress , it was rarely mentioned that it would end bimetallism , though this was not concealed . Congressmen instead debated other provisions . The legislation , in addition to ending the production of the silver dollar , abolished three low @-@ denomination coins . The bill became the Act of February 12 , 1873 , with the signature of President Ulysses S. Grant . 
 When silver prices dropped in 1876 , producers sought to have their bullion struck at the Mint , only to learn that this was no longer possible . The matter became a major political controversy that lasted the remainder of the century , pitting those who valued the deflationary gold standard against those who believed free coinage of silver to be necessary for economic prosperity . Accusations were made that the passage of the act had been secured through corruption , though there is little evidence of this . The gold standard was explicitly enacted into law in 1900 , and was completely abandoned by the U.S. in 1971 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Mint Act of 1792 established the Mint of the United States . The Mint , in its first decades , only coined gold and silver in response to deposits of that metal by citizens , returning the bullion to the depositor in the form of coins . Either gold or silver could be presented for conversion into currency , as both metals were a legal tender , a dollar was equal to a legally defined amount of silver , or a legally defined amount of gold . Having a currency be defined in terms of two different metals is called bimetallism . Such a system may experience instability as the price of gold and silver on the world market changes . At that time , gold or silver U.S. coins were rarely seen in the nation , as they were heavily exported because of such shifts — most pieces in circulation were foreign in origin . 
 In 1834 , Congress made a dollar worth slightly less , thus lightening U.S. gold and silver coins ( known collectively as specie ) , making them uneconomical to export , and they were seen more often in commerce within the U.S. With this greater circulation , Congress re @-@ examined the existing statutes relating to the Mint , and found many provisions to be obsolete . It enacted the Mint Act of 1837 , a thorough revision of the statutes relating to the Mint . New provisions included the establishment of a bullion fund , allowing depositors to be paid without waiting for their metal to go through the coining process . The ratio of value between equivalent weights of gold and silver was adjusted slightly , allowing coins of both metals to circulate within the U.S. 
 When silver prices rose relative to gold as a reaction to the California Gold Rush , silver coinage was worth more than face value , and rapidly flowed overseas for melting . Despite vocal opposition led by Tennessee Representative ( and future president ) Andrew Johnson , the precious metal content of smaller silver coins was reduced in 1853 , allowing them to circulate . Until then , depositors of silver could choose to have their bullion struck into silver coins of any denomination of five cents or above ; the 1853 act lightened the silver coins from the half dime to the half dollar and eliminated the right of the depositor to have silver struck into those denominations . Depositors could still choose to have silver struck into dollar coins , but the high price of silver made it more profitable to use the bullion in other ways . So long as silver prices remained high , this effectively placed the United States on the gold standard . 
 Although the Mint rarely received deposits of silver for striking into coins , it purchased silver bullion using the new lightweight silver coins at above @-@ market prices . This was illegal , as Congress had ordered that the new lightweight coins only be purchasable using gold , a provision intended to limit quantities sold to actual demand . As the silver pieces had a legal tender limit of $ 5 , if excessive numbers were circulated , they might choke commerce . This in fact occurred , and merchants and bankers complained that the legal tender limit was causing them to have to sell accumulations at a discount to brokers . 
 The glut was replaced with a shortage when most federal coins were hoarded amid the economic chaos of the Civil War . Slowest to vanish was the base @-@ metal cent , which only had value because government said it did , and at that time , confidence in the government was shaken . Eventually , it too vanished from circulation and commanded a premium for change . A variety of makeshifts replaced the vanished coins , such as fractional currency and merchant 's tokens . Beginning in 1864 , Congress began to authorize base metal coins that would not be hoarded . It reduced the weight of the cent , causing it to be made of bronze , and also required a two @-@ cent piece of the same metal . The following year saw the initiation of the three @-@ cent nickel and in 1866 , the five @-@ cent nickel ( today simply known as the nickel ) began production . The two @-@ cent piece , initially popular , saw declining mintages as the public preferred the smaller , more convenient nickel coins . 
 Greenbacks , which were backed by neither silver nor gold but by the credit of the United States , and which were necessitated by vast wartime expenditures , had helped to finance the war . In the late 1860s , politicians disagreed about how quickly to have the government resume paying out gold and silver in payment of its obligations . Treasury Secretary Hugh McCulloch felt the best way to return to that practice was to withdraw the greenbacks as quickly as possible , and he did so until stopped by Congress , which felt his <unk> stand was hurting the economy . More and more silver was being mined in the Far West . Falls in the price of the metal made the option of depositing silver at the Mint in exchange for coin more attractive , and mintages of the silver dollar rose considerably in the late 1860s and into the 1870s . The silver dollar was fully legal tender , and some officials worried that the increased deposits would cause silver to drive gold from circulation as predicted by Gresham 's Law , endangering the gold standard . 
 As it had been two decades since much silver was regularly deposited for striking into coins , the fact that the United States had been on a bimetallic standard since 1792 was often forgotten . The gold standard was seen as the only possible choice , and many people assumed that the United States was on that standard , which had been adopted by strong nations like the United Kingdom ( 1816 ) and the German Empire ( 1871 ) . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Losses of nearly $ 250 @,@ 000 at the San Francisco Mint had concerned the Treasury , and , in 1866 , McCullough sent John Jay Knox , a Treasury employee , on a special investigatory mission . Knox found that <unk> in transferring bullion between various officers of that mint had led to inconsistent sets of accounts , but due to the lack of receipts kept , it was not possible to pinpoint who was to blame . In 1869 , Knox , by then Deputy Comptroller of the Currency , was sent by McCullough 's successor George Boutwell to investigate other Mint facilities , discovering severe irregularities and large government losses at the New York Assay Office . Knox again discovered a dearth of proper accounting procedures , and that officials there had trouble finding a copy of the Mint 's regulations . 
 In 1867 , an international monetary conference was held in Paris to discuss how to have gold coins of various countries struck to a common standard . Slight adjustments to the British gold sovereign and to the five @-@ dollar gold piece ( or half eagle ) would make each equal to 25 francs , and it was proposed that the British and Americans make those changes while France began striking a 25 @-@ franc piece . None of this ever came to fruition , but in January 1868 , Ohio Senator John Sherman introduced legislation to place the United States formally on the gold standard , to eliminate silver as a legal tender , and to implement the recommendations of the conference . 
 Knox , in his 1866 report , had recommended a thorough revision of the laws pertaining to the Mint , and in January 1870 , Secretary Boutwell instructed him to prepare a draft . In this , Knox had the assistance of former Mint Director Henry Linderman , who then held a roving commission for the Treasury Department ; Linderman would in 1873 become the first director of the Bureau of the Mint . 
 Knox completed a draft bill , intended to repeal many antiquated legal provisions , and to rewrite others . He proposed to eliminate the standard silver dollar ( he proposed a lightweight silver dollar that would have a low legal tender limit ) , move the office of the Director of the Mint from Philadelphia to Washington , eliminate the Mint 's charge to strike gold bullion ( then .5 percent ) , and abolish the office of Treasurer at the mints and assay offices , transferring its functions to the superintendent . In drafting the bill , Knox consulted with a number of former Mint officers besides Linderman , such as former directors James Ross Snowden and Robert M. Patterson , as well as former Philadelphia Mint Chief Coiner Franklin Peale . Mint Director James Pollard submitted the bill to Congress on April 25 , 1870 . 
 = = Consideration and passage = = 
 Sherman introduced the bill on April 28 , 1870 , and it was referred to the Senate Finance Committee , of which he was chairman . He did not seek its passage in that session of Congress , as lawmakers were busy with other financial legislation . The bill attracted next to no newspaper attention throughout the period of almost three years it was under consideration , though monetary experts and others watched its progress closely . On January 9 , 1871 , Sherman brought the bill to the Senate floor for debate . That it abolished the silver dollar , and thus bimetallism , was not discussed , as senators focused on the omission of the coinage charge ( the fee for the Mint 's services in converting bullion to money ) . This was of importance to the Senate — especially members from the Far West — because it affected what mining companies and refiners ( an important economic interest ) could get for their product . Sherman offered an amendment to retain the coinage charge , but it was attacked by Western senators as an unjust tax on miners and refiners of gold , and the amendment was defeated , 26 – 23 . On January 10 , the bill passed the Senate , 36 – 14 , with Sherman voting against his own bill . It was then sent to the House of Representatives and referred to the Committee on Coinage , Weights , and Measures from which it was briefly brought forth on February 25 by Pennsylvania 's William D. Kelley , the chairman , before being recommitted to committee . The bill was not considered by the House during the remainder of the 41st Congress , which expired on March 3 , 1871 , and the Senate @-@ passed bill died with it . 
 Kelley reintroduced the bill in the House when Congress reconvened in December 1871 . Chairman Kelley was from Philadelphia , and was influenced by industrialist Joseph Wharton , who owned a nickel refinery in nearby Camden , New Jersey , from which the Mint purchased , without competitive bidding , much of the metal for the three @-@ cent and five @-@ cent base metal coins . The bill at that time proposed that the cent , then made of bronze , be made of nickel alloy as well — when it was debated on January 9 , 1872 , Wharton 's interest was an immediate target . Kelley was quizzed by New York Representative Clarkson Potter , who called the bill " this Pennsylvania contrivance " which would give " a monopoly to the gentleman in Pennsylvania [ Wharton ] . " Another New Yorker , Dwight Townsend , moved to scuttle the bill in disgust over how long it was taking to pass ; his motion on voice vote would have succeeded , but there was no quorum and it failed on a roll call vote . On January 10 , Missouri Congressman James R. McCormick , who represented nickel producers in his home state , introduced an amendment for competitive bidding for nickel purchases by the Mint . Rather than accede to McCormick 's amendment , Kelley sent the bill back to committee . 
 When the bill was brought back to the House floor on April 9 , 1872 , it was managed by Massachusetts Representative Samuel Hooper , chairman of the House Committee on Banking and Currency . He went through the bill section by section , and stated the bill would place the United States on the gold standard . In the ensuing debate , other representatives , including Potter and Kelley , showed their understanding of that . The bill now provided for competitive nickel bidding , but was again withdrawn , this time by Hooper , after Kelley accused Potter of trying to benefit New York bullion merchants . This fracas caused other New Yorkers to oppose the bill . On May 27 , Hooper presented a substitute bill , which he got passed , 110 — 13 , without it even being read . Among the changes that the House made to Knox 's bill were a slight increase in weight of the subsidiary silver coins ( the dime , quarter dollar , and half dollar ) , making a dollar in them weigh 25 grams ( 0 @.@ 88 oz ) . 
 The bill then awaited Congress reconvening in December . Early in that month , Secretary Boutwell issued his annual report , calling for the passage of the legislation . On the 16th , the bill was referred to Sherman 's committee . It emerged without the plan to make the cent from copper @-@ nickel , and with the lightweight silver dollar replaced with a Trade dollar intended for commerce in the Far East , having limited legal tender status in the U.S. The bill was reported back to the Senate on January 7 , 1873 . It was debated there on the 17th . 
 One topic of discussion was the bill 's requirement that an eagle appear on larger U.S. coins . Linderman had requested an amendment to require that gold and silver coins bear a statement of their weight and fineness , which would mean sacrificing the eagle . California 's Eugene Casserly opposed the amendment , which was sponsored by Sherman , stating " it will hardly be possible to think of a half dollar or a quarter dollar as being such a coin without the eagle upon it " . The eagle was saved when the amendment failed , 24 in favor and 26 against . Casserly was less successful with an amendment to remove entirely the reduced coinage charge of .2 percent , which failed . Sherman moved the bill along as quickly as he could , and it passed without a recorded vote . The House initially refused to agree to the Trade dollar ; representatives of both houses , led by Sherman and Potter , met in a conference committee , and the House acceded to the Senate amendment for the Trade dollar . The bill passed both houses without further debate , and was signed by President Ulysses S. Grant on February 12 , 1873 . At no point in its almost three @-@ year journey through the legislative process did the bill provide for the retention of the standard silver dollar , into which depositors could have their bullion coined . 
 = = = Intent of the bill 's authors = = = 
 When , several years after its passage , the 1873 law became a political issue , some of those involved in enacting it , including Sherman and Linderman , stated that there had been no intent to end bimetallism in the elimination of the authority for private citizens to have silver bullion coined into dollars . They argued that the 1853 legislation had ended the practice of having bullion struck into smaller @-@ denomination coins ; the 1873 act simply rectified an omission and eliminated a coin with a low mintage that did not circulate . They were not always consistent in their denials : Boutwell wrote in his memoirs that " in 1873 I had come to believe that it was wise for every nation to recognize , establish , and maintain the gold standard ... hence it was that I determined to abandon the idea of a double [ i.e. , bimetallic ] standard . 
 Within a few years , the idea that the omission of the silver dollar from the Coinage Act had not been with intent to place the United States on the gold standard became the establishment position . Part of this was in reaction against the conspiracy theories that were circulating about the " Crime of ' 73 " , as advocates of bimetallism called the act . This was accepted by many historians well into the 20th century . Neil Carothers , in his 1930 history of small @-@ denomination U.S. currency , wrote that " many others have demonstrated that this was not a corrupt or surreptitious action by the enemies of silver . The elimination of the standard silver dollar was simply in the interests of clarifying the coinage law ... Not one party to the passage of the law of 1873 recognized the significance of the abolition of the legally existing double standard . " According to historian Allen Weinstein , " Silver 's demonetization , according to the traditional account , came as an unplanned if fortunate by @-@ product of a complex and largely technical revision of the mint laws in the Coinage Act of 1873 . " 
 Economist Milton Friedman wrote , " what is not open to question is that the standard silver dollar was omitted from the list of coins to be minted intentionally , in full knowledge of the likely consequences , and in the belief that those consequences were desirable . " He cited Walter T. K. Nugent 's 1968 book , Money and American Society , 1865 — 1880 @,@ 
 as Nugent documents in great detail , Senator John Sherman , chairman of the Senate Finance Committee , had been determined to demonetize silver from at least 1867 and had arranged to have a bill to that effect drafted at the end of 1869 . From then on , Sherman , Linderman , John Jay Knox ( deputy comptroller of the currency and then comptroller ) , and Secretary of the Treasury George Boutwell cooperated to push a coinage bill that included the <unk> of silver . 
 Knox and Linderman were both personally familiar with mining conditions in the Far West . They knew that the amount of bullion produced was only going to increase , and would likely drop the price of silver below the level ( $ 1 @.@ 2929 per troy ounce ) at which the metal in a silver dollar was worth more as bullion than as money . In his explanatory statement accompanying his draft bill , Knox explained the discontinuance of the silver dollar would mean the United States was no longer a bimetallic nation . Boutwell , in his 1872 annual report , urged Congress to end the coinage of silver from private deposits , lest the government take a loss from paying out gold in exchange for the silver dollars , and ultimately having to melt them when they could not be circulated . According to Nugent , " Were Knox , Linderman , Boutwell , Sherman , and others aware of what they were doing when they planned to drop the silver dollar ? It is inconceivable that they were not ; Knox 's statement was explicit . But did they urge it because they feared a drop in silver prices ? No one made an explicit statement to that effect , but it was undoubtedly the case . " 
 = = Provisions = = 
 = = = Bureau of the Mint ; duties of officers ( § § 1 – 12 ) = = = 
 The Director of the Mint had always been located at the Philadelphia Mint , with the other mints and assay offices governed by superintendents of whom the director was in charge . The 1873 act moved the office to Washington , where the director supervised the new Bureau of the Mint and remained in charge of all mints and assay offices . The Mint Director required appointment by the president and confirmation by the Senate and served a term of five years ( unless removed by the president ) . Henceforth , the Philadelphia Mint would be under the immediate control of a superintendent , like the other mints . The act also formally made the bureau part of the Department of the Treasury . The Mint of the United States had originally reported directly to the president but over time legislation had made it subject to control by the Treasury Secretary . 
 Little change was made to the officers of the mints , other than adding a superintendent for Philadelphia ( Pollock would be the first incumbent ) , and abolishing the office of Treasurer at each facility . In addition to the superintendent , each mint had as officers the Assayer , the Melter and Refiner , and the Coiner ; each was required to post a bond to indemnify the government against losses during their tenure of office , and each was responsible for part of the coining process . Philadelphia also had an Engraver ( sometimes Chief Engraver ) , responsible for preparing coinage dies and designs , though the Director of the Mint could , with the agreement of the Treasury Secretary , hire outside artists to design coins . The provision allowing for the hiring of outside artists was inserted at the suggestion of former director Patterson . The act set the salaries and bonding requirements for the officers , and required them to be appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate , as was the case under both the 1792 and 1837 acts . It also set forth the procedures for appointment of an acting officer or Director of the Mint , in the case of the incumbent 's temporary absence . 
 = = = Coins and deposit of bullion ( § § 13 – 39 ) = = = 
 Sections 14 to 16 of the act set forth the coins authorized to be struck by the Mint Bureau . This is the part of the act that would later prove contentious , as it omitted the standard silver dollar , since 1853 the only coin into which depositors of silver bullion could have their metal struck . It did allow for a Trade dollar , of higher weight than the old coin , that depositors could have their silver made into , but the legal tender of this and all silver coins was limited to $ 5 — the old silver dollar had an unlimited legal tender . All gold coins had unlimited legal tender , and the act made provision for the redemption of gold coin abraded below normal weight at full value , if twenty years or more old and if still containing 99 @.@ 5 percent or more of the authorized weight . Lightweight gold coin that did not meet these qualifications would have the loss in value fall upon the depositor . 
 Also eliminated by the 1873 act were the two @-@ cent piece , three @-@ cent silver and half dime . Although the first two coins circulated little , the half dime was still being heavily struck by the San Francisco Mint for use in the Far West , where paper money was disfavored . The coins authorized by the 1873 act were the cent , three @-@ cent nickel , five @-@ cent nickel , dime , quarter , half dollar , Trade dollar , gold dollar , quarter eagle , three @-@ dollar piece , half eagle , eagle , and double eagle . 
 The act prescribed the specifications of each coin . No change was made to the bronze composition of the cent . The dime , quarter , and half dollar were made slightly heavier so that a dollar in these coins would weigh 25 grams ( 0 @.@ 88 oz ) , in a nod to the metric system — the five @-@ cent nickel already weighed 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 18 oz ) . It required that the obverse of each American coin be emblematic of Liberty , and that an eagle must appear on the reverse , except for the small @-@ diameter cent , three @-@ cent nickel , five @-@ cent nickel , dime , gold dollar , and three @-@ dollar piece , on which an eagle could not appear . It required the use of the country 's name on the reverse , and of " E Pluribus Unum " somewhere on the coin . It allowed the motto " In God We Trust " to appear on American coinage — continuing permission granted in the Act of March 3 , 1865 , which had authorized the three @-@ cent nickel . The 1873 law allowed for the redemption of current or obsolete base @-@ metal coinage by the Treasury when presented in lots of $ 20 or more , continuing a provision enacted in 1871 . 
 Further provisions in this part of the act allowed depositors of silver bullion to receive their metal back in the form of bars or in Trade dollars . It forbade deposit of silver for striking into other coins , but allowed the Mint , for two years , to purchase silver bullion with silver coins at Philadelphia and at the New York Assay Office . This practice , although illegal under the 1853 act , had long been permitted by Mint Directors . 
 = = = Testing and the Assay Commission ( § § 40 – 50 ) = = = 
 The annual Assay Commission met at the Philadelphia Mint in most years from 1797 to 1980 , when it was abolished . Consisting of government officials and members of the public , it tested the gold and silver coins issued by the Mint to ensure they met standards . 
 The 1837 act had designated the judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania , the United States Attorney for that district , and the Collector of the Port of Philadelphia as members ex officio of the Assay Commission . The Coinage Act of 1873 kept the judge as a member , but omitted the other two , substituting the Comptroller of the Currency and the assayer of the New York Assay Office . Under the 1837 act , the president was allowed to appoint members of the public each year , and this continued under the new legislation . The 1873 law also prescribed a detailed procedure for taking samples from each delivery by that mint 's Coiner , sealing them in envelopes and transmitting them to Philadelphia , where the Assay Commission met each February . 
 This part of the Coinage Act also provided as to how the Coiner should settle accounts , for internal testing of coins outside the auspices of the Assay Commission , and continued the bullion fund , allowing depositors of gold or silver to receive coins or other payment without having to wait for the actual metal they had deposited to go through the coining process . The mints were required to have a set of weights conforming to the official weight weighing one troy pound purchased by the U.S. minister in London in 1827 , and to have the ones at Philadelphia tested in the presence of the Assay Commission each year . 
 = = = Criminal offenses and miscellaneous provisions ( § § 51 – 67 ) = = = 
 Sections 51 to 53 regulated matters that had proved controversial in past decades . Section 51 required all obverse dies ( containing the date on most denominations ) to be destroyed at the conclusion of each year . Under Director Snowden in the 1850s , the Mint had restruck rare early @-@ dated coins to sell or exchange with collectors . Medals of a national nature could be struck at Philadelphia under Section 52 , but private medals were forbidden . Until 1854 , the year in which he was fired by President Franklin Pierce , Peale had conducted a controversial medals business on the premises of the Philadelphia Mint . Section 53 required the bureau 's profits from seignorage to be deposited in the Treasury and forbade the Mint from paying expenses or salaries from that money . Under Director Patterson ( retired 1851 ) , the Mint had retained such earnings , and spent them without congressional oversight . 
 The assay offices were regulated by sections 54 through 60 , under the control of the Director of the Mint . Each office would be governed in a manner similar to the mints , with a superintendent in charge and two subordinate officers : an Assayer and a Melter and Refiner . Sections 61 to 64 forbade counterfeiting , intentional lightening of coins to secure metal , and other offenses , and prescribed the punishments for them . Section 65 is a transition provision , setting an April 1 , 1873 effective date , as well as providing that the current Director of the Mint ( Pollock ) would become superintendent at Philadelphia , and the occupants of the office of Treasurer at each mint ( abolished by the legislation ) would become Assistant Treasurers of the United States . Section 66 names each mint and assay office , and Section 67 names the legislation as the " Coinage Act of one thousand eight hundred and seventy @-@ three " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Later reaction = = = 
 The abolition of the half dime , still circulating in the Far West , led to shortages of small change there . Congress tried to address this with the unpopular twenty @-@ cent piece , which was struck for circulation only in 1875 and 1876 and was rejected by the public for its similarity to the quarter dollar . The Western United States was not fully supplied with small change until the Mint began striking cents there in 1908 and five @-@ cent nickels in 1912 . The Trade dollar , struck principally to compete with Mexican dollars in the Far East trade , failed to gain full acceptance in the Orient . Many were returned to ( or never left ) the United States . As they could be purchased at a discount , they were popular among employers , who placed them in workers ' pay packets . In 1876 , Congress revoked even the limited legal tender status they enjoyed ; in 1878 , the Mint stopped striking them except for collectors , and even that limited issue ceased after 1885 . In 1887 , Congress allowed a six @-@ month window during which they could be redeemed for other currency , provided they had not been <unk> by Oriental merchants . 
 As Friedman noted , if the price of silver had remained high , the exclusion of the silver dollar from the 1873 act would have been irrelevant . By 1874 , the effect of the new mines in the Far West , and the sale of silver in Germany following its demonetization there , combined to force the price of silver down . Silver producers had not been aware of the statutory change , and only learned of it when they sought to present silver at the mints for coining . According to numismatic historian Don Taxay , " an agitation followed , during which several pious Congressmen feigned ignorance of the repeal , maintaining it had been worked into the Mint bill surreptitiously . " One Delaware manufacturer wrote to his senator , Thomas F. Bayard , in 1878 , " at the beginning ... I was totally ignorant of all that related to the silver question — so much in fact that ( I find now like almost everyone else not excluding Congressmen ! ) I did not know Silver had been demonetized . " 
 A severe depression , the Panic of 1873 , began in the same year as passage of the act , and persisted for much of the decade . Many in the United States came to believe the gold standard too rigid to deal with economic hard times like those , and sought to restore bimetallism . The inflation caused by such a policy would enable debtors to repay what they owed more easily . The price of silver continued to fall — the silver in a dollar in the new metric @-@ weight subsidiary silver coins was worth only $ .75 by mid @-@ 1876 , though the price recovered some after that . 
 In early 1875 , Congress passed a bill for the resumption of specie payments ( that is , in gold and silver coin ) — effective in 1879 . Friedman stated that had it not been for the 1873 act , resumption would have been on the effective basis of a silver standard , which he viewed as a good thing , allowing for more economic stability and " almost surely would have avoided " the downturn of the early 1890s known as the Panic of 1893 . 
 Support for bimetallism grew in the 1870s , and resulted in the passage of the Bland – Allison Act of February 28 , 1878 , over the veto of President Rutherford B. Hayes . This legislation required the Treasury to purchase millions of dollars worth of silver bullion each month , and coin it into silver dollars — the denomination was restored as a legal tender , except when gold was specified by law or private contract . Renewed support for silver led to the passage of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 , greatly increasing the silver purchases , and requiring the Treasury to pay for them in banknotes that could be redeemed for gold . Over the next three years , $ 132 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in gold was withdrawn from the Treasury , and amid another depression President Grover Cleveland secured the repeal of the silver purchase act . 
 The free silver movement reached its height with the 1896 campaign of former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan , who won the Democratic nomination for president after his Cross of Gold speech , which decried the gold standard , electrified the 1896 Democratic National Convention . Bryan was defeated in the election by former Ohio governor William McKinley , and in 1900 , Congress passed the Gold Standard Act , placing that standard into law . The gold standard was departed from for many purposes by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt 's New Deal administration , and completely ended by President Richard Nixon in 1971 . 
 = = = " Crime of ' 73 " = = = 
 The Atlanta Constitution on April 1 , 1873 , reported the passage of the Coinage Act . It noted the abolition of the two @-@ cent piece and the authorization of the Trade dollar , but did not mention the ending of the standard silver dollar . There was no widespread objection to the 1873 act until 1876 . Several factors combined to bring forth protest then : tight money policies by the Treasury in preparation for the resumption of specie payments , a more precipitous drop in the price of silver than had hitherto been the case , and widespread use of Trade dollars after their rejection in the Chinese market . At the same time , the Comstock Lode and other Western mining areas were producing record amounts of silver . With a depression still ongoing , silver began to be seen as a means of inflating the currency and stimulating the economy . 
 Beginning in March 1876 , former newspaper editor George Weston published letters asserting that bimetallism was mandated by the Constitution , and questioning how the Coinage Act had passed . Sympathetic newspapers began to suggest that the legislation had been enacted through corruption for the benefit of wealthy capitalists . On August 5 , 1876 , Missouri Congressman Richard P. Bland ( soon to be known as " Silver Dick " ) told the House of Representatives , " The act of February 12 , 1873 was a fraud , because its title gave no clue to the real intent of the act . The record shows that the act was stealthily passed , without reconsideration and without debate . " In 1878 , Congressman Kelley , who had introduced the bill into the House , stated , " I was ignorant of the fact it would demonetize the silver dollar " . 
 Often blamed by those who deemed the act a crime was British financial writer Ernest Seyd , who had given advice as to the text of the bill , as attested by Congressman Hooper on the House floor in 1872 . Seyd , according to this theory , was the agent of a group of British holders of American bonds , who had sent Seyd to America with ₤ 100 @,@ 000 ( then about $ 550 @,@ 000 ) to bribe congressmen into <unk> silver . Kelley denied this had taken place , but the story stuck , and became a common belief in the silver movement . In 1890 , Seyd 's corrupt involvement was asserted on the floor of the House of Representatives by Arkansas 's Thomas C. McRae . Seyd was in fact an ardent <unk> who strongly objected to the American demonetization of silver . He had submitted , at Hooper 's request , an analysis of the bill in the course of which he advocated retaining the silver dollar as a legal tender . 
 The earliest use of the phrase " Crime of 1873 " in congressional debate was by Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller , who on July 10 , 1890 , stated , " the fight for free coinage [ of silver ] is on , and it will stay on , too , till the will of the people shall be heard in the enactment of a law that shall put silver back where it belongs and where it would have been but for the blunder or the crime of 1873 " . The act had long been referred to as a " crime " without the exact phrase being used ; in one 1889 speech , Nevada Senator William M. Stewart called it a " crime " seven times . He had voted for it in 1873 . 
 = Operation Clambake = 
 Operation Clambake , also referred to by its domain name , xenu.net , is a website and Norway @-@ based non @-@ profit organization , launched in 1996 , founded by Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund , that publishes criticism of the Church of Scientology . It is owned and maintained by Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund , who has stated that he supports the rights of all people to practice Scientology or any religion . Operation Clambake has referred to the Church of Scientology as " a vicious and dangerous cult that masquerades as a religion " . The website includes texts of petitions , news articles , exposés , and primary source documents . The site has been ranked as high as the second spot in Google searches for the term " Scientology " . 
 The term for the organization refers both to a traditional clam bake , as well as the notion from L. Ron Hubbard 's Scientology : A History of Man that humans follow a " genetic line " which includes clams , and that the psychological problems afflicting humans are impacted by past experiences . The domain name xenu.net is a reference to the character Xenu from secretive " OT III " Scientology documents . 
 In 1996 , the site was one of the first locations on the internet to host secret Scientology documents pertaining to Xenu and OT III . Shortly thereafter , the Church of Scientology attempted to get this material removed from Operation Clambake and other internet sites , through letters written by counsel , and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . After receiving a DMCA takedown notice , Google removed many Xenu.net pages from its indexes , which decreased the site 's page rank in searches for " Scientology " . This inspired Google to contribute to the Chilling Effects archive , informing others about material missing from Google indexes due to DMCA takedown notices and other legal threats . 
 Operation Clambake has been consulted by news media organizations and other groups for information on Scientology and related organizations . Dateline NBC cited the organization in a 1998 investigative journalism piece , as have other publications including The Wall Street Journal , The New York Times and the Associated Press . During the Spring 2002 semester , Xenu.net was included as required reading in a New York University course on " Copyright and Censorship " , and in 2003 webmaster Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund received the 2003 Leipzig Human Rights Award by the European @-@ American Citizens Committee for Human Rights and Religious Freedom in the USA , an organization opposed to the Church of Scientology . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 Operation Clambake was founded in 1996 by Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund , an information technology manager in Stavanger , Norway , who administers the site at <unk> This domain name has been described as provocative , because it is seen by some as a caricature of the character Xenu from Scientology cosmogony . Operation Clambake is registered in Norway as a non @-@ profit organization . 
 Heldal @-@ Lund chose the name " Operation Clambake " for the organization , as a reference to statements made by L. Ron Hubbard in which Hubbard wrote that the problems of human beings today are a result of traumatic events experienced by them as spiritual beings when they inhabited the bodies of clams during Earth 's evolution . In Hubbard 's Scientology : A History of Man , he asserts humans follow his notion of the " genetic line " of the " genetic entity " , which include clams ( as well as sloths , volcanoes , and a " sense of being eaten " ) , and certain human psychological problems descend from difficulties these clams experienced . Hubbard defined " genetic line " as a collection of the total " incidents " which occurred during the evolution of what Scientology refers to as the " <unk> body " . 
 = = Conflict = = 
 = = = OT III documents = = = 
 Prior to its own direct conflict with the Church of Scientology , Operation Clambake had described on its site how Amazon.com had pulled Jon Atack 's book A Piece of Blue Sky , a work critical of Scientology . The site later became one of the focal points of what some have termed " the war between Scientology and the Internet " . On November 8 , 1996 , Operation Clambake was one of the first sites to host the secretive OT III documents describing the story of Xenu . Operation Clambake maintains the position that posting these internal Church of Scientology documents is permitted under " fair use " allowance of internationally recognized copyright law . The Church of Scientology threatened legal action against various Internet service providers that host the site , demanding it be removed from the Internet for hosting information copyrighted by the Church of Scientology . 
 In 1998 Salon reported that Scientologists were now blocked from viewing sites critical of Scientology including Operation Clambake and alt.religion.scientology , through the use of a content @-@ control software program referred to by critics as Scieno Sitter . The Church of Scientology was unable to shut down Operation Clambake 's internet service provider in Norway . The organization succeeded in shutting down the upstream connection to the site 's internet service provider , Netherlands @-@ based Xtended Internet . In November 2002 , Xtended Internet 's upstream provider , Cignal Global Communications received a letter from Church of Scientology counsel alleging copyright and trademark infringement involved with <unk> This letter led to Cignal Global Communications , a United States @-@ based company , terminating its service with Xtended Internet , which had to move their company to a new backbone provider . 
 = = = DMCA and Google delisting = = = 
 In various incidents documented in such publications as The New York Times , Slashdot and Wired , the Church of Scientology has also used the controversial Digital Millennium Copyright Act ( DMCA ) to force notable Web sites ( including the Google search engine ) to remove the Operation Clambake homepage , and several leaflets containing copyrighted information , from their indices . Because the Xenu.net site itself is based in Norway , it does not fall under the jurisdiction of the DMCA . 
 In March 2002 , Google agreed to limit access to material critical of the Church of Scientology on www.xenu.net , after it was sued by the Church of Scientology for copyright infringement . Information the Church of Scientology had objected to included an internal report on the death of Lisa McPherson , and images of L. Ron Hubbard . Google received criticism for its actions , and The Guardian reported that Operation Clambake suspected the Church of Scientology was mainly concerned about secret documents where " L Ron Hubbard is said to describe how an alien galactic ruler called Xenu is the root of all human woe " . After Operation Clambake was delisted by Google , free @-@ speech advocates besieged Google , complaining that the company was censoring search results . Prior to Google 's delisting of the Operation Clambake site , CBC News reported that the site was listed fourth in a search for " Scientology " . After Google 's actions , Xenu.net did not appear in searches for " Scientology " . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Though Google did remove links to Operation Clambake for a short time , in place of the actual links , Google posted a notice explaining the links were removed due to the DMCA , and where the internet surfer could go to find more information . In April 2002 the International Herald Tribune reported that the net effect of the copyright controversy actually drove up the number of links to www.xenu.net , which improved its search results in searches for " Scientology " on Google to number two on the results page — just below the official site of the Church of Scientology . Reflecting on the controversy in a February 2003 interview in The Boston Globe Magazine , Google founder Sergey Brin stated : " Ultimately where we ended up was the right conclusion , but we didn 't initially handle it correctly . " Some groups critical of the Church of Scientology 's actions have later used the Google bomb technique to increase Operation Clambake 's Google rankings to the number three slot in a search for " Scientology " on the search engine , by linking the term " Scientology " on their Web pages to http : / / www.xenu.net / . The Church of Scientology itself has also been accused of an attempt at Google bombing for making a large number of websites linking terms " Scientology " and " L. Ron Hubbard " to each other . 
 The publicity stemming from this incident was the impetus for Google contributing to the Chilling Effects archive , which archives legal threats of all sorts made against Internet users and Internet sites . Chilling Effects contains the original complaint letter from the law firm used by the Church of Scientology , Moxon & Kobrin . Helena Kobrin , lawyer for the Church of Scientology , stated she took offense at the name of the Web site , saying : " It implies that the First Amendment gives people some special right to infringe copyrights . " Sergey Brin and Larry Page were both questioned on Google 's response to the Church of Scientology 's complaints in a 2004 interview in Playboy Magazine , and they appreciated Chilling Effects as a " nice compromise " . Brin explained the new scenario : " So now , if you do a generic search on Scientology , you get a link to a site that discusses the legal aspects of why the anti @-@ Scientology site isn 't listed . " 
 Also in 2002 , Internet Archive removed all Wayback Machine archival pages of Xenu.net at the request of lawyers for the Church of Scientology . Initially queries reported that the pages had been removed " per the request of the site owner " , which Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund denied . This was later changed to a generic " Blocked Site Error " message . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 Operation Clambake is included as part of the Library of Congress " September 11 Web Archive , " and in Spring 2002 www.xenu.net was listed as required reading for the course " Computers in Principle and Practice " at New York University , under a section on " Copyright and Censorship " . 
 On May 17 , 2003 , Operation Clambake webmaster Andreas Heldal @-@ Lund received the 2003 Leipzig Human Rights Award from the European @-@ American Citizens Committee for Human Rights and Religious Freedom in the USA , an organization which states it is composed of " Scientology opponents from all over the world " . Operation Clambake was cited by the Committee for exposing what it referred to as " fraud and human rights violations " of the Church of Scientology in the United States . The former Secretary of State of France , Alain Vivien , presented Heldal @-@ Lund with the Award , and stated that his work had revealed the actions of Scientologists with " respect and intelligence " . In his acceptance speech , Heldal @-@ Lund spoke about freedom of speech , and emphasized the role of the individual citizen . 
 = = = Media resources = = = 
 On June 16 , 1998 , Dateline NBC aired an investigative journalism piece on Scientology , and Operation Clambake was referenced on @-@ screen as a resource to learn about " Xenu and the exploded souls " . The St. Petersburg Times called Operation Clambake : " the best known of the critical Web sites " on Scientology . New Straits Times referred to the site as " a fantastic source of information for anyone interested in the Scientology cult " . In July 2000 The Wall Street Journal included Operation Clambake among its list of " Our Favorite Sites " under the " Opinion , Commentary and Gossip " section . The Seattle Times described Operation Clambake as " one of the most popular " sites critical of Scientology . 
 Many other news organizations have recognized its work . BBC News wrote : " The Operation Clambake site portrays The Church as a money @-@ hungry cult . " , and an article in The New York Times stated : " The site portrays the church as a greedy cult that exploits its members and harasses critics . " Still other news articles have called Operation Clambake " an anti @-@ Scientology Web site " , and the program " <unk> " on Sky News called it " one of the most controversial sites on the web " . The Associated Press cited the Xenu and OT III story in describing the Web site : " Critics at www.xenu.net and elsewhere say advanced Scientologists are taught that 75 million years ago , the cosmic ruler Xenu paralyzed billions of people in our galaxy , stacked them on Earth and destroyed their bodies with H @-@ bombs , though the traumatized souls survived . " 
 More recently , news media have consulted Operation Clambake and its proprietor when seeking out information for background on stories involving Church of Scientology and related organizations . The Sunday Times used Operation Clambake 's resources while doing a January 2007 story on Narconon and its links to the Church of Scientology . The Daily Reveille consulted Operation Clambake resources for an article on the " Second Chance " program , specifically for background on the Scientology doctrine known as the " Purification Rundown " . In April 2007 , the Daily News cited an " emergency bulletin " disseminated by Church of Scientology leaders that was posted on Operation Clambake , which seemed to refute claims by Church of Scientology representatives that their ministers were forbidden from proselytizing on campus after the Virginia Tech massacre . In August 2007 , the Associated Press included information from Operation Clambake in an article on Scientology 's attempts to connect with religious leaders from other faiths . 
 = = = Scholarly perception = = = 
 In Who Controls the Internet ? : Illusions of a <unk> World , Jack Goldsmith notes that the site 's " secret library of Scientology " page was blocked from Google for a short time . He notes that Google 's actions in the matter were indicative of its policy to remove search results when threatened by governmental action . The incident between Google and the Church of Scientology involving the Web site was also discussed in an annual meeting of The State Bar of California , and cited as part of the caselaw for " Domestic Copyright Law in Cyberspace . " 
 Fred von Lohmann , an attorney with the Electronic Frontier Foundation , raised free speech concerns in the Xenu.net case , stating : " The danger is that people will attempt to silence critics under the guise of copyright infringement . " In Beyond the First Amendment : The Politics of Free Speech and Pluralism , author Samuel Peter Nelson raises the question : " Why should a private actor ( Church of Scientology ) in the United States have the power to restrict the speech of a Dutch citizen publishing in the Netherlands whose speech is protected by Dutch law ? " In an interview on the Xenu.net controversy , Harvard Law School professor Jonathan Zittrain predicted that more conflicts involving the Church of Scientology were likely to occur in the future . Zittrain stated : " The cutting edge on such battles is often the Church of Scientology . They have very well honed procedures and tactics to remove information that they find objectionable . " 
 Mentioning Operation Clambake as an example of an Internet response to a controversial movement in their 2003 book Understanding New Religious Movements , John A. <unk> and J. Gordon Melton referred to the site as " a Web page devoted to the negative aspects of Scientology " . Douglas E. Cowan , writing in Religion Online ( 2004 ) , characterizes Operation Clambake as an example of a " surfeit of sites dedicated to so @-@ called watchdog organizations or [ … ] home pages of disgruntled ex @-@ members . " According to Cowan , Internet coverage of the Church of Scientology represents an " important example of competing <unk> that struggle for authority and control both online and off " . Cowan proposes that Operation Clambake seeks to demonstrate that the Church of Scientology " lacks any redeeming social value " . Cowan notes that most of the content presented by the site is not the result of original research by the owner but rather a collection of hyperlinks to media reports , scholarly and popular articles , court documents and out @-@ of @-@ print books . <unk> by links to like @-@ minded sites hosting essentially the same information , the result is thought by Cowan to be inflation of the apparent quantity of anti @-@ Scientology material available . According to Cowan , Operation Clambake is not designed to be read by Scientologists , but rather meant for those who already hold negative views about Scientology and might join Heldal @-@ Lund in his self @-@ stated purpose : " The Fight Against the Church of Scientology on the Net . " Cowan compares the site to a propaganda effort , and writes that a message is presented repeatedly , consistently to a target audience that already has some affinity with it , leading to a somewhat self @-@ limiting construction of reality . 
 = Ode on a Grecian Urn = 
 " Ode on a Grecian Urn " is a poem written by the English Romantic poet John Keats in May 1819 and published anonymously in the January 1820 , Number 15 issue of the magazine Annals of the Fine Arts ( see 1820 in poetry ) . 
 The poem is one of several " Great Odes of 1819 " , which include " Ode on Indolence " , " Ode on Melancholy " , " Ode to a Nightingale " , and " Ode to Psyche " . Keats found earlier forms of poetry unsatisfactory for his purpose , and the collection represented a new development of the ode form . He was inspired to write the poem after reading two articles by English artist and writer Benjamin Haydon . Keats was aware of other works on classical Greek art , and had first @-@ hand exposure to the Elgin Marbles , all of which reinforced his belief that classical Greek art was idealistic and captured Greek virtues , which forms the basis of the poem . 
 Divided into five stanzas of ten lines each , the ode contains a narrator 's discourse on a series of designs on a Grecian urn . The poem focuses on two scenes : one in which a lover eternally pursues a beloved without fulfilment , and another of villagers about to perform a sacrifice . The final lines of the poem declare that " ' beauty is truth , truth beauty , ' – that is all / Ye know on earth , and all ye need to know " , and literary critics have debated whether they increase or diminish the overall beauty of the poem . Critics have focused on other aspects of the poem , including the role of the narrator , the inspirational qualities of real @-@ world objects , and the paradoxical relationship between the poem 's world and reality . 
 " Ode on a Grecian Urn " was not well received by contemporary critics . It was only by the mid @-@ 19th century that it began to be praised , although it is now considered to be one of the greatest odes in the English language . A long debate over the poem 's final statement divided 20th @-@ century critics , but most agreed on the beauty of the work , despite various perceived inadequacies . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the spring of 1819 , Keats had left his job as dresser , or assistant house surgeon , at Guy 's Hospital , Southwark , London , to devote himself entirely to the composition of poetry . Living with his friend Charles Brown , the 23 @-@ year @-@ old was burdened with money problems and despaired when his brother George sought his financial assistance . These real @-@ world difficulties may have given Keats pause for thought about a career in poetry , yet he did manage to complete five odes , including " Ode to a Nightingale " , " Ode to Psyche " , " Ode on Melancholy " , " Ode on Indolence " , and " Ode on a Grecian Urn " . The poems were transcribed by Brown , who later provided copies to the publisher Richard Woodhouse . Their exact date of composition is unknown ; Keats simply dated " Ode on a Grecian Urn " May 1819 , as he did its companion odes . While the five poems display a unity in stanza forms and themes , the unity fails to provide clear evidence of the order in which they were composed . 
 In the odes of 1819 Keats explores his contemplations about relationships between the soul , eternity , nature , and art . His idea of using classical Greek art as a metaphor originated in his reading of Haydon 's Examiner articles of 2 May and 9 May 1819 . In the first article , Haydon described Greek sacrifice and worship , and in the second article , he contrasted the artistic styles of Raphael and Michelangelo in conjunction with a discussion of medieval sculptures . Keats also had access to prints of Greek urns at Haydon 's office , and he traced an engraving of the " <unk> Vase " , a Neo @-@ Attic marble volute krater , signed by <unk> , in The Louvre , which he found in Henry Moses 's A Collection of Antique Vases , Altars , Paterae . 
 Keats 's inspiration for the topic was not limited to Haydon , but embraced only a few contemporary sources . He may have recalled his experience with the Elgin Marbles and their influence on his sonnet " On Seeing the Elgin Marbles " . Keats was also exposed to the Townley , Borghese , and Holland House vases and to the classical treatment of subjects in Robert Burton 's The Anatomy of Melancholy . Many contemporary essays and articles on these works shared Keats 's view that classical Greek art was both idealistic and captured Greek virtues . Although he was influenced by examples of existing Greek vases , in the poem he attempted to describe an ideal artistic type , rather than a specific original vase . 
 Although " Ode on a Grecian Urn " was completed in May 1819 , its first printing came in January 1821 when it was published with " Ode to a Nightingale " in the Annals of Fine Art , an art magazine that promoted views on art similar to those Keats held . Following the initial publication , the Examiner published Keats 's ode together with Haydon 's two previously published articles . Keats also included the poem in his 1820 collection Lamia , Isabella , The Eve of St Agnes , and Other Poems . 
 = = Structure = = 
 In 1819 , Keats had attempted to write sonnets , but found that the form did not satisfy his purpose because the pattern of rhyme worked against the tone that he wished to achieve . When he turned to the ode form , he found that the standard <unk> form used by poets such as John Dryden was inadequate for properly discussing philosophy . Keats developed his own type of ode in " Ode to Psyche " , which preceded " Ode on a Grecian Urn " and other odes he wrote in 1819 . Keats 's creation established a new poetic tone that accorded with his aesthetic ideas about poetry . He further altered this new form in " Ode to a Nightingale " and " Ode on a Grecian Urn " by adding a secondary voice within the ode , creating a dialogue between two subjects . The technique of the poem is <unk> , the poetic representation of a painting or sculpture in words . Keats broke from the traditional use of <unk> found in Theocritus 's Idyll , a classical poem that describes a design on the sides of a cup . While Theocritus describes both motion found in a stationary artwork and underlying motives of characters , " Ode on a Grecian Urn " replaces actions with a series of questions and focuses only on external attributes of the characters . 
 " Ode on a Grecian Urn " is organized into ten @-@ line stanzas , beginning with an ABAB rhyme scheme and ending with a Miltonic sestet ( 1st and 5th stanzas <unk> , 2nd stanza <unk> , and 3rd and 4th stanzas <unk> ) . The same overall pattern is used in " Ode on Indolence " , " Ode on Melancholy " , and " Ode to a Nightingale " ( though their sestet rhyme schemes vary ) , which makes the poems unified in structure as well as theme . The word " ode " itself is of Greek origin , meaning " sung " . While ode @-@ writers from antiquity adhered to rigid patterns of strophe , antistrophe , and epode , the form by Keats 's time had undergone enough transformation that it represented a manner rather than a set method for writing a certain type of lyric poetry . Keats 's odes seek to find a " classical balance " between two extremes , and in the structure of " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , these extremes are the symmetrical structure of classical literature and the asymmetry of Romantic poetry . The use of the ABAB structure in the beginning lines of each stanza represents a clear example of structure found in classical literature , and the remaining six lines appear to break free of the traditional poetic styles of Greek and Roman odes . 
 Keats 's metre reflects a conscious development in his poetic style . The poem contains only a single instance of medial inversion ( the reversal of an iamb in the middle of a line ) , which was common in his earlier works . However , Keats incorporates spondees in 37 of the 250 metrical feet . <unk> are never placed before the fourth syllable in a line . The word choice represents a shift from Keats 's early reliance on Latinate polysyllabic words to shorter , Germanic words . In the second stanza , " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , which emphasizes words containing the letters " p " , " b " , and " v " , uses syzygy , the repetition of a consonantal sound . The poem incorporates a complex reliance on assonance , which is found in very few English poems . Within " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , an example of this pattern can be found in line 13 ( " Not to the sensual ear , but , more endear 'd " ) where the " e " of " sensual " connects with the " e " of " endear 'd " and the " ea " of " ear " connects with the " ea " of " endear 'd " . A more complex form is found in line 11 ( " Heard melodies are sweet , but those unheard " ) with the " ea " of " Heard " connecting to the " ea " of " unheard " , the " o " of " melodies " connecting to the " o " of " those " and the " u " of " but " connecting to the " u " of " unheard " . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem begins with the narrator 's silencing the urn by describing it as the " bride of quietness " , which allows him to speak for it using his own impressions . The narrator addresses the urn by saying : 
 Thou still <unk> 'd bride of quietness ! 
 Thou foster @-@ child of silence and slow time ( lines 1 – 2 ) 
 The urn is a " foster @-@ child of silence and slow time " because it was created from stone and made by the hand of an artist who did not communicate through words . As stone , time has little effect on it and ageing is such a slow process that it can be seen as an eternal piece of artwork . The urn is an external object capable of producing a story outside the time of its creation , and because of this ability the poet labels it a " sylvan historian " that tells its story through its beauty : 
 Sylvan historian , who canst thus express 
 A flow 'ry tale more sweetly than our rhyme : 
 What leaf @-@ <unk> 'd legend haunts about thy shape 
 Of deities or mortals , or of both , 
 In Tempe or the dales of <unk> ? 
 What men or gods are these ? What maidens loth ? 
 What mad pursuit ? What struggle to escape ? 
 What pipes and <unk> ? What wild ecstasy ? ( lines 3 – 10 ) 
 The questions presented in these lines are too ambiguous to allow the reader to understand what is taking place in the images on the urn , but elements of it are revealed : there is a pursuit with a strong sexual component . The melody accompanying the pursuit is intensified in the second stanza : 
 Heard melodies are sweet , but those unheard 
 Are sweeter ; therefore , ye soft pipes , play on ; 
 Not to the sensual ear , but , more endear 'd , 
 Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone : ( lines 11 – 14 ) 
 There is a hint of a paradox in that indulgence causes someone to be filled with desire and that music without a sound is desired by the soul . There is a stasis that prohibits the characters on the urn from ever being fulfilled : 
 Bold Lover , never , never canst thou kiss , 
 Though winning near the goal – yet , do not grieve ; 
 She cannot fade , though thou hast not thy bliss , 
 For ever wilt thou love , and she be fair ! ( lines 17 – 20 ) 
 In the third stanza , the narrator begins by speaking to a tree , which will ever hold its leaves and will not " bid the Spring adieu " . The paradox of life versus lifelessness extends beyond the lover and the fair lady and takes a more temporal shape as three of the ten lines begin with the words " for ever " . The unheard song never ages and the pipes are able to play forever , which leads the lovers , nature , and all involved to be : 
 For ever panting , and for ever young ; 
 All breathing human passion far above , 
 That leaves a heart high @-@ sorrowful and <unk> , 
 A burning forehead , and a <unk> tongue . ( lines 27 – 30 ) 
 A new paradox arises in these lines because these immortal lovers are experiencing a living death . To overcome this paradox of merged life and death , the poem shifts to a new scene with a new perspective . The fourth stanza opens with the sacrifice of a virgin cow , an image that appeared in the Elgin Marbles , Claude Lorrain 's Sacrifice to Apollo , and Raphael 's The Sacrifice at <unk> 
 Who are these coming to the sacrifice ? 
 To what green altar , O mysterious priest , 
 Lead 'st thou that heifer lowing at the skies , 
 And all her silken flanks with garlands drest ? 
 What little town by river or sea shore , 
 Or mountain @-@ built with peaceful citadel , 
 Is emptied of its folk , this pious morn ? 
 And , little town , thy streets for evermore 
 Will silent be ; and not a soul to tell 
 Why thou art desolate , can e 'er return . ( lines 31 – 40 ) 
 All that exists in the scene is a procession of individuals , and the narrator conjectures on the rest . The altar and town exist as part of a world outside art , and the poem challenges the limitations of art through describing their possible existence . The questions are unanswered because there is no one who can ever know the true answers , as the locations are not real . The final stanza begins with a reminder that the urn is a piece of eternal artwork : 
 O Attic shape ! Fair attitude ! with <unk> 
 Of marble men and maidens overwrought , 
 With forest branches and the trodden weed ; 
 Thou , silent form , dost tease us out of thought 
 As doth eternity : Cold pastoral ! ( lines 41 – 45 ) 
 The audience is limited in its ability to comprehend the eternal scene , but the silent urn is still able to speak to them . The story it tells is both cold and passionate , and it is able to help mankind . The poem concludes with the urn 's message : 
 When old age shall this generation waste , 
 Thou shalt remain , in midst of other woe 
 Than ours , a friend to man , to whom thou <unk> , 
 " Beauty is truth , truth beauty , " – that is all 
 Ye know on earth , and all ye need to know . ( lines 46 – 50 ) 
 = = Themes = = 
 Like many of Keats 's odes , " Ode on a Grecian Urn " discusses art and art 's audience . He relied on depictions of natural music in earlier poems , and works such as " Ode to a Nightingale " appeal to auditory sensations while ignoring the visual . Keats reverses this when describing an urn within " Ode on a Grecian Urn " to focus on representational art . He previously used the image of an urn in " Ode on Indolence " , depicting one with three figures representing Love , Ambition and Poesy . Of these three , Love and Poesy are integrated into " Ode on a Grecian Urn " with an emphasis on how the urn , as a human artistic construct , is capable of relating to the idea of " Truth " . The images of the urn described within the poem are intended as obvious depictions of common activities : an attempt at courtship , the making of music , and a religious rite . The figures are supposed to be beautiful , and the urn itself is supposed to be realistic . Although the poem does not include the subjective involvement of the narrator , the description of the urn within the poem implies a human observer that draws out these images . The narrator interacts with the urn in a manner similar to how a critic would respond to the poem , which creates ambiguity in the poem 's final lines : " ' Beauty is truth , truth beauty , ' – that is all / Ye know on earth , and all ye need to know . " The lack of a definite voice of the urn causes the reader to question who is really speaking these words , to whom they are speaking , and what is meant by the words , which encourages the reader to interact with the poem in an interrogative manner like the narrator . 
 As a symbol , an urn cannot completely represent poetry , but it does serve as one component in describing the relationship between art and humanity . The nightingale of " Ode to a Nightingale " is separated from humanity and does not have human concerns . The urn , as a piece of art , requires an audience and is in an incomplete state on its own . This allows the urn to interact with humanity , to put forth a narrative , and allows for the imagination to operate . The images on the urn provoke the narrator to ask questions , and the silence of the urn reinforces the imagination 's ability to operate . This interaction and use of the imagination is part of a greater tradition called ut <unk> <unk> – the contemplation of art by a poet – which serves as a meditation upon art itself . In this meditation , the narrator dwells on the aesthetic and mimetic features of art . The beginning of the poem posits that the role of art is to describe a specific story about those with whom the audience is unfamiliar , and the narrator wishes to know the identity of the figures in a manner similar to " Ode on Indolence " and " Ode to Psyche " . The figures on the urn within " Ode on a Grecian Urn " lack identities , but the first section ends with the narrator believing that if he knew the story , he would know their names . The second section of the poem , describing the piper and the lovers , meditates on the possibility that the role of art is not to describe specifics but universal characters , which falls under the term " Truth " . The three figures would represent how Love , Beauty , and Art are unified together in an idealised world where art represents the feelings of the audience . The audience is not supposed to question the events but instead to rejoice in the happy aspects of the scene in a manner that reverses the claims about art in " Ode to a Nightingale " . Similarly , the response of the narrator to the sacrifice is not compatible with the response of the narrator to the lovers . 
 The two contradictory responses found in the first and second scenes of " Ode on a Grecian Urn " are inadequate for completely describing art , because Keats believed that art should not provide history or ideals . Instead , both are replaced with a philosophical tone that dominates the meditation on art . The sensual aspects are replaced with an emphasis on the spiritual aspects , and the last scene describes a world contained unto itself . The relationship between the audience with the world is for benefiting or educating , but merely to emphatically connect to the scene . In the scene , the narrator contemplates where the boundaries of art lie and how much an artist can represent on an urn . The questions the narrator asks reveal a yearning to understand the scene , but the urn is too limited to allow such answers . Furthermore , the narrator is able to visualise more than what actually exists on the urn . This conclusion on art is both satisfying , in that it allows the audience to actually connect with the art , and alienating , as it does not provide the audience the benefit of instruction or narcissistic fulfilment . Besides the contradictions between the various desires within the poem , there are other paradoxes that emerge as the narrator compares his world with that of the figures on the urn . In the opening line , he refers to the urn as a " bride of quietness " , which serves to contrast the urn with the structure of the ode , a type of poem originally intended to be sung . Another paradox arises when the narrator describes immortals on the side of an urn meant to carry the ashes of the dead . 
 In terms of the actual figures upon the urn , the image of the lovers depicts the relationship of passion and beauty with art . In " Ode to a Nightingale " and " Ode on Melancholy " , Keats describes how beauty is temporary . However , the figures of the urn are able to always enjoy their beauty and passion because of their artistic permanence . The urn 's description as a bride invokes a possibility of consummation , which is symbolic of the urn 's need for an audience . Charles Patterson , in a 1954 essay , explains that " It is erroneous to assume that here Keats is merely disparaging the bride of flesh wed to man and glorifying the bride of marble wed to quietness . He could have achieved that simple effect more deftly with some other image than the richly ambivalent unravished bride , which conveys ... a hint of disparagement : It is natural for brides to be possessed physically ... it is unnatural for them not to be . " John Jones , in his 1969 analysis , emphasises this sexual dimension within the poem by comparing the relationship between " the Eve Adam dreamed of and who was there when he woke up " and the " bridal urn " of " Ode on a Grecian Urn " . Helen Vendler expands on the idea , in her 1983 analysis of Keats 's odes , when she claimed " the complex mind writing the Urn connects stillness and quietness to <unk> and a bride " . In the second stanza , Keats " voices the generating motive of the poem – the necessary self @-@ exhaustion and self @-@ perpetuation of sexual appetite . " To Vendler , desire and longing could be the source of artistic creativity , but the urn contains two contradicting expressions of sexuality : a lover chasing after a beloved and a lover with his beloved . This contradiction reveals Keats 's belief that such love in general was unattainable and that " The true opponent to the urn @-@ experience of love is not satisfaction but extinction . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The first response to the poem came in an anonymous review in the July 1820 Monthly Review , which claimed , " Mr Keats displays no great nicety in his selection of images . According to the tenets of that school of poetry to which he belongs , he thinks that any thing or object in nature is a fit material on which the poet may work ... Can there be a more pointed <unk> than this address to the Piping Shepherds on a Grecian Urn ? " Another anonymous review followed in the 29 July 1820 Literary Chronicle and Weekly Review that quoted the poem with a note that said that " Among the minor poems , many of which possess considerable merit , the following appears to be the best " . Josiah Conder , in a September 1820 Eclectic Review , argues that : 
 Mr Keats , seemingly , can think or write of scarcely any thing else than the ' happy pieties ' of Paganism . A Grecian Urn throws him into an ecstasy : its ' silent form , ' he says , ' doth tease us out of thought as doth Eternity , ' — a very happy description of the bewildering effect which such subjects have at least had upon his own mind ; and his fancy having thus got the better of his reason , we are the less surprised at the oracle which the Urn is made to utter : 
 <unk> is truth , truth beauty , ' — that is all 
 Ye know on earth , and all ye need to know . 
 That is , all that Mr Keats knows or cares to know . — But till he knows much more than this , he will never write verses fit to live . 
 George Gilfillan , in an 1845 essay on Keats , placed the poem among " The finest of Keats ' smaller pieces " and suggested that " In originality , Keats has seldom been surpassed . His works ' rise like an exhalation . ' His language has been formed on a false system ; but , ere he died , was clarifying itself from its more glaring faults , and becoming copious clear , and select . He seems to have been averse to all speculative thought , and his only creed , we fear , was expressed in the words — Beauty is truth , — truth beauty " . The 1857 Encyclopaedia Britannica contained an article on Keats by Alexander Smith , which stated : " Perhaps the most exquisite specimen of Keats ' poetry is the ' Ode to the Grecian Urn ' ; it breathes the very spirit of antiquity , — eternal beauty and eternal repose . " During the mid @-@ 19th century , Matthew Arnold claimed that the passage describing the little town " is Greek , as Greek as a thing from Homer or Theocritus ; it is composed with the eye on the object , a <unk> and light clearness being added . " 
 = = = Beauty is truth debate = = = 
 The 20th century marked the beginning of a critical dispute over the final lines of the poem and their relationship to the beauty of the whole work . Poet laureate Robert Bridges sparked the debate when he argued : 
 The thought as <unk> in the first stanza is the supremacy of ideal art over Nature , because of its unchanging expression of perfect ; and this is true and beautiful ; but its amplification in the poem is unprogressive , monotonous , and scattered ... which gives an effect of poverty in spite of the beauty . The last stanza enters stumbling upon a pun , but its concluding lines are very fine , and make a sort of recovery with their forcible directness . 
 Bridges believed that the final lines redeemed an otherwise bad poem . Arthur Quiller @-@ Couch responded with a contrary view and claimed that the lines were " a vague observation – to anyone whom life has taught to face facts and define his terms , actually an uneducated conclusion , albeit most <unk> in one so young and ardent . " The debate expanded when I. A. Richards , an English literary critic who analysed Keats 's poems in 1929 , relied on the final lines of the " Ode on a Grecian Urn " to discuss " pseudo @-@ statements " in poetry : 
 On the one hand there are very many people who , if they read any poetry at all , try to take all its statements seriously – and find them silly ... This may seem an absurd mistake but , alas ! it is none the less common . On the other hand there are those who succeed too well , who swallow ' Beauty is truth , truth beauty ... , ' as the quintessence of an aesthetic philosophy , not as the expression of a certain blend of feelings , and proceed into a complete stalemate of muddle @-@ mindedness as a result of their linguistic naivety . 
 Poet and critic T. S. Eliot , in his 1929 " Dante " essay , responded to Richards : 
 I am at first inclined to agree ... But on re @-@ reading the whole Ode , this line strikes me as a serious blemish on a beautiful poem , and the reason must be either that I fail to understand it , or that it is a statement which is untrue . And I suppose that Keats meant something by it , however remote his truth and his beauty may have been from these words in ordinary use . And I am sure that he would have repudiated any explanation of the line which called it a pseudo @-@ statement ... The statement of Keats seems to me meaningless : or perhaps the fact that it is grammatically meaningless conceals another meaning from me . 
 In 1930 , John Middleton Murry gave a history of these responses " to show the astonishing variety of opinion which exists at this day concerning the culmination of a poem whose beauty has been acknowledged for many years . Whether such another cause , and such another example , of critical diversity exists , I cannot say ; if it does , it is unknown to me . My own opinion concerning the value of those two lines in the context of the poem itself is not very different from Mr. Eliot 's . " 
 Cleanth Brooks defended the lines from critics in 1947 and argued : 
 We shall not feel that the generalization , unqualified and to be taken literally , is meant to march out of its context to compete with the scientific and philosophical generalizations which dominate our world . ' Beauty is truth , truth beauty ' has precisely the same status , and the same justification as Shakespeare 's ' Ripeness is all . ' It is a speech ' in character ' and supported by a dramatic context . To conclude thus may seem to weight the principle of dramatic propriety with more than it can bear . This would not be fair to the complexity of the problem of truth in art nor fair to Keats 's little parable . Granted ; and yet the principle of dramatic propriety may take us further than would first appear . Respect for it may at least insure our dealing with the problem of truth at the level on which it is really relevant to literature . 
 M. H. Abrams responded to Brooks 's view in 1957 : 
 I entirely agree , then , with Professor Brooks in his explication of the Ode , that ' Beauty is truth ' ... is to be considered as a speech ' in character ' and ' dramatically appropriate ' to the Urn . I am uneasy , however , about his final reference to ' the world @-@ view ... ' For the poem as a whole is equally an utterance by a dramatically presented speaker , and none of its statements is proffered for our endorsement as a philosophical generalization of unlimited scope . They are all , therefore , to be apprehended as histrionic elements which are ' in character ' and ' dramatically appropriate , ' for their inherent interest as stages in the evolution of an artistically ordered ... experience of a credible human being . 
 Earl Wasserman , in 1953 , continued the discussion over the final lines and claimed , " the more we tug at the final lines of the ode , the more the noose of their meaning strangles our comprehension of the poem ... The aphorism is all the more beguiling because it appears near the end of the poem , for its apparently climactic position has generally led to the assumption that it is the abstract summation of the poem ... But the ode is not an abstract statement or an excursion into philosophy . It is a poem about things " . 
 Walter Evert , discussing the debate in 1965 , justified the final lines of the poem to declare " The poem , then , accepts the urn for the immediate meditative imaginative pleasure that it can give , but it firmly defines the limits of artistic truth . In this it is wholly consistent with all the great poetry of Keats 's last creative period . " Hugh Kenner , in 1971 , explained that Keats " interrogates an urn , and answers for it , and its last answer , about Beauty and Truth , may seem almost intolerably enigmatic " . To Kenner , the problem with Keats 's Beauty and Truth statement arises out of the reader 's inability to distinguish between the poet , his reflections on the urn , and any possible statement made by the urn . He concluded that Keats fails to provide his narrator with enough characterization to be able to speak for the urn . Charles <unk> , in 1986 , offered his view on the matter : " The truth @-@ beauty equation at the end of the ' Ode on a Grecian Urn ' offers solace but is finally no more convincing than the experience it describes is durable . " Rick Rylance picked up the debate again in 1990 and explained that the true meaning of the final lines cannot be discerned merely by studying the language . This posed a problem for the New Critics , who were prone to closely reading a poem 's text . 
 = = = Later responses = = = 
 Not every 20th @-@ century critic opined primarily on the quality of the final lines when discussing the success or failure of the poem ; Sidney Colvin , in 1920 , explained that " while imagery drawn from the sculptures on Greek vases was still floating through his mind , he was able to rouse himself to a stronger effort and produce a true masterpiece in his famous Ode on a Grecian Urn . " In his 1926 analysis , H. W. Garrod felt that the end of the poem did not match with the rest of the poem : " Perhaps the fourth stanza is more beautiful than any of the others — and more true . The trouble is that it is a little too true . Truth to his main theme has taken Keats rather farther than he meant to go ... This pure cold art makes , in fact , a less appeal to Keats than the Ode as a whole would pretend ; and when , in the lines that follow these lines , he indulges the jarring apostrophe ' Cold Pastoral ' [ ... ] he has said more than he meant — or wished to mean . " In 1933 , M. R. Ridley described the poem as a " tense ethereal beauty " with a " touch of didacticism that weakens the urgency " of the statements . Douglas Bush , following in 1937 , emphasized the Greek aspects of the poem and stated , " as in the Ode to Maia , the concrete details are suffused with a rich nostalgia . The hard edges of classical Greek writing are softened by the enveloping emotion and suggestion . In his classical moments Keats is a sculptor whose marble becomes flesh . " 
 In 1954 , Charles Patterson defended the poem and claimed , " The meaningfulness and range of the poem , along with its controlled execution and powerfully suggestive imagery , entitle it to a high place among Keats 's great odes . It lacks the even finish and extreme perfection of To Autumn but is much superior in these qualities to the Ode to a Nightingale despite the magic passages in the latter and the similarities of over @-@ all structure . In fact , the Ode on a Grecian Urn may deserve to rank first in the group if viewed in something approaching its true complexity and human wisdom . " Walter Jackson Bate argued in 1962 that " the Grecian Urn possesses a quiet and constrained composure hardly equaled by the other odes of this month and perhaps even unsurpassed by the ode To Autumn of the following September ... there is a severe repose about the Ode on a Grecian Urn ; it is both ' interwoven ' and ' complete ' ; and within its tensely braced stanzas is a potential energy momentarily stilled and imprisoned . " In 1964 , literary critic David Perkins claimed in his essay " The Ode on a Nightingale " that the symbol of the urn " may possibly not satisfy as the principal concern of poetry ... but is rather an element in the poetry and drama of human reactions " . 
 F. W. Bateson emphasized in 1966 the poem 's ability to capture truth : " The Ode to a Nightingale had ended with the explicit admission that the ' fancy ' is a ' cheat , ' and the Grecian Urn concludes with a similar repudiation . But this time it is a positive instead of a negative conclusion . There is no escape from the ' woe ' that ' shall this generation waste , ' but the action of time can be confronted and seen in its proper proportions . To enable its readers to do this is the special function of poetry . " Ronald Sharp followed in 1979 with a claim that the theme of " the relationship between life and art ... receives its most famous , and its most enigmatic and controversial , treatment " within the poem . In 1983 , Vendler praised many of the passages within the poem but argued that the poem was unable to fully represent what Keats wanted : " The simple movement of entrance and exit , even in its triple repetition in the Urn , is simply not structurally complex enough to be adequate , as a representational form , to what we know of aesthetic experience – or indeed to human experience generally . " Later in 1989 , Daniel Watkins claimed the poem as " one of [ Keats 's ] most beautiful and problematic works . " 
 Andrew Bennett , in 1994 , discussed the poem 's effectiveness : " What is important and compelling in this poem is not so much what happens on the urn or in the poem , but the way that a response to an artwork both figures and prefigures its own critical response " . In 1999 , Andrew Motion claimed that the poem " tells a story that cannot be developed . Celebrating the transcendent powers of art , it creates a sense of imminence , but also registers a feeling of frustration . " Ayumi <unk> , in 2001 , argued that early audiences did not support " Ode to Psyche " because it " turned out to be too reflexive and internalised to be enjoyed as a mythological picture . For the same reason , the ' Ode on a Grecian Urn ' drew neither attention nor admiration . Although the poet is gazing round the surface of the urn in each stanza , the poem cannot readily be consumed as a series of ' idylls ' . " 
 = Lagrivea = 
 Lagrivea is a fossil genus of squirrel from the Middle Miocene of France . The single species , L. vireti , is known from three mandibles ( lower jaws ) and two isolated teeth . All come from the fissure filling ( a fossil deposit formed when a rock fissure filled with sediment ) of La Grive L5 , part of the La Grive @-@ Saint @-@ Alban complex in Saint @-@ Alban @-@ de @-@ Roche , southeastern France . Lagrivea was a large tree squirrel with flat lower incisors and a large , triangular fourth lower premolar ( p4 ) . Each of the four cheekteeth ( p4 and three molars , m1 through m3 ) bears a deep basin in the middle of the crown . The m3 is about rectangular in shape , but rounded at the back . Although m1 and m2 have two roots , m3 has three . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Pierre Mein and Léonard Ginsburg described Lagrivea vireti in 2002 in a review of the ages and faunas of the Miocene fossil sites of La Grive @-@ Saint @-@ Alban in southeastern France . They suggested that it was probably a tree squirrel and related to the <unk> . Lagrivea belongs to the squirrel family ( Sciuridae ) , which first appears in the Late Eocene of North America and Early Oligocene of Europe . The specific name , vireti , honors Jean Viret for his work on the mammals of La Grive @-@ Saint @-@ Alban . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lagrivea is known from three mandibles ( lower jaws ) — one , the holotype , with the fourth premolar ( p4 ) and all three molars ( m1 – 3 ) preserved ; one with the incisor and m2 ; and one with the incisor , p4 , m1 , and m2 — an isolated lower incisor , and an isolated m2 . It was large for a squirrel , and can be distinguished from the fossil squirrels Palaeosciurus , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> by its larger size . 
 In the mandible , the diastema ( gap ) between the incisors and the cheekteeth ( premolars and molars ) is relatively deep . The mental foramen ( an opening in the bone ) is located relatively high and before the p4 . The upper and lower masseteric ridges , which are located on the outer side of the jaw and anchor some of the chewing muscles , meet at the m1 . The surfaces of the incisor are very flat , but there are small , irregular striations in the enamel along the length of the tooth . 
 The cheekteeth increase regularly in size from front to back . They all consist of a large central basin surrounded by cusps and crests . The basins are deeper than in Palaeosciurus and <unk> <unk> and lack crenulations in the enamel , which distinguishes them from another fossil squirrel , <unk> . The first cheekteeth , p4 , is large and about triangular in form , short and quite broad at the back . The two cusps at the front , the protoconid and metaconid , are isolated from each other . In front of the metaconid , there is a small cuspule , an anteroconid , at the lingual side of the tooth ( the side of the tongue ) . The central basin of the tooth is relatively deep . At the back of the tooth , the entoconid cusp is connected to the posterolophid , a crest that forms the back margin . Of the two roots , the one at the front is round and the one at the back is broad . 
 Although m1 is nearly rectangular , the width at the front is still smaller than the width at the back . There is a strong anteroconid . A crest , the metalophid , reaches from the protoconid nearly to the metaconid . A small cusp , the <unk> , is connected to the metaconid in front of it , unlike in Miopetaurista and <unk> . There are two broad roots . The next tooth , m2 , is similar to m1 in most respects , but the width at the front is virtually equal to the width at the back , so that the tooth is about rectangular . The back of m3 is rounded , but the tooth is still nearly rectangular . There is a long anteroconid , with is mainly connected to the metaconid . There is no metalophid . This tooth has three roots : two at the front and a larger one at the back . 
 = = Range and context = = 
 The remains of Lagrivea were probably collected by Viret at the site La Grive L5 in the village of Saint @-@ Alban @-@ de @-@ Roche , department of Isère , southeastern France . La Grive L5 is one of several fissure filling sites in the area , collectively known as La Grive @-@ Saint @-@ Alban , which have yielded rich fossil faunas . Another site , La Grive M , is the reference locality for the MN zone MN 7 / 8 , about 13 to 11 million years ago . La Grive L5 is one of the younger sites of La Grive , and Mein and Ginsburg proposed placing it in a separate zone MN 8 . Other squirrels at La Grive @-@ Saint @-@ Alban include species of <unk> , <unk> , Palaeosciurus , and chipmunks , and flying squirrels in the genera <unk> , Miopetaurista , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Miopetaurista <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> are also known from La Grive L5 . In 2012 , Ginsburg and Mein described an indeterminate squirrel from the older ( MN 6 ) site of <unk> , France , on the basis of a single p4 . This tooth is similar in size to Lagrivea , but differs in a narrower talonid . 
 = Sustainability = 
 In ecology , sustainability is the combination of the words sustain and ability . This concept makes reference to how biological systems remain diverse and productive indefinitely . Long @-@ lived and healthy wetlands and forests are examples of sustainable biological systems . In more general terms , sustainability is the endurance of systems and processes . The organizing principle for sustainability is sustainable development , which includes the four interconnected domains : ecology , economics , politics and culture . Sustainability science is the study of sustainable development and environmental science . 
 Sustainability can also be defined as a socio @-@ ecological process characterized by the pursuit of a common ideal . An ideal is by definition unattainable in a given time / space but endlessly approachable and it is this endless pursuit what builds in sustainability in the process ( ibid ) . Healthy ecosystems and environments are necessary to the survival of humans and other organisms . Ways of reducing negative human impact are environmentally @-@ friendly chemical engineering , environmental resources management and environmental protection . Information is gained from green chemistry , earth science , environmental science and conservation biology . Ecological economics studies the fields of academic research that aim to address human economies and natural ecosystems . 
 Moving towards sustainability is also a social challenge that entails international and national law , urban planning and transport , local and individual lifestyles and ethical consumerism . Ways of living more sustainably can take many forms from reorganizing living conditions ( e.g. , ecovillages , eco @-@ municipalities and sustainable cities ) , reappraising economic sectors ( permaculture , green building , sustainable agriculture ) , or work practices ( sustainable architecture ) , using science to develop new technologies ( green technologies , renewable energy and sustainable fission and fusion power ) , or designing systems in a flexible and reversible manner , and adjusting individual lifestyles that conserve natural resources . 
 Despite the increased popularity of the use of the term " sustainability " , the possibility that human societies will achieve environmental sustainability has been , and continues to be , questioned — in light of environmental degradation , climate change , overconsumption , population growth and societies ' pursuit of indefinite economic growth in a closed system . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name sustainability is derived from the Latin <unk> ( <unk> , to hold ; sub , up ) . Sustain can mean “ maintain " , " support " , or " endure ” . Since the 1980s sustainability has been used more in the sense of human sustainability on planet Earth and this has resulted in the most widely quoted definition of sustainability as a part of the concept sustainable development , that of the Brundtland Commission of the United Nations on March 20 , 1987 : “ sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs . ” 
 = = Components = = 
 = = = Three pillars of sustainability = = = 
 The 2005 World Summit on Social Development identified sustainable development goals , such as economic development , social development and environmental protection . This view has been expressed as an illustration using three overlapping ellipses indicating that the three pillars of sustainability are not mutually exclusive and can be mutually reinforcing . In fact , the three pillars are interdependent , and in the long run none can exist without the others . The three pillars have served as a common ground for numerous sustainability standards and certification systems in recent years , in particular in the food industry . Standards which today explicitly refer to the triple bottom line include Rainforest Alliance , Fairtrade and <unk> Certified . Some sustainability experts and practitioners have illustrated four pillars of sustainability , or a quadruple bottom line . One such pillar is future generations , which emphasizes the long @-@ term thinking associated with sustainability . 
 Sustainable development consists of balancing local and global efforts to meet basic human needs without destroying or degrading the natural environment . The question then becomes how to represent the relationship between those needs and the environment . 
 A study from 2005 pointed out that environmental justice is as important as is sustainable development . Ecological economist Herman Daly asked , " what use is a sawmill without a forest ? " From this perspective , the economy is a subsystem of human society , which is itself a subsystem of the biosphere , and a gain in one sector is a loss from another . This perspective led to the nested circles figure of ' economics ' inside ' society ' inside the ' environment ' . 
 The simple definition that sustainability is something that improves " the quality of human life while living within the carrying capacity of supporting eco @-@ systems " , though vague , conveys the idea of sustainability having quantifiable limits . But sustainability is also a call to action , a task in progress or “ journey ” and therefore a political process , so some definitions set out common goals and values . The Earth Charter speaks of “ a sustainable global society founded on respect for nature , universal human rights , economic justice , and a culture of peace . ” This suggested a more complex figure of sustainability , which included the importance of the domain of ' politics ' . 
 More than that , sustainability implies responsible and proactive decision @-@ making and innovation that minimizes negative impact and maintains balance between ecological resilience , economic prosperity , political justice and cultural vibrancy to ensure a desirable planet for all species now and in the future . Specific types of sustainability include , sustainable agriculture , sustainable architecture or ecological economics . Understanding sustainable development is important but without clear targets an unfocused term like " liberty " or " justice " . It has also been described as a " dialogue of values that challenge the sociology of development " . 
 = = = Circles of sustainability = = = 
 While the United Nations Millennium Declaration identified principles and treaties on sustainable development , including economic development , social development and environmental protection it continued using three domains : economics , environment and social sustainability . More recently , using a systematic domain model that responds to the debates over the last decade , the Circles of Sustainability approach distinguished four domains of economic , ecological , political and cultural sustainability . This in accord with the United Nations Agenda 21 , which specifies culture as the fourth domain of sustainable development . The model is now being used by organizations such as the United Nations Cities <unk> and Metropolis 
 = = = Shaping the future = = = 
 Integral elements of sustainability are research and innovation activities . A telling example is the European environmental research and innovation policy . It aims at defining and implementing a transformative agenda to greening the economy and the society as a whole so to make them sustainable . Research and innovation in Europe are financially supported by the programme Horizon 2020 , which is also open to participation worldwide . 
 = = Resiliency = = 
 Resiliency in ecology is the capacity of an ecosystem to absorb disturbance and still retain its basic structure and viability . Resilience @-@ thinking evolved from the need to manage interactions between human @-@ constructed systems and natural ecosystems in a sustainable way despite the fact that to policymakers a definition remains elusive . Resilience @-@ thinking addresses how much planetary ecological systems can withstand assault from human disturbances and still deliver the services current and future generations need from them . It is also concerned with commitment from geopolitical policymakers to promote and manage essential planetary ecological resources in order to promote resilience and achieve sustainability of these essential resources for benefit of future generations of life ? The resiliency of an ecosystem , and thereby , its sustainability , can be reasonably measured at junctures or events where the combination of naturally occurring regenerative forces ( solar energy , water , soil , atmosphere , vegetation , and biomass ) interact with the energy released into the ecosystem from disturbances . 
 A practical view of sustainability is closed systems that maintain processes of productivity indefinitely by replacing resources used by actions of people with resources of equal or greater value by those same people without degrading or endangering natural biotic systems . In this way , sustainability can be concretely measured in human projects if there is a transparent accounting of the resources put back into the ecosystem to replace those displaced . In nature , the accounting occurs naturally through a process of adaptation as an ecosystem returns to viability from an external disturbance . The adaptation is a multi @-@ stage process that begins with the disturbance event ( earthquake , volcanic eruption , hurricane , tornado , flood , or thunderstorm ) , followed by absorption , utilization , or deflection of the energy or energies that the external forces created . 
 In analysing systems such as urban and national parks , dams , farms and gardens , theme parks , open @-@ pit mines , water catchments , one way to look at the relationship between sustainability and resiliency is to view the former with a long @-@ term vision and resiliency as the capacity of human engineers to respond to immediate environmental events . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of sustainability traces human @-@ dominated ecological systems from the earliest civilizations to the present time . This history is characterized by the increased regional success of a particular society , followed by crises that were either resolved , producing sustainability , or not , leading to decline . 
 In early human history , the use of fire and desire for specific foods may have altered the natural composition of plant and animal communities . Between 8 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years ago , agrarian communities emerged which depended largely on their environment and the creation of a " structure of permanence . " 
 The Western industrial revolution of the 18th to 19th centuries tapped into the vast growth potential of the energy in fossil fuels . Coal was used to power ever more efficient engines and later to generate electricity . Modern sanitation systems and advances in medicine protected large populations from disease . In the mid @-@ 20th century , a gathering environmental movement pointed out that there were environmental costs associated with the many material benefits that were now being enjoyed . In the late 20th century , environmental problems became global in scale . The 1973 and 1979 energy crises demonstrated the extent to which the global community had become dependent on non @-@ renewable energy resources . 
 In the 21st century , there is increasing global awareness of the threat posed by the human greenhouse effect , produced largely by forest clearing and the burning of fossil fuels . 
 = = Principles and concepts = = 
 The philosophical and analytic framework of sustainability draws on and connects with many different disciplines and fields ; in recent years an area that has come to be called sustainability science has emerged . 
 The United Nations Millennium Declaration identified principles and treaties on sustainable development , including economic development , social development and environmental protection . The Circles of Sustainability approach distinguishes the four domains of economic , ecological , political and cultural sustainability . This in accord with the United Nations Agenda 21 , which specifies culture as the fourth domain of sustainable development . 
 = = = Scale and context = = = 
 Sustainability is studied and managed over many scales ( levels or frames of reference ) of time and space and in many contexts of environmental , social and economic organization . The focus ranges from the total carrying capacity ( sustainability ) of planet Earth to the sustainability of economic sectors , ecosystems , countries , municipalities , neighbourhoods , home gardens , individual lives , individual goods and services , occupations , lifestyles , behaviour patterns and so on . In short , it can entail the full compass of biological and human activity or any part of it . As Daniel Botkin , author and environmentalist , has stated : " We see a landscape that is always in flux , changing over many scales of time and space . " 
 The sheer size and complexity of the planetary ecosystem has proved problematic for the design of practical measures to reach global sustainability . To shed light on the big picture , explorer and sustainability campaigner Jason Lewis has drawn parallels to other , more tangible closed systems . For example , he likens human existence on Earth — isolated as the planet is in space , whereby people cannot be evacuated to relieve population pressure and resources cannot be imported to prevent accelerated depletion of resources — to life at sea on a small boat isolated by water . In both cases , he argues , exercising the precautionary principle is a key factor in survival . 
 = = = Consumption = = = 
 A major driver of human impact on Earth systems is the destruction of biophysical resources , and especially , the Earth 's ecosystems . The environmental impact of a community or of humankind as a whole depends both on population and impact per person , which in turn depends in complex ways on what resources are being used , whether or not those resources are renewable , and the scale of the human activity relative to the carrying capacity of the ecosystems involved . Careful resource management can be applied at many scales , from economic sectors like agriculture , manufacturing and industry , to work organizations , the consumption patterns of households and individuals and to the resource demands of individual goods and services . 
 One of the initial attempts to express human impact mathematically was developed in the 1970s and is called the I PAT formula . This formulation attempts to explain human consumption in terms of three components : population numbers , levels of consumption ( which it terms " affluence " , although the usage is different ) , and impact per unit of resource use ( which is termed " technology " , because this impact depends on the technology used ) . The equation is expressed : 
 I 
 = P × A × T 
 Where : I = 
 Environmental impact , P 
 = Population , A = 
 Affluence , T = Technology 
 = = Measurement = = 
 Sustainability measurement is a term that denotes the measurements used as the quantitative basis for the informed management of sustainability . The metrics used for the measurement of sustainability ( involving the sustainability of environmental , social and economic domains , both individually and in various combinations ) are evolving : they include indicators , benchmarks , audits , sustainability standards and certification systems like Fairtrade and Organic , indexes and accounting , as well as assessment , appraisal and other reporting systems . They are applied over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales . 
 Some of the best known and most widely used sustainability measures include corporate sustainability reporting , Triple Bottom Line accounting , World Sustainability Society , Circles of Sustainability , and estimates of the quality of sustainability governance for individual countries using the Environmental Sustainability Index and Environmental Performance Index . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 According to the 2008 Revision of the official United Nations population estimates and projections , the world population is projected to reach 7 billion early in 2012 , up from the current 6 @.@ 9 billion ( May 2009 ) , to exceed 9 billion people by 2050 . Most of the increase will be in developing countries whose population is projected to rise from 5 @.@ 6 billion in 2009 to 7 @.@ 9 billion in 2050 . This increase will be distributed among the population aged 15 – 59 ( 1 @.@ 2 billion ) and 60 or over ( 1 @.@ 1 billion ) because the number of children under age 15 in developing countries is predicted to decrease . In contrast , the population of the more developed regions is expected to undergo only slight increase from 1 @.@ 23 billion to 1 @.@ 28 billion , and this would have declined to 1 @.@ 15 billion but for a projected net migration from developing to developed countries , which is expected to average 2 @.@ 4 million persons annually from 2009 to 2050 . Long @-@ term estimates in 2004 of global population suggest a peak at around 2070 of nine to ten billion people , and then a slow decrease to 8 @.@ 4 billion by 2100 . 
 Emerging economies like those of China and India aspire to the living standards of the Western world as does the non @-@ industrialized world in general . It is the combination of population increase in the developing world and unsustainable consumption levels in the developed world that poses a stark challenge to sustainability . 
 = = = Carrying capacity = = = 
 At the global scale , scientific data now indicates that humans are living beyond the carrying capacity of planet Earth and that this cannot continue indefinitely . This scientific evidence comes from many sources but is presented in detail in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment and the planetary boundaries framework . An early detailed examination of global limits was published in the 1972 book Limits to Growth , which has prompted follow @-@ up commentary and analysis . A 2012 review in Nature by 22 international researchers expressed concerns that the Earth may be " approaching a state shift " in its biosphere . 
 The Ecological footprint measures human consumption in terms of the biologically productive land needed to provide the resources , and absorb the wastes of the average global citizen . In 2008 it required 2 @.@ 7 global hectares per person , 30 % more than the natural biological capacity of 2 @.@ 1 global hectares ( assuming no provision for other organisms ) . The resulting ecological deficit must be met from unsustainable extra sources and these are obtained in three ways : embedded in the goods and services of world trade ; taken from the past ( e.g. fossil fuels ) ; or borrowed from the future as unsustainable resource usage ( e.g. by over exploiting forests and fisheries ) . 
 The figure ( right ) examines sustainability at the scale of individual countries by contrasting their Ecological Footprint with their UN Human Development Index ( a measure of standard of living ) . The graph shows what is necessary for countries to maintain an acceptable standard of living for their citizens while , at the same time , maintaining sustainable resource use . The general trend is for higher standards of living to become less sustainable . As always , population growth has a marked influence on levels of consumption and the efficiency of resource use . The sustainability goal is to raise the global standard of living without increasing the use of resources beyond globally sustainable levels ; that is , to not exceed " one planet " consumption . Information generated by reports at the national , regional and city scales confirm the global trend towards societies that are becoming less sustainable over time . 
 Romanian American economist Nicholas Georgescu @-@ Roegen , a progenitor in economics and a paradigm founder of ecological economics , has argued that the carrying capacity of Earth — that is , Earth 's capacity to sustain human populations and consumption levels — is bound to decrease sometime in the future as Earth 's finite stock of mineral resources is presently being extracted and put to use . Leading ecological economist and steady @-@ state theorist Herman Daly , a student of Georgescu @-@ Roegen , has propounded the same argument . 
 = = = Global human impact on biodiversity = = = 
 At a fundamental level energy flow and biogeochemical cycling set an upper limit on the number and mass of organisms in any ecosystem . Human impacts on the Earth are demonstrated in a general way through detrimental changes in the global biogeochemical cycles of chemicals that are critical to life , most notably those of water , oxygen , carbon , nitrogen and phosphorus . 
 The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment is an international synthesis by over 1000 of the world 's leading biological scientists that analyzes the state of the Earth ’ s ecosystems and provides summaries and guidelines for decision @-@ makers . It concludes that human activity is having a significant and escalating impact on the biodiversity of world ecosystems , reducing both their resilience and biocapacity . The report refers to natural systems as humanity 's " life @-@ support system " , providing essential " ecosystem services " . The assessment measures 24 ecosystem services concluding that only four have shown improvement over the last 50 years , 15 are in serious decline , and five are in a precarious condition . 
 = = Sustainable development goals = = 
 The Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) are the current harmonized set of seventeen future international development targets . 
 The Official Agenda for Sustainable Development adopted on 25 September 2015 has 92 paragraphs , with the main paragraph ( 51 ) outlining the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and its associated 169 targets . This included the following seventeen goals : 
 Poverty – End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
 Food – End hunger , achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
 Health – Ensure healthy lives and promote well @-@ being for all at all ages 
 Education – Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 
 Women – Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
 Water – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
 Energy – Ensure access to affordable , reliable , sustainable and modern energy for all 
 Economy – Promote sustained , inclusive and sustainable economic growth , full and productive employment and decent work for all 
 Infrastructure – Build resilient infrastructure , promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
 Inequality – Reduce inequality within and among countries 
 Habitation – Make cities and human settlements inclusive , safe , resilient and sustainable 
 Consumption – Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns 
 Climate – Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
 Marine @-@ ecosystems – Conserve and sustainably use the oceans , seas and marine resources for sustainable development 
 Ecosystems – Protect , restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems , sustainably manage forests , combat desertification , and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss 
 Institutions – Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development , provide access to justice for all and build effective , accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
 Sustainability – Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 
 As of August 2015 , there were 169 proposed targets for these goals and 304 proposed indicators to show compliance . 
 The Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) replace the eight Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , which expired at the end of 2015 . The MDGs were established in 2000 following the Millennium Summit of the United Nations . Adopted by the 189 United Nations member states at the time and more than twenty international organizations , these goals were advanced to help achieve the following sustainable development standards by 2015 . 
 To eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 
 To achieve universal primary education 
 To promote gender equality and empower women 
 To reduce child mortality 
 To improve maternal health 
 To combat HIV / AIDS , malaria , and other diseases 
 To ensure environmental sustainability ( one of the targets in this goal focuses on increasing sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation ) 
 To develop a global partnership for development 
 = = = Sustainable development = = = 
 According to the data that member countries represented to the United Nations , Cuba was the only nation in the world in 2006 that met the World Wide Fund for Nature 's definition of sustainable development , with an ecological footprint of less than 1 @.@ 8 hectares per capita , 1 @.@ 5 , and a Human Development Index of over 0 @.@ 8 , 0 @.@ 855 . 
 = = Environmental dimension = = 
 Healthy ecosystems provide vital goods and services to humans and other organisms . There are two major ways of reducing negative human impact and enhancing ecosystem services and the first of these is environmental management . This direct approach is based largely on information gained from earth science , environmental science and conservation biology . However , this is management at the end of a long series of indirect causal factors that are initiated by human consumption , so a second approach is through demand management of human resource use . 
 Management of human consumption of resources is an indirect approach based largely on information gained from economics . Herman Daly has suggested three broad criteria for ecological sustainability : renewable resources should provide a sustainable yield ( the rate of harvest should not exceed the rate of regeneration ) ; for non @-@ renewable resources there should be equivalent development of renewable substitutes ; waste generation should not exceed the assimilative capacity of the environment . 
 = = = Environmental management = = = 
 At the global scale and in the broadest sense environmental management involves the oceans , freshwater systems , land and atmosphere , but following the sustainability principle of scale it can be equally applied to any ecosystem from a tropical rainforest to a home garden . 
 = = = = Atmosphere = = = = 
 At a March 2009 meeting of the Copenhagen Climate Council , 2 @,@ 500 climate experts from 80 countries issued a keynote statement that there is now " no excuse " for failing to act on global warming and that without strong carbon reduction " abrupt or irreversible " shifts in climate may occur that " will be very difficult for contemporary societies to cope with " . Management of the global atmosphere now involves assessment of all aspects of the carbon cycle to identify opportunities to address human @-@ induced climate change and this has become a major focus of scientific research because of the potential catastrophic effects on biodiversity and human communities ( see Energy below ) . 
 Other human impacts on the atmosphere include the air pollution in cities , the pollutants including toxic chemicals like nitrogen oxides , sulfur oxides , volatile organic compounds and airborne particulate matter that produce photochemical smog and acid rain , and the chlorofluorocarbons that degrade the ozone layer . Anthropogenic particulates such as sulfate aerosols in the atmosphere reduce the direct irradiance and reflectance ( albedo ) of the Earth 's surface . Known as global dimming , the decrease is estimated to have been about 4 % between 1960 and 1990 although the trend has subsequently reversed . Global dimming may have disturbed the global water cycle by reducing evaporation and rainfall in some areas . It also creates a cooling effect and this may have partially masked the effect of greenhouse gases on global warming . 
 = = = = Freshwater and oceans = = = = 
 Water covers 71 % of the Earth 's surface . Of this , 97 @.@ 5 % is the salty water of the oceans and only 2 @.@ 5 % freshwater , most of which is locked up in the Antarctic ice sheet . The remaining freshwater is found in glaciers , lakes , rivers , wetlands , the soil , aquifers and atmosphere . Due to the water cycle , fresh water supply is continually replenished by precipitation , however there is still a limited amount necessitating management of this resource . Awareness of the global importance of preserving water for ecosystem services has only recently emerged as , during the 20th century , more than half the world ’ s wetlands have been lost along with their valuable environmental services . Increasing urbanization pollutes clean water supplies and much of the world still does not have access to clean , safe water . Greater emphasis is now being placed on the improved management of blue ( harvestable ) and green ( soil water available for plant use ) water , and this applies at all scales of water management . 
 Ocean circulation patterns have a strong influence on climate and weather and , in turn , the food supply of both humans and other organisms . Scientists have warned of the possibility , under the influence of climate change , of a sudden alteration in circulation patterns of ocean currents that could drastically alter the climate in some regions of the globe . Ten per cent of the world 's population – about 600 million people – live in low @-@ lying areas vulnerable to sea level rise . 
 = = = = Land use = = = = 
 Loss of biodiversity stems largely from the habitat loss and fragmentation produced by the human appropriation of land for development , forestry and agriculture as natural capital is progressively converted to man @-@ made capital . Land use change is fundamental to the operations of the biosphere because alterations in the relative proportions of land dedicated to urbanisation , agriculture , forest , woodland , grassland and pasture have a marked effect on the global water , carbon and nitrogen biogeochemical cycles and this can impact negatively on both natural and human systems . At the local human scale , major sustainability benefits accrue from sustainable parks and gardens and green cities . 
 Since the Neolithic Revolution about 47 % of the world ’ s forests have been lost to human use . Present @-@ day forests occupy about a quarter of the world ’ s ice @-@ free land with about half of these occurring in the tropics . In temperate and boreal regions forest area is gradually increasing ( with the exception of Siberia ) , but deforestation in the tropics is of major concern . 
 Food is essential to life . Feeding more than seven billion human bodies takes a heavy toll on the Earth ’ s resources . This begins with the appropriation of about 38 % of the Earth ’ s land surface and about 20 % of its net primary productivity . Added to this are the resource @-@ hungry activities of industrial agribusiness – everything from the crop need for irrigation water , synthetic fertilizers and pesticides to the resource costs of food packaging , transport ( now a major part of global trade ) and retail . Environmental problems associated with industrial agriculture and agribusiness are now being addressed through such movements as sustainable agriculture , organic farming and more sustainable business practices . 
 = = = Management of human consumption = = = 
 The underlying driver of direct human impacts on the environment is human consumption . This impact is reduced by not only consuming less but by also making the full cycle of production , use and disposal more sustainable . Consumption of goods and services can be analysed and managed at all scales through the chain of consumption , starting with the effects of individual lifestyle choices and spending patterns , through to the resource demands of specific goods and services , the impacts of economic sectors , through national economies to the global economy . Analysis of consumption patterns relates resource use to the environmental , social and economic impacts at the scale or context under investigation . The ideas of embodied resource use ( the total resources needed to produce a product or service ) , resource intensity , and resource productivity are important tools for understanding the impacts of consumption . Key resource categories relating to human needs are food , energy , materials and water . 
 In 2010 , the International Resource Panel , hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) , published the first global scientific assessment on the impacts of consumption and production and identified priority actions for developed and developing countries . The study found that the most critical impacts are related to ecosystem health , human health and resource depletion . From a production perspective , it found that fossil @-@ fuel combustion processes , agriculture and fisheries have the most important impacts . Meanwhile , from a final consumption perspective , it found that household consumption related to mobility , shelter , food and energy @-@ using products cause the majority of life @-@ cycle impacts of consumption . 
 = = = = Energy = = = = 
 The Sun 's energy , stored by plants ( primary producers ) during photosynthesis , passes through the food chain to other organisms to ultimately power all living processes . Since the industrial revolution the concentrated energy of the Sun stored in fossilized plants as fossil fuels has been a major driver of technology which , in turn , has been the source of both economic and political power . In 2007 climate scientists of the IPCC concluded that there was at least a 90 % probability that atmospheric increase in CO2 was human @-@ induced , mostly as a result of fossil fuel emissions but , to a lesser extent from changes in land use . Stabilizing the world ’ s climate will require high @-@ income countries to reduce their emissions by 60 – 90 % over 2006 levels by 2050 which should hold CO2 levels at 450 – 650 ppm from current levels of about 380 ppm . Above this level , temperatures could rise by more than 2 ° C to produce “ catastrophic ” climate change . Reduction of current CO2 levels must be achieved against a background of global population increase and developing countries aspiring to energy @-@ intensive high consumption Western lifestyles . 
 Reducing greenhouse emissions , is being tackled at all scales , ranging from tracking the passage of carbon through the carbon cycle to the commercialization of renewable energy , developing less carbon @-@ hungry technology and transport systems and attempts by individuals to lead carbon neutral lifestyles by monitoring the fossil fuel use embodied in all the goods and services they use . Engineering of emerging technologies such as carbon @-@ neutral fuel and energy storage systems such as power to gas , compressed air energy storage , and pumped @-@ storage hydroelectricity are necessary to store power from transient renewable energy sources including emerging renewables such as airborne wind turbines . 
 = = = = Water = = = = 
 Water security and food security are inextricably linked . In the decade 1951 – 60 human water withdrawals were four times greater than the previous decade . This rapid increase resulted from scientific and technological developments impacting through the economy – especially the increase in irrigated land , growth in industrial and power sectors , and intensive dam construction on all continents . This altered the water cycle of rivers and lakes , affected their water quality and had a significant impact on the global water cycle . Currently towards 35 % of human water use is unsustainable , drawing on diminishing aquifers and reducing the flows of major rivers : this percentage is likely to increase if climate change impacts become more severe , populations increase , aquifers become progressively depleted and supplies become polluted and unsanitary . From 1961 to 2001 water demand doubled — agricultural use increased by 75 % , industrial use by more than 200 % , and domestic use more than 400 % . In the 1990s it was estimated that humans were using 40 – 50 % of the globally available freshwater in the approximate proportion of 70 % for agriculture , 22 % for industry , and 8 % for domestic purposes with total use progressively increasing . 
 Water efficiency is being improved on a global scale by increased demand management , improved infrastructure , improved water productivity of agriculture , minimising the water intensity ( embodied water ) of goods and services , addressing shortages in the non @-@ industrialized world , concentrating food production in areas of high productivity , and planning for climate change , such as through flexible system design . A promising direction towards sustainable development is to design systems that are flexible and reversible . At the local level , people are becoming more self @-@ sufficient by harvesting rainwater and reducing use of mains water . 
 = = = = Food = = = = 
 The American Public Health Association ( APHA ) defines a " sustainable food system " as " one that provides healthy food to meet current food needs while maintaining healthy ecosystems that can also provide food for generations to come with minimal negative impact to the environment . A sustainable food system also encourages local production and distribution infrastructures and makes nutritious food available , accessible , and affordable to all . Further , it is humane and just , protecting farmers and other workers , consumers , and communities . " Concerns about the environmental impacts of agribusiness and the stark contrast between the obesity problems of the Western world and the poverty and food insecurity of the developing world have generated a strong movement towards healthy , sustainable eating as a major component of overall ethical consumerism . The environmental effects of different dietary patterns depend on many factors , including the proportion of animal and plant foods consumed and the method of food production . The World Health Organization has published a Global Strategy on Diet , Physical Activity and Health report which was endorsed by the May 2004 World Health Assembly . It recommends the Mediterranean diet which is associated with health and longevity and is low in meat , rich in fruits and vegetables , low in added sugar and limited salt , and low in saturated fatty acids ; the traditional source of fat in the Mediterranean is olive oil , rich in monounsaturated fat . The healthy rice @-@ based Japanese diet is also high in carbohydrates and low in fat . Both diets are low in meat and saturated fats and high in legumes and other vegetables ; they are associated with a low incidence of ailments and low environmental impact . 
 At the global level the environmental impact of agribusiness is being addressed through sustainable agriculture and organic farming . At the local level there are various movements working towards local food production , more productive use of urban wastelands and domestic gardens including permaculture , urban horticulture , local food , slow food , sustainable gardening , and organic gardening . 
 Sustainable seafood is seafood from either fished or farmed sources that can maintain or increase production in the future without jeopardizing the ecosystems from which it was acquired . The sustainable seafood movement has gained momentum as more people become aware about both overfishing and environmentally destructive fishing methods . 
 = = = = Materials , toxic substances , waste = = = = 
 As global population and affluence has increased , so has the use of various materials increased in volume , diversity and distance transported . Included here are raw materials , minerals , synthetic chemicals ( including hazardous substances ) , manufactured products , food , living organisms and waste . By 2050 , humanity could consume an estimated 140 billion tons of minerals , ores , fossil fuels and biomass per year ( three times its current amount ) unless the economic growth rate is decoupled from the rate of natural resource consumption . Developed countries ' citizens consume an average of 16 tons of those four key resources per capita , ranging up to 40 or more tons per person in some developed countries with resource consumption levels far beyond what is likely sustainable . 
 Sustainable use of materials has targeted the idea of dematerialization , converting the linear path of materials ( extraction , use , disposal in landfill ) to a circular material flow that reuses materials as much as possible , much like the cycling and reuse of waste in nature . This approach is supported by product stewardship and the increasing use of material flow analysis at all levels , especially individual countries and the global economy . The use of sustainable biomaterials that come from renewable sources and that can be recycled is preferred to the use on non @-@ renewables from a life cycle standpoint . 
 Synthetic chemical production has escalated following the stimulus it received during the second World War . Chemical production includes everything from herbicides , pesticides and fertilizers to domestic chemicals and hazardous substances . Apart from the build @-@ up of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere , chemicals of particular concern include : heavy metals , nuclear waste , chlorofluorocarbons , persistent organic pollutants and all harmful chemicals capable of bioaccumulation . Although most synthetic chemicals are harmless there needs to be rigorous testing of new chemicals , in all countries , for adverse environmental and health effects . International legislation has been established to deal with the global distribution and management of dangerous goods . The effects of some chemical agents needed long @-@ term measurements and a lot of legal battles to realize their danger to human health . The classification of the toxic carcinogenic agents is handle by the International Agency for Research on Cancer . 
 Every economic activity produces material that can be classified as waste . To reduce waste industry , business and government are now mimicking nature by turning the waste produced by industrial metabolism into resource . <unk> is being encouraged through the ideas of industrial ecology , ecodesign and <unk> . In addition to the well @-@ established “ reduce , reuse and recycle , ” shoppers are using their purchasing power for ethical consumerism . 
 The European Union is expected to table by the end of 2015 an ambitious Circular Economy package which is expected to include concrete legislative proposals on waste management , ecodesign and limits on land fills . 
 = = Economic dimension = = 
 On one account , sustainability " concerns the specification of a set of actions to be taken by present persons that will not diminish the prospects of future persons to enjoy levels of consumption , wealth , utility , or welfare comparable to those enjoyed by present persons . " Sustainability interfaces with economics through the social and ecological consequences of economic activity . Sustainability economics represents : " ... a broad interpretation of ecological economics where environmental and ecological variables and issues are basic but part of a multidimensional perspective . Social , cultural , health @-@ related and monetary / financial aspects have to be integrated into the analysis . " However , the concept of sustainability is much broader than the concepts of sustained yield of welfare , resources , or profit margins . At present , the average per capita consumption of people in the developing world is sustainable but population numbers are increasing and individuals are aspiring to high @-@ consumption Western lifestyles . The developed world population is only increasing slightly but consumption levels are unsustainable . The challenge for sustainability is to curb and manage Western consumption while raising the standard of living of the developing world without increasing its resource use and environmental impact . This must be done by using strategies and technology that break the link between , on the one hand , economic growth and on the other , environmental damage and resource depletion . 
 A recent UNEP report proposes a green economy defined as one that “ improves human well @-@ being and social equity , while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities ” : it " does not favor one political perspective over another but works to minimize excessive depletion of natural capital " . The report makes three key findings : “ that greening not only generates increases in wealth , in particular a gain in ecological commons or natural capital , but also ( over a period of six years ) produces a higher rate of GDP growth ” ; that there is “ an inextricable link between poverty eradication and better maintenance and conservation of the ecological commons , arising from the benefit flows from natural capital that are received directly by the poor ” ; " in the transition to a green economy , new jobs are created , which in time exceed the losses in “ brown economy ” jobs . However , there is a period of job losses in transition , which requires investment in re @-@ skilling and re @-@ educating the workforce ” . 
 Several key areas have been targeted for economic analysis and reform : the environmental effects of unconstrained economic growth ; the consequences of nature being treated as an economic externality ; and the possibility of an economics that takes greater account of the social and environmental consequences of market behavior . 
 = = = Decoupling environmental degradation and economic growth = = = 
 Historically there has been a close correlation between economic growth and environmental degradation : as communities grow , so the environment declines . This trend is clearly demonstrated on graphs of human population numbers , economic growth , and environmental indicators . Unsustainable economic growth has been starkly compared to the malignant growth of a cancer because it eats away at the Earth 's ecosystem services which are its life @-@ support system . There is concern that , unless resource use is checked , modern global civilization will follow the path of ancient civilizations that collapsed through overexploitation of their resource base . While conventional economics is concerned largely with economic growth and the efficient allocation of resources , ecological economics has the explicit goal of sustainable scale ( rather than continual growth ) , fair distribution and efficient allocation , in that order . The World Business Council for Sustainable Development states that " business cannot succeed in societies that fail " . 
 In economic and environmental fields , the term decoupling is becoming increasingly used in the context of economic production and environmental quality . When used in this way , it refers to the ability of an economy to grow without incurring corresponding increases in environmental pressure . Ecological economics includes the study of societal metabolism , the throughput of resources that enter and exit the economic system in relation to environmental quality . An economy that is able to sustain GDP growth without having a negative impact on the environment is said to be decoupled . Exactly how , if , or to what extent this can be achieved is a subject of much debate . In 2011 the International Resource Panel , hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) , warned that by 2050 the human race could be devouring 140 billion tons of minerals , ores , fossil fuels and biomass per year – three times its current rate of consumption – unless nations can make serious attempts at decoupling . The report noted that citizens of developed countries consume an average of 16 tons of those four key resources per capita per annum ( ranging up to 40 or more tons per person in some developed countries ) . By comparison , the average person in India today consumes four tons per year . Sustainability studies analyse ways to reduce resource intensity ( the amount of resource ( e.g. water , energy , or materials ) needed for the production , consumption and disposal of a unit of good or service ) whether this be achieved from improved economic management , product design , or new technology . 
 There are conflicting views whether improvements in technological efficiency and innovation will enable a complete decoupling of economic growth from environmental degradation . On the one hand , it has been claimed repeatedly by efficiency experts that resource use intensity ( i.e. , energy and materials use per unit GDP ) could in principle be reduced by at least four or five @-@ fold , thereby allowing for continued economic growth without increasing resource depletion and associated pollution . On the other hand , an extensive historical analysis of technological efficiency improvements has conclusively shown that improvements in the efficiency of the use of energy and materials were almost always outpaced by economic growth , in large part because of the rebound effect ( conservation ) or Jevons Paradox resulting in a net increase in resource use and associated pollution . Furthermore , there are inherent thermodynamic ( i.e. , second law of thermodynamics ) and practical limits to all efficiency improvements . For example , there are certain minimum unavoidable material requirements for growing food , and there are limits to making automobiles , houses , furniture , and other products lighter and thinner without the risk of losing their necessary functions . Since it is both theoretically and practically impossible to increase resource use efficiencies indefinitely , it is equally impossible to have continued and infinite economic growth without a concomitant increase in resource depletion and environmental pollution , i.e. , economic growth and resource depletion can be decoupled to some degree over the short run but not the long run . Consequently , long @-@ term sustainability requires the transition to a steady state economy in which total GDP remains more or less constant , as has been advocated for decades by Herman Daly and others in the ecological economics community . 
 A different proposed solution to partially decouple economic growth from environmental degradation is the restore approach . This approach views " restore " as a fourth component to the common reduce , reuse , recycle motto . Participants in such efforts are encouraged to voluntarily donate towards nature conservation a small fraction of the financial savings they experience through a more frugal use of resources . These financial savings would normally lead to rebound effects , but a theoretical analysis suggests that donating even a small fraction of the experienced savings can potentially more than eliminate rebound effects . 
 = = = Nature as an economic externality = = = 
 The economic importance of nature is indicated by the use of the expression ecosystem services to highlight the market relevance of an increasingly scarce natural world that can no longer be regarded as both unlimited and free . In general , as a commodity or service becomes more scarce the price increases and this acts as a restraint that encourages frugality , technical innovation and alternative products . However , this only applies when the product or service falls within the market system . As ecosystem services are generally treated as economic externalities they are <unk> and therefore overused and degraded , a situation sometimes referred to as the Tragedy of the Commons . 
 One approach to this dilemma has been the attempt to " internalize " these " externalities " by using market strategies like ecotaxes and incentives , tradeable permits for carbon , and the encouragement of payment for ecosystem services . Community currencies associated with Local Exchange Trading Systems ( LETS ) , a gift economy and Time Banking have also been promoted as a way of supporting local economies and the environment . Green economics is another market @-@ based attempt to address issues of equity and the environment . The global recession and a range of associated government policies are likely to bring the biggest annual fall in the world 's carbon dioxide emissions in 40 years . 
 = = = Economic opportunity = = = 
 Treating the environment as an externality may generate short @-@ term profit at the expense of sustainability . Sustainable business practices , on the other hand , integrate ecological concerns with social and economic ones ( i.e. , the triple bottom line ) . Growth that depletes ecosystem services is sometimes termed " uneconomic growth " as it leads to a decline in quality of life . Minimizing such growth can provide opportunities for local businesses . For example , industrial waste can be treated as an " economic resource in the wrong place " . The benefits of waste reduction include savings from disposal costs , fewer environmental penalties , and reduced liability insurance . This may lead to increased market share due to an improved public image . Energy efficiency can also increase profits by reducing costs . 
 The idea of sustainability as a business opportunity has led to the formation of organizations such as the Sustainability Consortium of the Society for Organizational Learning , the Sustainable Business Institute , and the World Council for Sustainable Development . The expansion of sustainable business opportunities can contribute to job creation through the introduction of green @-@ collar workers . Research focusing on progressive corporate leaders who have integrated sustainability into commercial strategy has yielded a leadership competency model for sustainability , and led to emergence of the concept of " embedded sustainability " – defined by its authors Chris Laszlo and Nadya Zhexembayeva as " incorporation of environmental , health , and social value into the core business with no trade @-@ off in price or quality – in other words , with no social or green premium . " Laszlo and Zhexembayeva 's research showed that embedded sustainability offers at least seven distinct opportunities for business value creation : a ) better risk @-@ management , b ) increased efficiency through reduced waste and resource use , c ) better product differentiation , d ) new market entrances , e ) enhanced brand and reputation , f ) greater opportunity to influence industry standards , and g ) greater opportunity for radical innovation . 2014 research further suggested that innovation driven by resource depletion can result in fundamental advantages for company products and services , as well as the company strategy as a whole , when right principles of innovation are applied . 
 = = = <unk> approach = = = 
 One school of thought , often labeled ecosocialism or ecological Marxism , asserts that the capitalist economic system is fundamentally incompatible with the ecological and social requirements of sustainability . This theory rests on the premises that : 
 Capitalism ’ s sole economic purpose is “ unlimited capital accumulation ” in the hands of the capitalist class 
 The urge to accumulate ( the profit motive ) drives capitalists to continually reinvest and expand production , creating indefinite and unsustainable economic growth 
 “ Capital tends to degrade the conditions of its own production ” ( the ecosystems and resources on which any economy depends ) 
 Thus , according to this analysis : 
 Giving economic priority to the fulfillment of human needs while staying within ecological limits , as sustainable development demands , is in conflict with the structural workings of capitalism 
 A steady @-@ state capitalist economy is impossible ; further , a steady @-@ state capitalist economy is socially undesirable due to the inevitable outcome of massive unemployment and underemployment 
 Capitalism will , unless overcome by revolution , run up against the physical limits of the biosphere and self @-@ destruct 
 By this logic , market @-@ based solutions to ecological crises ( ecological economics , environmental economics , green economy ) are rejected as technical tweaks that do not confront capitalism ’ s structural failures . “ Low @-@ risk ” technology / science @-@ based solutions such as solar power , sustainable agriculture , and increases in energy efficiency are seen as necessary but insufficient . “ High @-@ risk ” technological solutions such as nuclear power and climate engineering are entirely rejected . Attempts made by businesses to “ <unk> ” their practices are regarded as false advertising , and it is pointed out that implementation of renewable technology ( such as Walmart ’ s proposition to supply their electricity with solar power ) has the effect opposite of reductions in resource consumption , viz. further economic growth . Sustainable business models and the triple bottom line are viewed as morally praiseworthy but ignorant to the tendency in capitalism for the distribution of wealth to become increasingly unequal and socially unstable / unsustainable . Ecosocialists claim that the general unwillingness of capitalists to tolerate — and capitalist governments to implement — constraints on maximum profit ( such as ecotaxes or preservation and conservation measures ) renders environmental reforms incapable of facilitating large @-@ scale change : “ History teaches us that although capitalism has at times responded to environmental movements . . . at a certain point , at which the system ’ s underlying accumulation drive is affected , its resistance to environmental demands stiffens . ” They also note that , up until the event of total ecological collapse , destruction caused by natural disasters generally causes an increase in economic growth and accumulation ; thus , capitalists have no foreseeable motivation to reduce the probability of disasters ( i.e. convert to sustainable / ecological production ) . 
 Ecosocialists advocate for the revolutionary succession of capitalism by ecosocialism — an egalitarian economic / political / social structure designed to harmonize human society with non @-@ human ecology and to fulfill human needs — as the only sufficient solution to the present @-@ day ecological crisis , and hence the only path towards sustainability . Sustainability is viewed not as a domain exclusive to scientists , environmental activists , and business leaders but as a holistic project that must involve the whole of humanity redefining its place in Nature : “ What every environmentalist needs to know . . . is that capitalism is not the solution but the problem , and that if humanity is going to survive this crisis , it will do so because it has exercised its capacity for human freedom , through social struggle , in order to create a whole new world — in coevolution with the planet . ” 
 = = Social dimension = = 
 Sustainability issues are generally expressed in scientific and environmental terms , as well as in ethical terms of stewardship , but implementing change is a social challenge that entails , among other things , international and national law , urban planning and transport , local and individual lifestyles and ethical consumerism . " The relationship between human rights and human development , corporate power and environmental justice , global poverty and citizen action , suggest that responsible global citizenship is an inescapable element of what may at first glance seem to be simply matters of personal consumer and moral choice . " 
 = = = Peace , security , social justice = = = 
 Social disruptions like war , crime and corruption divert resources from areas of greatest human need , damage the capacity of societies to plan for the future , and generally threaten human well @-@ being and the environment . Broad @-@ based strategies for more sustainable social systems include : improved education and the political empowerment of women , especially in developing countries ; greater regard for social justice , notably equity between rich and poor both within and between countries ; and intergenerational equity . Depletion of natural resources including fresh water increases the likelihood of “ resource wars ” . This aspect of sustainability has been referred to as environmental security and creates a clear need for global environmental agreements to manage resources such as aquifers and rivers which span political boundaries , and to protect shared global systems including oceans and the atmosphere . 
 = = = Poverty = = = 
 A major hurdle to achieve sustainability is the alleviation of poverty . It has been widely acknowledged that poverty is one source of environmental degradation . Such acknowledgment has been made by the Brundtland Commission report Our Common Future and the Millennium Development Goals . There is a growing realization in national governments and multilateral institutions that it is impossible to separate economic development issues from environment issues : according to the Brundtland report , “ poverty is a major cause and effect of global environmental problems . It is therefore futile to attempt to deal with environmental problems without a broader perspective that encompasses the factors underlying world poverty and international inequality . ” Individuals living in poverty tend to rely heavily on their local ecosystem as a source for basic needs ( such as nutrition and medicine ) and general well @-@ being . As population growth continues to increase , increasing pressure is being placed on the local ecosystem to provide these basic essentials . According to the UN Population Fund , high fertility and poverty have been strongly correlated , and the world ’ s poorest countries also have the highest fertility and population growth rates . The word sustainability is also used widely by western country development agencies and international charities to focus their poverty alleviation efforts in ways that can be sustained by the local populace and its environment . For example , teaching water treatment to the poor by boiling their water with charcoal , would not generally be considered a sustainable strategy , whereas using PET solar water disinfection would be . Also , sustainable best practices can involve the recycling of materials , such as the use of recycled plastics for lumber where deforestation has devastated a country 's timber base . Another example of sustainable practices in poverty alleviation is the use of exported recycled materials from developed to developing countries , such as Bridges to Prosperity 's use of wire rope from shipping container gantry cranes to act as the structural wire rope for footbridges that cross rivers in poor rural areas in Asia and Africa . 
 = = = Human relationship to nature = = = 
 According to Murray Bookchin , the idea that humans must dominate nature is common in hierarchical societies . Bookchin contends that capitalism and market relationships , if unchecked , have the capacity to reduce the planet to a mere resource to be exploited . Nature is thus treated as a commodity : “ The plundering of the human spirit by the market place is paralleled by the plundering of the earth by capital . ” Social ecology , founded by Bookchin , is based on the conviction that nearly all of humanity 's present ecological problems originate in , indeed are mere symptoms of , dysfunctional social arrangements . Whereas most authors proceed as if our ecological problems can be fixed by implementing recommendations which stem from physical , biological , economic etc . , studies , Bookchin 's claim is that these problems can only be resolved by understanding the underlying social processes and intervening in those processes by applying the concepts and methods of the social sciences . 
 A pure capitalist approach has also been criticized in Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change to mitigation the effects of global warming in this excerpt ... 
 “ the greatest example of market failure we have ever seen . ” 
 Deep ecology is a movement founded by Arne <unk> that establishes principles for the well @-@ being of all life on Earth and the richness and diversity of life forms . The movement advocates , among other things , a substantial decrease in human population and consumption along with the reduction of human interference with the nonhuman world . To achieve this , deep ecologists advocate policies for basic economic , technological , and ideological structures that will improve the quality of life rather than the standard of living . Those who subscribe to these principles are obliged to make the necessary change happen . The concept of a billion @-@ year <unk> has been developed to initiate policy consideration of an earth where human structures power and fuel the needs of that species ( for example through artificial photosynthesis ) allowing Rights of Nature . 
 = = = Human settlements = = = 
 One approach to sustainable living , exemplified by small @-@ scale urban transition towns and rural ecovillages , seeks to create self @-@ reliant communities based on principles of simple living , which maximize self @-@ sufficiency particularly in food production . These principles , on a broader scale , underpin the concept of a bioregional economy . These approaches often utilize commons based knowledge sharing of open source appropriate technology . 
 Other approaches , loosely based around New Urbanism , are successfully reducing environmental impacts by altering the built environment to create and preserve sustainable cities which support sustainable transport . Residents in compact urban neighborhoods drive fewer miles , and have significantly lower environmental impacts across a range of measures , compared with those living in sprawling suburbs . In sustainable architecture the recent movement of New Classical Architecture promotes a sustainable approach towards construction , that appreciates and develops smart growth , architectural tradition and classical design . This in contrast to modernist and globally uniform architecture , as well as opposing solitary housing estates and suburban sprawl . Both trends started in the 1980s . The concept of Circular flow land use management has also been introduced in Europe to promote sustainable land use patterns that strive for compact cities and a reduction of greenfield land take by urban sprawl . 
 Large scale social movements can influence both community choices and the built environment . Eco @-@ municipalities may be one such movement . Eco @-@ municipalities take a systems approach , based on sustainability principles . The eco @-@ municipality movement is participatory , involving community members in a bottom @-@ up approach . In Sweden , more than 70 cities and towns — 25 per cent of all municipalities in the country — have adopted a common set of " Sustainability Principles " and implemented these systematically throughout their municipal operations . There are now twelve eco @-@ municipalities in the United States and the American Planning Association has adopted sustainability objectives based on the same principles . 
 There is a wealth of advice available to individuals wishing to reduce their personal and social impact on the environment through small , inexpensive and easily achievable steps . But the transition required to reduce global human consumption to within sustainable limits involves much larger changes , at all levels and contexts of society . The United Nations has recognised the central role of education , and have declared a decade of education for sustainable development , 2005 – 2014 , which aims to " challenge us all to adopt new behaviours and practices to secure our future " . The Worldwide Fund for Nature proposes a strategy for sustainability that goes beyond education to tackle underlying individualistic and materialistic societal values head @-@ on and strengthen people 's connections with the natural world . 
 = = = Human and labor rights = = = 
 Application of social sustainability requires stakeholders to look at human and labor rights , prevention of human trafficking , and other human rights risks . These issues should be considered in production and procurement of various worldwide commodities . The international community has identified many industries whose practices have been known to violate social sustainability , and many of these industries have organizations in place that aid in verifying the social sustainability of products and services . The Equator Principles ( financial industry ) , Fair Wear Foundation ( garments ) , and Electronics Industry Citizenship Coalition are examples of such organizations and initiatives . Resources are also available for verifying the life @-@ cycle of products and the producer or vendor level , such as Green Seal for cleaning products , NSF @-@ 140 for carpet production , and even labeling of Organic food in the United States . 
 = = = Topics = = = 
 = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development = 
 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) is an international financial institution that offers loans to middle @-@ income developing countries . The IBRD is the first of five member institutions that compose the World Bank Group and is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was established in 1944 with the mission of financing the reconstruction of European nations devastated by World War II . The IBRD and its concessional lending arm , the International Development Association , are collectively known as the World Bank as they share the same leadership and staff . Following the reconstruction of Europe , the Bank 's mandate expanded to advancing worldwide economic development and eradicating poverty . The IBRD provides commercial @-@ grade or concessional financing to sovereign states to fund projects that seek to improve transportation and infrastructure , education , domestic policy , environmental consciousness , energy investments , healthcare , access to food and potable water , and access to improved sanitation . 
 The IBRD is owned and governed by its member states , but has its own executive leadership and staff which conduct its normal business operations . The Bank 's member governments are shareholders which contribute paid @-@ in capital and have the right to vote on its matters . In addition to contributions from its member nations , the IBRD acquires most of its capital by borrowing on international capital markets through bond issues . In 2011 , it raised $ 29 billion USD in capital from bond issues made in 26 different currencies . The Bank offers a number of financial services and products , including flexible loans , grants , risk guarantees , financial derivatives , and catastrophic risk financing . It reported lending commitments of $ 26 @.@ 7 billion made to 132 projects in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) and International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) were established by delegates at the Bretton Woods conference in 1944 and became operational in 1946 . The IBRD was established with the original mission of financing the reconstruction efforts of war @-@ torn European nations following World War II , with goals shared by the later Marshall Plan . The Bank issued its inaugural loan of $ 250 million ( $ 2 @.@ 6 billion in 2012 dollars ) to France in 1947 to finance infrastructure projects . The institution also established its first field offices in Paris , France , Copenhagen , Denmark , and Prague in the former Czechoslovakia . Throughout the remainder of the 1940s and 1950s , the Bank financed projects seeking to dam rivers , generate electricity , and improve access to water and sanitation . It also invested in France , Belgium , and Luxembourg 's steel industry . Following the reconstruction of Europe , the Bank 's mandate has transitioned to eradicating poverty around the world . In 1960 , the International Development Association ( IDA ) was established to serve as the Bank 's concessional lending arm and provide low and no @-@ cost finance and grants to the poorest of the developing countries as measured by gross national income per capita . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The IBRD is governed by the World Bank 's Board of Governors which meets annually and consists of one governor per member country ( most often the country 's finance minister or treasury secretary ) . The Board of Governors delegates most of its authority over daily matters such as lending and operations to the Board of Directors . The Board of Directors consists of 25 executive directors and is chaired by the President of the World Bank Group . The executive directors collectively represent all 189 member states of the World Bank . The president oversees the IBRD 's overall direction and daily operations . As of July 2012 , Jim Yong Kim serves as the President of the World Bank Group . The Bank and IDA operate with a staff of approximately 10 @,@ 000 employees . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Although members contribute capital to the IBRD , the Bank acquires funds primarily by borrowing on international capital markets by issuing bonds . The Bank raised $ 29 billion USD worth of capital in 2011 from bonds issued in 26 different currencies . The IBRD has enjoyed a triple @-@ A credit rating since 1959 , which allows it to borrow capital at favorable rates . It offers benchmark and global benchmark bonds , bonds denominated in non @-@ hard currencies , structured notes with custom @-@ tailored yields and currencies , discount notes in U.S. dollars and <unk> . In 2011 , the IBRD sought an additional $ 86 billion USD ( of which $ 5 @.@ 1 billion would be paid @-@ in capital ) as part of a general capital increase to increase its lending capacity to middle @-@ income countries . The IBRD expressed in February 2012 its intent to sell kangaroo bonds ( bonds denominated in Australian dollars issued by external firms ) with maturities lasting until 2017 and 2022 . 
 = = Services = = 
 The IBRD provides financial services as well as strategic coordination and information services to its borrowing member countries . The Bank only finances sovereign governments directly , or projects backed by sovereign governments . The World Bank Treasury is the division of the IBRD that manages the Bank 's debt portfolio of over $ 100 billion and financial derivatives transactions of $ 20 billion . 
 The Bank offers flexible loans with maturities as long as 30 years and custom @-@ tailored repayment scheduling . The IBRD also offers loans in local currencies . Through a joint effort between the IBRD and the International Finance Corporation , the Bank offers financing to subnational entities either with or without sovereign guarantees . For borrowers needing quick financing for an unexpected change , the IBRD operates a Deferred Drawdown Option which serves as a line of credit with features similar to the Bank 's flexible loan program . Among the World Bank Group 's credit enhancement and guarantee products , the IBRD offers policy @-@ based guarantees to cover countries ' sovereign default risk , partial credit guarantees to cover the credit risk of a sovereign government or subnational entity , and partial risk guarantees to private projects to cover a government 's failure to meet its contractual obligations . The IBRD 's Enclave Partial Risk Guarantee to cover private projects in member countries of the IDA against sovereign governments ' failures to fulfill contractual obligations . The Bank provides an array of financial risk management products including foreign exchange swaps , currency conversions , interest rate swaps , interest rate caps and floors , and commodity swaps . To help borrowers protect against catastrophes and other special risks , the bank offers a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option to provide financing after a natural disaster or declared state of emergency . It also issues catastrophe bonds which transfer catastrophic risks from borrowers to investors . The IBRD reported $ 26 @.@ 7 billion in lending commitments for 132 projects in fiscal year 2011 , significantly less than its $ 44 @.@ 2 billion in commitments during fiscal year 2010 . 
 = Professor Frink = 
 Professor John <unk> Frink , Jr . , or simply Professor Frink , is a recurring character in the animated television series The Simpsons . He is voiced by Hank Azaria , and first appeared in the 1991 episode " Old Money " . Frink is Springfield 's nerdy scientist and professor and is extremely intelligent , though somewhat mad and socially inept . Frink often tries to use his bizarre inventions to aid the town in its crises but they usually only make things worse . His manner of speech , including the impulsive shouting of nonsensical words , has become his trademark . 
 Frink was originally depicted as an evil scientist in " Old Money " , since he was trying to secure funding for a death ray . When Azaria ad @-@ libbed a voice for the character , he did an impression of Jerry Lewis 's Julius Kelp character from The Nutty Professor . The staff liked the voice and therefore changed Frink to be more like Julius Kelp , both in appearance and personality – he became more nerdy , and went from evil to just mad . Lewis later guest @-@ starred on the show as Frink 's father in the 2003 episode " Treehouse of Horror XIV " . 
 The professor has received acclaim from critics , particularly for his bizarre inventions such as the hamburger earmuffs , and he has appeared on many reviewers ' listings of their favorite supporting characters from The Simpsons . Frink has been featured in other media relating to the show , such as comics , video games , and a simulator ride at Universal Studios Florida . The character 's popularity has led to him giving name to the computer programming language , Frink . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 John Frink is generally depicted as Springfield 's stereotypical nerdy , mad , and socially inept scientist , inventor , and mathematician . He wears thick glasses , a white lab coat , pink pants , and has <unk> . Frink is a college professor at Springfield Heights Institute of Technology and runs his own astronomical observatory . He has an IQ of 197 – it was 199 before he sustained a concussion during the collapse of Springfield 's brief intellectual junta – and is a member of the Springfield chapter of Mensa . Frink is generally very polite and friendly . He has a trademark mannerism of using Jerry Lewis @-@ style gibberish when excited , such as " <unk> @-@ <unk> ! " and " <unk> " and impulsively shouting other words that have no relevance to the situation at hand . He also occasionally refers to the importance of remembering to " carry the one " in various mathematical calculations . When he rambles he often speaks incoherently in run @-@ on sentences without pauses . Frink also has a tendency to over @-@ complicate simple matters and / or invent scientific terminology while expressing various concepts , e.g. " Father and I got along like positrons and <unk> ! " or , " <unk> " . 
 Frink often tries to use his mad and bizarre inventions to aid the town in its crises , but they usually do not work or only make things worse . Most of his inventions never function properly or are of no real use . He is the inventor of , among other things , a frog <unk> ( which greatly misrepresents the size of amphibians ) , automatic tapping shoes for tap dancing , the sarcasm detector , hamburger earmuffs , the 8 @-@ month @-@ after pill , and a drilling machine that can cut through anything . Some of Frink 's unsuccessful inventions include his small remote @-@ controlled plane that carries babies as passengers ( it crashed ) , and a burglar @-@ proof house that sprouts legs and runs away from potential danger ( the legs of which collapsed causing the house to crash to the ground and catch fire ) . As a scientist , Frink has discovered and cured " Frink 's Disease " and discovered the element " <unk> " . He has also mastered astrology to the point where he can use it to accurately predict the future , and has been shown to be capable of time travel . 
 The professor has a son who is seen in " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " during a convention for infant and toddler products as a pilot of a remote @-@ controlled plane ( he flies out the window of the building while in the plane and crashes ) , and in " I , ( Annoyed Grunt ) -Bot " at a robot battle ( operating the robot ) . On the show , Frink has made mentions of a wife , but there have also been jokes about him having had little contact with women in his life . 
 Frink often appears in the Treehouse of Horror Halloween episodes of The Simpsons , which are not accepted as canon and always take place outside the normal continuity of the show . Frink 's bizarre inventions and understanding of advanced physics usually fit well into these supernatural plotlines . In " Treehouse of Horror VIII " , Bart enters Frink 's matter teleporter and - echoing the film The Fly - it results in an accidental mix between Bart 's genes and the genes of a housefly that was also present in the transporter at the same time . In " Treehouse of Horror XIV " , it is revealed that Frink had a father who was killed by a shark , whom he brings back to life in the episode by piecing together his body parts . Unfortunately , the man decides to steal body parts to improve himself after he is revived . In the latter episode , Frink is awarded a Nobel Prize . 
 = = Character = = 
 Frink first appeared in the season two episode " Old Money " that aired on March 28 , 1991 . In that episode , Grampa Simpson inherits $ 106 @,@ 000 from his girlfriend when she dies . He eventually decides to spend it on people who are in need of money and holds interviews . In one of these interviews , Frink introduces Grampa to his latest invention , the Death Ray , claiming that " it is just a prototype . With proper funding I ’ m confident this little baby could destroy an area the size of New York City ! " Grampa responds with " But I want to help people , not kill ‘ em ! " , to which Frink replies " Oh . Well , to be honest , the ray only has evil applications . You know my wife will be happy , she ’ s hated this whole Death Ray thing from day one . " 
 In the original script , Frink appeared more evil . However , when cast member Hank Azaria ad @-@ libbed a voice for Frink , he did an impression of Jerry Lewis 's character Julius Kelp from the 1963 film The Nutty Professor , and the writing staff started making Frink more of a parody of that character . Julius Kelp is a nerdy , mad professor , albeit not evil , and is often unsuccessful with his experiments , so Frink became more like that as the show progressed . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening told TV Guide that " He was just written as a mad scientist character until Hank did the voice , and suddenly he became this nutty professor persona . What I love about Hank is that , you give him a single line – and most of these characters have very few lines – and he just brings it to life . Every time . " Frink was originally animated without his <unk> ; they were added later on to make him look even more like Lewis 's character . He was named after television writer John Frink , who was later hired on The Simpsons . The nonsensical utterances that Frink makes are written in the scripts as " Frink noise " . 
 Azaria has voiced Frink ever since the first appearance of the professor . Out of the many characters for which Azaria provides the voice , Frink is his favorite to do because he was a fan of Lewis in his younger years and he enjoys imitating the voice of the nutty professor . He has said that " once you start talking like [ Julius Kelp ] it ’ s very hard to stop . On each take , I ’ ll make it sillier , I always have . I ’ ll add more and more stupid noises and sounds to it . If they let me keep going , it gets ridiculous . " 
 As a homage to Lewis , Azaria conceived the idea of the " Treehouse of Horror XIV " segment in which Frink revives his dead father , with Lewis guest starring as the father . In a review of that episode , which aired around Halloween in 2003 , Robert Bianco of USA Today wrote that it is hard to tell Frink and his father 's voices apart : " Azaria voices Frink with such a spot @-@ on Lewis imitation that it 's sometimes hard to tell which one of the two nutty professors is talking . " In addition , The Knoxville News @-@ Sentinel 's Terry Morrow commented that " to hear Lewis doing Azaria doing Lewis is a mind @-@ bending gut buster , the kind of pay @-@ off that die @-@ hard Simpsons fans live for . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Frink is a popular character on The Simpsons and he has received acclaim from critics . Mark Hughes Cobb of The Tuscaloosa News named him his favorite secondary character from the show . Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram 's Robert Philpot called the professor one of the five best supporting characters on The Simpsons , writing that " Springfield 's mad scientist is a triumph of style over substance , with Hank Azaria giving him a ripoff Jerry Lewis voice that reminds you why we once thought Lewis was funny . " On their list of the top twenty @-@ five peripheral Simpsons characters , IGN 's Eric Goldman , Dan Iverson , and Brian Zoromski listed Frink at number fourteen , commenting that he fits nicely into the Simpsons universe " as the town 's brilliant mad scientist . " They highlighted a scene from the episode " The PTA Disbands " , in which Frink becomes a kindergarten substitute teacher and keeps one of the children 's toys to himself because the children " wouldn 't enjoy it on as many levels " as he did . Nick Griffiths of Radio Times named Frink one of the best characters of the show , stating that he has " always loved Professor Frink " , particularly because of his appearance , gibberish talking , and overuse of the word " the " , and because of his inventions such as the matter teleporter that turns Bart into half @-@ human half @-@ fly . The Sydney Morning Herald 's David Hollingworth profiled Frink in his list of " TV 's great tech figures " , writing that apart from being smart , the professor is best known for his " rather idiosyncratic speech patterns — <unk> @-@ whey @-@ hey . " Joe Rhodes of TV Guide listed the following as the professor 's most memorable line : " Sorry I 'm late . There was trouble at the lab with the running and the exploding and the crying when the monkeys stole the glasses off my head . " 
 Several critics have commented on Frink 's inventions . Patrick Goss of MSN 's Tech & Gadgets wrote that " When it comes to gizmos , Frink is the king " , and listed the Death Ray as one of the greatest gadgets featured in The Simpsons . Although he added that it " was not one of [ Frink 's ] most successful , " since it never received the funding it needed from Grampa . On the same list , Goss also featured Frink 's automatic phone <unk> , intra bovine ice @-@ cream maker ( an invention that is inserted into a cow and uses the four stomachs to mix the various ingredients ) , and hamburger earmuffs . In a profile about Frink , the publication UGO Networks wrote : " Where would the town be without your Jerry Lewis / Julius Kelp @-@ inspired voice and antics ? A lot safer most likely . Professor John Frink 's inventions range from distracting to disruptive . Who can forget his hamburger earmuffs ? Or his teleportation device , responsible for switching Bart Simpson 's head with that of a housefly ? " Howard Waldrop and Lawrence Person of Locus listed the scene in The Simpsons Movie that features Frink 's drilling machine invention as one of the highlights of the film . 
 = = Merchandising and legacy = = 
 Frink has appeared in various merchandise related to The Simpsons , including issues of Simpsons Comics , the simulator ride " The Simpsons Ride " at Universal Studios Florida , and video games such as The Simpsons Wrestling , The Simpsons : Road Rage , The Simpsons : Hit & Run , and The Simpsons Game . He has also been turned into a Halloween @-@ inspired action figure that was packaged with Kids Meals at Burger King in October and November 2002 . In addition , Frink was featured on the cover of the October 16 , 2000 issue of TV Guide . 
 The professor has also had an impact on real life science . Frink , a computer programming language , was named after him . It is , according to creator of the language , " designed to make physical calculations simple , to help ensure that answers come out right , and to make a tool that 's really useful in the real world . It tracks units of measure ( feet , meters , kilograms , watts , etc . ) through all calculations , allowing you to mix units of measure transparently , and helps you easily verify that your answers make sense . " 
 = Aleksandar Đurić = 
 Aleksandar Đurić ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; born 12 August 1970 ) is a former Bosnian @-@ born Singapore international footballer of Serbian descent . He is currently a fitness coach for S.League club Tampines Rovers . He was noted for being a prolific striker with strong physical presence . His professional approach to his fitness and a disciplined lifestyle contributed to extending a career spanning over three decades . 
 Đurić was junior kayaking champion of Yugoslavia when he was 15 and was ranked 8th in the world at 17 . He represented Bosnia and Herzegovina in the C @-@ 1 500m canoeing event the 1992 Summer Olympics . After the Olympics , he returned to Hungary to resume his football career . In 1999 , he signed for Tanjong Pagar United in the S.League where he was converted to a striker for the first time in his career . He won trophies with subsequent clubs Home United , Geylang United , Singapore Armed Forces and Tampines Rovers . He won eight league titles and three Singapore Cups in 16 seasons , amassing three Player of the Year and four top scorer awards on the way to becoming the league 's all @-@ time top scorer . 
 At international level , he debuted for Singapore at the age of 37 years in 2007 . He became the first foreign @-@ born player to start a match as captain in May 2008 . He was in the Singapore squad for the AFF Championship in 2008 , 2010 and 2012 , the latter of which Singapore won . He retired from international football in December 2012 with a record of 24 goals in 53 matches . 
 In 2013 , he assumed his new duties as full @-@ time fitness coach at his club Tampines Rovers . He retired from his playing career at the age of 44 in November 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Aleksandar Đurić was born in <unk> on the outskirts of Doboj , in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . The childhood supporter of Red Star Belgrade spent his formative years in the youth teams of his hometown club FK <unk> Doboj as a goalkeeper and later , as a midfielder . He also took up kayaking at the age of 12 on the advice of the doctor treating his growth disorder of the chest . He became junior kayaking champion of Yugoslavia when he was 15 and by age 17 , he was ranked 8th in the world . 
 Đurić was drafted into the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) at the age of 17 , and became an officer during his service . With the impending Bosnian War , his father wanted either him or his brother to leave the country in order to preserve the family line . He was instructed to leave his hometown as he was younger and a sportsman . Đurić recalls : " My father fought in this war , my brother for almost five years and my mother was killed in 1993 by the Muslim army . They bombed our village and it hit my home directly . A really big bomb and my mother died instantly [ ... ] So many people like me lost mothers and fathers in this bloody civil war but for me I hold no grudges . I don ’ t look at race , I look at people by their hearts and here in Singapore I adopted a Muslim child . " With just 300 Deutsche Marks on him , Đurić left for Serbia where he played football in the second division for one season and then Sweden , where he trained with AIK Solna and was offered refugee status which he rejected . The breakup of Yugoslavia left him stranded in Hungary without a recognised passport . He wandered through the cafes and restaurants of Szeged before a family offered him accommodation and a trial at local club Szeged LC in the second tier of the Hungarian football league . 
 = = = 1992 Summer Olympics = = = 
 In 1992 , Đurić received an invitation from the newly formed Bosnian Olympic Committee to compete for Bosnia and Herzegovina in the C @-@ 1 500 m canoeing event at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona . Despite not having trained for two years and the ongoing conflict between the Serbs and the Bosniaks , he accepted the request as he ultimately decided he was first and foremost a sportsman . As the Bosnian Olympic Committee could not afford to pay for his travel , he had to hitch @-@ hike his way over 1 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 930 mi ) to Barcelona . With only a letter from the Olympic Committee and no valid passport , he managed to get a truck ride to the Austrian border but was initially refused passage by a disbelieving immigration officer who thought he was a refugee seeking asylum . After convincing them of his credentials with a phone call to the Olympic Committee , the border guards helped him persuade someone to take him half @-@ way to Slovenia , where he managed to get another ride to the airport and flew to Barcelona . A two @-@ day trek later , he made it to the Summer Olympics where he was one of Bosnia 's ten debuting competitors . He had to borrow equipment from the Italian and Spanish teams to complete in the event and was eliminated in the repechages . After the Olympics , he resumed his football career with Szeged LC . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 An associate of Đurić helped to arrange for a trial in Australia with Frank Arok , a retired Serbian footballer of Hungarian descent and former Australia coach . In 1994 , he moved to South Melbourne Hellas in the National Soccer League where he played as a defender . He also played for other Australian clubs such as Port Melbourne Sharks , Gippsland Falcons , Heidelberg United , West Adelaide and had a brief stint with Chinese side Locomotive Shanshan in 1997 . 
 In 1999 , Đurić ’ s club West Adelaide went bankrupt . He received offers from Hong Kong and Singapore but chose to move to the latter where he began his S.League career with Tanjong Pagar United . At this stage of his career , he had been playing on the left flank as a winger or left @-@ back . His coach Tohari <unk> converted the 6 ' 4 " player into a striker . He scored 11 goals in 16 league matches as the club finished third . 
 Đurić returned to Australia at the end of the season and obtained Australian citizenship in the hope of representing the Socceroos . He played for Sydney @-@ based Marconi Stallions , reverting to his left midfield position . 
 In June 2000 , Đurić moved permanently to Singapore with Home United , playing as a striker again . He scored 11 goals in all competitions for his new club as he won the 2000 Singapore Cup in front of a 45 @,@ 000 crowd at the National Stadium . He was released by the club at the end of the season . 
 = = = Geylang United = = = 
 In 2001 , Đurić signed on with Geylang United where he formed a strong understanding with forward Mohd Noor Ali , a partnership they would later replicate at Singapore Armed Forces and credit with creating " at least half of all my goals " . Geylang won their first S.League title in five years after defeating Jurong in the final matchday , with Đurić scoring 37 goals that season . Geylang played Home United in the 2001 Singapore Cup final . Home United led 4 – 0 at half @-@ time as Đurić and playmaker Brian Bothwell came off with injuries . Defender Noh Rahman was withdrawn after injuring his knee ligament and Noor Ali was sent off as 9 @-@ men Geylang lost with a final score of 8 – 0 . Despite coach Jang Jung stating in a post @-@ match interview that Đurić would be leaving the club with seven other players , he signed a three @-@ year contract extension and went on to score 97 goals in 126 league games over four seasons . In 2003 , he joined an exclusive club of S.League players who had scored 100 domestic goals . 
 With the success of the 2002 FIFA World Cup in Japan and South Korea , the AFC revamped their continental competition by introducing the AFC Champions League and the AFC Cup . Geylang as 2001 S.League winners participated in the 2002 – 03 AFC Champions League qualification . They were drawn against <unk> in the second round of the Eastern qualifying zone ; Đurić scored once in the home leg and twice in the away leg as Geylang progressed 7 – 0 on aggregate . They met Chinese Jia @-@ A League club Shanghai Shenhua in the final qualifying stage , exiting 5 – 1 on aggregate with Đurić scoring a goal in the second leg . 
 Geylang entered the inaugural AFC Cup as 2003 S.League runners @-@ up . Đurić scored in both legs of the quarter @-@ finals as Geylang United knocked Perak out of the competition . He scored a total of five goals in the competition as Geylang made the semi @-@ finals , missing out on the finals with a 1 – 0 defeat to Al @-@ <unk> in the second leg after a 1 – 1 draw in the away leg . 
 = = = Singapore Armed Forces = = = 
 Đurić signed for Singapore Armed Forces in November 2004 . The Warriors won the league four times , achieving the S.League and Singapore Cup double in 2007 and 2008 as he finished league top @-@ scorer three times in 2007 , 2008 and 2009 . Đurić scored 129 goals in 150 league appearances with the club . His prolific form was recognised with the S.League Player of the Year award in 2007 and 2008 . He scored his 200th domestic goal with a 5 @-@ minute hat @-@ trick over Liaoning <unk> on 9 July 2007 @.@ and broke Mirko <unk> 's league record of 244 goals in local competitions with two goals in a 2 – 2 draw with ex @-@ club Geylang United on his 38th birthday . The club also defeated Home United 5 – 4 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw in regulation time in the 2008 Charity Shield . 
 In 2009 , Singapore Armed Forces became the first Singapore club to advance to the AFC Champions League after defeating PEA and <unk> Medan in the play @-@ offs . They were drawn against Kashima Antlers , Suwon Samsung Bluewings and Shanghai <unk> for the group stage . Đurić scored a goal in the match against Suwon Bluewings on 19 May 2009 . The club failed to make it to the next round , ending bottom of the group with five losses and a draw . 
 In September 2009 , Đuric agreed to join Sriwijaya of the Indonesian Super League for a reported US $ 110 @,@ 000 a season contract . However , a month later , he told the press that he declined the offer in the end because Sriwijaya tried to change the terms of the contract which was mutually agreed upon . 
 = = = Tampines Rovers = = = 
 Đuric 's relationship with Singapore Armed Forces had been damaged with his attempted transfer to Sriwijaya . Following their decision not to offer him a new contract , he signed for Tampines Rovers in 2010 . He scored 20 league goals in his first season there as the club finished in second place . He clinched three consecutive S.League titles with Tampines Rovers from 2011 to 2013 , and four Charity Shield honours from 2011 to 2014 . He became the first player to reach a milestone 300th goal on 27 September 2010 with two goals against Balestier Khalsa in the Singapore Cup . With 328 goals in 444 top division club appearances , Đuric was ranked by IFFHS as the world top scorer in July 2011 . He picked up his third Player of the Year award in 2012 and finished joint league top @-@ scorer with Moon Soon @-@ Ho in 2013 . 
 Đurić announced his decision to quit professional football at the end of the 2014 season , having been convinced by the club management to postpone his initial plans to retire at the end of 2012 . He started the season having scored a record 378 domestic goals . Tampines failed to reach the 2014 AFC Champions League after losing to South China at the first qualifying round . The club dropped into the 2014 AFC Cup accordingly , and was eventually eliminated in the group stage . He ended the season with eight goals in 35 appearances across all competitions as Tampines finished third in the league . Đurić retired from his playing career after his final match in a 2 – 1 loss to Brunei <unk> in the Singapore Cup third @-@ place play @-@ off match on 5 November 2014 . 
 = = International career = = 
 It took Đurić three personal attempts before he received his Singaporean citizenship on 27 September 2007 as he was not on the Football Association of Singapore 's Foreign Sports Talent Scheme . Despite obtaining his Singapore passport for non @-@ footballing reasons , coach <unk> Avramović called him up to the Singapore national team on 1 November 2007 . He made his international debut at the age of 37 years and 89 days against Tajikistan in the first leg of the second round of the 2010 World Cup qualifiers on 9 November , contributing with an immediate impact by scoring both goals in a 2 – 0 victory . Đurić started the match following injuries to attacking midfielder Shi <unk> and striker Indra <unk> Daud . The result coupled with a 1 – 1 draw in the second leg meant that Singapore progressed to the third round of the Asian Qualifying Tournament for the first time , where they were drawn against Saudi Arabia , Lebanon and Uzbekistan . He continued his fine form on the international stage , scoring against Lebanon and Uzbekistan as Singapore finished third in Group 4 . 
 With the absence of regular captain Indra <unk> and vice @-@ captain Lionel Lewis for the friendly against Bahrain on 28 May 2008 , Đurić skippered Singapore for the first time , becoming the first ever foreign @-@ born player to start a game as captain . 
 Đurić made the national team for the 2008 AFF Championship but was ruled out for the rest of the tournament after suffering a fibula injury in the opening match against Cambodia . Singapore lost to Vietnam in the semi @-@ finals . 
 He was called up to the Singapore squad for the 2010 AFF Championship . Singapore was held to a 1 – 1 draw with Philippines in the opening match , with Đurić scoring a goal . He scored the equaliser as Singapore came back from a goal down to defeat Myanmar 2 – 1 in the next match . This was followed by a 1 – 0 loss to co @-@ host Vietnam . Singapore exited the tournament at the group stage . 
 Đurić began the 2012 tournament as second @-@ choice forward but following an injury to midfielder <unk> Harun , he was recalled into the first eleven on the left flank . He scored the third goal in a 3 – 0 win over defending champions Malaysia in the first match . With his goal against Malaysia , he became the oldest goalscorer in the history of the competition . Singapore lost 1 – 0 to Indonesia three days later but defeated Laos 4 – 3 in the final group stage match to advance to the next round on goal difference . They defeated Philippines 1 – 0 on aggregate over two legs in the semi @-@ finals to advance to the finals . Singapore went on to defeat Thailand in the finals to become champions . Đurić retired from international football with a record of 24 goals in 53 international appearances after the tournament . 
 = = = International = = = 
 International goals 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Đurić stated his intention to remain involved in Singapore football in a coaching capacity as he nears completing his ' A ' coaching licence by the end of his playing career . He has been Tampines Rovers ' fitness coach since 2013 , a job he has held full @-@ time as he prepares to make the shift to backroom staff . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Đurić 's father worked for the railways in between playing semi @-@ professional football . His mother was killed during an artillery attack on 9 August 1993 , three days before his birthday . His father died of cancer at the age of 62 in 2000 . Đurić has an older brother named Milan . 
 Đurić met his wife Natasha in Melbourne in 1998 . They married in January 2000 . Their two children – daughter Isabella Nina ( born 2002 ) and son Alessandro Hugo ( born 2004 ) – were both born in Singapore . 
 Đurić lives in Holland Village , Singapore . As part of his rigorous fitness regime , he runs 15 km around his Johor Bahru neighbourhood every morning . He does not drink , smoke or do late nights . He avoids chilli and limits his intake of greasy food like <unk> and chicken rice , and keeps up with his fitness regime in the off @-@ season . 
 Outside of football , Đurić has been involved in charity work . He has been volunteering at a children 's home for a decade . He adopted a son , Massimo Luca Monty when he was 7 days old from the children 's home . In 2011 , he ran the half @-@ marathon race at the Standard Chartered Marathon alongside radio deejay Rod Monteiro and <unk> Dr Tan Swee Kheng to help raise S $ 12 @,@ 000 for Sanctuary House , which provides foster care for children . In 2012 , Đurić drove a taxi for 12 days to raise $ 2 @,@ 657 for The Straits Times School Pocket Money Fund . He and his three kids also painted plastic doves that were sold in aid of the Dover Park Hospice in September 2013 . He believes it is part of his " obligation to give something back to Singapore " . In December 2014 , Đurić was appointed as the first ambassador for the Delta League , a football competition jointly organised by the National Crime Prevention Council and the Singapore Police Force to engage youth who are at risk of falling into delinquency . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 6 November 2014 
 The inaugural Singapore League Cup was held in 2007 . 
 Singapore Armed Forces withdrew from the 2007 Singapore League Cup due to prior pre @-@ season commitments . 
 The inaugural AFC Cup was held in 2004 . 
 The FAS withdrew their one allocated qualifying spot for the 2011 and 2012 AFC Champions League . Tampines Rovers entered the 2011 and 2012 AFC Cup instead . 
 References : S.League Singapore Cup Singapore League Cup AFC Champions League AFC Cup General 
 ( - ) indicates unavailable referenced data conforming to reliable sources guidelines . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = Frederick Scherger = 
 Air Chief Marshal Sir Frederick Rudolph William Scherger , KBE , CB , DSO , AFC ( 18 May 1904 – 16 January 1984 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff , the RAAF 's highest @-@ ranking position , from 1957 until 1961 , and as Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee , forerunner of the role of Australia 's Chief of the Defence Force , from 1961 until 1966 . He was the first RAAF officer to hold the rank of air chief marshal . 
 Born in Victoria of German origins , Scherger graduated from the Royal Military College , Duntroon , before transferring to the Air Force in 1925 . He was considered one of the top aviators between the wars , serving as a fighter pilot , test pilot , and flying instructor . He held senior training posts in the late 1930s and the early years of World War II , earning the Air Force Cross in June 1940 . Promoted to group captain , Scherger was acting commander of North @-@ Western Area when Darwin suffered its first air raid in February 1942 . Praised for his actions in the aftermath of the attack , he went on to lead the RAAF 's major mobile strike force in the South West Pacific , No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order in September 1944 for his actions during the assaults on Aitape and Noemfoor in Western New Guinea . 
 After the war , Scherger served in senior posts , including Deputy Chief of the Air Staff , Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in Washington , D.C. , and commander of Commonwealth air forces during the Malayan Emergency . In 1957 , he was promoted to air marshal and became Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , presiding over a significant modernisation of RAAF equipment . Completing his term as CAS in 1961 , he was the Air Force 's first appointee to the position of Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee ( COSC ) . As Chairman of COSC , Scherger became Australia 's first air chief marshal in 1965 , and played a leading role in the commitment of troops to the Vietnam War . Leaving the military the following year , he was appointed chairman of the Australian National Airlines Commission and , from 1968 , of the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation . Popularly known as " <unk> " , he retired in 1975 and lived in Melbourne until his death in 1984 at the age of seventy @-@ nine . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = 1920s : Duntroon to Point Cook = = = 
 Born in Ararat , Victoria , the grandson of German immigrants , Fred Scherger was educated to junior certificate level at his local high school . His ancestry and surname made him the object of xenophobia in his childhood during World War I , which carried on into the early part of his military career and beyond ; as late as 1941 , an anonymous letter writer from RAAF Station Wagga would tell Prime Minister Robert Menzies that his " blood ran cold " at the notion of someone called " Scherger " commanding trainee Australian pilots . Scherger nevertheless entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1921 and graduated as a lieutenant in 1924 , winning the King 's Medal . Two days prior to graduation , he volunteered for an Air Force secondment , which was later made permanent . He commenced his flight training as a pilot officer ( temporary flying officer ) in 1925 at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . 
 Scherger quickly took to the art of flying open @-@ cockpit biplanes and gained a reputation as a skilful if occasionally reckless pilot , being berated early in his career by his flight commander for " inverted and very low flying " . He was one of the Air Force 's first volunteers for parachute instruction , under the tutelage of Flying Officer Ellis Wackett at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and made the first public freefall descent in Australia , at Essendon , Victoria on 21 August 1926 . In February 1927 , he was asked by the commanding officer of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , Wing Commander Adrian " King " Cole , to drop a message to a woman at Port Melbourne before she departed on a steamer . After doing so , Scherger illegally flew his S.E.5 fighter between ship and wharf before heading back to Point Cook , only to be hauled into Cole 's office the next morning to find the CO brandishing a photograph taken by a member of the public , catching the young pilot in the act . Sent for a dressing down to the Air Member for Personnel , Group Captain Jimmy Goble , Scherger was forced to admit it was not the first time he had engaged in such stunts . Goble responded , " Good , I 'm glad to see we 've still got a few in the Air Force with spirit . " 
 = = = 1930s : Flying instructor to Director of Training = = = 
 By the 1930s , as a flight instructor and test pilot , Scherger was considered " perhaps the RAAF 's outstanding aviator " . He married Thelma <unk> on 1 June 1929 , and they had a daughter named Jill . Promoted to flight lieutenant , Scherger became chief flying instructor ( CFI ) at Point Cook that August . He also flew with Fighter Squadron , a unit of No. 1 FTS operating Bristol Bulldogs . As one of the leading pilots of the Bulldog , then regarded as the peak of military technology , and in what was generally thought of as the RAAF 's elite formation , he gained popular exposure that helped his later rise to senior leadership . In October 1931 , he won an Aero Club derby at Adelaide in a Bulldog , clocking a top speed of 160 @.@ 98 mph ( 259 @.@ 07 km / h ) . 
 Raised to squadron leader , Scherger was posted to England in August 1934 to study at RAF Staff College , Andover . Just prior to departing , he was involved in a notorious incident at RAAF Station Laverton . A fellow squadron leader arrived home early from a mess function to find his wife sleeping with another officer , who escaped by crashing through the bedroom window . The squadron leader then pursued his wife with a loaded revolver , the pair eventually arriving at Scherger 's quarters . Faced with the frightened woman and the enraged husband crying that he would " shoot the bitch " , Scherger knocked the man down with a poker . The unconscious husband was placed in the guardhouse , and the woman given shelter off the base ; the officer she had slept with promptly resigned his commission . 
 Scherger graduated from Andover in December 1935 and over the next year completed courses at the RAF 's School of Air Navigation and Central Flying School . Returning to Australia , he resumed his position as CFI at Point Cook in May 1937 . At the direction of the Federal government , he was responsible for training the Treasurer , Richard Casey , to fly ; the use of Air Force facilities for his own benefit by an elected official led to adverse publicity when it was revealed by the media . In September 1937 , Scherger test flew the North American NA @-@ 16 at Laverton ; the evaluation program led to the design being adapted as the CAC Wirraway the following year . He was appointed Director of Training at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , in January 1938 , and promoted to wing commander in March 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = 1939 – 42 : Outbreak of war to raid on Darwin = = = 
 As Director of Training at the outbreak of World War II , Scherger 's main challenge was to expand the RAAF 's pool of flying instructors . Central Flying School , Australia 's first military aviation unit , was re @-@ formed for this purpose in April 1940 . Awarded the Air Force Cross in June 1940 for his " outstanding ability " as a pilot and instructor , he took charge of No. 2 Service Flying Training School near Wagga the following month , and was promoted to group captain in September . In October 1941 , he was made commanding officer of RAAF Station Darwin , Northern Territory . Described by Major General Lewis H. Brereton , commander of the US Far East Air Force , as " energetic , efficient and very impatient " , Scherger started improving the operational readiness of the base and its surrounds without waiting for specific orders from RAAF Headquarters . The following January , he was appointed senior air staff officer , North @-@ Western Area ( NWA ) , which administered the RAAF Station and its satellite airfields . 
 In Air Commodore Douglas Wilson 's absence at ABDA Command Headquarters in Java , Scherger was acting Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) NWA on 19 February 1942 when Darwin suffered its first aerial attacks by the Japanese . Driving into town to meet Air Marshal Richard Williams , who was in transit on his way to England , Scherger first became aware of the assault after he heard anti @-@ aircraft fire and counted twenty @-@ seven enemy aircraft in the distance . He arrived at the civil airfield to witness a Curtiss P @-@ 40 crash land on the runway , before his car was strafed by fighters . In a lull after the initial attack that day , he made contact with Williams before the two men were forced to take shelter in a makeshift trench that was straddled by falling bombs as a second raid got under way . Afterwards , Scherger began to restore order and launched a Hudson light bomber on a reconnaissance mission , though there was no further contact with Japanese forces . 
 As well as the loss of civil and military infrastructure , twenty @-@ three aircraft and ten ships , and the death of some 250 people , 278 RAAF personnel had deserted Darwin in an exodus that became known as the " Adelaide River Stakes " . " There was " , in Scherger 's words , " an awful panic and a lot of men simply went bush " . Praised for his " great courage and energy " , he was one of the few senior Air Force officers in the region to emerge from Commissioner Charles Lowe 's inquiry into the debacle with his long @-@ term career prospects undamaged . In the immediate aftermath , however , his outspoken criticism of the RAAF 's state of preparedness alienated members of the Air Board , the service 's controlling body that consisted of its most senior officers and which was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) . He was relieved of his position at NWA by the CAS , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , and shunted through a series of postings for the remainder of the year , including commanding officer at RAAF Station Richmond , supernumerary at RAAF Headquarters , Director of Defence at Allied Air Forces Headquarters , South West Pacific Area , and Director of Training at RAAF Headquarters . Seeking restitution , he boldly went over the heads of the Air Board and successfully appealed to the Minister for Air , Arthur Drakeford , supported by Commissioner Lowe . 
 = = = 1943 – 45 : No. 10 Operational Group and First Tactical Air Force = = = 
 Scherger served as Officer Commanding No. 2 Training Group at RAAF Station Wagga from July 1943 until he was appointed AOC of the newly formed No. 10 Operational Group ( No. 10 OG ) in November . The Air Force 's main mobile strike force , No. 10 OG at its formation consisted of No. 77 Wing , operating A @-@ 31 Vengeance dive bombers , and No. 78 Wing , operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters , as well as various ancillary units . Promoted to acting air commodore in January 1944 , Scherger established his headquarters at Nadzab , Papua New Guinea , in support of the US Fifth Air Force . Though able to launch No. 78 Wing 's first mission that same month , he had to deal with several organisational problems to bring all his squadrons to combat readiness , including lack of training in tropical conditions , and shortcomings in aircraft maintenance and staff rotation that resulted in the RAAF 's operational rate of effort being inferior to similar USAAF formations . These issues were overcome later in the year and No. 10 OG units began exceeding the rate of effort of their American counterparts . 
 By March 1944 , No. 77 Wing 's Vengeances had been withdrawn from operations due to their inferiority to newer equipment . Three squadrons from No. 9 Operational Group — one each flying Bostons , Beaufighters , and Beauforts — were assigned to the Wing as replacements , but No. 10 OG itself was moved from Nadzab to Cape Gloucester to permit USAAF units with longer @-@ ranged aircraft to occupy vital airfields on the Allied front line . The group 's disappointment with its withdrawal from Nadzab was tempered by news that it was to take part in the forthcoming attack on Aitape , New Guinea , codenamed Operation Reckless . Scherger was appointed air commander for the assault , leading US and Australian units . No. 78 Wing 's Kittyhawks shadowed the main task force while heavier aircraft from NWA conducted bombing and mining sorties to indirectly support the operation . The landings on 22 April 1944 met little opposition , credited in part to the Allied bombardment in the days leading up to it . With elements of No. 10 OG going ashore on the first day , Aitape airfield was repaired and No. 78 Wing was operating from it within three days . In June , Scherger was named commander of Australian and US air forces for the attack on Noemfoor Island . Over the course of the battle that commenced on 2 July , he controlled Nos. 71 , 77 , 78 and 81 Wings RAAF , as well as the USAAF 's 58th and 348th Fighter Groups and 307th and 417th Bombardment Groups . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his actions at Aitape and Noemfoor , the citation noting that he " operated his air forces with great skill and success " and praising the way he placed himself " in the forefront of the landing of the ground troops " , where " his personal courage and leadership proved an inspiration to all personnel " . 
 A jeep accident in August left Scherger with a fractured pelvis , necessitating his evacuation to Australia for rehabilitation . In his absence , Air Commodore Harry Cobby took command of No. 10 OG ; two months later the formation was redesignated the Australian First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) . Still recuperating , Scherger acted in the role of Air Member for Personnel at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , from January to May 1945 . On 10 May , he was posted back to the Pacific to resume control of No. 1 TAF following Cobby 's dismissal in the wake of the " Morotai Mutiny " . He returned as Operation Oboe One , the Battle of Tarakan , was under way ; No. 1 TAF 's airfield construction teams had been tasked with opening the runway on Tarakan Island within a week of Allied landings but extensive pre @-@ invasion damage and adverse environmental conditions delayed this until the end of June . He then led No. 1 TAF in Operation Oboe Six , the invasion of Labuan , going ashore on the afternoon of the landings on 10 June to establish his command post . By July , when the final Allied offensive of the Borneo Campaign took place as Operation Oboe Two in Balikpapan , No. 1 TAF had reached a strength of some 25 @,@ 000 personnel ; by the end of hostilities on 14 August this figure had been reduced with the transfer of units to the recently formed No. 11 Group . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = 1946 – 57 : Rise to Chief of the Air Staff = = = 
 In October 1945 , Scherger led a survey team to Japan to review airfields and other facilities being considered for the British Commonwealth Occupation Force , determining that substantial work was needed to bring them up to the required capacity . The following year , he attended the Imperial Defence College , London . From July 1947 to July 1951 , he served as Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) , gaining promotion to temporary air vice marshal in May 1950 . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the King 's Birthday Honours the same year . As DCAS , Scherger reported to Air Marshal George Jones , whose ten @-@ year term as CAS would the longest of any incumbent in the position . The pair enjoyed a cordial working relationship , and Jones earmarked the younger officer as a leader of the future . However Scherger could not persuade his conservative chief to revamp the Air Force from its wartime area command structure into a more modern service organised along functional lines ; this radical change would await Jones ' successor , Air Marshal Sir Donald Hardman . 
 After completing his tour as DCAS , Scherger was posted to Washington , D.C. , to head up the Australian Joint Services Staff . Promoted to substantive air vice marshal , he became AOC of RAF Air Headquarters Malaya in January 1953 . In this role , he commanded all Commonwealth air forces in the region and was responsible for operations against communist guerrillas during the emergency . Scherger deliberately sited his headquarters , which had been based in Singapore when he took over , next to the offices of the Director of Operations in Kuala Lumpur , to more closely align air tasking with overall military planning . He expanded the use of helicopters for troop delivery and casualty evacuation , and presided over a change in tactics that saw an earlier policy of indiscriminate saturation bombing of jungle areas replaced by one of precision strike against enemy camps . He also pioneered psychological warfare in the form of " voice " aircraft broadcasting propaganda , close cooperation between light aircraft spotters and ground forces to aid bombing missions , and defoliation to clear jungle cover . 
 Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath on 30 April 1954 for his service in Malaya , Scherger joined the Air Board as Air Member for Personnel in March 1955 . During his term he commissioned a review into the effectiveness of the syllabus at RAAF College for meeting the future needs of the Air Force in an age of missiles and nuclear weaponry . This led to a policy of cadets undertaking academic degrees , in line with similar institutions in the other armed services ; the College was subsequently renamed RAAF Academy . Promoted air marshal , he became Chief of the Air Staff in March 1957 , succeeding Air Marshal Sir John McCauley . Long identified as a strong contender for the RAAF 's senior role , Scherger was described by Air Marshal Hardman as " easily the best material on offer " . He declared that as an administrator he was " not going to allow myself to be bogged down with minor matters of detail ... Broad policy comes from the top . These decisions have to be implemented in the commands — and that 's the way it 's going to be . " 
 = = = 1957 – 61 : Chief of the Air Staff = = = 
 As CAS , one of Scherger 's first tasks was investigating the feasibility of a nuclear arsenal for the Air Force . During visits to Britain and the US he explored the possibility of weapons being delivered by the RAAF 's Sabre fighters or its Canberra bombers . In 1958 , he held discussions with the Chief of Staff of the USAF , General Thomas D. White , about storing nuclear weapons in Australia under USAF control . In 1959 and 1960 , Scherger had information sent out , including manuals and maintenance instructions , regarding equipping the Canberras with Mark 7 nuclear bombs , the same type that the British Canberras used . For a time , Scherger championed the purchase of a force of British @-@ built Vulcan heavy bombers but excessive cost and a governmental determination to remain " under the shelter of the American nuclear umbrella " put paid to the proposal . Instead , in 1963 , the decision was taken to purchase the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 swing @-@ wing bomber " on the understanding that it could carry nuclear weapons " . 
 Turning to fighters , Scherger succeeded in reversing a publicly announced decision to purchase the F @-@ 104 Starfighter as a replacement for the Sabre , in favour of the Dassault Mirage III , a type better suited for Australia 's requirements . During trials he had taken the controls of a Starfighter , reportedly becoming the first Australian to fly at twice the speed of sound . He was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in the 1958 Queen 's Birthday Honours . 
 An advocate of helicopters since his experience in Malaya , Scherger influenced purchase of the UH @-@ 1 Iroquois for Australia . He also played a key role in the acquisition of the C @-@ 130 Hercules transport in 1958 , over the Federal treasury 's " bureaucratic hand @-@ wringing " ; the type soon proved itself vital to defence force activity in the region , being described as second only to the F @-@ 111 as " the most significant aircraft the RAAF has ever operated " . The following year , harking back to his experience in 1942 , Scherger proposed a second airfield in the Darwin area , which led eventually to the establishment of RAAF Base Tindal near Katherine . He transferred funding already in place for extension of the runway at Laverton to effect this , signalling a fundamental shift in the Air Force 's " centre of gravity " to the north of Australia . The first edition of RAAF News ( now Air Force News ) , which had been sponsored by Scherger , appeared in January 1960 and carried a message from the CAS concerning current defence policy , as well as announcing that Sidewinder air @-@ to @-@ air missiles would begin equipping the Air Force 's Sabres . Scherger also oversaw introduction of Bloodhound surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles to the RAAF 's arsenal . Towards the end of his term as CAS , he expressed interest in Britain 's supersonic BAC TSR @-@ 2 as a replacement for the Canberra , but noted that it was " many years " from production . 
 = = = 1961 – 66 : Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee = = = 
 Scherger became Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee ( COSC ) , the senior Australian military position at the time , in May 1961 , taking over from Vice Admiral Sir Roy Dowling . Keen as ever to see a supersonic bomber replace the Canberra , he visited Britain in April 1963 to investigate progress of the TSR @-@ 2 . Using back @-@ channel sources of information , he satisfied himself that the RAF 's pronouncements on the bomber 's development were overly optimistic , and later that year began supporting selection of the F @-@ 111 as the aircraft best suited to supplant the Canberra . 
 During the Indonesia – Malaysia Konfrontasi , Scherger acted as military liaison between the British and Australian governments . Openly sceptical about the cease @-@ fire announced by President Sukarno on 25 January 1964 , he supported British requests for Australian combat forces in Borneo but was in the short term " overruled by ' political cross @-@ currents ' " . Towards the end of the year , he advocated bombing Indonesian air bases using RAAF Canberras in Malaya , but in this instance the British held back . Although Australia eventually deployed battalions of the Royal Australian Regiment from March 1965 , Scherger 's earlier optimistic estimation of the speed and level of his government 's readiness to commit troops was said to have confused the British . 
 The latter part of Scherger 's tour as Chairman COSC coincided with the beginning of large @-@ scale Australian involvement in the Vietnam War . By mid @-@ 1964 , the Commonwealth had already sent a small team of military advisors , plus a detachment of newly acquired DHC @-@ 4 Caribou transports , to the region at the request of the South Vietnamese government . At a joint US , Australian and New Zealand conference from 30 March to 1 April 1965 , and with instructions only to ascertain America 's objectives in the conflict , Scherger indicated that Australia would be prepared to commit a sizeable ground force , of around battalion size . Within a week , Prime Minister Robert Menzies ' Federal cabinet had ratified the proposal , which was formally announced on 19 April . The 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment deployed to Vietnam in May 1965 , and two squadrons of the RAAF were committed by mid @-@ 1966 . With the formation of Australian Forces Vietnam ( AFV ) at this time , Scherger recommended that Air Force units effectively serve under Army control " to convey an image of all Australian forces fighting together , as one unit " . The Minister for Air , Peter Howson , felt that this made Scherger and the Army guilty of " exaggerated national pride " . 
 Promoted to air chief marshal in March 1965 , Scherger became not only the first RAAF officer to attain four @-@ star rank , but also the first Duntroon graduate to do so . Already considered " a particularly assertive Chairman " of COSC , his role was further strengthened by the promotion as he now out @-@ ranked the three service heads . His predecessors in the position had not advanced beyond three @-@ star rank . Scherger remained as chairman until retiring from military life on 18 May 1966 , having twice had his term extended by unanimous vote of Federal cabinet . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After leaving the military , Scherger became chairman of the Australian National Airlines Commission ( ACAC ) , the controlling body of the Federal government 's domestic carrier Trans Australia Airlines ( TAA ) , on 1 July 1966 . Considered as bringing to TAA " the dash and leadership the new air age demanded " , he presided over delivery of its first Douglas DC @-@ 9 twin @-@ jet transport in 1967 . The government 's Two Airlines Policy , designed to ensure even competition between TAA and Australia 's private domestic carrier , Ansett , meant that the decision of which airline would land the first DC @-@ 9 in the country came down to the toss of a coin , which Scherger won . He augmented his role at ACAC with chairmanship of the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation ( CAC ) from 1968 , and joined an Australian defence industries mission to the US the following year . 
 Scherger continued to lead ACAC and CAC until retiring to live in Melbourne in 1975 . He also served as director on the boards of other firms including electronics companies Plessey Pacific and International Computers ( Australia ) Limited . His wife Thelma died in a car accident in 1974 . On 3 March 1975 , at the age of seventy , he married Joy Robertson , a widow he had known three months . At the time , he was quoted as saying , " In the Air Force you have to move quickly or someone else will shoot you down " . In retirement he attracted some controversy by continuing to advocate for the Australian military to acquire a nuclear capability . Sir Frederick Scherger died in Melbourne on 16 January 1984 , having been ill following a stroke the previous year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Described by Air Force historian Alan Stephens as one of " the outstanding officers of the post @-@ war era " and " among the RAAF 's better chiefs " , Scherger is credited with helping to shift Australia 's defence posture to the north by developing the concept of a series of front @-@ line air bases in the continent 's top end , beginning with plans for RAAF Tindal in 1959 . From the time of his command of No. 10 Operational Group , he had an easy rapport — and worked to foster relations — with the US military , presaging closer defence ties with the Americans that he pursued as CAS . Among other things this manifested itself in the purchase of more and more US equipment for the Air Force , and far less from the United Kingdom . Once elevated to the position of Chairman of COSC , he further severed ties with Britain by removing senior Royal Australian Navy officers from the Royal Navy List , and dropping the words " ... and Chief of the Australian Section of the Imperial General Staff " from the title of Chief of the General Staff in the Australian Army List . 
 As Chairman of COSC , Scherger played a leading role in the large @-@ scale commitment of Australian forces to Vietnam . In an address at the Australian War Memorial in 2005 , journalist Paul Kelly referred to him as " Australia 's most prominent military hawk " at the time , who " exceeded his brief " by promising a battalion to the Americans before a formal request had been made . Historians Peter Edwards and Gregory Pemberton have written that " no official could have done more to press Australia into a military commitment in Vietnam than its most highly ranked serviceman , Air Chief Marshal Scherger " . Reflecting later on Australia 's involvement in the war , Scherger said " If you want allies , you 've got to support allies ... It was never conceivable to us that America could lose — no way . " 
 Along with Athol Townley , Minister for Defence from 1958 to 1963 , Scherger urged the establishment of an Australian Joint Services Staff College ( <unk> ) , to further inter @-@ service knowledge and cooperation against an indigenous background instead of sending officers to overseas colleges ; the <unk> opened in 1970 as the Joint Services Wing of a proposed Australian Services Staff College , later being subsumed by the Australian Defence College . Scherger was also an early advocate for " one Australian Defence Force " comprising three branches , under one Minister for Defence , rather than three competing services , each with its own minister . According to his biographer , Harry Rayner , he bequeathed to his successor as Chairman of COSC , Lieutenant General Sir John Wilton , a position much invigorated and respected by the service chiefs and the government , and contributing to a more cohesive Australian defence organisation . In 1973 , the single @-@ service ministries were abolished in favour of an all @-@ encompassing Department of Defence ; by 1984 , the Chairman COSC position had evolved to become the Chief of the Defence Force , directly commanding all three armed services through their respective chiefs . 
 Rayner described Scherger as " the most quoted and best known of contemporary military leaders " in Australia from 1957 to 1966 , recognised and admired by civilian and soldier alike . Detractors accused him of cunning and excessive politicking , Air Marshal Williams declaring that Scherger favoured his friends in the service and later in TAA and CAC , and Prime Minister John Gorton famously calling him " a politician in uniform " . Scherger was also labelled a self @-@ publicist , but argued " ... you can 't sell your ideas unless you can sell yourself , and if you can sell yourself you 're half way to selling the ideas that you 've got " . The newest of the northern air bases he proposed while CAS , near Weipa in Cape York , was opened in 1998 and named RAAF Base Scherger in his honour . His name is also borne by Sir Frederick Scherger Drive in North Turramurra , New South Wales . 
 = Beacon Park = 
 Beacon Park is a public park in the centre of the city of Lichfield , Staffordshire , in the United Kingdom . The park was created in 1859 when the Museum Gardens were laid out adjacent to the newly built Free Museum and Library . The park has since been extended in stages and now forms 69 acres ( 28 ha ) of open parkland in the city centre . The park is located in the northwest of the city centre and to the west of the Cathedral Close across the road from the Garden of Remembrance . 
 The majority of the park was originally waterlogged marshland and a lake covered the area of what is now the Museum Gardens . The land was drained in the early 19th century and the Museum Gardens were raised with silt dredged from Minster Pool . The large northern area of the park once formed the land and gardens of Beacon House . This land was incorporated into the park when the owner of Beacon House , Colonel Swinfen Broun , donated the land after his death . 
 The park has many sporting and recreational facilities for use by the public , including an 18 hole golf course , football pitches , tennis courts and bowling greens . The park also hosts a wide range of events throughout the year including the Lichfield Bower and The Lichfield Festival . The park is home to many monuments , most notably a large bronze statue of Captain Smith of the RMS Titanic . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Beacon Park stands on land which was originally low lying , poorly drained pasture alongside the <unk> Brook . The Museum Gardens and Recreation Grounds were the site of Bishops Fish Pool ( sometimes known as Upper Pool ) . The pool was created when a causeway was built on Beacon Street in the 14th century separating it from Minster Pool . The waterlogged marshland surrounding Bishops Fish Pool became known as ' The Moggs ' from the 15th century and later ' Swan Moggs ' . 
 Swans were kept by the Bishops of Lichfield on Bishops Fish Pool from the early 14th century . Special pens and nesting areas were constructed . Ownership of the birds passed to the Lichfield Corporation from 1548 . In 1704 the lease owner of ' Swan Moggs ' was required to allow the swans make their nests there . In this area today we get the street names Swan Road and Swan Mews reflecting the history of the land use . 
 The land of the wider Beacon Park was used for agriculture from at least the 13th century to the 19th century . This past use is visible today in street names with <unk> south of the park and north of the park there are records of a Shaw field in 1336 which is now Shaw Lane . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 As the city water supply from <unk> was diminishing in the early 19th century , money was spent diverting surface waters from ' Swan Moggs ' into a common conduit . The two streams across it were diverted into underground culverts ; the land was raised with silt and mud dredged from Minster Pool . The area was subsequently developed into the formal gardens of Beacon Park by the Lichfield Corporation , but paid for by the Conduit Lands Trust . The Museum Gardens were opened in 1859 to complement the new Italianate Free Library and Museum . The Recreation Grounds , opened in 1891 , is the small area between the Museum Gardens and the wider Beacon Park . The central fountain was unveiled as the central focus of the Museum Gardens in 1871 . A bandstand was also installed close to the junction of the Museum Gardens and Recreation Grounds , and was positioned to provide a focus for the avenue through the Museum Gardens . 
 The development of the wider Beacon Park is closely linked to the development of Beacon House , which was built for George Hand in 1800 . The gardens and parkland were developed in stages over the nineteenth century as ownership of the estate changed . In 1826 the owner , Richard Hinckley added two wings to the house , extended the grounds and carried out extensive improvements to the landscape . Two fish ponds were dug along the valley , fed by the <unk> Brook , and a long ornamental approach constructed across the fields towards Walsall Road . Samuel Lipscomb <unk> acquired Beacon House and its 32 acres ( 13 ha ) estate in 1880 . He extended the parkland to cover 100 acres ( 40 ha ) and added a terraced walk along the front ; linking the house to the ponds . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Statues of Edward VII and Edward Smith were erected in the Museum Gardens in 1908 and 1914 respectively . During the First World War , Beacon House was sold to the War department . A Crimean War cannon and a First World War German gun were placed in the Museum Gardens after the war , only to be removed for scrap metal during the next war . After the First World War the park was the scene of much celebration with the Recreation Grounds used for athletics and the Museum Gardens for dancing . The Garden of Remembrance was laid out across Beacon Street opposite the park in 1920 . The timber framed public convenience at the northeast entrance was built in 1930 , partly with old materials from the portion of the Friary which was taken down in 1925 on the making of the new road . 
 Beacon House was used by the Royal Army Service Corps during the Second World War before being demolished by the City Council in 1964 . The land on which Beacon House once stood is now a housing estate with street names Swinfen Broun Road and <unk> Road named after previous residents of the house . Colonel Swinfen Broun gifted 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) of the land to the park in 1943 . After the land attached to Beacon House was incorporated into Beacon Park between 1943 and 1964 the park area as we know it today was complete . 
 Over the rest of the 20th century many recreation facilities were incorporated into the park . Parkland was levelled for football pitches in 1947 . A second bowling green in the Recreation Grounds was laid out by the City Council in 1962 to join the green in the Museum Gardens laid in 1922 . In 1972 the two fish ponds were reshaped and deepened to leave one pool ( Beacon Pool ) we see today . The golf course was laid out and opened in 1973 . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In 2009 , the Heritage Lottery Fund and the Big Lottery Fund announced Beacon Park , Minster Pool and Walk and the Garden of Remembrance had been awarded a grant £ 3 @.@ 9 million under the ' Parks for People ' programme . The transformation started in 2010 and was completed in 2012 with works including a new café , refreshment kiosk , bowls and education pavilion , toilets , and new and improved play areas for children of all ages . Conservation work was carried out on the listed structures , including the statues , railings and fountain . In the Museum Gardens , the bowling green was relocated to the Recreation Grounds and in its previous location beds of flowers were planted to recreate the Victorian geometric landscaping to the gardens . 
 = = Monuments and sculpture = = 
 Plaque of Martyrs – The plaque came into being as the seal for the city of Lichfield . The disputed story of 999 Christian martyrs who were killed by the Romans under pagan Emperor Diocletian in Lichfield in 288 CE is depicted in the stonework of the monument . It was located on the front of the Guildhall until , in 1744 during the Victorian restoration of the Guildhall the plaque was taken down a placed in storage . It emerged again in 1864 , when it was moved to a rockery on the eastern side of the Museum Gardens . It lay in the rockery falling into a state of disrepair until 2010 when it was restored and relocated onto a plinth in the Recreation Grounds . The seal can also be seen on the railway bridge at St John 's Street . 
 Chancellor Law 's Fountain – Unveiled in May 1871 , the fountain was sculpted by Turner and Allen of London . The lions are made from Ashlar stone and the central figure is sculpted iron . The fountain was a gift from James Thomas Law who was the chancellor of the diocese and gave much to the city , including the statue of Samuel Johnson in the market square . The fountain is located at the centre of the Museum Gardens . In 2011 the fountain was restored with funding from Lichfield Conduit Lands Trust . 
 King Edward VII – Unveiled in September 1908 the statue was sculpted by local stonemason George Lowther of Robert Bridgeman & Sons of Lichfield . The pedestal is made of <unk> stone and the figure from Portland stone . Edward is portrayed in full coronation robes with a sceptre in his right hand . The arms of the City of Lichfield are on the front of the pedestal . The statue was erected during Edward 's reign as a gesture of the city 's loyalty to the King . The statue is located on the eastern end of the Museum Gardens . The statue was rededicated on 24 April 2013 by The Princess Royal . 
 Captain Edward Smith – Unveiled in July 1914 at the western end of the Museum Gardens , the statue was sculpted by Kathleen Scott , wife of Antarctic explorer Robert Scott . The pedestal is made from Cornish granite and the figure is bronze . This is a memorial to the captain of the RMS Titanic , which sank on 15 April 1912 . Captain Smith was from Hanley and Lichfield was chosen as the location for the monument because Smith was a Staffordshire man and Lichfield was the centre of the diocese . The statue originally cost £ 740 raised through local and national contributions . In 2010 , as part of the ' Parks for People ' programme , the statue was restored and the green patina removed from its surface at a cost of £ 16 @,@ 000 . In 2011 an unsuccessful campaign was started to get the statue moved back to Captain Smith 's home town of Hanley . 
 Colonel Swinfen Broun – Unveiled in September 1972 , the memorial is a <unk> high sandstone brick with two bronze plaques located on each side . In 1948 Lichfield mourned the loss of one of its most generous benefactors , Colonel Swinfen Broun . He had paid a large part of the cost of Victoria Hospital , given the Guildhall its clock and donated 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) of recreational land to Beacon Park in 1943 . In his will he also left half of his estate at Swinfen Hall to Lichfield Cathedral and the other half to the Lichfield Corporation . A memorial was set up on the west bank of Beacon Pool after his death in recognition to his contribution to the city . 
 Erasmus Darwin – Unveiled on 12 December 2012 , a 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) high bronze statue of Erasmus Darwin sculpted by Peter Walker . The statue was estimated to cost £ 61 @,@ 500 with 30 % of the funds to come from Section 106 funding . The statue is located near to the Bird Street entrance to the Museum Gardens . 
 = = Recreational uses = = 
 The park has many sporting facilities including flat and crown bowling greens in the recreation grounds . The Lichfield Museum Bowling Club has been playing on the greens since 1922 and is one of the oldest bowling clubs in the country . There are four asphalt surfaced tennis courts built in 1932 , six football pitches ( seasonal ) , a basketball court , a cricket pitch ( seasonal ) and an eighteen hole public golf course . 
 In addition to sports , other recreational facilities are available . These include a crazy golf course , a young children 's playground and an older children 's playground . During the summer season activities such as canoeing on Beacon Pool , donkey rides , giant board games and a bouncy castle are available in the park . 
 Two new catering facilities in the park opened in May 2012 . The Lakeside Bistro near Beacon Pool and Chandlers Café at the Bird Street entrance to the park were built as part of the works following the £ 3 @.@ 9 million grant and Chandlers Group spent £ 200 @,@ 000 fitting out the new facilities . 
 = = Entertainment uses = = 
 The park is used as a venue for many entertainment events throughout the year . The Lichfield bower and the Lichfield Festival hold events in the park annually , during the summer . ' Cars in the Park ' takes place annually at the end of June . First held in 1997 , ' Cars in the Park ' showcases more than 1 @,@ 000 vintage and modern cars and 62 car clubs took part in the 2011 event . Lichfield Proms in the Park , an open air classical music event , takes place annually on the first Saturday of September . A big top Circus also comes to the park annually in Spring . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Johnson County War = 
