 The Johnson County War , also known as the War on Powder River and the Wyoming Range War , was a series of range conflicts that took place in Johnson , Wyoming between 1889 and 1893 . The conflicts started when cattle companies ruthlessly persecuted supposed rustlers throughout the grazing lands of Wyoming . As tensions swelled between the large established ranchers and the smaller settlers in the state , violence finally culminated in Powder River Country , when the ranchers hired armed gunmen to invade the county and wipe out of scare off the competition , that is , the settlers . When word came out of the gunmen 's initial incursion in the territory , the small farmers and ranchers , as well as the state lawmen , formed a posse of 200 men to fight them , which led to a grueling stand @-@ off . The war ended when the United States Cavalry , on the orders of President Benjamin Harrison , relieved the two forces . 
 The events have since become a highly mythologized and symbolic story of the Wild West , and over the years variations of the storyline have come to include some of its most famous historical figures . In addition to being one of the most well @-@ known range wars of the American frontier , its themes , especially the theme of class warfare , have served as a basis for numerous popular novels , films , and television shows of the Western genre . 
 = = Background = = 
 Conflict over land was a common occurrence in the development of the American West , but was particularly prevalent during the late 19th century , when large portions of the West were being settled by white Americans for the first time through the homesteading act . It is a period which historian Richard Maxwell Brown has called the " Western Civil War of Incorporation , " of which the Johnson County War was a part . 
 In the early days of Wyoming most of the land was in public domain , which was open to stock raising as an open range and farmlands for homesteading . Large numbers of cattle were turned loose on the open range by large ranches . Each spring , round @-@ ups were held to separate the cattle belonging to different ranches . Before a roundup , an orphan or stray calf was sometimes surreptitiously branded , which was the common way to identify the cow 's owners . Lands and water rights were usually distributed to whoever settled the property first , and farmers and ranchers had to respect these boundaries ( the doctrine was known as Prior Appropriation ) . However , as more and more homesteaders moved into Wyoming , competition for land and water soon enveloped the state , and the cattle companies reacted by monopolizing large areas of the open range to prevent newcomers from using it . They also forbade their employees from owning cattle in fear of them becoming additional competition , and lynched and otherwise threatened anyone they suspected might be rustlers . 
 The often uneasy relationship between the larger , wealthier ranches and smaller ranch settlers became steadily worse after the harsh winter of 1886 @-@ 1887 , when a series of blizzards and temperatures of 40 @-@ 50 degrees below 0 ° F ( <unk> ° C ) followed by an extremely hot and dry summer , ravaged the frontier . Thousands of cattle were lost and the large companies began appropriating land and the water supply in the area . Some of the harsher tactics included forcing settlers off their land , setting fire to their properties , and excluding them from participating in the annual roundup . They justified these excesses on what was public land by using the catch @-@ all allegation of rustling . Hostilities worsened when the Wyoming legislature passed the " Maverick Act , " which stated that all unbranded cattle in the open range automatically belonged to the cattlemen 's association . The cattlemen also held a firm grip on Wyoming 's stock interests by limiting the number of small ranchers that could participate . 
 = = = Wyoming Stock Growers Association = = = 
 Many of the large ranching outfits in Wyoming were organized as the Wyoming Stock Growers Association ( the WSGA ) and gathered socially as the Cheyenne Club in Cheyenne , Wyoming . Comprising some of the state 's wealthiest and most influential residents , the organization held a great deal of political sway in the state and region . The WSGA organized the cattle industry by scheduling roundups and cattle shipments . The WSGA also employed an agency of detectives to investigate cases of cattle theft from its members ' holdings . 
 <unk> in the local area was likely increasing due to the harsh grazing conditions , and the illegal exploits of organized groups of rustlers were becoming well publicized in the late 1880s . Well @-@ armed outfits of horse and cattle rustlers roamed across various portions of Wyoming and Montana , with Montana vigilantes such as the infamous Stuart 's Stranglers declaring " War on the Rustlers " in 1884 . Bandits taking refuge in the infamous hideout known as the Hole in the Wall were also preying upon the herds . Frank M. Canton , Sheriff of Johnson County in the early 1880s and better known as a detective for the WSGA , was a prominent figure in eliminating these criminals from Wyoming . Before the events in Johnson County , Canton had already developed a reputation as a lethal gunman . At a young age he had worked as a cowboy in Texas , and in 1871 started a career in robbery and cattle @-@ rustling , as well as killing a Buffalo Soldier in October 10 , 1874 . Historian Harry Sinclair Drago described Canton as a " merciless , congenital , emotionless killer . For pay , he murdered eight — very likely ten — men . " 
 = = = Early killings = = = 
 On July 20 , 1889 , a range detective from the Association named George Henderson accused Ella Watson , a local rancher , of stealing cattle from a fellow rancher by the name of Albert John Bothwell . The cattlemen sent riders to arrest Ella and forced her into a wagon . They then apprehended her husband , Jim Averell , and subsequently hanged them both from a tree . This gruesome act was one of the rare cases in the old West in which a woman was lynched , an event which appalled many of the local residents and paved the way for the conflicts in the war . County Sheriff Frank <unk> arrested six men for the lynching and a trial date was set . However , before the trial , threats were sent to the witnesses who would testify against the aggressors . One of those witnesses was young Gene Crowder , who mysteriously disappeared under unknown circumstances . Another , Jim 's nephew and foreman Frank Buchanan , after a shoot @-@ out with unknown suspects , disappeared from the county as well , and was presumed to have been murdered or to be in hiding . Ralph Cole , another nephew of Averell 's , died on the day of the trial from poisoning . 
 The men working for the cattle barons weren 't safe from the locals they had enraged . George Henderson , who had pinned Ella Watson , was murdered by rustlers near Sweetwater Creek in October 1890 , an obvious challenge to the Association . The cattle barons soon tightened their control and hunted down anyone who opposed them . Soon , the double lynching of the <unk> was followed by the lynching of Tom Waggoner , a horse trader from Newcastle , in June 1891 . These killings would precipitate more hostilities and violence in the years to come . 
 = = War = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 After the lynchings of their prominent competitors , the WSGA 's control over the range was undisputed , until a group of smaller ranchers led by a local cowboy named Nate Champion formed the Northern Wyoming Farmers and Stock Growers ' Association ( NWFSGA ) to compete with the WSGA . Upon hearing this , the WSGA immediately viewed Champion 's association as a threat to their hold on the stock interests . The WSGA then blacklisted members of the NWFSGA from the round @-@ ups in order to stop their operations . However , the latter refused the orders to disband and instead publicly announced their plans to hold their own round @-@ up in the spring of 1892 . 
 Soon , the prominent cattlemen sent out an assassination squad to kill Nate Champion on the morning of November 1 , 1891 . Champion and another man named Ross Gilbertson were sleeping in a cabin in Middle Fork of Powder River , when two men armed with pistols burst in . Champion was immediately awakened by the intrusion , and as the gunmen pointed their weapons at him , Champion reached for his own pistol hidden under a pillow and a shootout commenced . Champion successfully shot both gunmen ; one of them named Billy <unk> died a month later . The rest of the assassination squad subsequently fled . Champion was left uninjured except for some facial powder burns from the gunfight . In a subsequent investigation of the attack , one of the gunmen gave the names of two witnesses who had been involved : ranchers John A. Tisdale and Orley “ Ranger ” Jones . However , both men were assassinated on or about December 1 , 1891 , before the formal trial , outraging many of the small ranchers and farmers in the county . By early 1892 , violence had reached something of a peak ; newspapers , such as the Big Horn County Rustler , published articles and speculations that a " war " was on the way . 
 = = = Invaders = = = 
 The WSGA , led by Frank Wolcott ( WSGA Member and large North Platte rancher ) , hired gunmen with the intention of eliminating alleged rustlers in Johnson County and breaking up the NWFSGA . By that time , prominent names in Wyoming started taking sides . Acting Governor Amos W. Barber supported the cattlemen , who blamed the small ranchers and homesteaders for the criminal activity in the state , while former cowboy and sheriff of Buffalo ( the county seat of Johnson County ) , Red Angus , supported the homesteaders , who believed that the cattle barons were stealing their land . 
 In March 1892 , the cattlemen sent agents to Texas from Cheyenne and Idaho to recruit gunmen and finally carry out their plans for exterminating the homesteaders . Soon , 23 gunmen from Paris , Texas and 4 cattle detectives from the WSGA were hired , as well as Wyoming dignitaries who also joined the expedition . State Senator Bob Tisdale , state water commissioner W. J. Clarke , as well as W. C. Irvine and Hubert <unk> , who had both been instrumental in organizing Wyoming 's statehood four years earlier , also joined the band . They were accompanied by surgeon Dr. Charles Penrose as well as Ed <unk> , a reporter for the Cheyenne Sun , and a newspaper reporter for the Chicago Herald , Sam T. Clover , whose lurid first @-@ hand accounts later appeared in eastern newspapers . A total expedition of 50 men was organized which consisted of cattlemen and range detectives , as well as the 23 hired guns from Texas . To lead the expedition , the WSGA hired Canton . Canton 's <unk> was later found to contain a list of 70 county residents to be either shot or hanged , and a contract to pay the Texans $ 5 a day plus a bonus of $ 50 for every rustler , real or alleged , they killed . The group became known as " The Invaders , " or alternately , " Wolcott 's Regulators . " 
 John Clay , a prominent Wyoming businessman , was suspected of playing a major role in planning the Johnson County invasion . Clay denied this , saying that in 1891 he advised Wolcott against the scheme and was out of the country when it was undertaken . He later helped the " invaders " avoid punishment after their surrender . The group organized in Cheyenne and proceeded by train to Casper , Wyoming and then toward Johnson County on horseback , cutting the telegraph lines north of Douglas , Wyoming in order to prevent an alarm . While on horseback , Canton and the gunmen traveled ahead while the party of WSGA officials led by Wolcott followed a safe distance behind . 
 = = = Battle of KC Ranch = = = 
 The first target of the WSGA was Nate Champion , who was at the KC Ranch ( also known as Kaycee ) at that time . They were tasked to perform the assassination that others had failed to carry out five months before . The group traveled to the ranch late Friday , April 8 , 1892 , quietly surrounded the buildings , and waited for daybreak . Three men besides Champion were at the KC . Two men who were evidently going to spend the night on their way through were captured as they emerged from the cabin early that morning to collect water at the nearby Powder River , while the third , Nick Ray , was shot while standing inside the doorway of the cabin and died a few hours later . Champion was besieged inside the log cabin . 
 Champion held out for several hours , killing at least four of the vigilantes , and wounding several others . During the siege , Champion kept a poignant journal which contained a number of notes he wrote to friends while taking cover inside the cabin . " Boys , I feel pretty lonesome just now . I wish there was someone here with me so we could watch all sides at once , " he wrote . The last journal entry read : " Well , they have just got through shelling the house like hail . I heard them splitting wood . I guess they are going to fire the house tonight . I think I will make a break when night comes , if alive . Shooting again . It 's not night yet . The house is all fired . Goodbye , boys , if I never see you again . " 
 With the house on fire , Nate Champion signed his journal entry and put it in his pocket before running from the back door with a six shooter in one hand and a knife in the other . As he emerged , four men shot him dead . The killers pinned a note on Champion 's bullet @-@ riddled chest that read , " Cattle Thieves Beware . " Two passers @-@ by heard the ruckus that Saturday afternoon and local rancher Jack Flagg rode to Buffalo where he reported Champion 's death to the townsfolk . Sheriff Angus then raised a posse of 200 men over the next 24 hours and the party set out for the KC on Sunday night , April 10 . 
 = = = Standoff at the TA Ranch = = = 
 The WSGA group then headed north on Sunday toward Buffalo to continue its show of force . The posse led by Sheriff Angus , caught up with the WSGA " Invaders " by early Monday morning of the 11th and besieged them at the TA Ranch on Crazy Woman Creek . The gunmen took refuge inside a log barn on the ranch . The sheriff 's posse besieged them for two days , as constant fighting between the two raged on . Sheriff Angus threatened to either blow up the ranch with dynamite , or force his way in with an improvised battering ram , but was held back by rifle fire . 20 of the gunmen then tried to escape the barn behind a fusillade , but the posse beat them back and killed three to five . One of the WSGA group escaped and was able to contact Governor Barber the next day . Frantic efforts to save the WSGA group ensued and two days into the siege Governor Barber was able to telegraph President Benjamin Harrison a plea for help late on the night of April 12 , 1892 . 
 The telegram read : 
 Harrison immediately ordered the U.S. Secretary of War Stephen B. Elkins to address the situation under Article IV , Section 4 , Clause 2 of the U.S. Constitution , which allows for the use of U.S. forces under the President 's orders for " protection from invasion and domestic violence . " The Sixth Cavalry from Fort McKinney near Buffalo was ordered to proceed to the TA ranch at once and take the WSGA expedition into custody . The 6th Cavalry left Fort McKinney a few hours later at 2 am on April 13 and reached the TA ranch at 6 : 45 am . The expedition surrendered to the Sixth soon after and was saved just as the posse had finished building a series of breastworks to shoot gunpowder on the invader 's log barn shelter so that it could be set on fire from a distance . The Sixth Cavalry took possession of Wolcott and 45 other men with 45 rifles , 41 revolvers and some 5 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . 
 The text of Barber 's telegram to the President was printed on the front page of The New York Times on April 14 , and a first @-@ hand account of the siege at the T.A. appeared in The Times and the Chicago Herald and other papers . On May 10 , a Marshal named George Wellman , who had been appointed deputy U.S. Marshal by Marshall Rankin , was ambushed and killed by locals en route to the small community of Buffalo . The incident received national attention , with Wellman being the first Marshal to die in the war . His death was grieved by a large crowd , and his funeral service took place in St. Lukes Church , Buffalo . 
 = = Arrest and legal action = = 
 The WSGA group was taken to Cheyenne to be held at the barracks of Fort D.A. Russell as the Laramie County jail was unable to hold that many prisoners . They received preferential treatment and were allowed to roam the base by day as long as they agreed to return to the jail to sleep at night . Johnson County officials were upset that the group was not kept locally at Ft . McKinney . The general in charge of the 6th Cavalry felt that tensions were too high for the prisoners to remain in the area . Hundreds of armed locals sympathetic to both sides of the conflict were said to have gone to Ft . McKinney over the next few days under the mistaken impression the invaders were being held there . 
 The Johnson County attorney began to gather evidence for the case and the details of the WSGA 's plan emerged . Canton 's <unk> was found to contain a list of seventy alleged rustlers who were to be shot or hanged , a list of ranch houses the invaders had burned , and a contract to pay each Texan five dollars a day plus a bonus of $ 50 for each person killed . The invaders ' plans reportedly included eventually murdering people as far away as Casper and Douglas . The Times reported on April 23 that “ the evidence is said to implicate more than twenty prominent stockmen of Cheyenne whose names have not been mentioned heretofore , also several wealthy stockmen of Omaha , as well as to compromise men high in authority in the State of Wyoming . They will all be charged with aiding and abetting the invasion , and warrants will be issued for the arrest of all of them . ” 
 The Invaders however , were protected by a friendly judicial system , and they took advantage of the cattle barons ' corruption . Charges against the men " high in authority " in Wyoming were never filed . Eventually the invaders were released on bail and were told to return to Wyoming for the trial . Many fled to Texas and were never seen again . In the end , the WSGA group went free after the charges were dropped on the excuse that Johnson County refused to pay for the costs of prosecution . The costs of housing the men at Fort D.A. Russell were said to exceed $ 18 @,@ 000 and the sparsely populated Johnson County was unable to pay . 
 Tensions in Johnson County remained high . The 6th Cavalry was said to be influenced by intense local political and social pressure , and they were unable to keep the peace . The 9th Cavalry of " Buffalo Soldiers " was ordered to Fort McKinney to replace the 6th . In a fortnight the Buffalo Soldiers moved from Nebraska to the rail town of Suggs , Wyoming where they created " Camp <unk> " to quell the local population . One Buffalo Soldier was killed and two wounded in gun battles with locals . The 9th Cavalry remained in Wyoming until November , 1892 . 
 = = = Final killings = = = 
 In the fall of 1892 , as the aftershock of the stand @-@ off was still being felt throughout the county , two alleged horse rustlers were gunned down by range detectives east of the Big Horn River . The killers escaped the law with assistance from Otto Franc , a rancher who had sided with the large cattle company faction . In May 24 , 1893 , Nate Champion 's brother , Dudley Champion , came to Wyoming looking for work before before he was shot and killed in cold blood . Fifteen miles from town , Dudley had come across the ranch of Mike Shonsey , who , after seeing the young man , immediately grabbed a gun and fired at him . A coroner 's inquiry ruled Shonsey 's actions were self @-@ defense and he was acquitted of murder . Afterwards , Shonsey left the country before the officials could continue with the investigation . A year before , Shonsey actually met Nate Champion near the Beaver Creek Canyon , where a fight almost commenced between the two as Nate suspected that Shonsey was one of the five men who had attacked him in his cabin . He further threatened Shonsey and demanded he give up the names of the rest of the assassins . This event made Shonsey harbor hatred toward Nate and probably toward his brother Dudley as well . Dudley Champion was the last person killed who was associated with the Johnson County War . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Emotions ran high for many years following the " Johnson County Cattle War . " Some considered the large and wealthy ranchers as heroes who had sought what they regarded as justice by using violence to defend what they regarded as their rights to range = land and water rights , while others saw the WSGA as heavy @-@ handed outlaw vigilantes running roughshod over the law . A number of tall tales were spun by both sides afterwards in an attempt to make their actions appear morally justified . Parties sympathetic to the invaders painted Nate Champion as the leader of a vast cattle rustling empire , claiming that he was a leading member of the fabled " Red Sash Gang " of outlaws that supposedly included the likes of the Jesse James gang . These claims have since been discredited , however . While some accounts do note that Champion wore a red sash at the time of his death , such sashes were common . While the Hole in the Wall Gang was known to hide out in Johnson County , there is no evidence that Champion had any relationship to them . Parties sympathetic to the smaller ranchers spun tales that included some of the West 's most notorious gunslingers under the employ of the Invaders , including such legends as Tom Horn and Big Nose George Parrot . Horn did briefly work as a detective for the WSGA in the 1890s , but there is little evidence he was involved in the war . 
 = = = Political effects = = = 
 Although many of the leaders of the WSGA 's hired force , such as W. C. Irvine , were Democrats , the ranchers who had hired the group were tied to the Republican party and their opponents were mostly Democrats . Many viewed the rescue of the WSGA group at the order of President Harrison ( a Republican ) and the failure of the courts to prosecute them a serious political scandal with overtones of class war . As a result of the scandal , the Democratic Party became popular in Wyoming for a time , winning the governorship in 1892 and taking control of both houses of the state legislature in that election . Wyoming voted for the Democrat William Jennings Bryan in the 1896 U.S. Presidential Election , and Johnson County was one of the two counties in the state with the largest Bryan majorities . 
 = = = Economic analysis = = = 
 Historian Daniel Belgrad argues that in the 1880s centralized range management was emerging as the solution to the overgrazing that had depleted open ranges . Moreover , cattle prices at the time were low . Larger ranchers also were hurt by <unk> ( taking lost , unbranded calves from other ranchers ' herds ) , and responded by organizing cooperative roundups , blacklisting , and lobbying for stricter anti @-@ maverick laws . These ranchers formed the WSGA and hired gunmen to hunt down rustlers , but local farmers resented the ranchers ' collective political power . The farmers moved toward decentralization and the use of private winter pastures . Randy McFerrin and Douglas Wills argue that the confrontation represented opposing property rights systems . The result was the end of the open @-@ range system and the ascendancy of large @-@ scale stock ranching and farming . The popular image of the war , however , remains that of vigilantism by aggressive landed interests against small individual settlers defending their rights . The end of the Johnson County War also marked the end of the open range in Wyoming . By 1893 , the WSGA was finally opened to the other small ranchers and farmers , finally ending their monopoly and control over Wyoming business interests . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Johnson County War , with its overtones of class warfare coupled with the intervention ordered by the President of the United States to save the lives of a gang of hired killers and set them free , is not a flattering reflection on the American myth of the west . The Johnson County War has been one of the best @-@ known range wars of the frontier . It has been a popular feature of the Western genre of fiction , which includes literature , films and television shows . The Banditti of the Plains , written in 1894 by witness Asa Shinn Mercer , is the earliest record of the Johnson County War . The book was suppressed for many years by the WSGA , who seized and destroyed all but a few of the first edition copies from the 1894 printing ; they were rumored to have hijacked and destroyed the second printing as it was being shipped from a printer north of Denver , Colorado . The book was reprinted several times in the 20th century and most recently in 2015 . Frances McElrath 's novel 1902 The Rustler , took inspiration from the Johnson County War , and was sympathetic to the perspective of the small ranchers . 
 The Virginian , a seminal 1902 western novel by Owen Wister , took the side of the wealthy ranchers , creating a myth of the Johnson County War , but bore little resemblance to a factual account the actual characters and events . Jack Schaefer 's popular 1949 novel Shane treated themes associated with the Johnson County War and took the side of the settlers . The 1953 film The Redhead from Wyoming , starring Maureen O 'Hara , dealt with similar themes ; in one scene Maureen O 'Hara 's character is told , " It won 't be long before they 're calling you Cattle Kate . " In the 1968 novel True Grit by Charles Portis , the main character , Rooster Cogburn , was involved in the Johnson County War . In the early 1890s Rooster had gone north to Wyoming where he was " hired by stock owners to terrorize thieves and people called nesters and <unk> ... . I fear that Rooster did himself no credit in what they called the Johnson County War . " 
 Films such as Heaven 's Gate and The Johnson County War painted the wealthy ranchers as the " bad guys . " Heaven 's Gate was a dramatic romance loosely based on historical events , while The Johnson County War was based on the 1957 novel Riders of Judgment by Frederick Manfred . The range war was also portrayed in an episode of Jim Davis 's syndicated western television series Stories of the Century , with Henry Brandon as Nate Champion and Jean Parker as Ella Watson . American Heroes Channel presented the Johnson County War in the 6th episode of their Blood Feuds series documentary . 
 The story of the Johnson County War from the point of view of the small ranchers was chronicled by Kaycee resident Chris <unk> in his song " Johnson County War " on the 1989 album Powder River . The song included references to the burning of the KC Ranch , the capture of the WSGA men , the intervention of the U.S. Cavalry and the release of the cattlemen and hired guns . The Jim Gatchell Memorial Museum in Buffalo featured dioramas and exhibits about the Johnson County War , as well as a 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) bronze statue of Nate Champion . Kaycee , Wyoming , the old site of the KC Ranch , also erected the <unk> in the Past Museum to commemorate the war . 
 = Josef Mengele = 
 Josef Mengele ( German : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 16 March 1911 – 7 February 1979 ) was a German Schutzstaffel ( SS ) officer and physician in Auschwitz concentration camp during World War II . Mengele was a notorious member of the team of doctors responsible for the selection of victims to be killed in the gas chambers and for performing deadly human experiments on prisoners . Arrivals deemed able to work were admitted into the camp , and those deemed unfit for labor were immediately killed in the gas chambers . Mengele left Auschwitz on 17 January 1945 , shortly before the arrival of the liberating Red Army troops . After the war , he fled to South America , where he evaded capture for the rest of his life . 
 Mengele received doctorates in anthropology and medicine from Munich University and began a career as a researcher . He joined the Nazi Party in 1937 and the SS in 1938 . Initially assigned as a battalion medical officer at the start of World War II , he transferred to the concentration camp service in early 1943 and was assigned to Auschwitz . There he saw the opportunity to conduct genetic research on human subjects . His subsequent experiments , focusing primarily on twins , had no regard for the health or safety of the victims . 
 Assisted by a network of former SS members , Mengele sailed to Argentina in July 1949 . He initially lived in and around Buenos Aires , then fled to Paraguay in 1959 and Brazil in 1960 while being sought by West Germany , Israel , and Nazi hunters such as Simon Wiesenthal so that he could be brought to trial . In spite of extradition requests by the West German government and clandestine operations by the Israeli intelligence agency , Mossad , Mengele eluded capture . He drowned while swimming off the Brazilian coast in 1979 and was buried under a false name . His remains were disinterred and positively identified by forensic examination in 1985 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Mengele was born the eldest of three children on 16 March 1911 to Karl and Walburga ( <unk> ) Mengele in Günzburg , Bavaria , Germany . His younger brothers were Karl Jr and Alois . Mengele 's father was founder of the Karl Mengele & Sons company , producers of farm machinery . Mengele did well in school and developed an interest in music , art , and skiing . He completed high school in April 1930 and went on to study medicine at Goethe University Frankfurt and philosophy at the University of Munich . Munich was the headquarters of the Nazi Party . In 1931 Mengele joined the Stahlhelm , Bund der Frontsoldaten , a paramilitary organisation that was in 1934 absorbed into the Nazi Sturmabteilung ( Storm Detachment ; SA ) . 
 In 1935 , Mengele earned a PhD in anthropology from the University of Munich . In January 1937 , at the Institute for Hereditary Biology and Racial Hygiene in Frankfurt , he became the assistant to Dr. <unk> Freiherr von Verschuer , a scientist conducting genetics research , with a particular interest in twins . As an assistant to von Verschuer , Mengele focused on the genetic factors resulting in a cleft lip and palate or cleft chin . His thesis on the subject earned him a cum laude doctorate in medicine in 1938 . Both of his degrees were later rescinded by the issuing universities . In a letter of recommendation , von Verschuer praised Mengele 's reliability and his ability to verbally present complex material in a clear manner . The American author Robert Jay Lifton notes that Mengele 's published works did not deviate much from the scientific mainstream of the time , and would probably have been viewed as valid scientific efforts even outside the borders of Nazi Germany . 
 On 28 July 1939 , Mengele married Irene <unk> , whom he had met while working as a medical resident in Leipzig . Their only son , Rolf , was born in 1944 . 
 = = Military service = = 
 The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism , racial hygiene , and eugenics , and combined them with pan @-@ Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more Lebensraum ( living space ) for the Germanic people . Nazi Germany attempted to obtain this new territory by attacking Poland and the Soviet Union , intending to deport or kill the Jews and Slavs living there , who were viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race . 
 Mengele joined the Nazi Party in 1937 and the Schutzstaffel ( SS ; protection squadron ) in 1938 . He received basic training in 1938 with the Gebirgsjäger ( mountain infantry ) and was called up for service in the Wehrmacht ( German armed forces ) in June 1940 , some months after the outbreak of World War II . He soon volunteered for medical service in the Waffen @-@ SS , the combat arm of the SS , where he served with the rank of SS @-@ Untersturmführer ( second lieutenant ) in a medical reserve battalion until November 1940 . He was next assigned to the SS @-@ Rasse- und Siedlungshauptamt ( SS Race and Resettlement Main Office ) in Posen , evaluating candidates for Germanisation . 
 In June 1941 , Mengele was posted to Ukraine , where he was awarded the Iron Cross Second Class . In January 1942 , he joined the 5th SS Panzer Division Wiking as a battalion medical officer . He rescued two German soldiers from a burning tank and was awarded the Iron Cross First Class , as well as the Wound Badge in Black and the Medal for the Care of the German People . He was seriously wounded in action near Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don in mid @-@ 1942 , and was declared unfit for further active service . After recovery , he was transferred to the Race and Resettlement Office in Berlin . He also resumed his association with von Verschuer , who was at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Anthropology , Human Genetics and Eugenics . Mengele was promoted to the rank of SS @-@ Hauptsturmführer ( captain ) in April 1943 . 
 = = Auschwitz = = 
 In early 1943 , encouraged by von Verschuer , Mengele applied for transfer to the concentration camp service , where he foresaw the opportunity to undertake genetic research on human subjects . His application was accepted , and he was posted to Auschwitz concentration camp . He was appointed by SS @-@ <unk> Eduard <unk> , chief medical officer at Auschwitz , to the position of chief physician of the <unk> ( Romani family camp ) , located in the sub @-@ camp at Birkenau . 
 By late 1941 , Hitler decided that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated , so Birkenau , originally intended to house slave laborers , was re @-@ purposed as a combination labor camp / extermination camp . Prisoners were transported there by rail from all over German @-@ occupied Europe , arriving in daily convoys . By July 1942 , the SS were conducting " selections " . Incoming Jews were segregated ; those deemed able to work were admitted into the camp , and those deemed unfit for labor were immediately killed in the gas chambers . The group selected to die , about three @-@ quarters of the total , included almost all children , women with small children , pregnant women , all the elderly , and all those who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be completely fit . Mengele , a member of the team of doctors assigned to do selections , undertook this work even when he was not assigned to do so in the hope of finding subjects for his experiments . He was particularly interested in locating sets of twins . In contrast to most of the doctors , who viewed undertaking selections as one of their most stressful and horrible duties , Mengele undertook the task with a flamboyant air , often smiling or whistling a tune . 
 Mengele and other SS doctors did not treat inmates , but supervised the activities of inmate doctors forced to work in the camp medical service . Mengele made weekly visits to the hospital barracks and sent to the gas chambers any prisoners who had not recovered after two weeks in bed . He was also a member of the team of doctors responsible for supervising the administration of Zyklon B , the cyanide @-@ based pesticide that was used to kill people in the gas chambers at Birkenau . He served in this capacity at the gas chambers located in crematoria IV and V. 
 When an outbreak of noma ( a gangrenous bacterial disease of the mouth and face ) broke out in the Romani camp in 1943 , Mengele initiated a study to determine the cause of the disease and develop a treatment . He enlisted the aid of prisoner Dr. Berthold Epstein , a Jewish pediatrician and professor at Prague University . Mengele isolated the patients in a separate barrack and had several afflicted children killed so that their preserved heads and organs could be sent to the SS Medical Academy in Graz and other facilities for study . The research was still ongoing when the Romani camp was liquidated and its remaining occupants killed in 1944 . 
 In response to a typhus epidemic in the women 's camp , Mengele cleared one block of 600 Jewish women and sent them to the gas chamber . The building was then cleaned and disinfected , and the occupants of a neighboring block were bathed , de @-@ <unk> , and given new clothing before being moved into the clean block . The process was repeated until all the barracks were disinfected . Similar <unk> were used for later epidemics of scarlet fever and other diseases , but with all the sick prisoners being sent to the gas chambers . For his efforts , Mengele was awarded the War Merit Cross ( Second Class with Swords ) and was promoted in 1944 to First Physician of the Birkenau subcamp . 
 = = = Human experimentation = = = 
 Mengele used Auschwitz as an opportunity to continue his anthropological studies and research on heredity , using inmates for human experimentation . The experiments had no regard for the health or safety of the victims . He was particularly interested in identical twins , people with heterochromia iridum ( eyes of two different colours ) , dwarfs , and people with physical abnormalities . A grant was provided by the Deutsche <unk> , applied for by von Verschuer , who received regular reports and shipments of specimens from Mengele . The grant was used to build a pathology laboratory attached to Crematorium II at Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau . Dr. Miklós Nyiszli , a Hungarian Jewish pathologist who arrived in Auschwitz on 29 May 1944 , performed dissections and prepared specimens for shipment in this laboratory . Mengele 's twin research was in part intended to prove the supremacy of heredity over environment and thus bolster the Nazi premise of the superiority of the Aryan race . Nyiszli and others report that the twins studies may also have been motivated by a desire to improve the reproduction rate of the German race by improving the chances of racially desirable people having twins . 
 Mengele 's research subjects were better fed and housed than other prisoners and temporarily safe from the gas chambers . He established a kindergarten for children that were the subjects of experiments , along with all Romani children under the age of six . The facility provided better food and living conditions than other areas of the camp , and even included a playground . When visiting his child subjects , he introduced himself as " Uncle Mengele " and offered them sweets . But he was also personally responsible for the deaths of an unknown number of victims that he killed via lethal injection , shootings , beatings , and through selections and deadly experiments . Lifton describes Mengele as sadistic , lacking empathy , and extremely antisemitic , believing the Jews should be eliminated entirely as an inferior and dangerous race . Mengele 's son Rolf said his father later showed no remorse for his wartime activities . 
 A former Auschwitz prisoner doctor said : 
 He was capable of being so kind to the children , to have them become fond of him , to bring them sugar , to think of small details in their daily lives , and to do things we would genuinely admire ... And then , next to that , ... the crematoria smoke , and these children , tomorrow or in a half @-@ hour , he is going to send them there . Well , that is where the anomaly lay . 
 Twins were subjected to weekly examinations and measurements of their physical attributes by Mengele or one of his assistants . Experiments performed by Mengele on twins included unnecessary amputation of limbs , intentionally infecting one twin with typhus or other diseases , and <unk> the blood of one twin into the other . Many of the victims died while undergoing these procedures . After an experiment was over , the twins were sometimes killed and their bodies dissected . Nyiszli recalled one occasion where Mengele personally killed fourteen twins in one night via a chloroform injection to the heart . If one twin died of disease , Mengele killed the other so that comparative post @-@ mortem reports could be prepared . 
 Mengele 's experiments with eyes included attempts to change eye color by injecting chemicals into the eyes of living subjects and killing people with heterochromatic eyes so that the eyes could be removed and sent to Berlin for study . His experiments on dwarfs and people with physical abnormalities included taking physical measurements , drawing blood , extracting healthy teeth , and treatment with unnecessary drugs and X @-@ rays . Many of the victims were sent to the gas chambers after about two weeks , and their skeletons were sent to Berlin for further study . Mengele sought out pregnant women , on whom he would perform experiments before sending them to the gas chambers . Witness Vera Alexander described how he sewed two Romani twins together back to back in an attempt to create conjoined twins . The children died of gangrene after several days of suffering . 
 = = After Auschwitz = = 
 Along with several other Auschwitz doctors , Mengele transferred to Gross @-@ Rosen concentration camp in Lower Silesia on 17 January 1945 . He brought along two boxes of specimens and records of his experiments . Most of the camp medical records had already been destroyed by the SS . The Red Army captured Auschwitz on 27 January . Mengele fled Gross @-@ Rosen on 18 February , a week before the Soviets arrived , and traveled westward disguised as a Wehrmacht officer to <unk> ( now Žatec ) . Here he temporarily entrusted his incriminating Auschwitz documents to a nurse with whom he had struck up a relationship . He and his unit hurried west to avoid being captured by the Soviets and were taken prisoner of war by the Americans in June . Mengele was initially registered under his own name , but because of the disorganization of the Allies regarding the distribution of wanted lists and the fact that Mengele did not have the usual SS blood group tattoo , he was not identified as being on the major war criminal list . He was released at the end of July and obtained false papers under the name " Fritz Ullman " , documents he later altered to read " Fritz Hollmann " . 
 After several months on the run , including a trip to the Soviet @-@ occupied area to recover his Auschwitz records , Mengele found work near Rosenheim as a farmhand . Worried that his capture would mean a trial and death sentence , he fled Germany on 17 April 1949 . Assisted by a network of former SS members , Mengele traveled to Genoa , where he obtained a passport under the alias " Helmut Gregor " from the International Committee of the Red Cross . He sailed to Argentina in July . His wife refused to accompany him , and they divorced in 1954 . 
 = = In South America = = 
 In Buenos Aires , Argentina , Mengele worked as a carpenter while residing in a boarding house in the suburb of Vicente Lopez . After a few weeks he moved to the house of a Nazi sympathiser in the more affluent neighborhood of Florida , Buenos Aires . He next worked as a salesman for his family 's farm equipment company , and beginning in 1951 he made frequent trips to Paraguay as sales representative for that region . An apartment in the center of Buenos Aires became his residence in 1953 , the same year he used family funds to buy a part interest in a carpentry concern . In 1954 he rented a house in the suburb of Olivos . Files released by the Argentine government in 1992 indicate that Mengele may have practiced medicine without a license , including performing abortions , while living in Buenos Aires . 
 After obtaining a copy of his birth certificate through the West German embassy in 1956 , Mengele was issued an Argentine foreign residence permit under his real name . He used this document to obtain a West German passport , also under his real name , and embarked for a visit to Europe . He met up in Switzerland for a ski holiday with his son Rolf ( who was told Mengele was his " Uncle Fritz " ) and his widowed sister @-@ in @-@ law Martha , and spent a week in his home town of Günzburg . Upon his return to Argentina in September , Mengele began living under his real name . Martha and her son Karl Heinz followed about a month later , and the three took up residence together . The couple married while on holiday in Uruguay in 1958 and bought a house in Buenos Aires . Business interests now included part ownership of <unk> Farm , a pharmaceutical company . Along with several other doctors , Mengele was questioned and released in 1958 under suspicion of practicing medicine without a license after a teenage girl died following an abortion . Worried that the publicity would lead to his Nazi background and wartime activities being discovered , he took an extended business trip to Paraguay and was granted citizenship under the name José Mengele in 1959 . He returned to Buenos Aires several times to wrap up his business affairs and visit his family . Martha and Karl Heinz lived in a boarding house in the city until December 1960 , when they returned to Germany . 
 Mengele 's name was mentioned several times during the Nuremberg trials , but Allied forces were convinced that he was dead . Irene and the family in Günzburg also said that he was dead . Working in West Germany , Nazi hunters Simon Wiesenthal and Hermann <unk> collected information from witnesses as to Mengele 's wartime activities . In a search of the public records , <unk> found Mengele 's divorce papers listing an address in Buenos Aires . He and Wiesenthal pressured West German authorities into drawing up an arrest warrant on 5 June 1959 , and starting extradition proceedings . Initially Argentina turned down the request , because the fugitive was no longer living at the address given on the documents . By the time extradition was approved on 30 June 1960 , Mengele had already fled to Paraguay , where he was living on a farm near the Argentine border . 
 = = = Efforts by the Mossad = = = 
 In May 1960 , Isser Harel , director of the Mossad ( the Israeli intelligence agency ) , personally led the successful effort to capture Adolf Eichmann in Buenos Aires . He hoped to track down Mengele as well so he too could be brought to trial in Israel . Under interrogation , Eichmann provided the address of a boarding house that had been used as a safe house for Nazi fugitives . Surveillance of the house did not reveal Mengele or any members of his family , and the neighborhood postman said that although Mengele had recently been receiving letters there under his real name , he had since relocated , leaving no forwarding address . Harel 's inquiries at a machine shop where Mengele had been part owner did not turn up any leads either , so he had to give up . 
 In spite of having provided Mengele with legal documents in his real name in 1956 , thus enabling him to regularize his residency in Argentina , West Germany offered a reward for his capture . Ongoing newspaper coverage of his wartime activities ( accompanied by photographs of the fugitive ) led Mengele to relocate again in 1960 . Former pilot Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel put him in touch with the Nazi supporter Wolfgang Gerhard , who helped Mengele get across the border into Brazil . He stayed with Gerhard on his farm near São Paulo until more permanent accommodations were found with Hungarian expatriates Geza and Gitta <unk> . Helped by an investment from Mengele , the couple bought a farm in Nova Europa , and Mengele was given the job of manager . In 1962 the three bought a coffee and cattle farm in Serra Negra , with Mengele owning a half interest . Initially , Gerhard told the couple that Mengele 's name was " Peter <unk> " , but they discovered his true identity in 1963 . Gerhard convinced them not to report Mengele 's location to the authorities , saying they could themselves get in trouble for harboring the fugitive . West Germany , tipped off to the possibility that Mengele had relocated there , widened its extradition request to include Brazil in February 1961 . 
 Meanwhile , Zvi Aharoni , one of the Mossad agents who had been involved in the Eichmann capture , was placed in charge of a team of agents tasked with locating Mengele and bringing him to trial in Israel . Inquiries in Paraguay gave no clues as to his whereabouts , and they were unable to intercept any correspondence between Mengele and his wife Martha , then living in Italy . Agents following Rudel 's movements did not produce any leads . Aharoni and his team followed Gerhard to a rural area near São Paulo , where they located a European man believed to be Mengele . Aharoni reported his findings to Harel , but the logistics of staging a capture , budgetary constraints , and the need to focus on the nation 's deteriorating relationship with Egypt led the Mossad chief to call a halt to the operation in 1962 . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 Mengele and the Stammers bought a house on a farm in <unk> in 1969 , with Mengele as half owner . When Wolfgang Gerhard returned to Germany in 1971 to seek medical treatment for his seriously ill wife and son , he gave his identity card to Mengele . The Stammers had a falling out with Mengele in late 1974 and bought a house in São Paulo ; Mengele was not invited . The Stammers bought a bungalow in Eldorado , São Paulo , which they rented out to Mengele . Rolf , who had not seen his father since the ski holiday in 1956 , visited him there in 1977 and found an unrepentant Nazi who claimed he had never personally harmed anyone and had only done his duty . 
 Mengele 's health had been steadily deteriorating since 1972 , and he had a stroke in 1976 . He had high blood pressure and an ear infection that had an impact on his balance . While visiting his friends Wolfram and Liselotte <unk> in the coastal resort of <unk> on 7 February 1979 , he suffered another stroke while swimming and drowned . Mengele was buried in Embu das Artes under the name " Wolfgang Gerhard " , whose identification card he had been using since 1971 . 
 Other pseudonyms used by Mengele included Dr. Fausto <unk> and S. Josi <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Exhumation = = 
 Meanwhile , Mengele sightings were reported all over the world . Wiesenthal claimed to have information that placed Mengele on the Greek island of <unk> in 1960 , Cairo in 1961 , in Spain in 1971 , and in Paraguay in 1978 , eighteen years after he had left . He insisted as late as 1985 — six years after Mengele 's death — that he was still alive , in 1982 offering a reward of $ 100 @,@ 000 for his capture . Worldwide interest in the case was raised by a mock trial held in Jerusalem in February 1985 featuring the testimony of over a hundred victims of Mengele 's experiments . Shortly afterwards , the governments of West Germany , Israel , and the United States launched a coordinated effort to determine Mengele 's whereabouts . Rewards for his capture were offered by the Israeli and West German governments , The Washington Times , and the Simon Wiesenthal Center . 
 On 31 May 1985 , acting on a tip received by the West German prosecutor 's office , police raided the house of Hans <unk> , a lifelong friend of Mengele and sales manager of the family firm in Günzburg . They found a coded address book and copies of letters to and from Mengele . Among the papers was a letter from <unk> notifying <unk> of Mengele 's death . German authorities notified the police in São Paulo , who contacted the <unk> . Under interrogation , they revealed the location of the grave . The remains were exhumed on 6 June 1985 , and extensive forensic examination confirmed with a high degree of probability that the body was Mengele 's . Rolf Mengele issued a statement on 10 June admitting that the body was his father 's . He said that the news of his father 's death had been kept quiet to protect the people who had sheltered his father for so many years . In 1992 , DNA testing verified Mengele 's identity . The family refused to have the remains repatriated to Germany , and they remain stored at the São Paulo Institute for Forensic Medicine . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mengele 's life was the inspiration for a novel and film titled The Boys from Brazil ( 1978 ) , where a fictional Mengele ( portrayed by Gregory Peck ) produces clones of Hitler in a clinic in Brazil . In 2007 , the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum received as a donation the <unk> Album , an album of photographs of Auschwitz staff taken by Karl @-@ Friedrich <unk> . Eight of the photographs include Mengele . 
 In February 2010 , a 180 @-@ page volume of Mengele 's diary sold by Alexander Autographs at auction for an undisclosed sum to the grandson of a Holocaust survivor . The unidentified previous owner , who acquired the journals in Brazil , was reported to be close to the Mengele family . A Holocaust survivors ' organization described the sale as " a cynical act of exploitation aimed at profiting from the writings of one of the most heinous Nazi criminals . " Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center was glad to see the diary fall into Jewish hands . " At a time when Ahmadinejad 's Iran regularly denies the Holocaust and anti @-@ Semitism and hatred of Jews is back in vogue , this acquisition is especially significant , " he said . In 2011 , a further 31 volumes of Mengele 's diaries were sold — again amidst protests — by the same auction house to an undisclosed collector of World War II memorabilia for $ 245 @,@ 000 . 
 Mengele 's stay in Patagonia was used as the basis of the 2013 Argentinian film The German Doctor with Àlex <unk> in the lead role . 
 = = Summary of SS career = = 
 SS number : 317 @,@ 885 
 Nazi Party number : 5 @,@ 574 @,@ 974 
 Primary positions : WVHA , Medical Physician ( Auschwitz Concentration Camp ) 
 Waffen @-@ SS Service : 
 Medical Staff Officer , Waffen @-@ SS Medical Inspectorate ( 1940 ) 
 Medical Officer , Pioneer Battalion No. 5 , 5th SS Panzer Division Wiking ( 1941 – 1943 ) 
 Medical Officer , Battalion " Ost " , 3rd SS Division Totenkopf ( 1943 ) 
 Dates of rank 
 Awards 
 Iron Cross ( First and Second Class ) 
 War Merit Cross ( Second Class with Swords ) 
 Eastern Front Medal 
 Wound Badge ( Black ) 
 Social Welfare Decoration 
 German Sports Badge ( Bronze ) 
 Honour Chevron for the Old Guard 
 = = Journal articles = = 
 Racial @-@ Morphological Examinations of the Anterior Portion of the Lower Jaw in Four Racial Groups . This dissertation , completed in 1935 and first published in 1937 , earned him a PhD in anthropology from Munich University . In this work Mengele sought to demonstrate that there were structural differences in the lower jaws of individuals from different ethnic groups , and that racial distinctions could be made based on these differences . 
 Genealogical Studies in the Cases of Cleft Lip @-@ Jaw @-@ <unk> ( 1938 ) , his medical dissertation , earned him a doctorate in medicine from Frankfurt University . Studying the influence of genetics as a factor in the occurrence of this deformity , Mengele conducted research on families who exhibited these traits in multiple generations . The work also included notes on other abnormalities found in these family lines . 
 Hereditary Transmission of <unk> <unk> . This journal article , published in Der <unk> ( The Genetic Physician ) , focuses on fistula <unk> ( an abnormal fissure on the external ear ) as a hereditary trait . Mengele noted that individuals who have this trait also tend to have a dimple on their chin . 
 = Intimacy Remixed = 
 Intimacy Remixed is the remix album to Intimacy , the third album by indie rock band Bloc Party . It was released on 11 May 2009 in the United Kingdom through Wichita Recordings , the band 's primary label , in limited edition CD and triple LP formats to coincide with Bloc Party 's worldwide touring schedule . The record entered the UK Album Chart at number 79 . In the United States , it achieved a peak of number 15 on the Billboard Dance / Electronic Albums chart . 
 The band members gave each of the original tracks , including those on the deluxe edition of Intimacy , to a number of musicians from different genres ; Mogwai , Filthy Dukes , and No Age were amongst those who reworked the songs . " Signs ( Armand Van Helden Remix ) " was released as a single and a music video was also made for " Ares ( Villains Remix ) " . Critics often considered the record as a poor showcase for electronic music , although a minority of reviewers commented that it was a forward @-@ thinking piece of work . 
 = = Release = = 
 Intimacy Remixed is the second remix album of Bloc Party 's work following Silent Alarm Remixed , the remix album to debut full @-@ length release Silent Alarm . Details of the record and its track listing were confirmed on 16 March 2009 after the band 's European tour in support of Intimacy . Several dance acts , DJs , and alternative music groups were asked to rework tracks . Mogwai , whose debut album Mogwai Young Team is frontman Kele Okereke 's musical " Year Zero " , were drafted in to remix " Biko " . " Talons ( Phones R.I.P Remix ) " is Intimacy co @-@ producer Paul Epworth 's last song remix under the " Phones " name . Pitchfork Media 's reaction to the release news was mixed ; Tom Breihan indicated that the concept could be successful , but noted that the idea of remix albums in rock music has become stagnant . 
 Bloc Party spent much of March and April 2009 touring in the US and Canada in support of Intimacy Remixed . The band members invited fans attending their one @-@ off London Olympia concerts on 11 – 12 April to film the performances on their mobiles and send the recordings to the band online . A music video for " Ares ( Villains Remix ) " was created by collating the resulting footage and was webcast . " Signs ( Armand Van Helden Remix ) " was released as a promotional single on 27 April 2009 . Intimacy Remixed was released in Europe on 11 May 2009 . The album was distributed in the rest of the world on 26 – 27 May but no physical copies were released on US record labels . The cover art is a negative of the close @-@ up of a couple kissing by freelance photographer Perry <unk> used on Intimacy . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Media response to Intimacy Remixed was generally negative . Emily Tartanella of PopMatters explained that the remixers ' efforts ultimately make Bloc Party 's work " less engaging , less meaningful " . Ben Patashnik of NME stated that the album is largely monotonous and includes too many pedestrian experiments in dance music . Drowned in Sound 's Chris Power indicated that " in putting their names to the album Bloc Party seem to be saying they either don 't care about what they ask fans to spend their money on or they don 't know much about electronic music " . 
 BBC 's Lou Thomas was more receptive and commented that Intimacy Remixed is unprecedented in its field and entirely better than Intimacy . James <unk> of <unk> described the album as " something special " that should appeal to both Bloc Party fans and dance music lovers due to its " highly listenable , subtly energetic sound " . Pitchfork Media 's Ian Cohen was largely disappointed with the record and concluded , " Remix albums all but acknowledge their own <unk> — why not take more chances when only the diehards are going to subject themselves to 60 minutes of someone else 's idea of what Intimacy could sound like ? " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Electronic music duo Villains reworked " Ares " by replacing the big beat percussion of the original with electronic drums and synthesisers . The result was compared to the music of French band Justice by Lou Thomas of the BBC . British DJ Hervé 's mix of Mercury " removes the horns of the original and instead includes keyboards in an electro house @-@ like composition . We Have Band 's version of " Halo " is the only dub song on the Intimacy Remixed and incorporates a modulating synth line on top of cut @-@ up vocals . Alex Hibbert of <unk> noted its " euphoric " percussion . Scottish post @-@ rockers Mogwai infused Bloc Party 's blueprint in " Biko " with electronica elements . 
 " Trojan Horse " was given a drum and bass reworking by English DJ John B , while another U.S. DJ , Armand Van Helden , remixed " Signs " through the inclusion of trance beats and studio effects such as high @-@ pass filters . Synthpop group Filthy Dukes took charge of " One Month Off " and created an electro house version of the track according to Chris Power of Drowned in Sound . Paul Epworth 's " Talons ( Phones R.I.P Remix ) " contains samples from " You Don 't Know Nothing About Love " by Carl Hall and the use of a vocoder . " Better Than Heaven " was remixed by American noise pop duo No Age and begins with a rhythmic pattern on the piano . The song features feedback , distorted drumming , and backmasked vocals . 
 London @-@ based Italian solo act Alessio Andalusia , under his Banjo or Freakout alias , provided the remix for " Ion Square " and created an ambient version of the original . The track infuses Bloc Party 's blueprint with keyboards , looped strings , and ethereal vocals . Power concluded , " By taking the percolating synth from the end of the original version and wrapping the sweet ee <unk> @-@ borrowed lyric — " I carry your heart here with me " — in a dense cloud of treated , looped guitar , he produces a remix that ... offers an interesting , possibly even superior , reading of its source material . " Album closer " Your Visits Are Getting Shorter ( <unk> Remix ) " was named as a " generic commercial dance music " song by Lee White of This Is Fake DIY . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs originally written and composed by Bloc Party and remixed by each credited artist . 
 The limited edition UK triple LP version and the Japanese edition include " Your Visits Are Getting Shorter ( Double D Remix ) " as track 13 . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 " Talons " ( Acoustic ) – 4 : 32 – track 14 on the Japanese edition 
 " Signs " ( Acoustic ) – 3 : 24 – track 15 on the Japanese edition 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Supernatural ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of Supernatural , an American television series created by Eric Kripke , premiered on September 13 , 2005 , and concluded on May 4 , 2006 after 22 episodes . It focuses on brothers Sam and Dean Winchester as they track down their father , John , who is on the trail of the demon who killed their mother and Sam 's girlfriend . During their travels , they use their father 's journal to help them carry on the family business — saving people and hunting supernatural creatures . Jared Padalecki and Jensen Ackles star as Sam and Dean , with Jeffrey Dean Morgan recurring as their father , John , and Nicki Aycox as the demonic Meg Masters . This is the only season to air on The WB Television Network , with all subsequent seasons airing on The CW Television Network , a joint venture of The WB and UPN . 
 The first sixteen episodes of the season aired on Tuesdays at 9 : 00 pm ET in the United States , after which the series was rescheduled to Thursdays . Overall , the season averaged about 3 @.@ 81 million American viewers . The season gained many award nominations , among them two Primetime Emmy Awards for work done on the pilot episode . While some critics did not like the mostly anthology @-@ like format , others praised the show for the emotional moments and noted the brotherly chemistry between the lead actors . 
 The season was internationally syndicated , airing in the United Kingdom on ITV , in Canada on Citytv , and in Australia on Network Ten . The first season was released on DVD as a six @-@ disc box set on September 5 , 2006 , by Warner Home Video in Region 1 . Although the season was split into two separate releases in Region 2 , the complete set was released on October 2 , 2006 , and in Region 4 on October 2 , 2007 . The episodes are also available through digital retailers such as Apple 's iTunes Store , Microsoft 's Xbox Live Marketplace , and Amazon.com 's on @-@ demand TV service . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In this table , the number in the first column refers to the episode 's number within the entire series , whereas the number in the second column indicates the episode 's number within this particular season . " U.S. viewers in millions " refers to how many Americans watched the episode live or on the day of broadcast . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Starring = = = 
 Jared Padalecki as Sam Winchester 
 Jensen Ackles as Dean Winchester 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 Jeffrey Dean Morgan as John Winchester 
 Nicki Aycox as Meg Masters 
 Adrianne Palicki as Jessica Moore 
 Samantha Smith as Mary Winchester 
 Sebastian Spence as Tom 
 Jim Beaver as Bobby Singer 
 A. J. Buckley as Ed <unk> 
 Travis Wester as Harry Spangler 
 Taylor Cole as Sarah Blake 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first season 's mythology mainly follows Sam and Dean 's search for their missing father . Series creator Eric Kripke summarized this storyline as merely " find Dad " , which he deemed " simple " , " emotional " , and " clean " . However , he found the self @-@ enclosed episodes — independent stories which attain closure at the end of each episode and add little to the overarching storylines — to be " hit and miss " . Because the first ten episodes consist of self @-@ enclosed stories , the series mythology does not begin until the eleventh episode , " Scarecrow " . This episode introduces the demon Meg Masters , which executive producer Kim Manners felt was " desperately needed " . Though uncertain at exactly what direction to take the character , the writers intended Meg to be an antagonist for the Winchesters throughout her story arc . The series mythology further expands with the addition of the demon @-@ killing Colt handgun near the season 's end , lending to the " modern American Western " theme the producers were going for . 
 Although the weekly adversaries for the Winchesters were often based on urban legends , the writers tried to put their own spin on the stories for each of the episodes . For example , Kripke combined the well @-@ known urban legend of the vanishing hitchhiker with the Mexican legend of La Llorona to give the spirit more motivation and characterization in the pilot . The episode " Hook Man " , however , borrowed three or four elements from the numerous variations of the Hook Man legend . The figure is an escaped mental patient in the traditional myth , but the writers decided for the purposes of the show to make him the ghost of a hook @-@ handed killer . They also added a poltergeist element by having him attached to the conflicting emotions of the guest star — she wears a crucifix made from his melted hook . Rather than focus on modern interpretations , Kripke and co @-@ executive producer John Shiban decided that Supernatural 's vampires would stem more from the original legends . The vampires were given retractable fangs — these were inspired by the rowed teeth of sharks — as well as no aversion to sunlight or the crucifix . Kripke personally added the fact that vampires would become weak if given the blood of a dead man . 
 Other aspects grew out of basic concepts or ideas . For the episode " Skin " , writer Shiban felt that the shapeshifting villain had to change into one of the lead characters . The character chosen was Dean , and the writers decided not to clear his name of attempted murder at the end of the episode . Though they at first feared that having one of the main characters be a wanted man would later ruin the show , the writers eventually felt it was " a great layer to add " , opening up new potential storylines and characters . Dean 's reputation is addressed again in " The Benders " , and catches up to him in the second and third seasons . Another element that would influence future episodes came about in " Hook Man " when writers <unk> and Burton realized that shotguns shoot salt , a weakness for spirits . Kripke deemed it the " perfect combination of occult element " , as it brought together a " folkloric repellent of evil " with the " blue @-@ collar aspect of shotguns " . The episode " Asylum " later established iron as another weapon against ghosts . " Faith " , on the other hand , stemmed from the question of whether it truly was wrong to heal good people of their illnesses at the cost of the lives of strangers . Kripke noted , " [ Layla 's ] really a great girl and she deserves to live , and some stranger you don 't even know will die ... and maybe that 's worth it . " Reapers were not in the original script of the episode , but were added later to give the writers a chance to create " scary " sequences and to explain the faith healer 's ability . Because the writers found the traditional look of the Reaper — hooded and carrying a sickle — to be cheesy , they ultimately made him appear as " the most shriveled old man you could ever imagine " . 
 Although the villain of the episode " Hell House " has supernatural origins , the basis of the story came from a situation writer Trey Callaway had as a child ; he and his friends created a fake murder scene in an abandoned barn and then convinced their friends that killings occurred there . The children would often go there to scare each other , with one girl running away and breaking her leg after believing that she saw an attacking ghost . The human antagonists of " The Benders " , however , were completely devoid of supernatural elements . Shiban made this decision not only to surprise the audience , but also to have the Winchesters face something they had never encountered before . For " Nightmare " , Tucker tried to write the character Max as sympathetic , and thus had difficulties in deciding how to end the episode . The writers eventually decided to have him kill himself to prevent him from doing more harm . 
 Starting off on the series , Kripke excluded vampires due to their affiliation to Buffy the Vampire Slayer . He wanted Supernatural to have its own identity , but became more comfortable with it over time . The writers intended for the vampire @-@ episode " Dead Man 's Blood " to be a self @-@ enclosed episode , but Kripke 's introduction of the Colt tied it to the final two episodes of the season . This addition pleased the writers of the penultimate episode " Salvation " because the Colt gave the brothers a way to fight Meg and also provided a reason for her to kill the Winchesters ' friends . Gamble and Tucker crafted the latter storyline because they felt Kripke would only allow their inclusion if they died . When the writers could not come up with something for the Winchesters to be doing while Meg is on the loose , they split the episode into two stories ; John would go after Meg while the brothers protect another family from Azazel . Tucker felt that this opened " all this emotional stuff with the guys " , as well as " brought back all the themes of the show and tied the season up into a nice big bow " . Similarly , Kripke believed that the revelation of John being possessed by Azazel in " Devil 's Trap " had to be , as it completed the two main storylines of the season — finding their father and tracking down the demon — at the same time , but had them find both characters in one body . 
 = = = Influences by popular culture = = = 
 While supernatural and urban legends inspired many episodes , some storyline aspects were influenced by popular culture . The inspiration for the wendigo 's appearance in " Wendigo " came from the creature featured in the music video for the Aphex Twin song " Come to Daddy " . Human features were added to the design due the wendigo 's human origins , and the creature was given the ability to mimic human voices to create a " creepy effect " . However , Kripke was not pleased with the final appearance of the wendigo , deeming him as " Gollum 's tall , gangly cousin " . Because of this , the creature is not seen throughout most of the episode . For shapeshifting scenes in the episode " Skin " , Kripke chose to base the transformation on that of An American Werewolf in London , using prosthetics and makeup rather than computer @-@ generated imagery . The Ring 's Samara influenced the titular villain in " Bloody Mary " , though Kripke felt that she ended up looking too similar to the character due to her grisly appearance and the use of speed ramping to create a time @-@ manipulation effect . Visual effects supervisor Ivan Hayden , on the other hand , believes it was more of an homage . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Though the pilot was shot in Los Angeles , principal filming for the rest of the season took place in Vancouver , British Columbia . Local sites often served as shooting locations , with much of " Dead in the Water " taking place at Buntzen Lake and the climax of " Wendigo " occurring in a Britannia Beach mine . Likewise , Riverview Hospital functioned as a mental institution in " Asylum " . Though production has sometimes recycled sets from other television series — " The Benders " made use of a previously @-@ built Western town , while the warehouse @-@ loft set of " Shadow " originated from the series Tru Calling — most episodes usually require the construction of new sets due to the constant change of setting . The production team , however , created reusable standing sets in the form of the motel rooms frequented by the Winchesters . Each episode presents a different theme to disguise the motel @-@ room set 's repeated use , with different colors , bedspreads , and curtains being used . The episode " Provenance " , for instance , displayed a disco @-@ themed motel room . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The mostly synthesized orchestral score of the season was composed by Christopher Lennertz and Jay Gruska . The pair try to base the music on the visuals of each episode , with about a third of each episode 's score being newly written for the supernatural legend . For example , off @-@ angle shots in " Dead in the Water " are accompanied by repetitive and discordant notes . As well , spoken words such as " water " and " die " are followed by a lower pitch because Lennertz felt it created a " <unk> " water sound . An electric cello and woodwinds helped to create a big emotional tone in the episode " Home " , with Lennertz feeling that the final cue " became a very cinematic musical moment " . To fit in with the episode 's ambiance in " Asylum " , Gruska made the music very subtle ; Lennertz felt that it was " creepy @-@ crawly " like " a snake sneaking along the ground " . Conversely , Lennertz matched the theme of traveling evangelists in " Faith " by using a small 76 @-@ key piano that was damaged and slightly out of tune . He attached small items such as coins and paper clips to the keys to create a rattling noise , making the piano seem " old and crappy " . Lennertz then played " bluesy gospel music " during the sermon scenes involving the Reapers . Because he felt that there was also a " snake @-@ oil salesman vibe " to the episode , he included an Armenian duduk due to its association with snake charming . The score of " Hell House " , on the other hand , had a much lighter tone to coincide with the episode 's humor . For example , music for the scenes involving the " professional " ghost hunters used percussion instruments to slightly mimic the Mission : Impossible theme . 
 However , recurring characters often have certain musical themes attached to them . For the pilot episode , Lennertz used a piano solo with discordant notes and reverberations to create a " really nasty " -sounding echo effect for the scenes involving Mary and Jessica 's deaths at the hands of the demon Azazel . Lennertz returns to this in " Nightmare " , including it when Sam realizes the connection he shares with the demon and Max . The episode " Dead in the Water " was the first to use what Kripke feels is the " Winchester emotion " , which involves sorrowful and reverberating piano notes on top of strings . It plays when the brothers make connections with other characters . As well , there are variants of a guitar line used as the " humorous brothers ' theme " in many episodes , including " Pilot " and " Hell House " , when the brothers are having fun . With Gruska writing Meg Masters ' theme for " Scarecrow " , Lennertz reused the music in " Shadow " but " took the scary up a notch " to imply to the viewers that she is both " more important and more devilish " than the other creatures in the episode . For the penultimate episode " Salvation " , Lennertz incorporated musical elements used throughout the season . 
 In addition to the score , the series makes use of rock songs , with most being selected from Kripke 's private collection . Among the many bands featured in the first season are AC / DC , Blue Öyster Cult , Creedence Clearwater Revival , Lynyrd Skynyrd , and Bad Company . Rock songs are also usually featured in " The Road So Far " montages at the beginning of select episodes that recap previous events . This was first done with the episode " Salvation " , in which the entire season was recapped to Kansas ' " Carry On Wayward Son " , with the subsequent episode — the season finale — using Triumph 's " Fight the Good Fight " . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 To depict the supernatural aspects of the show , the series makes use of visual , special , and make @-@ up effects , as well as stuntwork . While various companies were contracted for the Los Angeles @-@ based production of the pilot episode , subsequent episodes being filmed in Vancouver required a new crew to be hired . The company Entity FX performed the visual effects for the pilot episode , with Ivan Hayden taking over as visual effects supervisor for the rest of the season . The crew was required to design all of the external airplane shots in " Phantom Traveler " from scratch using computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . As well , they created a time @-@ manipulation effect for the titular villain in " Bloody Mary " by altering the capture frame rate of the camera . Randy <unk> acted as special effects supervisor , and the department found the episode " Asylum " to be quite a challenge because one scene has the vengeful spirit collapse into dust . They made casts of the character 's torso and hands , and had to find the perfect mixture in order to have the casts remain solid but disintegrate when needed . 
 The visual and special effects departments often overlap , such as in Mary Winchester 's death scene in the pilot episode . Because the character is pinned to the ceiling and burned to death , actress Samantha Smith was required to lie on a floor with two propane pipes spouting fire approximately five feet away from her on either side . For the actual burning of the character , a papier @-@ mâché body was ignited on a fake ceiling . When the burning of the titular creature in the episode " Wendigo " was not sufficient using special effects , a wire @-@ frame mannequin wrapped in steel wool was then burned , with the scene being composited into the original footage to draw out the wendigo 's death . To make it appear that the Hook Man is invisible as he scrapes his hook along the wall for one of the scenes in " Hook Man " , a wire was placed inside plaster walls and then pulled out ; the wire later was digitally removed in post @-@ production . In the episode " Bugs " , the cast had to be sealed in a small area with hundreds of bees , and were stung despite wearing special costumes with cuffs sewn into their sleeves and pants . However , the bees did not show up well on camera , so most of them that appear in the final version were added with CGI . 
 In addition to the digital effects , the series also features stuntwork . Lou Bollo took over as stunt coordinator after the pilot episode , and big scenes often involved the actors , though stunt doubles were used for certain moments . For the final lake scene in " Dead in the Water " , in which Dean must save a boy after he is pulled underwater by a vengeful spirit , Jensen Ackles had to hold onto the young actor as they were pulled down ten feet into the water by divers . The actor portraying the vengeful spirit had to wear a wetsuit under his costume due to the extended period of time he was required to spend in the lake . Ackles and Jared Padalecki performed most of the fight scene featured in " Skin " , and only took four hours to learn the fight choreography . However , stunt doubles were brought in for the scenes in which they are thrown into bookshelves and through a coffee table . For the episode " Shadow " , rather than filming at the exterior location for the scene of Meg Masters being thrown out of a window to the street below , it was decided to not depict the impact , instead having the Winchesters look down at her body after the landing . Thus , filming of it was allowed to take place in the studio using a body double . 
 Throughout filming , various scenes make use of all three effects departments . For scenes involving the floating , fiery spirit of Mary Winchester in " Home " , a small and slim stuntman wearing a fire suit was lit on fire and raised into the air on wires . For the spirit 's transition into Mary 's normal form , Smith stood in front of a black background with wind blowing onto her , and the two scenes were later combined in post @-@ production . Many aspects went into filming the crash scene in the season finale " Devil 's Trap " . For the interior scenes used in the first moments of the Impala being hit , Jeffrey Dean Morgan , Padalecki , and Ackles were required to sit in the car , which was in front of a blue screen . A sheet of <unk> placed very close to the passenger @-@ side window protected the actors as the window was shattered , and at the same time , cannons beneath the frame blew out pieces of rubber glass to give the appearance that the window exploded onto them . For scenes of the actual crash , the car and truck were cabled together by a winch , and driven toward one another . The intention was for a cannon to launch the Impala into the air at the collision point , causing the car to then barrel roll as the truck drives away . However , the car became stuck in the truck 's bumper , forcing the cannon to fail and the truck to go out of control . The truck began to jackknife , but the stuntman driving it saved it from flipping . The mistake ended up being beneficial for the scene , as Kripke and director Manners found it to look " pretty real " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After the first four episodes of Supernatural aired in 2005 , the WB decided to pick up the series for a full season of 22 episodes . During those first episodes , the series was ranked third in males aged 18 – 34 and 12 – 34 . It also posted an increase of 73 % in males aged 18 – 49 from the year before , although it only gained 4 % in total viewers , and retained 91 % of viewers from its lead @-@ in , Gilmore Girls . Supernatural 's first season averaged about 3 @.@ 81 million American viewers . According to Special Forces Soldier Master Sergeant Kevin Wise at a 2007 Supernatural convention , the DVDs most requested by armed forces personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan were the first two seasons of the series . 
 On Metacritic , the season scored 59 out of 100 based on 22 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 69 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 8 / 10 based on 13 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Despite some too @-@ hip dialogue and familiar thematic elements , Supernatural 's vigilante brothers manage to stir up some legitimate scares . " Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly gave the first season a B , saying the show " comes off as weekly installments of a horror movie series " , but that " Adding to the show 's cred are the ' 67 Chevy Impala the boys rumble around in and their kick @-@ ass soundtrack " . Tom Gliatto of People Weekly ranked the show at number five on his list of the Best TV Shows of 2005 . Peter Schorn of IGN gave the season a score of 7 out of 10 . While he found the self @-@ enclosed episodes to be " passably entertaining " , he enjoyed the story arcs introduced later in the season . Schorn also deemed the " stormy relationship between Sam and his father " to be " compelling " , and noted that the lead stars have " good chemistry together " . Rick Porter of Zap2it felt that while the season had its " share of emotional moments " , it also " [ scared ] the pants off " of viewers " surprisingly well " . He also believed that it did a good job at balancing mythology episodes with self @-@ enclosed ones , comparing it to the early seasons of The X @-@ Files . However , Eric Neigher of Slant Magazine highly criticized the self @-@ enclosed episodes for being " almost totally linear , without any B- or C @-@ stories " , and felt that the episodes were mainly " watered @-@ down rehashes of classic weird fiction or popular urban legends " . 
 Work on the pilot episode garnered two Primetime Emmy Awards nominations in 2006 , composer Christopher Lennertz being nominated in the category of " Outstanding Music Composition For A Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) " and the sound editors receiving a nomination for " Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series " . The pilot episode also brought in a nomination for a Golden Reel Award in the category of " Best Sound Editing in Television : Short Form – Sound Effects and Foley " , with work on the episode " Salvation " gaining the same nomination in 2007 . Additionally , the season was nominated for a Saturn Award in the category of " Best Network Television Series " . For the Teen Choice Awards , the series was nominated for " TV – Choice Breakout Show " and Jensen Ackles for " TV – Choice Breakout Star " . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first season of Supernatural was released as a six @-@ disc Region 1 DVD box set on September 5 , 2006 , three weeks before the premiere of the second season . The cover art incorporated a stylized shot of the Winchester brothers in front of their car . Including all 22 episodes of the first season , the set also featured DVD extras such as episode commentaries , deleted scenes , bloopers , featurettes , and a DVD @-@ ROM sneak @-@ peek at the second season . The season was ranked No. 14 in DVD sales for its week of release , and slipped to No. 28 the following week , with cumulative sales during those two weeks coming to 150 @,@ 376 sets for $ 5 @,@ 264 @,@ 942 . The set was later packaged with the first season of Smallville as a " Season One Starter Pack " , which was released on September 18 , 2007 . For Region 2 , the season was split into two parts , being released on May 22 , 2006 , and August 21 , 2006 ; the complete set was released on October 2 , 2006 . The season was also released in Region 4 on September 6 , 2006 , though the special features were removed . A " Special Collector 's Edition " was later released on October 2 , 2007 , with the extras restored . The first season was released on Region A Blu @-@ ray Disc on June 15 , 2010 , including new special features – " The Devil 's Road Map " , an interactive guide featuring interviews about every episode and a Paley Festival panel discussion featuring the cast and crew . 
 = New York State Route 192 = 
 New York State Route 192 ( NY 192 ) was a 7 @.@ 35 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 83 km ) long east – west state highway in Franklin County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route was at an intersection with NY 30 in the hamlet of Paul Smiths within the town of Brighton . Its eastern terminus was at a junction with NY 86 near the Adirondack Regional Airport in the town of Harrietstown . In between , NY 192 served the hamlet of Gabriels . 
 NY 192 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to an alignment extending from Paul Smiths to Bloomingdale . A suffixed route of NY 192 , NY 192A , was assigned in the 1950s to provide a signed connection between NY 192 near Gabriels and then @-@ NY 86 in Harrietstown . NY 192A became part of NY 192 in 1980 , and NY 192 became part of NY 86 on March 28 , 1989 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 192 began at an intersection with NY 30 in the hamlet of Paul Smiths within the town of Brighton in Franklin County . The highway headed to the northeast , passing Cooler Pond to the south and Church Pond to the north . Just north of Church Pond was Osgood Pond , which was accessible at the first intersection , which was White Pond Road . NY 192 then headed eastward , intersecting with County Route 31 ( CR 31 , named Jones Pond Road ) in the hamlet of Paul Smiths Easy Street . The highway turned to the southeast , intersecting with another county route and passing Brighton Town Park . At the intersection with CR 60 near the park , NY 192 entered Gabriels . 
 NY 192 then continued to the southeast , intersecting with CR 55 , its former routing eastward to NY 3 in Bloomingdale . At CR 55 , NY 192 curved southward and passed into the town of Harrietstown . The route ended shortly afterward at a junction with NY 86 in the hamlet of Harrietstown 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of the Adirondack Regional Airport . 
 = = History = = 
 When NY 3 was assigned in 1924 , it followed a significantly different routing through the North Country than it does today . NY 3 entered Franklin County near Hogansburg and served Malone , Paul Smiths , Gabriels , and Harrietstown before leaving the county near Saranac Lake . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 3 was rerouted east of Watertown to follow its modern alignment through the North Country . The portion of NY 3 's former routing from Harrietstown to a junction southeast of Gabriels was designated as NY 408 while the segment between Paul Smiths and the vicinity of Gabriels became part of NY 192 , an east – west highway extending from Paul Smiths to the realigned NY 3 in Bloomingdale . 
 NY 408 and the eastern half of NY 192 were included as part of NY 365 c . 1932 . The new route extended from NY 5 southwest of Oneida to U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in Plattsburgh . NY 365 initially overlapped both NY 192 and NY 408 ; however , NY 408 was removed c . 1938 , leaving only NY 365 on the Harrietstown – Gabriels roadway . NY 192 , meanwhile , continued to overlap NY 365 from Gabriels to Bloomingdale . In the mid @-@ 1940s , NY 365 was rerouted between <unk> and Bloomingdale to overlap NY 3 instead . The portion of NY 365 's former routing from Harrietstown to Gabriels was not initially assigned a new designation . 
 The Harrietstown – Gabriels highway became a signed route once again in the early 1950s when it became NY 192A . Both NY 192 and NY 192A remained unchanged through the late 1970s . On January 7 , 1980 , NY 192A was supplanted by a realigned NY 192 . Maintenance of NY 192 's former routing between Gabriels and Bloomingdale was transferred to the counties it ran through — namely Franklin and Essex — in stages . The Franklin County portion was given to the county on April 1 , 1980 , while the section in Essex County was transferred to county control on April 1 , 1985 , as part of highway maintenance swaps between the state of New York and Franklin and Essex counties . On March 28 , 1989 , NY 192 was supplanted by a realigned NY 86 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Franklin County . 
 = Fortification of Dorchester Heights = 
 The Fortification of Dorchester Heights was a decisive action early in the American Revolutionary War that precipitated the end of the siege of Boston and the withdrawal of British troops from that city . 
 On March 4 , 1776 , troops from the Continental Army under George Washington 's command occupied Dorchester Heights , a series of low hills with a commanding view of Boston and its harbor , and mounted powerful cannons there . General William Howe , commander of the British forces occupying the city , considered contesting this act , as the cannon threatened the town and the military ships in the harbor . After a snowstorm prevented execution of his plans , however , Howe chose to withdraw from the city . The British forces , accompanied by Loyalists who had fled to the city during the siege , left the city on March 17 and sailed to Halifax , Nova Scotia . 
 = = Background = = 
 The siege of Boston began on April 19 , 1775 , when , in the aftermath of the Battles of Lexington and Concord , Colonial militia surrounded the city of Boston . Benedict Arnold , who arrived with Connecticut militia to support the siege , told the Massachusetts Committee of Safety that cannons and other valuable military stores were stored at the lightly defended Fort Ticonderoga in New York , and proposed its capture . On May 3 , the Committee gave Arnold a colonel 's commission and authorized him to raise troops and lead a mission to capture the fort . Arnold , in conjunction with Ethan Allen , his Green Mountain Boys , and militia forces from Connecticut and western Massachusetts , captured the fort and all of its armaments on May 10 . 
 After George Washington took command of the army outside Boston in July 1775 , the idea of bringing the cannons from Ticonderoga to the siege was raised by Colonel Henry Knox . Knox was eventually given the assignment to transport weapons from Ticonderoga to Cambridge . Knox went to Ticonderoga in November 1775 , and , over the course of 3 winter months , moved 60 tons of cannons and other armaments by boat , horse and ox @-@ drawn sledges , and manpower , along poor @-@ quality roads , across two semi @-@ frozen rivers , and through the forests and swamps of the sparsely inhabited Berkshires to the Boston area . Historian Victor Brooks has called Knox 's feat " one of the most stupendous feats of logistics " of the entire war . 
 = = Geography and strategy = = 
 The British military leadership , headed by General William Howe , had long been aware of the importance of the Dorchester Heights , which , along with the heights of Charlestown , had commanding views of Boston and its outer harbor . The harbor was vital to the British , as the Royal Navy , at first under Admiral Samuel Graves , and later under Admiral Molyneux Shuldham , provided protection for the troops in Boston , as well as transportation of supplies to the besieged city . Early in the siege , on June 15 , the British agreed on the plan of seizing both of these heights , beginning with those in Dorchester , which had a better view of the harbor than the Charlestown hills . It was the leaking of this plan that precipitated events leading to the Battle of Bunker Hill . 
 Neither the British nor the Americans had the daring to take and fortify the heights ; but both armies knew of its strategic importance in the war . When Washington took command of the siege in July 1775 , he considered taking the unoccupied Dorchester Heights , but rejected the idea , feeling the army was not ready to deal with the likely British attack on the position . The subject of an attempt on the heights was again discussed in early February 1776 , but the local Committee of Safety believed the British troop strength too high , and important military supplies like gunpowder too low , to warrant action at that time . By the end of February , Knox had arrived with the cannon from Ticonderoga , as had additional supplies of powder and shells . Washington decided the time was right to act . 
 = = Fortification = = 
 Washington first placed some of the heavy cannons from Ticonderoga at Lechmere 's Point and Cobble Hill in Cambridge , and on Lamb 's Dam in Roxbury . As a diversion against the planned move on the Dorchester Heights , he ordered these batteries to open fire on the town on the night of March 2 , which fire the British returned , without significant casualties on either side . These cannonades were repeated on the night of March 3 , while preparations for the taking of the heights continued . 
 On the night of March 4 , 1776 , the batteries opened fire again , but this time the fire was accompanied by action . General John Thomas and about 2 @,@ 000 troops quietly marched to the top of Dorchester Heights , hauling entrenching tools and cannon placements . Hay bales were placed between the path taken by the troops and the harbor in order to muffle the sounds of the activity . Throughout the night , these troops and their relief labored at hauling cannon and building earthworks overlooking the town and the harbor . General Washington was present to provide moral support and encouragement , reminding them that March 5 was the sixth anniversary of the Boston Massacre . By 4 a.m. , they had constructed fortifications that were proof against small arms and grapeshot . Work continued on the positions , with troops cutting down trees and constructing <unk> to impede any British assault on the works . The outside of the works also included rock @-@ filled barrels that could be rolled down the hill at attacking troops . 
 Washington anticipated that General Howe and his troops would either flee or try to take the hill , an action that would have probably been reminiscent of the Battle of Bunker Hill , which was a disaster for the British . If Howe decided to launch an attack on the heights , Washington planned to launch an attack against the city from Cambridge . As part of the preparations , he readied two floating batteries and boats sufficient to carry almost 3 @,@ 000 troops . Washington 's judgment of Howe 's options was accurate ; they were exactly the options Howe considered . 
 = = British reaction = = 
 Admiral Shuldham , commander of the British fleet , declared that the fleet was in danger unless the position on the heights was taken . Howe and his staff then determined to contest the occupation of the heights , and made plans for an assault , preparing to send 2 @,@ 400 men under cover of darkness to attack the position . Washington , notified of British movements , increased the forces on the heights until there were nearly 6 @,@ 000 men on the Dorchester lines . However , a snow storm began late on March 5 and halted any chance of a battle for several days . By the time the storm subsided , Howe reconsidered launching an attack , reasoning that preserving the army for battle elsewhere was of higher value than attempting to hold Boston . 
 On March 8 , intermediaries delivered an unsigned paper informing Washington that the city would not be burned to the ground if his troops were allowed to leave unmolested . After several days of activity , and several more of bad weather , the British forces departed Boston by sea on March 17 and sailed to Halifax , Nova Scotia , taking with them more than 1 @,@ 000 Loyalist civilians . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The fortifications on the Heights were maintained through the end of the war , and then abandoned . During the War of 1812 , the Heights were refortified and occupied against potential British invasion . Following that war , the fortifications were completely abandoned , and , in the later years of the 19th century , the Dorchester hills were used as a source of fill for Boston 's expanding coastline . 
 In 1902 , following revived interest in the local history , a monument was constructed on the ( remaining ) high ground in what is now South Boston . The large Irish population in the area was also instrumental in having March 17 ( which is also Saint Patrick 's Day ) named as the Evacuation Day holiday in Suffolk County , Massachusetts , which includes the city of Boston . 
 The Dorchester Heights National Historic Site was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1966 , and in 1978 came under the administration of the National Park Service as part of Boston National Historical Park . 
 = The Thing You Love Most = 
 " The Thing You Love Most " is the second episode of the first season of the American fairy tale / drama television series Once Upon a Time . The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke , Maine , in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the " real world " town by a powerful curse . This episode centers on Regina 's ( Lana Parrilla ) efforts to run Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) out of Storybrooke and reveals how the Evil Queen ( Parrilla ) unleashed her curse upon the Enchanted Forest . 
 The episode was co @-@ written by co @-@ creators Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis , while Greg Beeman directed . Actress Kristin Bauer van Straten was cast at the last minute and guest starred as the sorceress Maleficent , a character from Disney 's 1959 animated film Sleeping Beauty . Mary Margaret 's ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) loft as well as most of the interior shots of the episode were filmed in Vancouver , while many exterior shots were shot in nearby Steveston , British Columbia . 
 " The Thing You Love Most " first aired in the United States on ABC on October 30 , 2011 . It was watched by an estimated 11 @.@ 64 million viewers , scoring a 3 @.@ 9 ratings share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics ; many were complimentary towards Emma and Regina 's feud and thought the episode was superior to the pilot , but believed Bauer van Straten was underused . A novelization of the episode was published in 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Opening Sequence = = = 
 Maleficent 's unicorn is shown galloping through the forest . 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 Regina ( Lana Parrilla ) looks through the book of fairy tales and discovers that the last few pages are torn out . She confronts Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) , who lies and says that the pages are missing because it is an old book . Believing that Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) will try to take Henry away from her , Regina encourages Emma to leave town . Regina meets with The Daily Mirror editor , Sidney Glass ( Giancarlo Esposito ) , who has run a front @-@ page story about Emma 's auto accident which portrays Emma in a poor light , but tells Regina that he has found very little of interest in Emma 's past . 
 Henry tells Emma that he has a plan for them to break the curse , called " Operation Cobra " . The first step is to associate his book 's characters with each of the Storybrooke residents , as no one can remember their past . Henry explains to a skeptical Emma that she is the daughter of Snow White and Prince Charming . Concerned about Henry , Emma goes to see his therapist , Archie Hopper ( Raphael Sbarge ) . She is willingly given Henry 's file , only to be arrested when Archie claims she stole it . Regina unsuccessfully tries to use the incident to divide Emma and Henry . Emma retaliates by attacking Regina 's apple tree with a chainsaw , provoking another confrontation . 
 Back at the inn , Granny ( Beverley Elliott ) apologetically kicks Emma out , telling her they have a no @-@ felons policy . Regina suggests to Emma that they meet at her office to make peace . Once there , Emma tells Regina that she does not plan to take Henry away , but that she is worried about Henry 's sanity because of his " crazy " fairy @-@ tale theory . Henry overhears Emma and runs away , hurt . Regina acknowledges that she knew Henry would arrive just in time to hear their conversation . 
 Emma later tells Henry that she thinks the curse is crazy , but that does not mean it is not true . She also tells him that in order to break the curse , they must keep Regina off their trail by making her think that they don 't believe in the curse . 
 As Regina tends the apple tree , Mr. Gold ( Robert Carlyle ) offers to help Regina get rid of Emma , for a price . Regina says that she is not in the business of making deals with him anymore , and Gold acknowledges that she had made a deal with him in the past to procure Henry . He asks Regina how she chose the name Henry ; she does not answer . She questions him about Emma 's past , and he is equally evasive . As Gold walks away , Regina gives him a meaningful stare , suggesting that she suspects that Gold remembers their lives in the Enchanted Forest . 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 At the wedding of Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) and Prince Charming ( Joshua Dallas ) , the Evil Queen ( Parrilla ) announces her plan to cast a terrible curse on everyone . She goes to see the sorceress Maleficent ( Kristin Bauer van Straten ) , to whom she had traded a Dark Curse . Maleficent refuses to return the curse , but the Queen defeats her in a magical battle , taking the curse 's scroll . She lets Maleficent live , stating that the sorceress is the only friend she has . Later in the forest , the Queen assembles a number of dark creatures . She demands a lock of hair from each of the assembly in order to cast the curse and sacrifices the heart of her prized stallion to complete the spell . The curse , however , fails . 
 To find out why the curse failed , the Queen turns to Rumpelstiltskin ( Carlyle ) , the original owner of the curse . Rumpelstiltskin offers to help the Queen if , in turn , she makes him a wealthy and respected person in the new world and promises that she will do anything he asks so long as he says " please . " The Queen agrees , reminding him that in the new world , they would have no recollection of their agreement . Rumpelstiltskin then tells the Queen that she must cut out the heart of the thing she loves the most and use it to complete the spell . The Queen protests that what she loved most died because of Snow White , but Rumpelstiltskin suggests that there is something else the Queen also loves . He also tells the Queen that he has informed Snow White and Prince Charming that their unborn daughter will be able to break the Queen 's curse . 
 On returning to her castle , the Queen is distraught over what Rumpelstiltskin told her . She confides in her valet ( Tony Perez ) , who is revealed to be her father . Knowing he is the thing the Queen loves the most , her father tries to dissuade her from her plan , saying that she could still find love again . Appearing to be persuaded , the Queen pulls her father in for an embrace , then stabs him . 
 Alone in the forest , the Queen uses her father 's heart to complete the Dark Curse . As the curse takes shape , she lays a black rose on her father 's grave . The headstone bears the inscription " Henry , Beloved Father . " 
 = = Production = = 
 As with the pilot , " The Thing You Love Most " was co @-@ written by series co @-@ creators Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz . Smallville co @-@ executive producer Greg Beeman served as director . The episode focuses on the rivalry between Emma and Regina , as each believes they know what is best for Henry . In an interview with TV Overmind , actress Lana Parrilla explained that viewers would see a " vulnerable " side of Regina / The Evil Queen in this episode . Says Parrilla , " What I ’ ve been trying to show is not the hatred for Snow White , but where it derives from . It ’ s not so surfaced . That brings a vulnerability to the character . You ’ ll see into her history and that exposes her in a very vulnerable way as well . " As for Regina 's troubled relationship with Henry , Parrilla noted that " she may have a cold heart , but I think she really , genuinely loves her son . She doesn ’ t think of him as an adopted son , she thinks of him as her son . " 
 In September 2011 , The Hollywood Reporter reported that Kristin Bauer van Straten would be guest starring as Maleficent , a character from Disney 's 1959 animated film Sleeping Beauty . She was cast at the last minute , which she felt made her performance more instinctual because of the lack of prep time . The actress described Maleficent as being the Evil Queen 's " frenemy , " as each has been " kind of helping [ the ] other and playing this chess game for years . " Bauer van Straten noted the similarities between Once Upon a Time and her HBO series True Blood character Pam , and said that she enjoyed the " evil @-@ bitch typecasting " . She added that the elaborate purple costume helped her get into character , making her feel " slightly evil . " 
 " The Thing You Love Most " is the first episode to feature Mary Margaret 's loft , which is filmed on a small sound stage in Vancouver ; most of the first season 's interior shots are also filmed in the city , while many exterior shots are of nearby Steveston , British Columbia . The production team led by set decorator Mark Lane and production designer Michael Joy designed the residence to seem " locked in time a little bit , so there 's not a lot of new stuff . " They included working class antiques such as a Hoosier cabinet , an old gas stove , and a Bakelite radio . The loft was meant to be located above a store and near a lumber mill and water , so the crew also designed it to feel like a fish cannery . 
 The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode was first broadcast on October 30 , 2011 . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was viewed by an estimated 11 @.@ 64 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 9 ratings share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , and even though it was down a tenth from its debut , it retained its lead in its timeslot and was the only ABC show to have the most viewers tuned in that evening . It ranked third in its timeslot behind Football Night In America on NBC and 60 Minutes on CBS but it beat The Simpsons on the Fox network . On November 3 , ABC ordered a full season in part based on the success of " The Thing You Love Most " , the second episode of the series . In Canada , the episode was watched by an estimated 1 @.@ 44 million viewers , finishing in twenty @-@ second place for the week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe rated " The Thing You Love Most " with a score of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , describing it as " fun " with " not impressive but not horrible " special effects and a story that was " enjoyable and entertaining but not gripping . " Ratcliffe enjoyed the interactions between Emma and Regina , but commented that she " could do with less of Regina 's withering stares " and " precious apples . " She also found the change of music when switching to the fairy tale realm to be " an unnecessary bat over the head . " Cindy McLennan of Television Without Pity graded the episode with an A – . While she liked Bauer van Straten 's performance , McLennan wished that her character had been " fiercer " in her first appearance . Entertainment Weekly columnist Shaunna Murphy thought it was more fun than the pilot and praised Morrison 's " tough @-@ as @-@ nails @-@ but @-@ with @-@ a @-@ secret @-@ heart @-@ of @-@ gold " performance , as well as her character 's feud with Regina . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Oliver Sava criticized the episode for possessing " the same problems as the pilot : It takes itself too seriously , the flashbacks are hilariously campy , and Henry is a horribly obnoxious character in an unfortunately central role . " In addition to giving a negative opinion of the episode 's CGI , Sava opined that Bauer van Staten was misused and disliked Gilmore 's performance , but praised Esposito 's . He gave the episode a " C " . TV Fanatic 's Christine Orlando was more positive , and gave the episode 4 @.@ 6 out of 5 stars , saying that " The Thing You Love Most " was " a great second outing " for the series . She complimented the production design and applauded the conflict between Emma and Regina , citing her favorite scene as " when Emma took a chainsaw to the Regina 's beloved apple tree . " Like Sava , Orlando thought that Maleficent was underused and criticized her hair and the scene for its poor special effects . 
 = Hobey Baker = 
 Hobart Amory Hare " Hobey " Baker ( January 15 , 1892 – December 21 , 1918 ) was an American amateur athlete of the early twentieth century . Considered the first American star in ice hockey by the Hockey Hall of Fame , he was also an accomplished American football player . Born into a prominent family from Philadelphia , he enrolled at Princeton University in 1910 . Baker excelled on the university 's hockey and football teams , and became a noted amateur hockey player for the St. Nicholas Hockey Club in New York City . He was a member of three national championship teams , for football in 1911 and hockey in 1912 and 1914 , and helped the St. Nicholas Club win a national amateur championship in 1915 . Baker graduated from Princeton in 1914 and worked for J.P. Morgan Bank until he enlisted in the United States Army Air Service . During World War I he served with the 103rd and the 13th Aero Squadrons before being promoted to captain and named commander of the 141st Aero Squadron . Baker died in December 1918 after a plane he was test @-@ piloting crashed , hours before he was due to leave France and return to America . 
 Baker was widely regarded by his contemporaries as one of the best athletes of his time and is considered one of the best early American hockey players . When the Hockey Hall of Fame was founded in 1945 , Baker was named one of the first nine inductees , the only American among them . In 1973 he became one of the initial inductees in the United States Hockey Hall of Fame . He was also inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1975 , and is the only person to be in both the hockey and college football halls of fame . 
 F. Scott Fitzgerald idolized Baker and based Allenby , a minor character in the 1920 novel This Side of Paradise , on him . In 1921 , Princeton named its new hockey arena the Hobey Baker Memorial Rink . The National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) , the governing body of college sports in the United States , introduced the Hobey Baker Award in 1980 ; it is awarded annually to the best collegiate hockey player . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Baker was born in Bala Cynwyd , Pennsylvania , the second son of Alfred Thornton Baker , a wealthy upholsterer , and Mary Augusta Pemberton , a socialite . Alfred , known as Bobby to his friends , had played halfback while a student at Princeton University in the 1880s , the same school his father had attended . One of Baker 's ancestors was Francis Rawle , a Quaker who emigrated to Philadelphia in 1688 and became one of the wealthiest members of the city . Baker was named after his uncle , Dr. Hobart Amory Hare , who was the obstetrician at his birth and president of the Jefferson Medical Hospital in Philadelphia . At the age of eleven , Baker and his twelve @-@ year @-@ old brother Thornton were sent to St. Paul 's School in Concord , New Hampshire . Baker 's parents divorced in 1907 and both remarried . 
 While at St. Paul 's , Baker was introduced to ice hockey . Malcolm Gordon , one of the first people to help develop hockey in the United States , was the coach of the school team and recognized Baker 's skill . Baker was known by his classmates to be an exceptionally fast and agile skater . He spent nights skating on frozen ponds to improve his ability to move with the puck while not looking down . Baker was named to the school 's varsity team at the age of fourteen and helped St. Paul 's defeat some of the best prep schools and universities in the United States . In every sport he attempted , Baker soon demonstrated proficiency . His cousin said that Baker swam through water " like some sort of engine " . After his first attempt at golf he was able to score in the low 40s on the school 's nine @-@ hole course ; after using roller skates for the first time , he was able to perform one @-@ legged stunts within minutes . He once entered St. Paul 's annual cross @-@ country race for fun and won , defeating some of the school 's most proficient runners . At the age of fifteen he was named the school 's best athlete for his skill in hockey , football , baseball , tennis , swimming , and track . Most of his former classmates recalled their time at St. Paul 's with Baker solely by his athletic achievements . 
 Alfred Baker lost much of his savings in the Panic of 1907 and could only afford to send one of his sons to college . Thornton agreed to let his talented younger brother continue his education , a sacrifice that Hobey Baker never forgot . Although an above @-@ average student , Baker stayed an extra year at St. Paul 's in 1909 to allow his father another year to save money . By the time Baker left St. Paul 's , his sporting achievements had helped make him one of the school 's most popular students . 
 = = Princeton = = 
 In 1910 , Baker enrolled at Princeton University as a member of the Class of 1914 . Along with six other classmates from St. Paul 's , he lived in a house at 82 Nassau Street in Princeton . He joined the school 's hockey , football , and baseball teams in his freshman year . The university 's rules stated that students could only play two varsity sports , so Baker played outfield for the freshman baseball team before he gave up that sport to focus on hockey and football . In one of his first games with the football team , he helped defeat rival Yale when he faked a drop @-@ kick field goal and instead ran the ball for a touchdown . Easily recognizable on the field because he wore no helmet , Baker was referred to as " the blond Adonis of the gridiron " by Philadelphia sportswriters . Princeton finished the 1911 season with a record of eight wins and two ties in ten games and won the national championship . During a game against Yale on November 18 , 1911 , Baker set a school record that still stands when he had 13 punt returns for 63 yards . 
 During the 1911 football season Baker scored 92 points , a school record that lasted until 1974 . Princeton finished the 1912 season with seven wins , one loss , and one tie in nine games . As the Princeton hockey team did not have its own ice rink , most of their home games were played in New York City at the St. Nicholas Rink , one of the few facilities in the world with artificial ice at the time . The team finished the 1911 – 12 hockey season with a record of eight wins and two losses in ten games . During his sophomore year , Baker was invited to join the Ivy Club , the oldest and most prestigious of the eating clubs that were at the center of social life at the university . 
 Baker was named captain of the football team in 1913 , his senior year . Princeton finished with a record of five wins , two losses , and one tie . Over his three @-@ year football career with the Tigers , Baker scored 180 points , a school record that lasted until 1964 when Cosmo <unk> broke it in the final quarter of his last college game . Baker caught over 900 punts in his career , and averaged 300 yards in punt returns per season . He was awarded a varsity letter in football five times ; combined with the three letters he earned in hockey , his total was the most that could be earned at Princeton at the time . 
 It was during the 1913 – 14 hockey season , Baker 's senior year , that his most famous game with Princeton took place . On January 24 , they played Harvard at the Boston Arena . Initially the favorite to win , Princeton had a setback as one of its star players was injured and unable to play , and another was suspended . Baker was repeatedly called offside , as he was too fast for the two replacement Princeton players ( players were required to stay behind the puck @-@ carrier at the time ) . In the " sudden death " overtime , after sixty minutes of play , Baker was not even breathing heavily . The game was the longest college hockey game played up to that point . 
 The final hockey game of Baker 's Princeton career was at Ottawa 's Dey 's Arena against the University of Ottawa on February 28 , 1914 , for the Intercollegiate Hockey Championship of America . Ottawa defeated Princeton by a 3 – 2 score . Princeton won the 1914 national championship after they finished with a record of ten wins and three losses . Statistics were not kept of his time at Princeton , but biographer Emil Salvini estimated Baker to have scored over 120 goals and 100 assists in three years , an average of three goals and three assists per game . As well as skill , Baker was known for his sportsmanship . In a hockey game against Harvard on January 22 , 1913 , Baker suffered the only penalty of his collegiate career , for slashing ; Princeton lost the game 5 – 4 in overtime . He visited the dressing rooms of opponents after every game to shake hands with each player . 
 In early 1914 , Baker graduated from Princeton , majoring in history , politics , and economics , and finished with above @-@ average grades . He was named the school 's best football player , hockey player , and all @-@ round athlete and the man who had done the most for Princeton . The football team had posted a record of twenty wins , three losses , and four ties in Baker 's three seasons as a member ; the hockey team fared equally well with a record of twenty wins and seven losses . By the end of his football career at Princeton , he had two notable achievements : he had never fumbled a punt , and had never lost to Yale . 
 = = Post @-@ university years = = 
 The summer after graduation , Baker toured Europe as a celebrity correspondent for The New York Times , where he wrote about events like the Henley Royal Regatta . Through his Princeton classmates , he was hired by Wall Street insurance firm Johnson & Higgins upon his return to the United States . Soon after , another Princeton graduate offered him a job at J.P. Morgan Bank . Hired onto a two @-@ year trainee program , Baker earned about $ 20 per week . Baker befriended a rich New York socialite , Percy R. Pyne II , who had also attended St. Paul 's and Princeton . Though ten years older than Baker , they quickly became friends and Pyne allowed Baker to stay at his house at 263 Madison Avenue . Pyne later introduced Baker to Jeanne Marie Scott , a socialite known as Mimi , to whom Baker was briefly engaged late in 1918 . A quiet individual , Baker was embarrassed when bank executives brought important clients by his office to see him . He quickly tired of working in an office job , and looked for ways to alleviate his boredom . 
 Baker found enjoyment outside the office through sports . He joined the St. Nicholas Club , an amateur hockey team in New York , soon after he arrived in the city . Pyne introduced Baker to both polo and auto racing , sports he quickly mastered . Baker remained well known from his time at Princeton ; marquees at his home arena , which was shared with Princeton , often said " Hobey Baker Plays Tonight " . This made Baker uncomfortable and he eventually asked the building manager to take down the sign . Preferring a life out of the public eye , he once told a reporter that he would rather have nothing written about him . In order to leave the arena quickly after hockey games without having to deal with the public , Baker often borrowed Pyne 's valet and car . During the two years that Baker played hockey with St. Nicholas , he was recognized as one of the best players in the American Amateur Hockey League and named to the post @-@ season All @-@ Star Teams both years . While still with the St. Nicholas Club , Baker was offered a contract by the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey Association . He turned down an offer of $ 20 @,@ 000 to play three seasons as social conventions prohibited a person of his standing from playing sports for money . 
 On March 24 , 1917 , Baker played his last hockey game at the Winter Garden at Exposition Hall in Pittsburgh . The game pitted an amateur all @-@ star team from Philadelphia , led by Baker , against an all @-@ star team from Pittsburgh 's amateur leagues . The Philadelphia team defeated Pittsburgh in overtime by a score of 3 – 2 . Baker scored all three Philadelphia goals to net a hat trick . Baker began to tire of playing hockey after 1915 ; the constant physical play of opposing players on the ice had taken its toll , and the growing professionalism of the sport went against his belief that sports should be played for the love of the game . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Looking for new adventures , in 1916 he joined a civilian aviation corps led by New York City attorney Phillip A. Carroll on Governors Island , off the coast of Manhattan , a privately funded program to train civilians to pass the Reserve Military Aviator flying test and receive commissions in the Signal Officers Reserve Corps . He often went to the island late in the afternoon after he finished work for the day . Baker found the same enjoyment in flying that he had in sports , but with a more serious aspect . Prior to the annual Yale – Princeton football game on November 18 , 1916 , Baker in a Curtiss " Jenny " flown by fellow Governors Island student Cord Meyer ( a <unk> ) , joined a squadron of New York National Guard <unk> led by Captain Raynal Bolling , the most to have ever flown in military formation , and flew to Palmer Stadium , home of the Princeton football team . The planes performed several maneuvers to the delight of the crowd , and Baker landed on the field , becoming the first person to reach a football game by air . 
 The entry of the United States into World War I excited Baker , as it finally gave him a purpose in life and allowed him to make good use of his pilot training . He left the United States for Europe in the summer of 1917 , among the first group of Americans to do so . Though eager to join the front immediately , Baker was told that he had to be certified by the French . Success in the courses was dependent on how quickly the pilots learned French , the predominant language of instruction . Though he managed to complete all the courses easily , a lack of qualified teachers meant that Baker was first sent to a school in England for more training and then back to France to teach Americans what he had learned in England , in an attempt to create pilots as quickly as possible . This discouraged Baker , who was eager to get into the front lines and fight . Owing to a lack of aircraft supplies , Baker was stuck in Paris , and doubted he would ever get to the front . While in Paris , he was happy to continue seeing Scott , who had enlisted as a nurse and worked at a hospital in France . 
 Baker was finally sent to the front in April and assigned to the 103d Aero Squadron , formed from former members of the Lafayette Escadrille and Lafayette Flying Corps in January 1918 . Baker helped to bring down an enemy plane for the first time in his career on May 21 , but due to a complicated system of confirming kills , he was not given credit for it . In a letter home describing the battle , Baker said it was the " biggest thrill I ever had in my life " , and compared it to the feeling after a big sports game . Throughout the spring of 1918 Baker continued to lead planes over the front , and continued to see Scott , although he began to have reservations over their future together due to the financial disparity between them . After his first confirmed kill on May 21 , 1918 , the French government awarded him the Croix de Guerre . 
 During the summer , Baker was transferred to the 13th Aero Squadron after its commander , Captain Charles Biddle , requested that he join the squadron as a flight commander . Though reluctant to leave the 103rd , Baker felt that Biddle would not have requested him without confidence in his abilities . On July 20 , the 13th Squadron recorded its first confirmed kill during a flight led by Baker ; he and two other men shot down a German plane . In August , Baker and another pilot were promoted and given command of their own squadron ; Baker was given charge of the 141st Aero Squadron , composed of 26 pilots and 180 enlisted men stationed behind the front line , where they had to wait for equipment to arrive before leaving for the front . 
 Various delays in the arrival of planes and equipment meant that Baker 's squadron was unable to participate in the final major offensives of the war . In September , Baker became engaged to Scott . He asked Pyne to sell a bond to pay for an engagement ring , and the newspapers in the United States carried headlines that announced the engagement . Early in October , Baker was promoted again and given the rank of captain . The planes and equipment arrived for his squadron soon after . Baker had the planes painted in Princeton 's black and orange and adopted a tiger for the squadron insignia . He recorded two more kills on October 28 and November 5 , the last of his career ( despite reports at the time of his death , Baker was not an ace , as that required five confirmed kills ) . 
 Around the time of the armistice which ended the war , Baker 's engagement with Scott was broken off ; Scott then began a relationship with an American diplomat in Paris , Philander Cable . Missing his fiancee and the excitement of the war , he felt directionless ; he dreaded going back to work in an office and considered himself a sportsman rather than a businessman . Though he was scheduled to return to the United States in December , Baker requested and was refused an extension of his time in France . 
 = = Death = = 
 On December 21 , 1918 , Baker received orders to return to the United States . Reluctant to leave France and return to his life in America , he decided to take a final flight at his squadron 's airfield in Toul . As he went for his own plane , the mechanic brought out a recently repaired one instead , in need of a test flight . The other pilots remonstrated with Baker , but he maintained that as commanding officer he could not let anyone else test the aircraft . 
 In heavy rain , Baker took off and began to level off at 600 feet . A quarter of a mile into the flight , the engine failed . The plane was generally easy to crash @-@ land if necessary , something he had done previously at the cost of a few broken ribs . 
 A few hundred yards from the airfield , his plane crashed nose first into the ground . He was quickly freed from the aircraft by his men , but died in an ambulance minutes later ; his orders to return home were found in his jacket pocket . Baker was buried in a small military cemetery near Toul ; in 1921 , his mother had his remains moved to her family plot in West Laurel Hill Cemetery , Bala Cynwyd , Pennsylvania . 
 Though newspapers reported that Baker had died as a result of engine failure , unsubstantiated rumors began to circulate that his death was not accidental . Those who knew him were aware of his reluctance to return to civilian life and his feelings over the loss of Scott . He could have returned to America and played professional sport , where he could have earned far more money than from a job in finance , but his upbringing made that impossible for him . A career in business held no appeal ; during a weekend vacation with a fellow Princeton graduate , Baker revealed that he felt his life was over , and he would never again experience the thrills of football or hockey . In 1966 , author John D. Davies published a biography of Baker , where he noted a relative of Baker 's could not see a future for him in the post @-@ war world . However , Davies refused to elaborate on what he called the " suicide theory of [ Baker 's ] enigmatic death " , as he feared that " some of the old guard would be furious if they thought I was trying to prove it " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Baker is considered one of the greatest ice hockey players of his era , and the first great American hockey player . He was one of the first nine players inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame upon its founding in 1945 , the first American so honored , and was inducted into the United States Hockey Hall of Fame as one of its charter members in 1973 . Baker was posthumously awarded the Lester Patrick Trophy by the National Hockey League and USA Hockey in 1987 for his contributions to hockey in the United States . In 1975 , he was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame and is the only person in both the College Football and Hockey Halls of Fame . Baker was also inducted into the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame in 2010 . 
 His popularity was such that , after he enlisted in the military , so many of his fellow Princeton athletes followed his lead that the school had to cancel its hockey team for the 1917 – 18 season ; all five starting players enlisted in the armed forces . Of the eleven players on the team the previous season , nine enlisted shortly after Baker . 
 Baker was also the inspiration for literary works . In 1913 F. Scott Fitzgerald enrolled at Princeton as a freshman , when Baker was a senior . Though he only spoke to Baker once during their time at Princeton , Fitzgerald idolized him . His first novel , This Side of Paradise , has several references to Baker : the main character is named Amory Blaine after Baker 's middle name , and the minor character Allenby is Baker himself . Mark Goodman 's 1985 novel Hurrah for the Next Man Who Dies is a fictionalized account of Baker 's life . 
 Baker 's honors included a citation on March 27 , 1919 , by General John Pershing , commander of the American Expeditionary Forces , for exceptional bravery on May 21 , 1918 , when he brought down his first plane . The Hobey Baker Award was established in 1981 and is awarded annually to the best player in NCAA hockey . The Hobey Baker Legends of College Hockey Award was also created that year and is given to the " all @-@ time great contributors to the game of college hockey " each year . Since 1950 , Princeton has awarded the Hobey Baker Trophy to the " freshman hockey player who , among his classmates , in play , sportsmanship and influence has contributed most to the sport . " When Princeton opened their hockey arena in 1921 , it was named the Hobey Baker Memorial Rink . At St. Paul 's , hockey players compete for an award known as " Hobey 's Stick " . Inside the bar of the Nassau Inn in Princeton is a photo of Baker flanked by two other famous Princeton athletes , Bill Bradley and Dick Kazmaier . The Ivy Club , of which Baker was a member , has a painting of him in the living room . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Statistics from Total Hockey , Diamond 2002 , p . 616 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = Terminus ( god ) = 
 In Roman religion , Terminus was the god who protected boundary markers ; his name was the Latin word for such a marker . Sacrifices were performed to sanctify each boundary stone , and landowners celebrated a festival called the " Terminalia " in Terminus ' honor each year on February 23 . The Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill was thought to have been built over a shrine to Terminus , and he was occasionally identified as an aspect of Jupiter under the name " Jupiter <unk> " . 
 Ancient writers believed that the worship of Terminus had been introduced to Rome during the reign of the first king Romulus ( traditionally 753 – 717 BC ) or his successor Numa ( 717 – 673 BC ) . Modern scholars have variously seen it as the survival of an early animistic reverence for the power inherent in the boundary marker , or as the Roman development of proto @-@ Indo @-@ European belief in a god concerned with the division of property . 
 = = Worship = = 
 The name of the god Terminus was the Latin word for a boundary stone , and his worship as recorded in the late Republic and Empire centred on this stone , with which the god could be identified . Siculus Flaccus , a writer on land surveying , records the ritual by which the stone was sanctified : the bones , ashes , and blood of a sacrificial victim , along with crops , honeycombs , and wine , were placed into a hole at a point where estates converged , and the stone was driven in on top . On February 23 annually , a festival called the Terminalia was celebrated in Terminus ' honor , involving practices which can be regarded as a reflection or " yearly renewal " of this foundational ritual . Neighboring families would garland their respective sides of the marker and make offerings to Terminus at an altar — Ovid identifies these , again , as crops , honeycombs , and wine . The marker itself would be drenched in the blood of a sacrificed lamb or pig . There followed a communal feast and hymns in praise of Terminus . 
 These rites were practised by private landowners , but there were also related public ceremonies . Ovid refers to the sacrifice of a sheep on the day of the Terminalia at the sixth milestone from Rome along the Via <unk> ; it is likely this was thought to have marked the boundary between the early Romans and their neighbors in <unk> . Also , a stone or altar of Terminus was located in the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on Rome 's Capitoline Hill . Because of a belief that this stone had to be exposed to the sky , there was a small hole in the ceiling directly above it . On occasion Terminus ' association with Jupiter extended to regarding Terminus as an aspect of that god ; Dionysius of Halicarnassus refers to " Jupiter <unk> " , and one inscription names a god " <unk> Ter . " 
 There is some evidence that Terminus ' associations could extend from property boundaries to limits more generally . Under the Republican calendar , when the intercalary month <unk> was added to a year , it was placed after February 23 or February 24 , and some ancient writers believed that the Terminalia on February 23 had once been the end of the year . Diocletian 's decision in 303 AD to initiate his persecution of Christians on February 23 has been seen as an attempt at enlisting Terminus " to put a limit to the progress of Christianity " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ancient views = = = 
 Ancient authors agreed that the worship of Terminus was of Sabine origin , ascribing its introduction to Rome either to Titus <unk> , the Sabine colleague of Rome 's founding king Romulus ( traditional reign 753 – 717 BC ) , or to Romulus ' successor Numa <unk> ( 717 – 673 BC ) . Those authors who gave the credit to Numa explained his motivation as the prevention of violent disputes over property . Plutarch further states that , in keeping with Terminus 's character as a guarantor of peace , his earliest worship did not involve blood sacrifices . 
 The stone in the Capitoline Temple was believed to have been among the altars located on the Capitoline Hill before the Temple was built under Tarquinius Priscus ( traditional reign 616 – 579 BC ) or Tarquinius Superbus ( 535 – 510 BC ) . When the augurs took the auspices to discover whether the god or goddess of each altar was content for it to be moved , Terminus refused permission , either alone or along with Juventas the goddess of youth . The stone was therefore included within the Capitoline Temple , and its <unk> was regarded as a good omen for the permanence of the city 's boundaries . 
 = = = Modern views = = = 
 According to the dominant scholarly view during the late 19th and much of the 20th century , Roman religion was originally animistic , directed towards spirits associated with specific objects or activities which were only later perceived as gods with independent personal existence . Terminus , with his lack of mythology and his close association with a physical object , seemed a clear example of a deity who had developed little from such a stage . 
 This view of Terminus retains some recent adherents , but other scholars have argued from Indo @-@ European parallels that the personalised gods of Roman religion must have preceded the city 's foundation . Georges Dumézil regarded Jupiter , Juventas and Terminus as the Roman form of a proto @-@ Indo @-@ European triad , comparing the Roman deities respectively to the Vedic Mitra , <unk> , and Bhaga . In this view the sovereign god ( Jupiter / Mitra ) was associated with two minor deities , one concerned with the entry of men into society ( Juventas / <unk> ) and the other with the fair division of their goods ( Terminus / Bhaga ) . 
 = Fork @-@ marked lemur = 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs or fork @-@ crowned lemurs are strepsirrhine primates ; the four species comprise the genus Phaner . Like all lemurs , they are native to Madagascar , where they are found only in the west , north , and east sides of the island . They are named for the two black stripes which run up from the eyes , converge on the top of the head , and run down the back as a single black stripe . They were originally placed in the genus Lemur in 1839 , later moved between the genera Cheirogaleus and Microcebus , and finally given their own genus in 1870 by British zoologist John Edward Gray . Only one species ( Phaner furcifer ) was recognized , until three subspecies described in 1991 were promoted to species status in 2001 . New species may yet be identified , particularly in northeast Madagascar . 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs are among the least studied of all lemurs and are some of the largest members of the family Cheirogaleidae , weighing around 350 grams ( 0 @.@ 77 lb ) or more . They are the most phylogenetically distinct of the cheirogaleids , and considered a sister group to the rest of the family . Aside from their dorsal forked stripe , they have dark rings around their eyes , and large membranous ears . Males have a scent gland on their throat , but only use it during social grooming , not for marking territory . Instead , they are very vocal , making repeated calls at the beginning and end of the night . Like the other members of their family , they are nocturnal , and sleep in tree holes and nests during the day . Monogamous pairing is typical for fork @-@ marked lemurs , and females are dominant . Females are thought to have only one offspring every two years or more . 
 These lemurs live in a wide variety of habitats , ranging from dry deciduous forests to rainforests , and run quadrupedally across branches . Their diet consists primarily of tree gum and other exudates , though they may obtain some of their protein and nitrogen by hunting small arthropods later at night . Three of the four species are endangered and the other is listed as vulnerable . Their populations are in decline due to habitat destruction . Like all lemurs , they are protected against commercial trade under CITES Appendix I. 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs were first documented in 1839 by French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville when he described the Masoala fork @-@ marked lemur ( P. furcifer ) as Lemur furcifer . The holotype is thought to be MNHN 1834 @-@ 136 , a female specimen taken from Madagascar by French naturalist Justin <unk> . The source of this specimen is unknown , but thought to be Antongil Bay . In 1850 , French zoologist Isidore Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire moved the fork @-@ marked lemurs to the genus Cheirogaleus ( dwarf lemurs ) , but they were also commonly listed in the genus Microcebus ( mouse lemurs ) . In 1870 , British zoologist John Edward Gray assigned fork @-@ marked lemurs to their own genus , Phaner , after initially including them and the mouse lemurs in the genus Lepilemur ( sportive lemurs ) . Although French naturalist Alfred Grandidier accepted Gray 's new genus ( while also lumping the other cheirogaleids in Cheirogaleus and illustrating the cranial similarities between cheirogaleids and Lepilemur ) in 1897 , the genus Phaner was not widely accepted . In the early 1930s , zoologists Ernst Schwarz , Guillaume Grandidier , and others resurrected the name , citing characteristics that were intermediate between Cheirogaleus and Microcebus . 
 Until the late 20th century , there was only one recognized species of fork @-@ marked lemur , although size and coloration differences had been noted previously . After comparing museum specimens , paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall and physical anthropologist Colin Groves recognized three new subspecies in 1991 : the Pale fork @-@ marked lemur ( P. f. pallescens ) , Pariente 's fork @-@ marked lemur ( P. f. <unk> ) , and the Amber Mountain fork @-@ marked lemur ( P. f. <unk> ) . In 2001 , Groves elevated all four subspecies to species status based on noticeable color , size , and body proportion differences between the fragmented populations . Although Tattersall disagreed with this promotion , citing inadequate information for the decision , the arrangement is generally accepted . 
 In December 2010 , Russell Mittermeier of Conservation International and conservation geneticist Edward E. Louis , Jr. announced the possibility of a new species of fork @-@ marked lemur in the protected area of Daraina in northeast Madagascar . In October , a specimen was observed , captured , and released , although genetic tests have yet to determine if it is in fact a new species . The specimen demonstrated a slightly different color pattern from other fork @-@ marked lemur species . If shown to be a new species , they plan to name it after Fanamby , a key conservation organization working in that protected forest . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The etymology of the genus Phaner puzzled researchers for many years . Gray often created mysterious and unexplained taxonomic names . In 1904 , American zoologist Theodore Sherman Palmer attempted to document the etymologies of all mammalian taxa , but could not definitively explain the origins of the generic name Phaner , noting only that it derived from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " visible , evident " . In 2012 , Alex Dunkel , Jelle Zijlstra , and Groves attempted to solve the mystery . Following some initial speculation , a search of the general literature published around 1870 revealed the source : the British comedy The Palace of Truth by W. S. Gilbert , which premiered in London on 19 November 1870 , nearly one and a half weeks prior to the date written on the preface of Gray 's manuscript ( also published in London ) . The comedy featured characters bearing three names : King Phanor ( sic ) , Mirza , and Azema . Since the genera Mirza ( giant mouse lemurs ) and Azema ( for M. rufus , now a synonym for Microcebus ) were both described in the same publication and equally enigmatic , the authors concluded that Gray had seen the comedy and then based the names of three lemur genera on its characters . 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs were called " fork @-@ marked dwarf lemurs " by Scottish naturalist Henry Ogg Forbes in 1894 and " fork @-@ crowned mouse lemur " by English missionary and naturalist James <unk> in 1895 . Literature searches by Dunkel et al. also uncovered other names , such as " fork @-@ lined lemur " and " squirrel lemur " , during the early 1900s . By the 1970s , reference to dwarf and mouse lemurs had ended , and the " fork @-@ crowned " prefix became popular between 1960 and 2001 . Since then , the " fork @-@ marked " prefix has become more widely used . These lemurs get their common name from the distinctive forked stripe on their head . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Within the family Cheirogaleidae , fork @-@ marked lemurs are the most phylogenetically distinct , although their placement remained uncertain until recently . One uniting characteristic ( synapomorphy ) among all cheirogaleids , to the exclusion of other lemurs , is the branching of the carotid artery along with how it enters the skull — a trait which is shared by fork @-@ marked lemurs . Analyses based on morphology , immunology , and repetitive DNA have given contradictory placements of Phaner , while studies in 2001 and 2008 either lacked data or yielded poor resolution of their placement . 
 A study in 2009 of seven mitochondrial genes ( mtDNA ) and three nuclear genes grouped fork @-@ marked lemurs with sportive lemurs ( family Lepilemuridae ) , offering a host of explanations , such as a possible hybridization ( introgression ) following the initial split between the families . A study published in 2013 also grouped fork @-@ marked lemurs with sportive lemurs when it used 43 morphological traits and mtDNA . If correct , this would make the family Cheirogaleidae paraphyletic . However , broad agreement between two lemur phylogeny studies — one in 2004 using SINE analysis and another in 2012 using multilocus phylogenetic tests — gave strong support for a sister group relationship between fork @-@ marked lemurs and the rest of the cheirogaleids and a more distant relationship with sportive lemurs . The split between Phaner and the rest of the cheirogaleids is thought to have occurred approximately 38 mya ( million years ago ) , not long after the radiation of most of the major lemur groups on Madagascar , roughly 43 mya . 
 = = Description = = 
 Of the mostly small , nocturnal lemurs in family Cheirogaleidae , the genus Phaner contains some of the largest species , along with Cheirogaleus . Their body weight ranges between 350 and 500 g ( 0 @.@ 77 and 1 @.@ 10 lb ) , and their head @-@ body length averages between 23 @.@ 7 and 27 @.@ 2 cm ( 9 @.@ 3 and 10 @.@ 7 in ) , with a tail length between 31 @.@ 9 and 40 @.@ 1 cm ( 12 @.@ 6 and 15 @.@ 8 in ) . 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs ' dorsal ( back ) fur is either light brown or light grayish @-@ brown , while their ventral ( underside ) fur can be yellow , cream , white , or pale brown . A black stripe extends from the tail , along the dorsal midline to the head , where it forks at the top of the head in a distinguishing Y @-@ shape leading to the dark rings around both eyes , and sometimes extends down the snout . The dorsal stripe varies in width and darkness . The base of the tail is the same color as the dorsal fur and is usually tipped in black ; the tail is bushy . The lemurs ' ears are relatively large and membranous . Males have a scent gland on the middle of their throat , which is approximately 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) wide and pink in color . Females have a narrow , bare patch of white skin in the same location , but theirs does not appear to produce secretions . 
 These lemurs have relatively long hindlegs . For gripping tree trunks and large branches , they have large hands and feet with extended pads on the digits , as well as claw @-@ like nails . They have a long tongue which assists obtaining the gum and nectar , as well as a long caecum , which helps digest gums . Their procumbent ( forward @-@ facing ) lemuriform toothcomb ( formed by the lower incisors and canines ) is long and more compressed , with significantly reduced interdental spaces to minimize the accumulation of gum between the teeth . 
 The genus is distinguished from other cheirogaleids by the toothrows on its maxilla ( upper jaw ) , which are parallel and do not converge towards the front of the mouth . The fork @-@ marked lemur dental formula is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 × 2 = 36 ; on each side of the mouth , top and bottom , there are two incisors , one canine , three premolars , and three molars — a total of 36 teeth . Their upper first incisor ( I1 ) is long and curved towards the middle of the mouth ( unique among lemurs ) , while the second upper incisor ( I2 ) is small with a gap ( diastema ) between the two . The upper canines are large , with their tips curved . Their upper anterior premolars ( P2 ) are caniniform ( canine @-@ shaped ) and more pronounced than in any other living lemur . The next upper premolar ( P3 ) is very small , with a single , pointed cusp that contacts the lingual cingulum ( a crest or ridge on the tongue side ) , which circles the base of the tooth . The two cusps on the last upper premolar ( P4 ) are a large paracone and a smaller protocone . Like other cheirogaleids , their first lower premolar ( P2 ) is caniniform and large , while the <unk> ( ridges ) on the three lower premolars are more developed compared to most other cheirogaleids . The first two upper molars ( M1 – 2 ) have a developed hypocone , and the buccal cingulum ( a crest or ridge on the cheek side ) is well developed on all three upper molars . The molars are relatively small compared to other cheirogaleids , with the second upper and lower molars ( M2 and M2 ) having reduced functionality compared to those of mouse lemurs . 
 Males have relatively small testes compared other lemurs , and their canine teeth are the same size as those seen in females . During the dry season , females can weigh more than males . Both patterns of sexual dimorphism are consistent with the theory of sexual selection for monogamous species and female dominance respectively . Females have two pairs of nipples . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs are found in the west , north , and east of Madagascar , but their distribution is discontinuous . Their habitat ranges from dry deciduous forests on the western coast of the island to rainforest in the east . They are also commonly found in secondary forest , but not in areas lacking continuous forest cover . They are most common in the west of the island . Fork @-@ marked lemurs are not found in the southern spiny forests in the dry southern part of the island , and only recently have been reported from the southeastern rainforest at Andohahela National Park , though this has not been confirmed . A team led by E. E. Louis Jr. has suggested that undescribed varieties may also exist elsewhere on the island . 
 The Masoala fork @-@ marked lemur is found on the Masoala peninsula in the northeast of the island , while the Amber Mountain fork @-@ marked lemur is located in the far north of the island , particularly at Amber Mountain National Park . Pariente 's fork @-@ marked lemur is found in the Sambirano region in the northwest , and the pale fork @-@ marked lemur is in the west of the island . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs are among the least studied of all lemurs , and little is known about them . Only the pale fork @-@ marked lemur ( P. pallescens ) has been studied relatively well , primarily by Pierre Charles @-@ Dominique , Jean @-@ Jacques Petter , and Georges Pariente during two expeditions in the 1970s and a more extensive 1998 study in Kirindy Forest . Like the other cheirogaleids , these lemurs are nocturnal , sleeping in tree hollows ( typically in large baobab trees ) or abandoned nests built by giant mouse lemurs ( Mirza coquereli ) during the day . Some of the abandoned nests they sleep in are leaf @-@ lined , and fresh leaves are often added when young are born . As many as 30 sleeping sites may be used over the course of a year , each for a variable length of time . 
 At night , fork @-@ marked lemurs visit the feeding sites within their range by running quadrupedally across branches at high speed over long distances , leaping from tree to tree without pausing . They have been seen on the ground ( typically during chases following fights ) and as high as 10 m ( 33 ft ) , but they are typically seen running along branches at a height of 3 to 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) . While running , they can leap 4 to 5 m ( 13 to 16 ft ) horizontally between tree branches without losing height or as much as 10 m ( 33 ft ) while falling a short distance . 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs are sensitive to light intensity , and emerge at twilight , calling numerous times and answering their neighbors ' calls before going off to forage . Just before dawn , they also communicate again on their way to their sleep site . Cold temperatures can also cause individuals to retire to their sleeping site as early as two hours before dawn . Their eye shine creates a unique pattern among lemurs because they tend to bob their heads up and down and from side to side . 
 These lemurs are territorial , with territory size dependent upon food availability , though territories typically cover 3 to 10 hectares ( 7 @.@ 4 to 24 @.@ 7 acres ) . Because of their fast movement , individuals can easily defend their territories by traversing it within 5 minutes . Territory overlap is minimal between males , and the same pattern is seen in females , though males and females may overlap their territories . In areas where territory overlap occurs ( " meeting areas " ) , several neighbors may gather and vocalize together without aggression . Multiple family groups may gather in these meeting areas , and females will often socialize with the other females and young . Unlike other lemurs , fork @-@ marked lemurs do not scent @-@ mark , and instead use vocalizations during territorial confrontations . They are considered very vocal animals , and have a complex range of calls . On average , males make approximately 30 loud calls per hour , and are most vocal at dusk and dawn . Their high @-@ pitched , whistling calls help researchers identify them in the field . As well as their stress call and fighting call , they emit a Hon call ( contact call between male @-@ female pairs ) , Ki and <unk> calls ( more excited contact calls that identify the caller ) , and a Kea call ( a loud call shared between males in adjacent territories ) . Females also make a " bleating " call when they have infants . 
 Males and females have been seen sleeping and foraging together as monogamous pairs , although polygamy and solitary behavior has also been observed . At Kirindy Forest , pairs were observed staying together for multiple seasons , though they were only seen foraging alone , with most interactions resulting from conflicts over feeding sites . Nest sharing among pairs occurs one out of every three days . During social grooming ( allogrooming ) , the male <unk> females using a scent gland on the throat , and grooming sessions can last several minutes . While feeding , females appear to be dominant , gaining first access to food . Females are also dominant over non @-@ resident males , indicating true female dominance , comparable to that seen in the ring @-@ tailed lemur ( Lemur catta ) . 
 Mating has been observed to take place at the end of the dry season , in early November , and births were inferred between late February and early March . Only one infant is born per season , despite females having two pairs of nipples . Infants are initially parked in unguarded tree holes while the mother forages . Older infants have not been observed clinging to the mother , and as they get older , they are parked in vegetation until they can move independently . Females produce milk for two years following the birth of the young . The offspring may remain under the care of their parents for three years or more , and there is no information about their dispersal at maturity . Females have not been observed giving birth in consecutive years . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 These lemurs have a specialized diet of tree gums and sap . Their diet consists mainly of gum from trees in the genus Terminalia ( known locally as " <unk> " ) , which are often parasitized by beetle larvae that burrow beneath the bark . Fork @-@ marked lemurs either consume the gum as it seeps from cracks in the bark of parasitized trees or gouge open the bark with their toothcomb to scoop it up directly with their long tongue . Between March and May , gums compose the majority of the diet . They have also been documented eating gums from Commiphora species and <unk> racemosa , bud exudates from <unk> <unk> , sap from baobab trees ( Adansonia species ) , nectar from <unk> <unk> flowers , the sugary excretions from bugs ( family <unk> ) which feed on trees of the genus <unk> , and very small amounts of fruit . Although fork @-@ marked lemurs have widely varied forest habitat , gum and other plant exudates of other species are likely to dominate their diet . They are not known to estivate or accumulate fat reserves for the dry season . 
 To meet their protein requirements and obtain nitrogen , these lemurs also hunt small arthropods . In captivity , P. furcifer strongly favored preying mantises and moths of the family Sphingidae while ignoring grasshoppers , larva of the moth genus <unk> , and small reptiles . Hunting usually occurs later at night , following gum collection , and typically happens in the canopy or on tree trunks . Insects are captured by rapidly grasping them with the hands , a stereotypic behavior seen in other members of their family , as well as galagos . However , the exudates of several tree species they are known to feed on are high in protein , so some fork @-@ marked lemurs may meet their protein requirements without preying on insects . 
 Other nocturnal lemurs are sympatric with fork @-@ marked lemurs . In western Madagascar , interspecific competition is reduced by restricting activity to specific levels of the canopy , such as using only the highest sleeping sites at least 8 m ( 26 ft ) above the ground . Competition with other cheirogaleids , such as the gray mouse lemur ( Microcebus murinus ) and Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur ( Mirza coquereli ) , is most intense for Terminalia gum during the dry season , but fork @-@ marked lemurs always drive the other lemur species off . Studies of P. pallescens at Kirindy Forest found up to a 20 % drop in body mass during the dry season despite no changes in exudate production , indicating flowers and insects have a significant impact on the species ' health . 
 Fork @-@ marked lemurs are thought to be preyed upon by large owls , such as the Madagascar owl ( Asio madagascariensis ) , and snakes like the Malagasy tree boa ( <unk> madagascariensis ) . In one case , a family of fork @-@ marked lemurs exhibited mobbing behavior when they encountered a Malagasy tree boa . Diurnal raptors , such as the Madagascar buzzard ( Buteo brachypterus ) and Madagascar cuckoo @-@ hawk ( <unk> madagascariensis ) hunt these lemurs at dusk , and the hunting behavior of the Madagascar harrier @-@ hawk ( Polyboroides radiatus ) suggests it might extract them from their sleeping holes . The fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) has also been seen attacking fork @-@ marked lemurs , and remains have been found in their scat . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 In 2012 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) listed P. <unk> , P. <unk> , and P. pallescens as endangered , and P. furcifer as vulnerable . Before this assessment , it was assumed that their population was in decline due to habitat destruction for the creation of pasture and agriculture . Measures of their population density vary widely , from 50 to 550 individuals per square kilometer ( 250 acres ) , but these numbers are thought to reflect only small , gum @-@ rich areas , and therefore only small , clustered populations with an overall low population density . 
 As with all lemurs , fork @-@ marked lemurs were first protected in 1969 when they were listed as " Class A " of the African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources . This prohibited hunting and capture without authorization , which would only be given for scientific purposes or the national interest . They were also protected under CITES Appendix I as of 1973 . This strictly regulates their trade and forbids commercial trade . Although enforcement is patchy , they are also protected under Malagasy law . Fork @-@ marked lemurs are rarely kept in captivity , and their captive lifespan can range from 12 to 25 years . 
 = No. 450 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 450 Squadron was a unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) that operated during World War II . Established at RAAF Station Williamtown , New South Wales , in February 1941 , it was the first Australian Article XV squadron formed under the Empire Air Training Scheme . 
 The squadron embarked for the Middle East in April 1941 ; its personnel initially consisted solely of ground crew , who joined the pilots of No. 260 Squadron RAF to form No. 260 / 450 Squadron , which briefly operated Hawker Hurricane fighters in Syria . It was not until February 1942 that No. 450 Squadron , now with its own pilots and equipped with Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters , commenced operations in earnest . Over the next 15 months , it fought in the North African and Tunisian Campaigns in both fighter and fighter @-@ bomber roles , claiming 49 German and Italian aircraft destroyed in the air and earning the nickname " The Desert <unk> " . 
 Beginning in July 1943 , No. 450 Squadron took part in the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Italian campaign , primarily in the close support role . Its aircraft attacked targets in Yugoslavia as well as in Sicily and Italy . The squadron began converting from Kittyhawks to North American P @-@ 51 Mustang fighters in May 1945 , but never saw action with its new aircraft . It was disbanded in August 1945 following the conclusion of hostilities , having suffered 63 fatal casualties during the war . Today , by agreement with the RAAF , the squadron 's number is carried by a Royal Canadian Air Force unit , 450 Tactical Helicopter Squadron . 
 = = History = = 
 No. 450 Squadron was formed at RAAF Station Williamtown , near Newcastle , New South Wales , on 7 February 1941 . Raised a week before No. 451 Squadron , it was the first Australian squadron established for service with the British military under the Article XV of the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . No. 450 Squadron was intended to be an " infiltration " squadron , which would consist initially only of ground crew and would receive a nucleus of experienced pilots after arriving in its designated theatre of operations . 
 Inaugurated at Ottawa , Canada , in October 1939 , EATS was a plan to expand the Royal Air Force 's ( RAF ) capacity to train aircrews by creating a pool of personnel from various Commonwealth countries — Australia , Canada , Britain and New Zealand — through the establishment of a common training system consisting of a series of initial , elementary , and advanced training schools . At the conclusion of advanced training , personnel were posted as required to RAF @-@ controlled squadrons in Britain or the Middle East . These squadrons were designated as either RAF , RAAF , Royal Canadian Air Force or Royal New Zealand Air Force squadrons , but were paid for and administered by the British government , and personnel could be drawn from any Commonwealth nation . Seventeen RAAF squadrons were formed during the war under Article XV of the agreement . 
 = = = Middle East and North Africa = = = 
 Under the temporary command of Flight Lieutenant Bruce Shepherd , No. 450 Squadron left Australia on 11 April 1941 , embarking on the troopship Queen Elizabeth at Sydney , and arriving in Egypt on 3 May . At RAF Abu <unk> , Squadron Leader Gordon Steege took command of the squadron before it was combined with the pilots and Hawker Hurricanes of No. 260 Squadron RAF , which had been established without ground crew , to form an operational squadron . The combined unit , known as No. 260 / 450 ( Hurricane ) Squadron , then relocated to Amman in Transjordan . Its first operation was on 29 June 1941 , when the Hurricanes attacked Vichy French airfields and infrastructure during the invasion of Syria . No. 260 / 450 Squadron operated for ten days only and flew 61 sorties against airfields , 20 on offensive patrols and six on bomber @-@ escort duties during the Syrian campaign . 
 In August 1941 , No. 450 Squadron personnel were separated from No. 260 Squadron , when the latter received its own ground crew . No. 450 Squadron moved to Rayak airfield , Lebanon , where it was allocated Hurricanes and Miles Magister trainers . A batch of 20 trainee Australian , British and Canadian pilots — the majority being Australian — were posted to the squadron in early October , and it began duties as an Operational Training Unit . A fortnight later these pilots were posted out and , lacking trained pilots , the squadron 's aircraft were re @-@ allocated . On 20 October , the squadron moved to Burg El Arab , Egypt , and began operating as an advanced repair , salvage and service unit , taking part in the North African Campaign . 
 By December 1941 , the squadron was receiving pilots and it began taking delivery of Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters . On 19 December , RAF Middle East Command issued an administrative instruction declaring that although manned primarily by Australians , Nos. 450 and 451 Squadrons were " paid by and loaned to the Royal Air Force under the Empire Air Training Scheme and for all practical purposes they should be regarded as R.A.F. squadrons in every way " . Confusion reigned for a time , but after intervention by the British Air Ministry , a further communique on 23 January 1942 announced that " 450 and 451 <unk> Squadrons are to be regarded as R.A.A.F. squadrons " . Training began the same month , and No. 450 Squadron commenced operations from RAF Gambut on 19 February 1942 , with an uneventful patrol near Tobruk . Three days later Sergeant Raymond Shaw became the first pilot from the squadron to claim an aerial victory , after he intercepted a Junkers Ju 88 near Gazala . 
 The squadron became part of the Desert Air Force 's newly formed No. 239 Wing on 1 March 1942 , serving alongside one Australian squadron , No. 3 , and two RAF squadrons , Nos. 112 and 250 Squadrons . No. 450 Squadron 's main roles — escorting daylight raids by Douglas Boston bombers , and ground @-@ attack missions in support of the Eighth Army — were hazardous and resulted in relatively heavy losses . From 26 May , as Rommel launched an assault on the Gazala – Bir <unk> line , all Kittyhawk units began to focus on the fighter @-@ bomber role rather than air @-@ to @-@ air combat , to support retreating Commonwealth forces . On 29 May , No. 450 Squadron claimed two Junkers Ju 87s and a Messerschmitt Bf 109 , for the loss of three pilots killed , including Shaw . Flight Sergeant Don <unk> , the squadron 's highest @-@ scoring pilot with five solo victories and one shared , claimed his final " kill " on 4 July 1942 when he shot a Messerschmitt Bf 110 into the sea following a bombing mission on airfields west of Daba . 
 No. 450 Squadron took part in the decisive Second Battle of El Alamein , during October and November 1942 , attacking enemy airfields and claiming three German and Italian fighters destroyed in the air . It suffered several losses during this time , including one of its leading scorers , Squadron Leader John Williams , who was shot down and taken prisoner on 31 October 1942 , three days after he had been appointed commanding officer . The squadron was frequently on the move as the Allies advanced following Second El Alamein , changing locations six times during November . It often found itself using captured or hastily constructed airfields ; one Kittyhawk was destroyed and several ground personnel killed or wounded by land mines at Marble Arch , Libya , in December 1942 . 
 From late 1942 , No. 450 Squadron was engaged in the Tunisian Campaign . By March 1943 , as the Allied forces advanced , the squadron was operating from <unk> along the Mareth Line . That month it flew over 300 sorties . Further moves occurred , and by mid @-@ April it was based at <unk> . Throughout April and early May , 350 sorties were flown , including attacks on Axis shipping in Cape Bon and in the Gulf of Tunis . The campaign came to an end in mid @-@ May , but the squadron continued defensive patrols into June . Between February 1942 and May 1943 , it claimed 49 German and Italian aircraft destroyed in aerial combat , for the loss of 31 pilots , four to accidents . As a result of its involvement in the North African fighting , the squadron received the nickname , " The Desert <unk> " , and adopted the motto , " <unk> " , both of which were derived from a comment by the Nazi propaganda broadcaster " Lord Haw Haw " , who described the unit as " Australian mercenaries whose harassing tactics were easily beaten off by the Luftwaffe . " 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Following the conclusion of the fighting in the desert , No. 450 Squadron was allocated a ground @-@ attack role during the Allied invasion of Sicily . Moving to Malta on 13 July 1943 , the squadron staged out of RAF Luqa , and undertook its first attack in Sicily against <unk> . Four days later , on 17 July , No. 450 Squadron relocated to Pachino , Sicily , from where it continued ground @-@ attack missions . A further move came on 1 August , when Nos. 450 and 3 Squadrons relocated to Agnone , near Catania , where they commenced close air support operations on 11 August , working closely with Allied ground units around Mount Etna . On the night of 11 August , the airfield was attacked by Ju 88 bombers , which dropped incendiary , anti @-@ personnel and high @-@ explosive bombs for more than an hour . No. 450 Squadron 's personnel had been located some distance from the airfield and only one Australian was wounded , although casualties among other units amounted to twelve killed and 60 wounded . Eighteen RAAF Kittyhawks were destroyed , including eleven belonging to No. 450 Squadron . Despite this , the two RAAF squadrons flew 22 sorties the following day . 
 During the early stages of the Allied campaign on the Italian mainland , which commenced in early September 1943 , the squadron undertook bomber escort missions in support of the Eighth Army 's landings . In the middle of September , it reverted to the close air support role , operating from Grottaglie , although it also undertook anti @-@ shipping operations , including an attack on Manfredonia on 21 September , during which its aircraft sunk two vessels . The following month , No. 450 Squadron was transferred to Foggia , and then to <unk> , where it was briefly withdrawn from operations to convert to newer model Kittyhawk IVs before rejoining the campaign in late November . In December , the squadron moved to Cutella , near Termoli , on the central Adriatic coast of Italy . There it encountered problems with severe winter weather restricting operations . Cutella airfield was located close to the beach ; heavy rains caused a storm surge on 1 January 1944 and flooded the airfield , damaging some aircraft . 
 Meanwhile , Williams and another prisoner of war from No. 450 Squadron , Flight Lieutenant Reginald Kierath , were incarcerated with other Allied POWs at Stalag Luft III , in eastern Germany . In March 1944 , both took part in " The Great Escape " and were among 50 POWs murdered by the Gestapo , after being recaptured . Williams , who was 27 years old and from Sydney , was officially an RAF officer , as he had joined the British service under a short service commission in 1938 . Kierath , who was 29 and from Narromine , New South Wales , was an RAAF officer . 
 Throughout January 1944 , No. 450 Squadron undertook anti @-@ shipping operations as well as ground support tasks . It flew missions against targets off Dalmatia and in the harbour at <unk> , as well as around the ports of <unk> and Zera . In March , the squadron 's attention returned to Italy , launching strikes against rolling stock ; the following month saw it heavily tasked , flying a total of 430 sorties . On 29 April 1944 , a USAAF Republic P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt pilot strafed Cutella by mistake . No. 450 Squadron suffered no fatalities or aircraft destroyed but the pilot of a float plane belonging to an air @-@ sea rescue unit was killed , some ground personnel were wounded , a Kittyhawk of No. 3 Squadron was destroyed and several others were damaged . The following month , No. 450 Squadron moved to San Angelo , mounting a series of attacks against a 200 @-@ vehicle convoy near Subiaco in concert with other Kittyhawk squadrons that claimed 123 vehicles destroyed or damaged . No. 450 Squadron later operated from several airfields in central and northern Italy , under the " cab rank " system , whereby patrolling fighter @-@ bombers would attack as requested by army air liaison officers . It flew over 1 @,@ 100 sorties in June and July . The Australian Kittyhawk units were regularly lauded for the accuracy of their assaults ; following a mission by No. 450 Squadron on 12 July , the Eighth Army wired No. 239 Wing headquarters : " Excellent bombing . Good show and thank you . No further attacks required . " 
 No. 450 Squadron took part in the major offensive against the Gothic Line in August – September 1944 . Its first attack in early August was a strike on an artillery battery , during which three Kittyhawks were shot down ; subsequent attacks throughout the following months were made against various targets including rolling stock , armour , and troop concentrations . From November , after it had moved to Fano on the Italian north @-@ east coast , the squadron also began attacking German forces in Yugoslavia . Its average complement of pilots during the second half of 1944 was 25 from the RAAF , seven from the RAF and five from the South African Air Force . No. 450 Squadron commenced operations from <unk> in February 1945 ; that month , it lost three pilots to prematurely detonating bombs . On 21 March , it took part in Operation Bowler , a major air raid on Venice harbour . The attack resulted in the sinking of a merchant ship , a torpedo boat , and a coastal steamer , as well as the destruction of five warehouses and other harbour infrastructure . 
 In May 1945 , following the end of the war in Europe , No. 450 Squadron transferred to <unk> , a few miles south of Udine in north @-@ eastern Italy . It also began replacing its Kittyhawks with North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs . The squadron was disbanded at <unk> on 20 August 1945 . During the war , it had lost 63 personnel killed in action , of whom 49 were Australian . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The squadron was not re @-@ raised by the RAAF after the war , although the numerical designation of " 450 " was assumed by a Canadian helicopter unit , 450 Tactical Helicopter Squadron , in March 1968 . The use of the " 450 " designation was the result of an administrative error , as the Canadian 400 series squadrons formed during World War II had been numbered between 400 and 449 . An agreement was subsequently reached between the RCAF and RAAF and the squadron kept the designation . It is based at Petawawa , in Ontario , and operates Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopters . 
 Gordon Steege , No. 450 Squadron RAAF 's first commanding officer , became patron of the squadron association in April 2008 ; he died in September 2013 , aged 95 . 
 = = Aircraft operated = = 
 No. 450 Squadron operated the following aircraft : 
 = = Squadron bases = = 
 No. 450 Squadron operated from the following bases and airfields : 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 No. 450 Squadron was commanded by the following officers : 
 = The Boat Race 1921 = 
 The 73rd Boat Race took place on 30 March 1921 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge , with the heavier crew , went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . In total , nine of the participants in this year 's race had previous Boat Race experience , and five had won a silver medal in the 1920 Summer Olympics . In this year 's race , umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by one length in a time of 19 minutes 45 seconds . It was Cambridge 's third consecutive win , the fastest winning time since 1913 and the narrowest margin of victory since 1913 . The result took the overall record to 39 – 33 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1920 race by four lengths ; Oxford led overall with 39 victories to Cambridge 's 32 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by H. R. Baker ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1908 and 1909 races ) , G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races , C. D. Burnell ( a Blue from 1895 to 1898 ) and R. P. P. Rowe who had rowed four times between 1889 and 1892 . Cambridge 's coaches were John Houghton Gibbon , who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1899 and 1900 races , Sidney Swann ( who had rowed in the four races from 1911 to 1914 ) and G. E. Tower ( who had rowed in 1913 and 1914 ) . For the thirteenth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 11 @.@ 75 lb ( 81 @.@ 3 kg ) , 4 @.@ 25 pounds ( 1 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained five participants with Boat Race experience , while Cambridge saw four of the 1920 crew return . Five of the participants were silver medallists in the men 's eight at the 1920 Summer Olympics : Oxford 's Sebastian Earl , Walter James , Richard Lucas and Guy Oliver Nickalls , and Cambridge 's John Campbell . Two rowers were registered as non @-@ British , Oxford 's Francis Bacon Lothrop was American while Cambridge 's Campbell hailed from Australia . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Umpire Pitman started the race on a " moderate tide " in good conditions at 5 : 00 p.m. Cambridge made the quicker start , outrating Oxford and holding a half @-@ length lead by the time the crews reached Craven Steps . Gaining further , the Light Blues were a quarter of a length clear of the Dark Blues by the Mile Post . At this point , the Cambridge boat attempted to cross into the Surrey side of the river , but Oxford responded and surged to become level by the time the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge . 
 As the course of the river now favoured Oxford , they pulled away and , according to author and former Dark Blue rower George Drinkwater , after a " ding @-@ dong struggle " held a half @-@ length lead by Barnes Bridge . Oxford were forced to allow the Light Blue space ; the Cambridge stroke P. H. G. H @-@ S. Hartley took advantage and spurted to push the Dark Blues off their line . The bend in the river now favouring Cambridge , they levelled proceedings and pushed on to win by one length in a time of 19 minutes 45 seconds . It was their third consecutive victory , the fastest winning time since the 1911 race and the narrowest winning margin since the 1913 race . It took the overall record in the event to 39 – 33 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = 1987 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1987 Pacific hurricane season was the last year in which the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center was the primary warning center for tropical cyclones in the eastern Pacific Ocean . The season officially started May 15 , 1987 , in the eastern Pacific , and June 1 , 1987 , in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1987 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when the vast majority of tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . 
 Despite there being 20 named systems , five above the average , only four storms directly affected land . Hurricane Eugene was the first Pacific hurricane to make landfall in Mexico in July since the 1954 season and caused all of the season 's three deaths and $ 142 @.@ 12 million damage . Tropical Storm Pilar and Hurricane Norma also came close to land , with the former producing record rain in Baja California Sur . The remnants of Hurricanes Ramon and Norma caused rain in the Continental United States . Elsewhere , Peke was a central north Pacific hurricane that crossed the International Dateline and became a typhoon of the 1987 Pacific typhoon season . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 Overall , the season continued the general trend in the 1980s of well above @-@ average seasons in the East Pacific . In 1987 , there were 20 tropical storms , 10 hurricanes , and four major hurricanes , all were well above average , save the number of major hurricanes which was only slightly above normal . The former made 1987 the fifth most active season on record at that time . Today , 1987 is tied with the 1994 Pacific hurricane season and the 2009 Pacific hurricane season as the sixth most active on record . In the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , one storm peaked at hurricane strength ( Peke ) and one peaked as a tropical storm ( Oka ) . Two tropical storms entered this area of responsibility from the east by crossing 140 ° W. 
 The season lasted a total 171 days beginning with the formation of Adrian and early June and the dissipation of Tropical Depression Twenty on November 25 . There was a total of 924 storms hours and 631 hurricane hours . By comparison , the long @-@ term averages at that time were 161 season days , 875 tropical storm hours , and 664 hurricane hours . 397 advisories were issued , which was below the 1977 – 1987 average of 428 . The Hurricane Hunters did not fly into any of the storms in 1987 . This was also the first year where tropical storm watches and warnings were issued instead of gale watches and warnings for tropical cyclones . 1987 was the last season that the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center in Redwood City was responsible for forecasting in this basin , a task it had performed since circa 1972 . The EPHC was folded into the National Hurricane Center , which took responsibility for the basin starting in the spring of 1988 . 
 Only one tropical storm developed in June . In July , six named storms formed . Out of these storms , Hilary was the only storm to reach major hurricane status . The month of August had a total of five named storms , four of which became hurricanes . However , August did not feature any major hurricanes , though Hurricane Jova came close , peaking as a moderate Category 2 . The month of September held the same number of named storms as August , with five named storms . The month also was the carrier of the strongest hurricane on record at that time ( that had its intensity estimated from satellite imagery ) , Hurricane Max , a strong Category 4 hurricane . Hurricane Norma was a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scale , which dissipated to the south of the Baja California Peninsula . The month of October featured only two tropical cyclones . The first system , Ramon , was a Category 4 hurricane . 
 Very few cyclones this season impacted land . The only landfalling hurricane of the year , Hurricane Eugene was responsible for significantly damaging about 15 sq. mi of fruit crop , where damage estimated were at $ 2 @.@ 6 million ( 1987 USD ) In all , damage totaled to about $ 142 million . Tropical Storm Irwin , paralleled the coast of Mexico , causing flooding near Acapulco . Damage was totaled at $ 2 @.@ 1 million ( 1987 USD ) . The remnants of Norma and Pilar produced rain over Baja California Sur . The remnants of Ramon brought extremely heavy rains to the Western United States . 
 A moderate El Niño was present throughout the season , with water temperatures across the equatorial Central Pacific was 1 @.@ 6 ° C ( 34 @.@ 9 ° F ) above normal . The Pacific Decadal Oscillation ( PDO ) was in a warm phase during this time period ; . modern estimates place the PDO for 1987 at 0 @.@ 81 ° C ( 33 @.@ 46 ° F ) above normal . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Adrian = = = 
 On June 7 , a tropical depression formed 400 mi ( 645 km ) southeast of Acapulco . It strengthened into a tropical storm immediately thereafter . After peaking with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) on June 8 , Adrian slowly weakened . It fell to tropical depression status on June 9 and dissipated later that day . During its life , Adrian paralleled the Mexican shoreline far offshore before looping counter @-@ clockwise over its path when it was a depression . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Beatriz = = = 
 On July 3 , a tropical depression formed 970 mi ( 1 @,@ 560 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . It strengthened into a tropical storm later that day . Beatriz slowly strengthened and moved generally northwest as it stayed far offshore . On July 5 , Beatriz reached its peak wind speed of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . It weakened thereafter , falling to a depression on July 6 and dissipating the next day . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Calvin = = = 
 A tropical depression formed 310 mi ( 500 km ) south of Mexico on July 5 and immediately strengthened into a tropical storm the next day . Calvin headed generally east . On July 8 , as a strong tropical storm . It then gradually weakened , falling to a depression on July 9 and dissipated the next day while located 440 mi ( 710 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dora = = = 
 A tropical depression that had organized on July 15 while located 710 mi ( 1 @,@ 140 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . The depression strengthened into a tropical storm that same day while located around 215 mi ( 345 km ) west of Acapulco . Dora headed west @-@ northwest and slowly strengthened . It reached its peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on July 17 . It then steadily weakened , becoming a depression two days later . Dora dissipated on July 20 while located 500 mi ( 805 km ) west of Cabo San Lucas . 
 = = = Hurricane Eugene = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed into a tropical depression on July 22 near the coast of Mexico . It initially headed westward and strengthened into a tropical storm the same day it formed . It strengthened into a hurricane , the first of the season , on July 24 as an upper @-@ level cyclone pulled the system north . After peaking as a low @-@ end Category 2 hurricane on July 25 , land interaction weakened the hurricane to Category 1 as it made landfall south of Manzanillo . The rough topography weakened Eugene , and the hurricane was only a depression when it emerged into the Gulf of California . It promptly dissipated on July 26 . 
 When the storm first posed a threat to Mexico on July 24 , the port of <unk> was closed for small craft . Operation classes were suspended in Acapulco . In Manzanillo , the port was officially closed down . The Mexican navy was put on alert for a total distance of 945 mi ( 1 @,@ 520 km ) . The weather service issued navigation warnings for three coastal states and ships were urged to maintain contact with officials . Hurricane Eugene caused extremely heavy rain in coastal parts of Mexico . The highest rain was 20 @.@ 68 inches at Aquila , Michoacán . The system was responsible for the highest tropical cyclone caused rainfall in five Mexican states . Over 5 @,@ 000 people were displaced . In Manzanillo alone , at least 60 people were rendered homeless . Most of the damage was the scattering of debris and mud . Six people were injured , and a man in Venustiano <unk> was killed when a palm tree was blown over . In all , three fatalities were reported . The hurricane destroyed about 15 sq. mi ( 39 km2 ) of fruit crop in the country , amounting to more than $ 2 @.@ 6 million in damage ( 1987 USD ) . Additionally , damage to eight beach houses totaled to $ 120 @,@ 000 . Total crop damage reached $ 142 million ( 1987 USD ) ; In the aftermath of the storm , the navy and army and local government devised a cleanup plan . They worked quickly to restore water and power service , and within a few days the services had been restored for most of the impacted area . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fernanda = = = 
 At a location more westerly than typical for eastern Pacific hurricanes , Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E formed on July 24 . Heading west , the cyclone reached tropical storm intensity on July 25 . Fernanda strengthened and reached its peak strength near hurricane status on July 26 , the same day it crossed 140 ° W and entered the central north Pacific . Fernanda headed in the general direction of the Hawaiian Islands as a trough approached . The trough caused wind shear , which weakened the cyclone into a tropical depression on July 28 . Fernanda dissipated three days later . 
 = = = Hurricane Greg = = = 
 A tropical wave left the coast of Panama on July 26 . It organized into Tropical Depression Ten on July 28 while located 800 mi ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) and it strengthened into a tropical storm the day after the system formed . Over 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) water , the cyclone steadily intensified as it roughly paralleled the Mexican coast while remaining far offshore . Greg became a hurricane on 1800 UTC July 31 and peaked with wind speeds of 80 mph ( 130 kmh ) on August 1 . It then weakened as it moved over cooler water , falling to tropical storm intensity later on August 1 . At this time , Greg was located 570 mi ( 915 km ) away from Baja California . It then weakened into depression intensity on August 2 , and completely dissipated the next day . Greg affected Mexico a few weeks after Eugene did , resulting in additional flooding . Due to both storms , the region registered rainfall amounts for times the average . 
 = = = Hurricane Hilary = = = 
 A tropical wave moved through Central America on July 30 and July 31 . Steered by a large deep @-@ layer ridge that extended as far southwest as Hawaii and as far northeast as Oklahoma , the wave moved steadily west @-@ northwest . Thunderstorm activity increased considerably after 0000 UTC July 31 . A tropical depression formed at 1800 UTC July 31 while located 775 mi ( 1 @,@ 245 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . The cyclone strengthened at a steady pace and reached hurricane intensity on August 1 . Hilary continued strengthening , and became a hurricane on August 2 . On August 3 , the cyclone reached Category 3 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , making it the first major hurricane of the season . At its peak strength , which it reached on August 4 , Hilary had winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . It then weakened , and had fallen to Category 1 intensity on August 5 . The hurricane then restrengthened , maintaining Category 2 intensity until August 6 . The system then began a terminal weakening trend . By August 7 it was only a tropical storm . After falling to depression strength , Hilary dissipated on August 9 over 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) waters . In Southern California , officials hoped that Hilary would produce a major increase in waves in time for a surfing tournament finals , though only a small increase in wave action was expected . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Irwin = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on August 3 over 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 610 km ) south of Manzanillo . The depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm . Irwin fluctuated in strength as it closely paralleled the coast of Mexico . On August 6 , Irwin reached its maximum winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) ; it maintained that velocity for over two days . During August 8 , Irwin turned nearly due west and headed out to sea . Irwin weakened to a tropical depression on August 9 and immediately dissipated . Forecasters at one point in time noted the possibility of the storm impacting California . In addition , the storm produced heavy rainfall in Mexico , causing $ 2 @.@ 1 million in damage . Although many businesses and homes received damage , no deaths were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Jova = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on August 13 , while located 1 @,@ 095 miles ( 1 @,@ 760 km ) south @-@ southeast from Baja California Sur . The cyclone intensified into Tropical Storm Jova the next day . The depression initially moved to the west @-@ southwest due to a ridge north of the system . It slowly strengthened and reached hurricane intensity on 1800 UTC August 16 . The intensifying hurricane then turned west @-@ northwest . When it peaked on August 17 , Jova was a moderate Category 2 hurricane . After peaking , Jova slowly weakened as it turned westbound . It was in a moderately declining state when it crossed 140 ° W and entered the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility . Jova continued to weaken , and was a depression by August 20 . Jova dissipated two days later while due south of the Big Island of Hawaii over 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) water , although it remnants were still visible south of Johnston Atoll until at least August 24 . Jova generated heavy surf for a few days in Southern California . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Oka = = = 
 A disturbance in the intertropical convergence zone organized into Tropical Depression One @-@ C on August 26 . Twelve hours later , it was upgraded to a tropical storm and named Oka , which is Hawaiian for Oscar . Oka slowly moved west @-@ northwest and reached its peak wind speed of 60 mph ( 95 kmh ) on August 27 . The next day , a nearby trough caused wind shear , which weakened Oka to a depression on August 29 and subsequently destroyed it . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Knut = = = 
 On August 28 , a tropical depression formed 1 @,@ 165 mi ( 1 @,@ 875 km ) west Manzanillo , Mexico . Twelve hours later , it strengthened into a tropical storm and was named Knut . Never attaining winds stronger than 40 mph ( 65 kmh ) , Knut stayed a tropical storm for one day . It weakened to a tropical depression on August 30 and dissipated later that day . The cyclone stayed out at sea for its entire life , and never threatened land . 
 Knut 's impact is unknown . However , its name was retired in 1992 . 
 = = = Hurricane Lidia = = = 
 Lidia originated from a disturbance that entered the basin on August 28 . It remained south of the Mexican coast in an area of warm sea surface temperatures , and at 1800 UTC August 29 , Tropical Depression Fifteen formed . It intensified into a tropical storm six hours after development about 860 mi ( 1 @,@ 385 km ) away from Baja California Sur . Lidia moved northwest , paralleling the Mexican coast . It edged in a more westerly direction for a day before resuming its northwesterly path , and reached hurricane intensity on 0600 UTC September 1 . At its strongest on September 1 based on intensity estimates via Dvorak classifications , Hurricane Lidia had a wind speed of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , Lidia began weakening and lost hurricane intensity on September 2 . Lidia weakened very rapidly over cold water . Early the next day , Lidia weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated over 76 ° F ( 24 ° C ) waters on 1200 UTC September 3 . The remnants of the storm ; however , brought showers to California . One women was injured by a lighting strike . 
 = = = Hurricane Max = = = 
 A tropical disturbance left Central America on September 8 . At 1200 UTC on September 9 , a tropical depression formed over the warm waters south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . While located 935 mi ( 1 @,@ 505 km ) from Cabo San Lucas , the depression intensified into a tropical storm and was named Max . Heading west @-@ northwest , Max rapidly intensified and became a hurricane on September 11 , over a day after it was named . Turning northwest , Max continued to intensify . By September 20 , the cyclone reached Category 2 intensity , and became a major hurricane several hours later . On September 12 , Hurricane Max reached Category 4 intensity . The cyclone reached its maximum windspeed of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) on September 13 .. <unk> a then @-@ record was set for the highest satellite estimates for a Pacific hurricane . At that time , Dvorak classifications , which measure a tropical cyclones intensity , were at " 7 @.@ 0 " , which was then the highest ever recorded in the basin , though this was later matched by hurricanes Hernan and Trudy of the 1990 Pacific hurricane season . 
 Max maintained its intensity for then unprecedented 24 hours . However , the storm crossed the 78 ° F ( 26 ° C ) isotherm and began to weaken rapidly . The hurricane 's track then shifted north for a time , before turning to the west on September 15 . That same day , the weakened to a tropical storm . The tropical cyclone dissipated at 1200 UTC September 16 while located 865 mi ( 1 @,@ 392 km ) north @-@ northeast of Cabo San Lucas . The hurricane was predicted to send 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) waves to Southern California , though Max was well past its peak at that time . 
 = = = Hurricane Norma = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed on September 13 while located 340 mi ( 550 km ) southwest of Acapulco . Moving northwest , a depression formed on September 14 far from land . It took over 24 hours to reach tropical storm strength . Norma paralleled the coast far offshore . The storm steadily intensified over 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) sea surface temperatures . On September 17 , Norma turned to the north , and became a minimal hurricane for 12 hours as an eye became visible on infrared imagery . Norma turned northbound toward land . However , Norma remained offshore due weak southwesterly flow from a cutoff low located west of Baja California Sur . The cyclone stalled and then edged slightly east when it weakened back into a depression on September 19 . Tropical Depression Norma dissipated a mere 95 mi ( 155 km ) south of the Baja California Peninsula ; it never made landfall . 
 Prior to the remains of Hurricane Norma 's arrival in the Southwestern United States , forecasters were anticipating cloudy skies over San Diego . Over the deserts and mountains near the area , there was also a possibility of heavy rainfall . The remnants ultimately caused rainfall and thunderstorms in California on September 22 and September 23 . The rainfall totaled to <unk> in ( 18 mm ) at Lindbergh Field , and <unk> in ( 25 mm ) at Lemon Grove . There were numerous power outages , small fires , some road flooding , and some property damage . In San Diego and southern Orange County , 200 @,@ 000 homes and business lost power , but the power was quickly restored . However , there are no reports of damage or flooding in Baja California from the storm ; the area the tropical cyclone stuck was sparsely populated . 
 = = = Hurricane Otis = = = 
 Otis originated from the a tropical disturbance in the monsoon trough . It moved over the warm waters south of the Mexican Riviera from September 17 to September 19 . At 0000 UTC September 20 , the disturbance was upgraded into Tropical Depression Nineteen @-@ E while moving to the northwest . It strengthened into a tropical storm later that day while located 950 mi ( 1 @,@ 530 km ) southwest of La Paz . Eighteen hours later on September 21 , Otis became a hurricane . It also began to turn back to the west and began to undergo a period of rapid deepening . The hurricane would then reach Category 2 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scale . The next day , Otis reached its peak windspeed of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . It would oscillate irregularly between that strength and Category 2 intensity until September 24 . That day , it began accelerating to the west as it lost strength due to increased wind shear and 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) water . Otis fell to tropical storm strength on September 25 and a depression on September 26 , and dissipated shortly after that . 
 = = = Hurricane Peke = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather southwest of Hawaii gathered enough convection and a closed circulation to become Tropical Depression Two @-@ C on September 21 . It immediately strengthened into a storm and was named Peke . Peke continued to strengthen as it tracked north just east of the International dateline . Peke intensified into a hurricane on September 23 and reached Category 2 intensity the next day . Peke continued heading north and shortly after weakening into a Category 1 hurricane , it turned to the northwest and crossed the dateline . It re @-@ intensified , and peaked as a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) typhoon on September 23 . It accelerated to the northwest and began to take in drier air , which caused weakening . On October 2 , Peke re @-@ curved to the southeast . The last advisory on this tropical cyclone was issued on October 3 as it dissipated . Peke 's remnants continued drifting erratically for over three days , first heading east , then northwest , and then southeast , at which time they were finally unidentifiable . 
 Hurricane / Typhoon Peke caused no damages or deaths . However , was also the first tropical cyclone of hurricane strength to cross the dateline since 1967 's Hurricane Sarah to cross the dateline at that strength . In addition , Peke was the third tropical cyclone in three years to exist on both sides of the dateline , after 1985 's Typhoon Skip and 1986 's Typhoon Georgette . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Pilar = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on September 30 while located 330 mi ( 530 km ) south of the Baja California Peninsula . It headed north and peaked as a minimal tropical storm on October 1 . After being a tropical storm for a mere six hours , Pilar weakened to a depression and dissipated that same day . It never made landfall , dissipating just south of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula . It was a tropical cyclone for a total of 24 hours . The system caused no known damage on land , but Pilar dropped heavy precipitation on Baja California Sur from 1200 UTC on September 30 until 0000 UTC October 2 . An observer station reported 7 @.@ 15 in ( 182 mm ) of rainfall . This was the most rainfall the weather station had ever recorded since its founding in 1969 . 
 = = = Hurricane Ramon = = = 
 On October 3 – 4 an area of disturbed weather moved into the Pacific Ocean south of a high pressure area over Central Mexico . The storm became better organized over 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) waters . By October 5 , a tropical storm had developed 490 mi ( 790 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , bypassing the tropical depression stage . It moved generally to the west @-@ northwest . Ramon intensified into a hurricane on October 7 and reached major hurricane status on October 8 . At its most intense on October 9 and October 10 , Hurricane Ramon had winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . After peaking , Ramon turned to the northwest due to interaction with subtropical jetstream winds and rapidly weakened over cooler sea surface temperatures . It became a tropical storm on October 11 and a depression on October 12 . It dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 Torrential rains deluged Southern California , resulting in street flooding . Two people perished in separate traffic accidents . In Los Angeles , three more people perished in separate traffic incidents . Heavy rains extended west and was also reported in Hemet in Riverside County , where three people were also injured during a car accident . The rains helped dissolve a week @-@ long forest fire 16 @,@ 000 acre ( 65 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m ² ) on Mt . Palomar . The Spring Creek River overflowed its banks . The tropical moisture also helped end a 37 @-@ day dry spell at Salt Lake City , marking the longest time the city went without rain since 1964 . Nationwide , Ramon killed five people , all due to road @-@ related incidents . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Selma = = = 
 On October 27 , a tropical depression formed and headed northwest , gradually re @-@ curving north . It intensified into a 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) tropical storm on October 28 . Selma maintained that strength until the next day , when it weakened to a depression . Selma 's re @-@ curving continued , and on October 29 , it again intensified into a 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) tropical storm . Without further strengthening , it weakened into a tropical depression , headed north northeast , and dissipated on October 31 about 880 mi ( 1 @,@ 415 km ) east of the southern tip of Baja California . 
 = = Other storms = = 
 According to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , on July 18 a tropical depression formed east of the International Dateline , and 2 days later it exited CPHC 's area of responsibility ; however , this storm wasn 't included into CPHC database . As it entered into western Pacific , it strengthened as a tropical storm and received the name Wynne . 
 On June 10 , a weak tropical depression , the second of the season , developed . It moved very little and did not affect land . It dissipated on 1200 UTC June 12 . The season 's next tropical cyclone , Tropical Depression Three formed six days after the previous one dissipated . Moving west @-@ northwest , it peaked at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . On June 20 , it dissipated . 
 Tropical Depression Six developed on July 13 about 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas . The depression had same peak intensity as Three and had dissipated on July 17 . 
 The final tropical cyclone developed at 1800 UTC November 24 around 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) southwest of Baja California Sur . A very weak cyclone , the depression dissipated on November 25 , ending the above @-@ average season . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1987 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1993 season . This is the same list used for the 1981 season . However , the names Xina , York , and Zelda were added to name lists for odd @-@ numbered years sometime after 1985 due to that year 's season threatening to exhaust the list . Storms were named Pilar and Ramon for the first time in 1987 , as the name Selma had been used on the older lists . 
 Two names from the Central Pacific list were used – Oka and Peke . This was the first usage for both names . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired one Eastern Pacific name in the spring of 1992 : Knut . It was replaced in the 1993 season by Kenneth . 
 = Hurricane Arlene ( 1963 ) = 
 Hurricane Arlene was the first tropical cyclone of the 1963 Atlantic hurricane season and one of the wettest storms ever recorded in Bermuda . Originating from a tropical depression on July 31 , Arlene quickly intensified into a Category 2 hurricane on August 2 . After attaining this intensity , the storm quickly weakened and turned west . By August 4 , Arlene had degenerated into a tropical depression . The storm failed to re @-@ organize until August 7 , by which time it restrengthened into a tropical storm . The following day , Arlene re @-@ attained hurricane @-@ status before passing directly over Bermuda . Several hours after passing the island , it reached its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 160 km / ) and a barometric pressure of 969 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 61 inHg ) . By August 11 , Arlene transitioned into an extratropical cyclone before being absorbed by another cyclone later that day . 
 Along its track , several hurricane warnings and watches were issued for the Leeward Islands ; however , no damage was reported on any of the islands . The storm has its greatest impact in Bermuda where high winds and near @-@ record rainfall downed trees , power lines and caused flooding . Damages across the island amounted to $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 1963 USD ; $ 2 @.@ 1 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Arlene was first identified as a tropical depression on July 31 between the Lesser Antilles and the Cape Verde Islands by the TIROS VI satellite . The large cyclone , estimated at five degrees in diameter , steadily tracked westward and eventually northwestward and intensified into a tropical storm on August 2 . Later that day , a Navy reconnaissance aircraft reached the storm and found a clear eye and a barometric pressure of 987 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 15 inHg ) , resulting in Arlene being classified a hurricane . This meant that the storm had rapidly intensified from a tropical depression to a hurricane within the span of 18 hours . The intensification continued for another 6 hours , at which time the storm attained its initial peak strength with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , classifying Arlene as a Category 2 hurricane . 
 Early on August 3 , Arlene began to weaken as it turned towards the west once more . The storm continued to slowly weaken before rapidly degenerating into a tropical depression on August 4 . The quick decrease in intensity was the result of a sudden increase in vertical wind shear near the core of the cyclone . Later that day , the system passed near the northern Leeward Islands ; however , the depression was poorly organized . The former hurricane steadily tracked northwestward and began to regenerate on August 7 . 
 As the storm began to reorganize , the forward motion had become virtually stationary but later began to increase as Arlene turned northeastward , beginning recurvature into the main belt of the Westerlies . Ships in the vicinity of the depression reported that it had regained gale @-@ force winds on August 8 , resulting in advisories on Arlene being re @-@ initiated around that time . Later that day , a Navy reconnaissance plane found hurricane @-@ force winds around the center of the storm , resulting in Arlene being upgraded to a minimal hurricane a second time . 
 During the day on August 9 , Arlene passed directly over Bermuda with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . The storm continued to intensify after passing the island , with reconnaissance recorded a minimum pressure of 969 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 61 inHg ) and maximum winds reached 105 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The hurricane began to weaken hours later , with winds decreasing below 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) by the afternoon of August 10 . Shortly after , Arlene transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , while maintaining hurricane @-@ force winds , over the north Atlantic . The remnants were absorbed by a larger cyclone near Newfoundland on August 11 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On August 3 , the National Weather Service in San Juan , Puerto Rico issued hurricane warnings for the northern Leeward Islands and a hurricane watch for the Virgin Islands . Later that day , the watch was expanded to include Puerto Rico . By August 4 , the hurricane warnings were lowered to gale warnings and the watch was discontinued as Arlene weakened to a tropical storm . Later that day , all warnings were canceled since the storm had further weakened to a tropical depression . On August 8 , after Arlene regenerated , residents in Bermuda were advised to not venture offshore on any vessel and rush all hurricane preparations to completion . 
 In Bermuda , Arlene produced winds up to 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a pressure of 974 @.@ 5 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 78 inHg ) was recorded during its passage . A maximum gust of 98 mph ( 158 km / h ) was recorded at Kindley Air Force Base . Tree limbs and power lines were downed across the island , a few small boats sank in rough seas and flooding was reported in some areas . The hurricane produced the second highest tropical cyclone @-@ related rainfall on the island , peaking at 6 @.@ 05 in ( 154 mm ) . In all , damages in Bermuda amounted to $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 1963 USD ; $ 2 @.@ 1 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = Wood Siding railway station = 
 Wood Siding railway station was a small halt in Bernwood Forest , Buckinghamshire , England . It was opened in 1871 as a terminus of a short horse @-@ drawn tramway built to assist the transport of goods from and around the Duke of Buckingham 's extensive estates in Buckinghamshire and to connect the Duke 's estates to the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway at Quainton Road . 
 A lobbying campaign by residents of the town of Brill led to the tramway being converted for passenger use and extended a short distance beyond Wood Siding to Brill railway station in 1872 , becoming known as the Brill Tramway . Cheaply built and ungraded , and using poor quality locomotives , services on the line were very slow , initially limited to a speed of 5 miles per hour ( 8 km / h ) . In the 1890s it was planned to extend the tramway to Oxford , but the scheme was abandoned . Instead , the operation of the line was taken over by the Metropolitan Railway in 1899 . Between 1908 and 1910 the station was completely rebuilt on a bridge over the newly built Chiltern Main Line of the Great Western Railway , which passed directly beneath the station . 
 In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership and became the Metropolitan line of London Transport . As a result , Wood Siding became a station on the London Underground network , despite being over 45 miles ( 72 km ) from the City of London . London Transport 's new management aimed to move away from goods services to concentrate on passenger services . As the line served a very lightly populated rural area , the new management believed it very unlikely that it could ever be made viable . Wood Siding was closed , along with the rest of the line , from 30 November 1935 . Although all infrastructure associated with the station was removed in 1936 , the remains of the bridge which supported the station were not demolished and are still in place . 
 = = Brill Tramway = = 
 On 23 September 1868 the small Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & BR ) opened , linking the Great Western Railway 's station at Aylesbury to the London and North Western Railway 's Oxford to Bletchley line at Verney Junction . On 1 September 1894 London 's Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) reached Aylesbury , and shortly afterwards connected to the A & BR line , with local MR services running to Verney Junction from 1 April 1894 . Through trains from the MR 's London terminus at Baker Street commenced on 1 January 1897 . 
 The Duke of Buckingham had long had an interest in railways , and had served as Chairman of the London and North Western Railway from 1852 to 1861 . In the early 1870s he decided to build a light railway to carry freight from his estates in Buckinghamshire to the A & BR 's line at Quainton Road . Because the proposed line ran on land owned by the Duke of Buckingham and by the Winwood Charity Trust , who consented to its construction , the line did not need Parliamentary approval and construction could begin immediately . 
 The first stage of the line , known as the Wotton Tramway , was a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) line from Quainton Road via Wotton to a coal siding at Kingswood , and opened on 1 April 1871 . Intended for use by horse trams , the line was built with longitudinal sleepers to avoid horses tripping on the sleepers . In November 1871 the tramway was extended to Wood Siding , in a surviving fragment of Bernwood Forest 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the town of Brill and 1 @,@ 500 yards ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) from the nearest settlement at Dorton . 
 Lobbying from residents and businesses in Brill for the introduction of passenger services on the line led to a 1 @,@ 840 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 680 m ) further extension from Wood Siding to Brill railway station , at the foot of Brill Hill 3 ⁄ 4 of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) from the hilltop town of Brill itself , in the summer of 1872 . Two mixed trains ran each day in each direction , and the line was renamed the Brill Tramway . The Duke bought two Aveling and Porter traction engines modified to work as locomotives for the line , each with a top speed of 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) , although a speed limit of 5 miles per hour ( 8 km / h ) was enforced . 
 The Duke died in 1889 , and in 1894 the trustees of his estate set up the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company ( O & ATC ) with the intention of extending the line from Brill to Oxford . Rail services from London to Oxford were very poor at this time ; despite being an extremely roundabout route , had the connection from Quainton Road to Oxford been built it would have been the shortest route between Oxford and the City of London . The Metropolitan Railway leased the Brill Tramway from 1 December 1899 , and from then on the MR ( the Metropolitan line of the London Underground from July 1933 ) operated all services on the line . Throughout the operation of the Brill Tramway the track and stations remained in the ownership of the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company ; the MR had an option to purchase the line outright , but it was never taken up . 
 = = Services and facilities = = 
 The station was positioned on the southern edge of <unk> Wood , a surviving part of the Bernwood Forest . It was on the western side of the level crossing over Kingswood Lane . Intended primarily for goods use , Wood Siding initially had no facilities for passengers , and the platform was simply a raised earth bank . 
 Despite the lack of passenger facilities , Wood Siding was the starting point for the first passenger service to operate on the line . On 26 August 1871 an excursion service ran from Wood Siding to London hauled by the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) . It carried around 150 people , for a total of 1051 ⁄ 2 passenger fares ( with each child counted as half an adult ) , and was drawn by horses between Wood Siding and Quainton Road and by locomotive from Quainton Road to Aylesbury where the carriages were attached to the 7 @.@ 30 am GWR service via Princes Risborough to London , arriving at 10 @.@ 00 am . The experiment was not a success . Sharp overhanging branches along the route posed a danger to passengers and had to be cut back in the week before the excursion . The day itself was extremely rainy , and ticket sales were lower than expected . The return train from London to Quainton Road was delayed in Slough , and the excursion eventually arrived back at Wood Siding at 2 @.@ 00 am . 
 In 1894 the crude stations on the Brill Tramway were rebuilt in anticipation of the extension to Oxford . While the other stations on the line were provided with buildings containing a booking office , waiting rooms and toilets , Wood Siding station was equipped with a small corrugated iron waiting room " with shelf and drawer " for passengers . A low passenger platform was also built . As well as the passenger platform , a short siding led to a raised wooden platform , alongside the through line to Brill , which served both as a buffer stop for the siding , and as a loading platform for milk . The station was staffed by a single porter , responsible for opening the gates of a nearby level crossing and for loading and unloading freight ( mainly milk ) ; a small , unheated hut was provided for his use . While the original Aveling & Porter locomotives were slow and noisy and could be heard by the porter long before their arrival , the more advanced locomotives introduced by the Metropolitan Railway were quieter and quicker ; a ladder was installed against a large oak for the porter to watch for oncoming trains . 
 After the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the MR introduced a single Brown Marshall passenger carriage on the line ; unlike other stations on the line , the platform height at Wood Siding was not raised at this time to accommodate the new carriage . From 1872 to 1894 the station was served by two passenger trains per day in each direction , and from 1895 to 1899 the number was increased to three per day . Following the 1899 transfer of services to the Metropolitan Railway , the station was served by four trains per day until closure in 1935 . 
 Limited by poor quality locomotives and ungraded , cheaply laid track which followed the contours of the hills , and stopping at four intermediate stations between Wood Siding and Quainton Road to pick up and set down goods , passengers and livestock , trains ran very slowly . In 1887 trains took between 15 and 20 minutes to travel approximately one mile from Wood Siding to Brill , and a little over 1 hour 20 minutes from Wood Siding to the junction station with the main line at Quainton Road . Improvements to the line carried out at the time of the transfer to the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad , and the use of the MR 's better quality rolling stock , reduced the journey time from Wood Siding to Quainton Road to about 30 minutes . 
 In 1910 the new Bicester cut @-@ off line of the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) Chiltern Main Line was routed directly through Wood Siding , although no interchange station was built . The GWR was to run in a cutting beneath the existing station ; Wood Siding station and its siding were rebuilt at the GWR 's expense between 1908 and 1910 to stand on a wide bridge above the GWR 's line . 
 With trains travelling only marginally quicker than walking pace , and serving a lightly populated area , the stations at Wood Siding and Brill saw relatively little passenger use , and Wood Siding was removed from the passenger timetable by 1931 , although trains continued to stop on request . In 1932 , the last year of private operation , Brill and Wood Siding stations saw only 3 @,@ 272 passenger journeys and raised only £ 191 ( about £ 12 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts . 
 = = Withdrawal of services = = 
 On 1 July 1933 the Metropolitan Railway , along with London 's other underground railways aside from the small Waterloo & City Railway , was taken into public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . Thus , despite it being over 45 miles ( 72 km ) and over two hours travel from the City of London , Wood Siding became a London Underground station . As a cost @-@ cutting measure Wood Siding became unstaffed and the porter 's hut was sold as a garden shed ; from then on , the train crew would work the crossing gate . Although it was now officially a part of the London Underground network , Wood Siding — in common with all Metropolitan line stations north of Aylesbury — was never shown on the tube map . 
 Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , aimed to move the network away from freight services and saw the lines beyond Aylesbury via Quainton Road to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes , concluding that over £ 2000 ( about £ 130 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) would be saved by closing the Brill Tramway . As a consequence , the LPTB decided to abandon all passenger services beyond Aylesbury . The Brill Tramway was closed on 1 December 1935 , with the last trains running on 30 November . While services on the Brill Tramway were withdrawn completely following the transfer to public ownership , the LPTB considered the Verney Junction branch as having a use as a freight line and as a diversionary route . The LPTB continued to maintain the line and operate freight services until 6 September 1947 . 
 = = Closure = = 
 Upon the withdrawal of London Transport services the lease expired and the railway and stations reverted to the control of the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company . With no funds and no rolling stock of its own the O & ATC was unable to operate the line . On 2 April 1936 the entire infrastructure of the line was sold piecemeal at auction ; excluding track , the buildings and structures at Wood Siding fetched a total of £ 9 2s 6d ( about £ 560 in 2016 ) . Aside from the station houses at Westcott and Brill , which were sold separately , the auction raised £ 112 10s ( about £ 6 @,@ 890 in 2016 ) in total . While Wood Siding station was demolished shortly after closure , the abutments of the bridge which carried the station and sidings remain intact . 
 With the stations at Wood Siding and Brill closed , and the Great Western Railway 's Brill and Ludgershall railway station inconveniently sited , the GWR opened a new station on the Chiltern Main Line nearby at Dorton Halt on 21 June 1937 . Both Dorton Halt and Brill and <unk> stations were closed on 7 January 1963 , although the line remains in use by trains between Princes Risborough and Bicester North . There are no longer any open railway stations in the vicinity of Brill and Wood Siding . 
 = M @-@ 41 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 41 was the designation of a former state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan that began near Holton and ran north- and northwest @-@ ward , ending at Hart . The highway was created by 1919 and lasted until 1926 . The designation has not been reused since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 41 followed the present day route of M @-@ 120 between Holton and Hesperia . The roadway ran northeast to the Muskegon – Newaygo county line . The highway turned north along the county line to the tri @-@ point between Muskegon , Newaygo and Oceana counties . From there , M @-@ 41 followed the Oceana – Newaygo county line north to Hesperia . There it turned west to Ferry and then northwest to Hart . 
 = = History = = 
 When the state highway system was first signed in 1919 , M @-@ 41 was designated between Holton and Hart . After the creation of the United States Numbered Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , and the designation of U.S. Highway 41 in the Upper Peninsula , the Michigan State Highway Department renumbered the state highways that had numbers that duplicated the then @-@ new US Highways . In the process , the M @-@ 41 designation was <unk> the southern half became part of a newly designated M @-@ 20 . The northern half was made part of M @-@ 82 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Mehmed II 's first Albanian campaign = 
 In 1452 , the newly acceded Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II ordered his first campaign against Skanderbeg , the chief of the League of Lezhë . Shortly after the First Siege of Krujë , Murad II died in Edirne , only to be succeeded by his son Mehmed II . Mehmed always supported more aggressive strategies of conquest which his father had continually rejected . Once in power , Mehmed ordered nearly annual invasions of Albania which often resulted in multiple battles in one year . The first of these expeditions was sent in 1452 under the dual @-@ command of Hamza Pasha and Tahip Pasha , with an army of approximately 25 @,@ 000 men . This campaign was the first major test for the new Sultan against western Europe and a high point of a diplomatic struggle between the major Mediterranean powers . 
 Albania at the time was suffering a crisis of power as Skanderbeg , the chief of the League of Lezhë , became a vassal of Alfonso the Magnanimous , the king of Aragon . Worried about another growing adversary in the Venetian Gulf , the Republic of Venice tried to turn Skanderbeg 's allies against him in order to weaken Alfonso 's influence . Realizing his opportunity , Mehmed ordered an invasion of Albania . Skanderbeg , knowing the impetuous nature of the new Sultan and the effect it would have if his army were not immediately defeated , acted quickly . As soon as the Ottoman army was split into two separate forces , Skanderbeg attacked and defeated both Hamza and Tahip . Tahip was killed in battle whereas Hamza was captured and ransomed for 13 @,@ 000 ducats along with his staff . Soon thereafter , Skanderbeg cajoled his former Venetian adversaries into easing Albanian @-@ <unk> relations . 
 = = Albanian relations with the West = = 
 The siege of Krujë in 1450 resulted in heavy loss for both Murad II and the League of Lezhë . A large portion of the Albanian land was wasted from the long campaign where the Turkish forces had been stationed for more than half a year . The country was left with few resources to produce crops and a large famine was the result . In 1451 , the year after Murad 's forces had devastated the country , Mehmed II gained control of the Ottoman Empire after his father 's death . Mehmed 's great energy was already apparent during the previous years when he had accompanied his father to Albania . Skanderbeg realized that if Mehmed struck now , he would be in great difficulty since he lacked the resources and the support to successfully hold off a large invasion . One of Albania 's most powerful princedoms , the Dukagjini , were making open negotiations with the Turks , suggesting that they would become Mehmed 's vassals . 
 With an internal conflict , a destroyed economy , and a weakened army , Skanderbeg realized that he needed to make an alliance with a powerful state so that the League would continue its existence . He first approached the Republic of Venice by offering a military alliance and a sort of <unk> to the Republic of Venice , but the Republic was then enjoying good relations with the Ottomans and thus refused Skanderbeg 's offer . Rome offered some monetary help , but Skanderbeg was looking for more . Skanderbeg then turned to Alfonso V of Aragon who then controlled Naples and Sicily . Alfonso wanted to expand his empire from Gibraltar to the Bosphorus . In order to realize his dreams , he would need a bridgehead in the Balkans from where he could march to Constantinople . Alfonso thus took up the offer to establish diplomatic relations with Skanderbeg and his Albanian allies . 
 The process was not without obstacles , however . The Neapolitan nobles distrusted Skanderbeg since the Kastrioti family had previously been allied with Venice . Alfonso himself had been offended when he asked Skanderbeg to attack Venice along with Đurađ Branković and the Albanian refused . Alfonso was also a devout Christian and found it uneasy to ally with Skanderbeg who had previously practiced Islam in the Ottoman court . On the other hand , Skanderbeg had been disillusioned when Alfonso failed to send any troops to Krujë when they were most needed . But things changed once Skanderbeg had thwarted the Ottoman Army . Both Venice and Alfonso grew an interest in expanding their powers in the Adriatic and the Ionian . On 26 March 1451 , the Treaty of Gaeta was signed , creating an Albanian @-@ Aragonese alliance . 
 Skanderbeg also sent diplomats to other Italian states . In August 1451 , along with Venice he sent messages to Francesco Sforza , then duke of Milan , and Siena to inform them of his victory over the Turks and of the desperate need for supplies to continue combating the Ottoman armies , but no aid was received . Venice responded that she wished to see the Albanians and the Turks settle for peace , whereas Sforza 's response hinged upon the excuse that his state was not financially sound and that his soldiers were not meant to help an Albanian prince . Only Ragusa offered a large amount of ducats . 
 = = Conflict over control of Albania = = 
 Skanderbeg 's primary reason for allying with Alfonso was his fear of 21 @-@ year @-@ old Mehmed II , whose ambition was to reconquer Justinian I 's empire which stretched from Syria to Spain . Mehmed had been planning a campaign against Albania since Skanderbeg had defeated his father at Krujë in 1450 . Another factor was that Krujë geographically dominated Durazzo , which was only 150 kilometers from Brindisi , the nearest Italian port . Mehmed 's ambitions were symmetrical to Alfonso 's and it was clear that there would be some sort of clash between the two in Albania , the epicenter of the conflict . Mehmed was one of the first monarchs since Roman times to keep a massive centralized army under his personal control . Besides controlling a huge army , Mehmed was widely acknowledged for his far @-@ reaching wisdom which allowed him to produce a highly advanced military armed with the newest models of the cannon . 
 The strength of the Albanian resistance was supposed to be fierce , but Alfonso wanted to see the League become powerful enough to seriously challenge the Ottoman Empire , much unlike the Venetians who were troubled by the growing Albanian state . In May , Alfonso sent two experienced Catalan officers with 200 men and plenty of supplies to Krujë and , on 7 June 1451 , he established an alliance with George Arianiti , the most powerful League member from southern Albania . Later that same year , Alfonso created similar alliances with John <unk> , George Stres Balsha , Muzaka Thopia , Peter <unk> , and Simon <unk> , all important Albanian nobles allied to Skanderbeg . Skanderbeg was pleased with Alfonso , but dissension in the League over political issues was still present . Paul Dukagjini and Peter Spani remained aligned with Venice and established friendly relations with the Sultan . 
 In 1451 , Mehmed was focused on defeating the <unk> and <unk> in the East , but it was in his intentions to return to Albania . During this brief period of rest , Skanderbeg took up the rebuilding of Krujë and erected a new fortress in <unk> in the Drin Valley near Svetigrad ( which had been lost in a 1448 siege ) where Turkish forces had previously slipped through unhindered . The fortress was constructed in the heat of summer within a few months when few Turkish posts were present . This came as a huge blow to Ottoman efforts whose Albanian operations were thus inhibited . 
 Meanwhile , the Venetian cities had been trying to antagonize Skanderbeg 's allies against him in order to halt Aragonese expansion into the Eastern Mediterranean . In response , Alfonso sent Bernard <unk> to be the governor of Krujë , only to be replaced later by Ramon d 'Ortafà , whereas the commander of the garrison was Pedro <unk> with 100 men . Alfonso thus became the nominal ruler of Albania , although Skanderbeg 's men made up the dominant majority of the anti @-@ Ottoman forces , leaving Skanderbeg in virtual command of Albania . Venice continued its efforts to turn Skanderbeg 's allies against Alfonso and Skanderbeg . George Arianiti resisted the Venetian plots and even cut himself off from Albanian politics . Paul Dukagjini , however , prepared for war against Skanderbeg . 
 To the north , Stefan <unk> did not keep relations with Alfonso . Instead , he allied himself with Venice which gave him the Flag of St. Marc to bear . <unk> thus became a Venetian vassal , who promised to protect Albania Veneta from Serbian and Turkish attacks . Skanderbeg grew agitated from the Venetian subtleties and threatened a renewed war against Venice under the pretext that the Senate had not been annually paying the 1 @,@ 400 ducats promised to the Albanian in 1448 . He had already moved his men towards Durazzo and Scutari , leaving the Republic with no choice but to ease their secretive diplomacy . 
 = = War in the East = = 
 In 1452 , Turkish cavalry forces had begun raiding Albanian territories in the East , a common Ottoman tactic to weaken an enemy before beginning a full @-@ scale invasion . On 23 April , Raimon d 'Ortafà , Alfonso 's governor in Albania , feared that the Turkish invasion would force many of the Albanians to turn to Islam and sent letters to Alfonso for aid . Mehmed , believing that the misunderstandings between the Albanian leaders was at its most critical point , ordered a force of 25 @,@ 000 @-@ 27 @,@ 000 inexperienced men . His reasoning was that these could weaken Albanian forces enough so that he could then launch a concerted invasion . The force was under the main command of Tahip Pasha . Tahip would split his forces into two parts , one under his command , and the other under his subordinate , Hamza Pasha . Mehmed had been tied up in war in the East so he let Hamza ride back to the West . 
 = = = Battle of <unk> = = = 
 Skanderbeg gathered 14 @,@ 000 men and marched against Tahip Pasha 's army . Skanderbeg planned to first defeat Hamza and then to move around Tahip and encircle him . Hamza had 10 @,@ 000 @-@ 12 @,@ 000 men under his personal command and was camped near the new fortress of <unk> . Skanderbeg did not give Hamza much time to prepare and , on 21 July , he assaulted immediately . The fierce attack made short work of the Ottoman force , resulting in them fleeing . Much of the force fell on the field and the parts that ran away were pursued . 
 Hamza was captured in the battle as well as his staff . Francesco Sansovino , in Historia universale dell 'origine et imperio de <unk> , states that Hamza , fearing punitive measures , begged for mercy , arguing that he had only fought against Skanderbeg since he had been ordered to . According to Demetrio Franco , one of Skanderbeg 's earliest biographers , Skanderbeg responded in such a way that the Ottoman officers began to cry and he offered to have dinner with them . After this , he ordered for his prisoners to be put under guard and to be treated properly . The men were freed in the end , but Hamza and his staff were ransomed for 13 @,@ 000 ducats . Franco reports that Skanderbeg 's magnanimity became known throughout Albania and the Ottoman Empire to the point where many of his men gained much more respect for him as a warrior . Skanderbeg 's intention in doing so was to show that he would not take advantage of the unfortunate and that he had enough confidence in his ability to let his enemies fight him again another day . 
 = = = Battle of Meçad = = = 
 Skanderbeg had kept the captured Ottoman foot @-@ soldiers under his control , however . The same day that he defeated Hamza 's army he sent several men to Tahip 's army ( which had moved to the center of Albania ) where they displayed the captives along with the captured Ottoman standards in order to demoralize Tahip 's army . Tahip was not intimidated and split his forces in two in the plains of Meçad , with his elite forces covering his flanks . Skanderbeg , however , had sent Moses of Dibra around Tahip 's rear flanks in order to weaken the Ottoman army before launching his main attack . After this was done , Skanderbeg then attacked with his own men . In the heat of the battle , Moses was able to spot out Tahip and after a fierce duel , managed to kill him . The Turks were thus left without their commander and they fled . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the battles of <unk> and Meçad 7 @,@ 000 Ottoman forces were left dead on the battlefield along with thousands of horses . The Albanians had suffered 1 @,@ 000 casualties themselves and , in their exhaustion , they refused to pursue the fleeing Ottoman forces . Hamza Pasha and his staff were ransomed to the sultan . Raimon d 'Ortafà reported Skanderbeg 's victory to Alfonso who received it with great exuberance . Skanderbeg 's victory over a ruler even more powerful than Murad came as a great surprise to the Albanians . Skanderbeg 's reputation among his allies was redeemed and the Dukagjini opted for a reconciliation . 
 In order to reduce the risk of Ottoman expeditions prompted by Venice , Skanderbeg took several steps to soften relations with the Republic . In the autumn of 1452 , Đurađ Branković attacked the Venetian city of Cattaro . Skanderbeg sent a troop of men to aid the Venetians to thwart the attack , but Venice , despite thanking the Albanian , still held its animosity towards him . Skanderbeg took another step . He sent an " orator " , <unk> <unk> , to Alfonso in order to ask for military aid and to convince Alfonso to urge for a reconciliation with Venice . The first request could not be fulfilled : Alfonso responded that he had neither the men nor the means to help Skanderbeg . The second request , however , was satisfied and on 5 March 1453 , Alfonso sent a letter censuring Venice for not paying its dues to Skanderbeg and also for supporting Skanderbeg 's enemies . He thus urged for a peremptory measure to all Albanian @-@ Venetian conflicts . 
 On 22 April 1453 , Mehmed sent another expedition to Albania under Ibrahim Pasha , only to be defeated at <unk> with Ibrahim killed in action . The Albanian victory , however , was shadowed by Mehmed 's conquest of Constantinople only five weeks after , which deeply troubled the Christian states of Europe . Mehmed , by then called el @-@ <unk> ( " the Conqueror " ) , turned his attention to finally defeating the Kingdom of Hungary and crossing into Italy . 
 The European powers were locked in internal conflicts : e.g. the war in Lombardy . Skanderbeg believed that the threat of Mehmed launching his withheld European campaigns was at its highest . He sent urgent requests to Venice to prepare for a new Ottoman offensive , thus attempting to develop an Albanian @-@ Venetian alliance . While recognizing the threat and Skanderbeg 's sovereignty over Albania , Venice withheld an establishment of an alliance . Alfonso promised to send men and an annual pension of 1500 ducats to Skanderbeg , whereas Pope Nicholas V sent 5 @,@ 000 florins . Albania , Ragusa , Serbia , and Hungary then made a loose anti @-@ Ottoman coalition to halt any future Turkish expansions . 
 = The Green ( Dartmouth College ) = 
 The Green ( formally the College Green ) is a grass @-@ covered field and common space at the center of Dartmouth College , an Ivy League university located in Hanover , New Hampshire , United States . It was among the first parcels of land obtained by the College upon its founding in 1769 , and is the only creation of the 18th century remaining at the center of the campus . After being cleared of pine trees , it initially served as a pasture and later as an athletic field for College sporting events . Today , it is a central location for rallies , celebrations , and demonstrations , and serves as a general , all @-@ purpose recreation area . The College describes the Green as " historic " and as the " emotional center " of the institution . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Green is a five @-@ acre ( two @-@ hectare ) plot located in the center of downtown Hanover , New Hampshire . It is crossed by seven gravel walking paths , the locations of which varied until about 1931 , when the configuration was last altered . Three of them bisect the Green , running southwest to northeast , northwest to southeast , and east to west . The northernmost of its two east @-@ west paths was added after Massachusetts Hall was constructed in 1907 , and links the central entrance to that dormitory west of the Green to the northern entrance to Dartmouth Hall , east of it . Two paths run from the northwest and southwest corners respectively to the middle of the Green 's eastern edge . A final path runs north @-@ south along the eastern side . The Green also has paved sidewalks along its southern and western edges . 
 The Green is not perfectly rectangular , as its southern border along Wheelock Street runs slightly to the northeast rather than due east @-@ west . This irregularity is due to the Town of Hanover 's 1873 seizure of part of the southeast corner of the Green , which it used to straighten Wheelock Street . The Green had previously extended 30 feet ( nine meters ) farther south on that corner . 
 The outside edges of the Green are bordered by benches and trees ; two flagpoles stand at the center of the western side . The plot is bounded by four streets : Wheelock Street to the south , College Street to the east , Wentworth Street to the north , and Main Street to the west . All but Wheelock Street are one @-@ way roads , with traffic circulating counter @-@ clockwise around the Green . 
 Many of Dartmouth 's important campus buildings are located around the Green . To the north lies Baker Memorial Library , Dartmouth 's principal library , Webster Hall , containing Rauner Special Collections Library , and Sanborn Hall , home to the English department . On the west side sits the administration building , Parkhurst Hall , the admissions building , McNutt Hall , and two student buildings , Robinson Hall and the Collis Center . To the south sits the Hanover Inn , a College @-@ owned hotel , and the Hopkins Center for the Arts . To the east lies the historic Dartmouth Row buildings , composed Wentworth Hall , Dartmouth Hall , Thornton Hall , and Reed Hall , as well as Rollins Chapel . 
 = = History = = 
 The land on which the Green sits was originally a pine forest , with some trees reaching the height of 270 feet ( 82 m ) , high enough to block out the sun . The process of clearing the pines was begun in 1770 by the newly founded Dartmouth College . The village plan of Hanover was laid out the following year and included as its central feature an open square of 7 @.@ 5 acres ( 3 ha ) ( three hectares ) . Even though the land had been cleared , many tree stumps remained until 1831 ; for a long period , it was a Dartmouth tradition for the graduating class to remove one stump . 
 The Green was not maintained at first ; after being cleared , it was unkempt and ragged , sloping sharply towards a swamp in the southwest corner . As early as 1807 , the College was debating as to the future of the plot , considering using it for a variety of purposes . In 1828 , the Board of Trustees finally voted to plow , seed , level , and fence the area . Lack of funding would delay this plan from being carried out immediately ; the Green was leveled in 1831 and finally fenced in 1836 . The main road from Hanover to the northward Lyme , New Hampshire had previously led diagonally across the Green , and due to the new fences , had to be diverted around it . 
 One of the Green 's earliest uses was as a pasture for cattle belonging to the residents of the town . Dartmouth students resented this use , and in the early 19th century herded all the cattle into the basement of Dartmouth Hall as a protest . The fence constructed during the 1836 renovations was in part a response to this action , and was meant to keep animals out . 
 In 1824 , a Hanover ordinance permitted " the playing at ball or any game in which ball is used on the public common in front of Dartmouth College , " confirming the Green 's ongoing use as an athletic field . Cricket was among the games regularly played on the Green in the 18th century , and old division football was played by the 1820s . Dartmouth 's first intercollegiate matches in baseball ( 1866 ) , track and field ( 1875 ) , football ( 1881 ) , and tennis ( 1884 ) took place there . The College built its first gymnasium ( Bissell Gymnasium ) on the southeast corner of the Green in 1866 @-@ 67 . 
 In April 1873 , the Town of Hanover seized part of the southeast corner of the green to align East and West Wheelock Streets ; the town moved the fence thirty feet to the north of its original position . Dartmouth students protested by tearing down and burning the rebuilt fence ; the town responded by threatening to reopen Main Street on its previous route from the Green 's southwest corner across to the northeast . In an effort to quickly replace the fence and prevent the road from being reopened , College President Asa Dodge Smith convinced students to pay for the new fence . In 1893 , when the fence 's original purpose of keeping out livestock was no longer needed , the College decided to tear it down , to much student and alumni outcry . The class of 1893 restored and sponsored part of the fence as a " senior fence , " and today the Senior Fence runs along the parts of the southern and western borders closest to the southwest corner . Only senior students were allowed to sit on it , and underclassmen in violation of this policy were soaked in a nearby watering trough . 
 In 1906 , the Board of Trustees voted to officially name the space " the College Green " , although at the time the space also went by names such as " the College Square " , " the Common " , and " the Campus " . Aside from minor changes in furnishing , vegetation , and <unk> , the Green has remained largely unchanged since being cleared . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The 2007 – 2008 edition of Dartmouth 's Student Handbook states that the Green is reserved " for informal use , including rallies and other assemblies , by students , faculty , staff , and guests of the College ... and for a limited number of traditional events " . Since other facilities have superseded its use as such , the Green is no longer used for official athletic competitions . Nevertheless , informal sports and games frequently occur on the Green . Like all of the Dartmouth campus , the entirety of the Green is Wi @-@ Fi @-@ enabled . 
 = = = Rallies and protests = = = 
 Given the Green 's role as " the physical and emotional center of campus life , " it is often the setting for protests , rallies , and demonstrations . <unk> , an online directory of Dartmouth College 's buildings , describes the Green as being " used any time when collective joy or frustration is to be expressed " . Dartmouth 's Student Handbook explicitly permits the Green to be used for demonstrations and rallies . 
 One of the earliest student demonstrations took place in 1814 , when students gathered on the Green to celebrate Napoleon 's defeat in Europe . At the height of the Vietnam War in the late 1960s , the Green regularly saw antiwar demonstrations , some attracting up to a thousand protesters . A 1969 protest over the presence of the campus Reserve Officer Training Corps ( ROTC ) program culminated in the occupation of Parkhurst Hall , the College 's administration building . In 1986 , students constructed shanties on the Green to encourage the College to divest from South African companies supporting Apartheid ; staffers of the conservative newspaper The Dartmouth Review took sledgehammers to the structures . More recently , the Green was the location of a controversial 2006 May Day rally in favor of immigrant rights . 
 On September 26 , 2007 , Dartmouth hosted a Democratic Presidential Candidates Debate . The Green was the site of student rallies in favor of various candidates , and also saw the live broadcast of Hardball with Chris Matthews . 
 = = = Traditions and celebrations = = = 
 Dartmouth is well known for its variety of long @-@ standing student traditions , many of which are centered on the Green . At Homecoming each fall , a bonfire is constructed on the Green by the freshman class ; students and community members gather to watch the freshmen run around it as it burns . The wintertime celebration of Winter Carnival sees the construction of a snow sculpture on the Green . In the springtime , Green Key Weekend is marked by concerts and performances on the Green , which until 1984 was also the site of fiercely competitive Green Key chariot races . 
 Other traditions involving the Green include the placement of a Christmas tree at the center each December and an annual Native American Pow @-@ Wow . Students gather on the Green on the night of the winter 's first snowfall for a school @-@ wide snowball fight . The College 's commencement ceremonies are traditionally held on the Green , regardless of weather conditions . 
 = Saab JAS 39 Gripen = 
 The Saab JAS 39 Gripen ( English : " griffin " ) is a light single @-@ engine multirole fighter aircraft manufactured by the Swedish aerospace company Saab . It was designed to replace the Saab 35 Draken and 37 Viggen in the Swedish Air Force ( <unk> ) . The Gripen has a delta wing and canard configuration with relaxed stability design and fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight controls . It is powered by the Volvo RM12 , and has a top speed of Mach 2 . Later aircraft are modified for NATO interoperability standards and to undertake in @-@ flight refuelling . 
 In 1979 , the Swedish government began development studies for an aircraft capable of fighter , attack and reconnaissance missions to replace the Saab 35 Draken and 37 Viggen . A new design from Saab was selected and developed as the JAS 39 , first flying in 1988 . Following two crashes during flight development and subsequent alterations to the aircraft 's flight control software , the Gripen entered service with the Swedish Air Force in 1997 . Upgraded variants , featuring more advanced avionics and adaptations for longer mission times , began entering service in 2003 . 
 In order to market the aircraft to export customers , Saab has formed several partnerships and collaborative efforts with multiple overseas aerospace companies . One example of such efforts was Gripen International , a joint partnership between Saab and BAE Systems formed in 2001 . Gripen International was responsible for marketing the aircraft , and was heavily involved in the successful export of the type to South Africa ; the organization was later dissolved amidst allegations of bribery being employed to secure foreign interest and sales . On the export market , the Gripen has achieved moderate success in sales to nations in Central Europe , South Africa and Southeast Asia ; bribery has been suspected in some of these procurements , but authorities closed the investigation in 2009 . 
 A further version , designated Gripen JAS 39E / F , is under development as of 2014 ; it has been referred to as Gripen NG or Super @-@ JAS . The changes include the adoption of a new powerplant , the General Electric F414G , an active electronically scanned array radar , and significantly increased internal fuel capacity . Saab has proposed other derivatives , including a navalised Sea Gripen for carrier operations and an optionally manned aircraft for unmanned operations . Sweden and Brazil have ordered the Gripen E / F and Switzerland initially selected it for procurement . As of 2013 , more than 247 Gripens have been built . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In the late 1970s , Sweden sought to replace its ageing Saab 35 Draken and Saab 37 Viggen . The Swedish Air Force required an affordable Mach 2 aircraft with good short @-@ field performance for a defensive dispersed basing plan in the event of invasion ; the plan included 800 m long by 9 m wide rudimentary runways as stated in the Base 90 directives . One goal was for the aircraft to be smaller than the Viggen while equalling or improving on its payload @-@ range characteristics . Early proposals included the Saab 38 , also called <unk> , intended as an attack aircraft and trainer , and the A 20 , a development of the Viggen that would have capabilities as a fighter , attack and sea reconnaissance aircraft . Several foreign designs were also studied , including the General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon , the McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , the Northrop F @-@ 20 Tigershark and the Dassault Mirage 2000 . Ultimately , the Swedish government opted for a new fighter to be developed by Saab ( Svenska <unk> Aktiebolag ) . 
 In 1979 , the government began a study calling for a versatile platform capable of " JAS " , standing for <unk> ( air @-@ to @-@ air ) , Attack ( air @-@ to @-@ surface ) , and <unk> ( reconnaissance ) , indicating a multirole , or <unk> , fighter aircraft that can fulfill multiple roles during the same mission . Several Saab designs were reviewed , the most promising being " Project 2105 " ( redesignated " Project <unk> " and , later , " Project 2110 " ) , recommended to the government by the Defence Materiel Administration ( <unk> <unk> , or FMV ) . In 1980 , <unk> JAS ( IG JAS , " JAS Industry Group " ) was established as a joint venture by Saab @-@ Scania , LM Ericsson , Svenska <unk> , Volvo <unk> and <unk> <unk> , the industrial arm of the Swedish armed forces . 
 The preferred aircraft was a single @-@ engine , lightweight single @-@ seater , embracing fly @-@ by @-@ wire technology , canards , and an aerodynamically unstable design . The powerplant selected was the Volvo @-@ <unk> RM12 , a license @-@ built derivative of the General Electric F404 @-@ 400 ; engine development priorities were weight reduction and lowering component count . On 30 June 1982 , with approval from the Riksdag , the FMV issued contracts worth SEK 25 @.@ 7 billion to Saab , covering five prototypes and an initial batch of 30 production aircraft . By January 1983 , a Viggen was converted to a flying test aircraft for the JAS 39 's intended avionics , such as the fly @-@ by @-@ wire controls . The JAS 39 received the name Gripen ( griffin ) via a public competition , which is the heraldry on Saab 's logo . 
 = = = Testing , production and improvements = = = 
 The first Gripen was rolled out on 26 April 1987 , marking Saab 's 50th anniversary . Originally planned to fly in 1987 , the first flight was delayed by 18 months due to issues with the flight control system . On 9 December 1988 , the first prototype ( serial number 39 @-@ 1 ) took its 51 @-@ minute maiden flight with pilot Stig <unk> at the controls . During the test programme , concern surfaced about the aircraft 's avionics , specifically the fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight control system ( FCS ) , and the relaxed stability design . On 2 February 1989 , this issue led to the crash of the prototype during an attempted landing at Linköping ; the test pilot Lars <unk> walked away with a broken elbow . The cause of the crash was identified as pilot @-@ induced oscillation , caused by problems with the FCS 's pitch @-@ control routine . 
 In response to the crash Saab and US firm Calspan introduced software modifications to the aircraft . A modified Lockheed NT @-@ 33A was used to test these improvements , which allowed flight testing to resume 15 months after the accident . On 8 August 1993 , production aircraft <unk> was destroyed in an accident during an aerial display in Stockholm . Test pilot <unk> lost control of the aircraft during a roll at low altitude when the aircraft stalled , forcing him to eject . Saab later found the problem to be high amplification of the pilot 's quick and significant stick command inputs . The ensuing investigation and flaw correction delayed test flying by several months , resuming in December 1993 . 
 The first order included an option for another 110 , which was exercised in June 1992 . Batch II consisted of 96 one @-@ seat JAS <unk> and 14 two @-@ seat JAS <unk> . The JAS 39B variant is 66 cm ( 26 in ) longer than the JAS 39A to accommodate a second seat , which also necessitated the deletion of the cannon and a reduced internal fuel capacity . By April 1994 , five prototypes and two series @-@ production Gripens had been completed ; but a beyond @-@ visual @-@ range missile ( BVR ) had not yet been selected . A third batch was ordered in June 1997 , composed of 50 upgraded single @-@ seat JAS 39Cs and 14 JAS 39D two @-@ seaters , known as ' Turbo Gripen ' , with NATO compatibility for exports . Batch III aircraft , delivered between 2002 and 2008 , possess more powerful and updated avionics , in @-@ flight refuelling capability via retractable probes on the aircraft 's starboard side , and an on @-@ board oxygen @-@ generating system for longer missions . In @-@ flight refueling was tested via a specially equipped prototype ( 39 ‐ 4 ) used in successful trials with a Royal Air Force VC10 in 1998 . 
 = = = Teaming agreements = = = 
 During the 1995 Paris Air Show , Saab Military Aircraft and British Aerospace ( BAe , now BAE Systems ) announced the formation the joint @-@ venture company Saab @-@ BAe Gripen AB with the goal of adapting , manufacturing , marketing and supporting Gripen worldwide . The deal involved the conversion of the A and B series aircraft to the " export " C and D series , which developed the Gripen for compatibility with NATO standards . This cooperation was extended in 2001 with the formation of Gripen International to promote export sales . In December 2004 , Saab and BAE Systems announced that BAE was to sell a large portion of its stake in Saab , and that Saab would take full responsibility for marketing and export orders of the Gripen . In June 2011 , Saab announced that an internal investigation revealed evidence of acts of corruption by BAE Systems , including money laundering , in South Africa , one of the Gripen 's customers . 
 On 26 April 2007 , Norway signed a <unk> million joint @-@ development agreement with Saab to cooperate in the development programme of the Gripen , including the integration of Norwegian industries in the development of future versions of the aircraft . In June of the same year , Saab also entered an agreement with Thales Norway A / S concerning the development of communications systems for the Gripen fighter ; this order was the first to be awarded under the provisions of the Letter of Agreement signed by the Norwegian Ministry of Defence and Gripen International in April 2007 . As a result of the United States diplomatic cables leak in 2010 , it was revealed that US diplomats had become concerned with cooperation between Norway and Sweden on the topic of the Gripen , and had sought to exert pressure against a Norwegian purchase of the aircraft . 
 In December 2007 , as part of Gripen International 's marketing efforts in Denmark , a deal was signed with Danish technology supplier Terma A / S which allows them to participate in an industrial cooperation programme over the next 10 – 15 years . The total value of the programme is estimated at over <unk> billion , and is partly dependent on a procurement of the Gripen by Denmark . 
 = = = Controversies , scandals , and costs = = = 
 Developing an advanced multi @-@ role fighter was a major undertaking for Sweden . The predecessor Viggen , despite being less advanced and less expensive , had been criticized for occupying too much of Sweden 's military budget and was branded " a cuckoo in the military nest " by critics as early as 1971 . At the 1972 party congress of the Social Democrats , the dominant party in Swedish politics since the 1950s , a motion was passed to stop any future projects to develop advanced military aircraft . In 1982 , the Gripen project passed in the Riksdag by a margin of 176 for and 167 against , with the entire Social Democratic party voting against the proposal due to demands for more studies . A new bill was introduced in 1983 and a final approval was given in April 1983 with the condition that the project was to have a predetermined fixed @-@ price contract , a decision that would later be criticized as unrealistic due to later cost overruns . 
 According to Annika <unk> , in the aftermath of the 1989 and 1993 crashes , the Gripen risked a loss of credibility and the weakening of its public image . There was public speculation that failures to address technical problems exposed in the first crash had directly contributed to the second crash and thus had been avoidable . <unk> observed that media elements had called for greater public accountability and explanation of the project ; ill @-@ informed media analysis had also distorted public knowledge of the Gripen . The sitting Conservative government quickly endorsed and supported the Gripen – Minister of Defense Anders Björck issued a public reassurance that the project was very positive for Sweden . In connection to the Gripen 's marketing efforts to multiple countries , including South Africa , Austria , the Czech Republic and Hungary , there were reports of widespread bribery and corruption by BAE Systems and Saab . In 2007 , Swedish journalists reported that BAE had paid bribes equivalent to millions of dollars . Following criminal investigations in eight countries , only one individual in Austria , Alfons <unk> @-@ Pouilly , was prosecuted for bribery . The scandal tarnished the international reputation of the Gripen , BAE Systems , Saab , and Sweden . 
 The Gripen 's cost has been subject to frequent attention and speculation . In 2008 , Saab announced reduced earnings for that year , partly attributing this to increased marketing costs for the aircraft . In 2008 , Saab disputed Norway 's cost calculations for the Gripen NG as overestimated and in excess of real world performance with existing operators . A 2007 report by the European Union Institute for Security Studies stated the total research and development costs of Gripen to be € 1 @.@ 84 billion . According to a study by Jane 's Information Group in 2012 , the Gripen 's operational cost was the lowest among several modern fighters ; it was estimated at $ 4 @,@ 700 per flight hour . The Swedish Ministry of Defense estimated the cost of the full system , comprising 60 Gripen E / F , at SEK 90 billion distributed over the period 2013 – 42 . The Swedish Armed Forces estimated that maintaining 100 C / D @-@ model aircraft until <unk> would cost SEK 60 billion , while buying aircraft from a foreign supplier would cost SEK 110 billion . 
 = = = Further developments = = = 
 A two @-@ seat aircraft , designated " Gripen Demo " , was ordered in 2007 as a testbed for various upgrades . It was powered by the General Electric F414G , a development of the Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet 's engine . The Gripen NG 's maximum take off weight was increased from 14 @,@ 000 to 16 @,@ 000 kg ( 30 @,@ 900 – 35 @,@ 300 lb ) , internal fuel capacity was increased by 40 per cent by relocating the undercarriage , which also allowed for two hardpoints to be added on the fuselage underside . Its combat radius was 1 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 810 mi ) when carrying six AAMs and drop tanks . The PS @-@ 05 / A radar is replaced by the new Raven ES @-@ 05 active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar , which is based on the Vixen AESA radar family from Selex ES . The Gripen Demo 's maiden flight was conducted on 27 May 2008 . On 21 January 2009 , the Gripen Demo flew at Mach 1 @.@ 2 without reheat to test its supercruise capability . The Gripen Demo served as a basis for the Gripen E / F , also referred to as the Gripen NG ( Next Generation ) and MS ( Material Standard ) 21 . 
 Saab studied a variant of the Gripen capable of operating from aircraft carriers in the 1990s . In 2009 , it launched the Sea Gripen project in response to India 's request for information on a carrier @-@ borne aircraft . Brazil may also require new carrier aircraft . Following a meeting with Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) officials in May 2011 , Saab agreed to establish a development center in the UK to expand on the Sea Gripen concept . In 2013 , Saab 's Lennart <unk> stated that development of an optionally manned version of the Gripen E capable of flying unmanned operations was being explored by the firm ; further development of the optionally manned and carrier versions would require the commitment of a customer . On 6 November 2014 , the Brazilian Navy expressed interest in a carrier @-@ based variant of the Gripen . 
 In 2010 , Sweden awarded Saab a four @-@ year contract to improve the Gripen 's radar and other equipment , integrate new weapons , and lower its operating costs . In June 2010 , Saab stated that Sweden planned to order the Gripen NG , designated JAS 39E / F , and was to enter service in 2017 or earlier dependent on export orders . On 25 August 2012 , following Switzerland 's intention to buy 22 of the E / F variants , Sweden announced it planned to buy 40 – 60 Gripen E / Fs . The Swedish government approved the decision to purchase 60 Gripen Es on 17 January 2013 . 
 In July 2013 , assembly began on the first pre @-@ production aircraft . Originally 60 JAS 39Cs were to be retrofitted to the E @-@ models by 2023 , but this has been revised to Gripen Es having new @-@ built airframes and some reused parts from JAS 39Cs . The first production aircraft is to be delivered in 2018 . In March 2014 , Saab revealed the detailed design and indicated it planned to receive military type certification in early 2018 . The first Gripen E was rolled out on 18 May 2016 . 
 In September 2015 , Saab Aeronautics head Lennard <unk> announced that an electronic warfare version of the Gripen F two @-@ seater was under development . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The Gripen is a multirole fighter aircraft , intended to be a lightweight and agile aerial platform incorporating advanced , highly adaptable avionics . It has canard control surfaces which contributes a positive lift force at all speeds , while the generous lift from the delta wing compensates for the rear stabilizer producing negative lift at high speeds , increasing induced drag . Being intentionally unstable and employing digital fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight controls to maintain stability removes many flight restrictions , improves maneuverability , and reduces drag . The Gripen also has good short takeoff performance , being able to maintain a high sink rate and strengthened to withstand the stresses of short landings . A pair of air brakes are located on the sides of the rear fuselage ; the canards also angle downward to act as air brakes and decrease landing distance . It is capable of flying at a 70 @-@ 80 degrees angle of attack . 
 In order to enable the Gripen to have a long service life , projected to be roughly 50 years , the aircraft was designed to have low maintenance requirements ; major systems such as the RM12 engine and PS @-@ 05 / A radar are of a modular type to reduce operating cost and increase reliability . The Gripen was designed to be flexible as it had been anticipated that newly developed sensors , computers , and armaments would need to be integrated as technology advances . The aircraft was estimated to be roughly 67 % sourced from Swedish or European suppliers and 33 % from the United States . 
 One key aspect of the Gripen program that Saab have been keen to emphasize has been technology @-@ transfer agreements and industrial partnerships with export customers . The Gripen is typically customized to customer requirements , enabling the routine inclusion of local suppliers in the manufacturing and support processes . A number of South African firms provide components and systems – including the communications suite and electronic warfare systems – for the Gripens operated by South African Air Force . Operators also have access to the Gripen 's source code and technical documentation , allowing for upgrades and new equipment to be independently integrated . Some export customers intend to domestically assemble the Gripen ; it has been proposed that Brazilian aerospace manufacturer Embraer may produce Gripens for other export customers as well . 
 = = = Avionics and sensors = = = 
 All of the Gripen 's avionics are fully integrated using total of five MIL @-@ STD @-@ <unk> digital data buses , described as " sensor fusion " . The total integration of the avionics makes the Gripen a " programmable " aircraft , allowing software updates to be introduced over time to increase performance and allow for additional operational roles and equipment . The Ada programming language was adopted for the Gripen , and is used for the primary flight controls on the final prototypes from 1996 onwards and all subsequent production aircraft . The Gripen 's software is continuously being improved to add new capabilities , as compared to the preceding Viggen which was updated only in an 18 @-@ month schedule . 
 Much of the data generated from the onboard sensors and by cockpit activity is digitally recorded throughout the length of an entire mission . This information can be replayed in the cockpit or easily extracted for detailed post @-@ mission analysis using a data transfer unit that can also be used to insert mission data to the aircraft . The Gripen , like the Viggen , was designed to operate as one component of a networked national defence system , which allows for automatic exchange of information in real @-@ time between Gripen aircraft and ground facilities . According to Saab , the Gripen features " the world 's most highly developed data link " . The Gripen 's <unk> tactical navigation system combines information from multiple onboard systems such as the air data computer , radar altimeter , and GPS to continuously calculate the Gripen 's location . 
 The Gripen entered service using the PS @-@ 05 / A pulse @-@ Doppler X band multi @-@ mode radar , developed by Ericsson and GEC @-@ Marconi , which is based on the latter 's advanced Blue Vixen radar for the Sea Harrier that also served as the basis for the Eurofighter 's CAPTOR radar . The all @-@ weather radar is capable of locating and identifying targets 120 km ( 74 mi ) away , and automatically tracking multiple targets in the upper and lower spheres , on the ground and sea or in the air . It can guide several beyond visual range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles to multiple targets simultaneously . Saab stated the PS @-@ 05 / A is able to handle all types of air defense , air @-@ to @-@ surface , and reconnaissance missions , and is developing a Mark 4 upgrade to it . The Mark 4 version has a 150 % increase in high @-@ altitude air @-@ to @-@ air detection ranges , detection and tracking of smaller targets at current ranges , 140 % improvement in air @-@ to @-@ air mode at low altitude , and full integration of modern weapons such as the AIM @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 AMRAAM , AIM @-@ 9X Sidewinder , and MBDA Meteor missiles . 
 The future Gripen E / F will make use of a new active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar , Raven ES @-@ 05 , based on the Vixen AESA radar family from Selex ES . Among other improvements , the new radar is to be capable of scanning over a greatly increased field of view and improved range . In addition , the new Gripen integrates the Skyward @-@ G Infra @-@ red search and track ( IRST ) sensor , which is capable of passively detecting thermal emissions from air and ground targets in the aircraft 's vicinity . The sensors of the Gripen E are claimed to be able to detect low radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) targets at beyond visual range . Targets are tracked by a " best sensor dominates " system , either by onboard sensors or through the Transmitter Auxiliary Unit ( <unk> ) data link function of the radar . 
 = = = Cockpit = = = 
 The primary flight controls are compatible with the HOTAS control principle – the centrally mounted stick , in addition to flying the aircraft , also controls the cockpit displays and weapon systems . A triplex , digital fly @-@ by @-@ wire system is employed on the Gripen 's flight controls , with a mechanical backup for the throttle . Additional functions , such as communications , navigational and decision support data , can be accessed via the up front control panel , directly above the central cockpit display . The Gripen includes the EP @-@ 17 cockpit display system , developed by Saab to provide pilots with a high level of situational awareness and reduces pilot workload through intelligent information management . The Gripen features a sensor fusion capability , information from onboard sensors and databases is combined , automatically analysed , and useful data is presented to the pilot via a wide field @-@ of @-@ view head @-@ up display , three large multi @-@ function colour displays , and optionally a helmet mounted display system ( HMDS ) . 
 Of the three multi @-@ function displays ( MFD ) , the central display is for navigational and mission data , the display to the left of the center shows aircraft status and electronic warfare information , and the display to the right of the center has sensory and fire control information . In two @-@ seat variants , the rear seat 's displays can be operated independently of the pilot 's own display arrangement in the forward seat , Saab has promoted this capability as being useful during electronic warfare and reconnaissance missions , and while carrying out command and control activities . In May 2010 , Sweden began equipping their Gripens with additional onboard computer systems and new displays . The MFDs are interchangeable and designed for redundancy in the event of failure , flight information can be presented on any of the displays . 
 Saab and BAE developed the Cobra HMDS for use in the Gripen , based on the Striker HMDS used on the Eurofighter . By 2008 , the Cobra HMDS was fully integrated on operational aircraft , and is available as an option for export customers ; it has been retrofitted into older Swedish and South African Gripens . The HMDS provides control and information on target cueing , sensor data , and flight parameters , and is optionally equipped for night time operations and with chemical / biological filtration . All connections between the HMDS and the cockpit were designed for rapid detachment , for safe use of the ejection system . 
 = = = Engine = = = 
 All in @-@ service Gripens as of January 2014 are powered by a Volvo RM12 turbofan engine ( now GKN Aerospace Engine Systems ) , a license @-@ manufactured derivative of General Electric F404 , fed by a Y @-@ duct with splitter plates ; changes include increased performance and improved reliability to meet single engine use safety criteria , as well as a greater resistance to bird strike incidents . Several subsystems and components were also redesigned to reduce maintenance demands . By November 2010 , the Gripen had accumulated over 143 @,@ 000 flight hours without a single engine @-@ related failure or incident ; Rune <unk> , head of Military Program management at Volvo Aero , stated " I think this must be a hard record to beat for a single @-@ engine application " . 
 The JAS 39E and F variants currently under development are to adopt the F414G powerplant , a variant of the General Electric F414 . The F414G can produce 20 % greater thrust than the current RM12 engine , enabling the Gripen to supercruise ( maintain speed beyond the sound barrier without the use of afterburners ) at a speed of Mach 1 @.@ 1 while carrying an air @-@ to @-@ air combat payload . In 2010 , Volvo Aero stated it was capable of further developing its RM12 engine to better match the performance of the F414G , and claimed that developing the RM12 would be a less expensive option . Prior to Saab 's selection of the F414G , the <unk> <unk> had also been under consideration for the Gripen ; proposed implementations included the use of thrust vectoring . 
 = = = Equipment and armaments = = = 
 The Gripen is compatible with a number of different armaments , beyond the aircraft 's single 27 mm Mauser BK @-@ 27 cannon ( omitted on the two @-@ seat variants ) , including air @-@ to @-@ air missiles such as the AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder , air @-@ to @-@ ground missiles such as the AGM @-@ 65 Maverick , and anti @-@ ship missiles such as the RBS @-@ 15 . In 2010 , the Swedish Air Force 's Gripen fleet completed the <unk> upgrade process , enabling compatibility with a range of weapons , including the long @-@ range MBDA Meteor missile , the short @-@ range IRIS @-@ T missile and the GBU @-@ 49 laser @-@ guided bomb . Speaking on the Gripen 's selection of armaments , Saab 's campaign director for India Edvard de la Motte stated that : " If you buy Gripen , select where you want your weapons from . Israel , Sweden , Europe , US … South America . It 's up to the customer " . 
 In flight , the Gripen is typically capable of carrying up to 14 @,@ 330 lb ( 6 @.@ 50 t ) of assorted armaments and equipment . Equipment includes external sensor pods for reconnaissance and target designation , such as Rafael 's LITENING targeting pod , Saab 's Modular Reconnaissance Pod System , or Thales ' Digital Joint Reconnaissance Pod . The Gripen has an advanced and integrated electronic warfare suite , capable of operating in an undetectable passive mode or to actively jam hostile radar ; a missile approach warning system passively detects and tracks incoming missiles . In November 2013 , it was announced that Saab will be the first to offer the <unk> expendable Active jammer developed by Selex ES . In June 2014 , the Enhanced Survivability Technology Modular Self Protection Pod , a defensive missile countermeasure pod , performed its first flight on the Gripen . 
 Saab describes the Gripen as a " swing @-@ role aircraft " , stating that it is capable of " instantly switching between roles at the push of a button " . The human / machine interface changes when switching between roles , being optimized by the computer in response to new situations and threats . The Gripen is also equipped to use a number of different communications standards and systems , including <unk> secure radio , Link @-@ 16 , <unk> , and satellite <unk> . Equipment for performing long range missions , such as an aerial refueling probe and onboard oxygen generation system ( OBOGS ) , was integrated upon the Gripen C / D. 
 = = = <unk> and maintenance = = = 
 During the Cold War , the Swedish Armed Forces were to be ready to defend against a possible invasion . This scenario required combat aircraft to be dispersed in order to maintain an air defence capacity . Thus , a key design goal during the Gripen 's development was the ability to take off from snow @-@ covered landing strips of only 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) ; furthermore , a short @-@ turnaround time of just ten minutes , during which a team composed of a technician and five conscripts would be able to re @-@ arm , refuel , and perform basic inspections and servicing inside that time window before returning to flight . 
 During the design process , great priority was placed on facilitating and minimising aircraft maintenance ; in addition to a maintenance @-@ friendly layout , many subsystems and components require little or no maintenance at all . Aircraft are fitted with a Health and Usage Monitoring Systems ( <unk> ) that monitors the performance of various systems , and provides information to technicians to assist in servicing it . Saab operates a continuous improvement programme ; information from the <unk> and other systems can be submitted for analysis . According to Saab , the Gripen provides " 50 % lower operating costs than its best competitor " . 
 A 2012 Jane 's Aerospace and Defense Consulting study compared the operational costs of a number of modern combat aircraft , concluding that Gripen had the lowest cost per flight hour ( CPFH ) when fuel used , pre @-@ flight preparation and repair , and scheduled airfield @-@ level maintenance together with associated personnel costs were combined . The Gripen had an estimated CPFH of $ 4 @,@ 700 whereas the next lowest , the F @-@ 16 Block 40 / 50 , had a 49 % higher CPFH at $ 7 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
 The Swedish Air Force placed a total order for 204 Gripens in three batches . The first delivery occurred on 8 June 1993 , when <unk> was handed over to the <unk> during a ceremony at Linköping ; the last was handed over on 13 December 1996 . The air force received its first Batch II example on 19 December 1996 . Instead of the fixed @-@ price agreement of Batch I , Batch II aircraft were paid as a " target price " concept : any cost under / overruns would be split between FMV and Saab . 
 The JAS 39 entered service with the F 7 Wing ( F 7 <unk> <unk> ) on 1 November 1997 . The final Batch three aircraft was delivered to FMV on 26 November 2008 . This was accomplished at 10 % less than the agreed @-@ upon price for the batch , putting the JAS 39C flyaway cost at under US $ 30 million . This batch of Gripens was equipped for in @-@ flight refuelling from specially equipped <unk> . In 2007 , a programme was started to upgrade 31 of the air force 's JAS 39A / B fighters to JAS 39C / Ds . The <unk> had a combined 134 JAS 39s in service in January 2013 . In March 2015 , the Swedish Air Force received its final JAS 39C . 
 On 29 March 2011 , the Swedish parliament approved the Swedish Air Force for a 3 @-@ month deployment to support the UN @-@ mandated no @-@ fly zone over Libya . Deployment of eight Gripens , ten pilots , and other personnel began on 2 April . On 8 June 2011 , the Swedish government announced an agreement to extend the deployment for five of the Gripens . By October 2011 , Gripens had flown more than 650 combat missions , almost 2 @,@ 000 flight hours , and delivered approximately 2 @,@ 000 reconnaissance reports to NATO . Journalist Tim <unk> suggested that the Libyan operations may stimulate sales of the Gripen and other aircraft . 
 In November 2012 , Lieutenant Colonel Lars <unk> of the Swedish Air Force testified to the Riksdag regarding the Gripen E. He stated that the current version of the Gripen would be outdated in air @-@ to @-@ air combat by 2020 . With 60 Gripens having been judged to be the minimum required to defend Swedish Airspace , the Swedish Air Force wants to have 60 – 80 Gripens upgraded to the E / F standard by 2020 . 
 On 25 August 2012 , the Swedish government announced that 40 – 60 JAS 39E / F Gripens were expected to be procured and in service by 2023 . On 11 December 2012 , the Riksdag approved the purchase of 40 to 60 JAS 39E / Fs with an option to cancel if at least 20 aircraft are not ordered by other <unk> on 17 January 2013 , the government approved the deal for 60 JAS <unk> to be delivered between 2018 and 2027 . On 3 March 2014 , the Swedish defence minister stated that another 10 JAS <unk> might be ordered , this was later confirmed by the government . 60 JAS 39E are to be delivered from 2018 to 2026 . 
 = = = Czech Republic = = = 
 When the Czech Republic became a NATO member in 1999 , the need to replace their existing Soviet @-@ built MiG @-@ 21 fleet with aircraft compatible with NATO interoperability standards became apparent . In 2000 , the Czech Republic began evaluating a number of aircraft , including the F @-@ 16 , F / A @-@ 18 , Mirage 2000 , Eurofighter Typhoon and the Gripen . One major procurement condition was the industrial offset agreement , set at 150 % of the expected purchase value . In December 2001 , having reportedly been swayed by Gripen International 's generous financing and offset programme , the Czech Government announced that the Gripen had been selected . In 2002 , the deal was delayed until after parliamentary elections had taken place ; alternative means of air defense were also studied , including leasing the aircraft . 
 On 14 June 2004 , it was announced that the Czech Republic was to lease 14 Gripen aircraft , modified to comply with NATO standards . The agreement also included the training of Czech pilots and technicians in Sweden . The first six were delivered on 18 April 2005 . The lease was for an agreed period of 10 years at a cost of € 780 million ; the 14 ex @-@ Swedish Air Force aircraft included 12 single @-@ seaters and two JAS 39D two @-@ seat trainers . In September 2013 , the Defence and Security Export Agency announced that a follow @-@ up agreement with the Czech Republic had been completed to extend the lease by 14 years , until 2029 ; the leased aircraft shall also undergo an extensive modernisation process , including the adoption of new <unk> . The lease also has an option of eventually acquiring the fighters outright . In 2014 the lease was extended to 2027 and the Saab service contract was extended to 2026 . 
 As of November 2014 , the Czech Government considers leasing further six Gripens due to Russia 's deteriorating relationship with the West . More recently , it decided to upgrade its fleet to the <unk> configuration . 
 = = = Hungary = = = 
 Following Hungary 's membership of NATO in 1999 , there were several proposals to achieve a NATO @-@ compatible fighter force . Considerable attention went into studying second @-@ hand aircraft options as well as modifying the nation 's existing MiG @-@ 29 fleet . In 2001 , Hungary received several offers of new and used aircraft from various nations , including Sweden , Belgium , Israel , Turkey , and the United States . Although the Hungarian government initially intended to procure the F @-@ 16 , in November 2001 it was in the process of negotiating a 10 @-@ year lease contract for 12 Gripen aircraft , with an option to purchase the aircraft at the end of the lease period . 
 As part of the procurement arrangements , Saab had offered an offset deal valued at 110 per cent of the cost of the 14 fighters . Initially , Hungary had planned to lease several Batch II aircraft ; however , the inability to conduct aerial refuelling and weapons compatibility limitations had generated Hungarian misgivings . The contract was renegotiated and was signed on 2 February 2003 for a total of 14 Gripens , which had originally been A / B standard and had undergone an extensive upgrade process to the NATO @-@ compatible C / D ' Export Gripen ' standard . The last aircraft deliveries took place in December 2007 . 
 While the Hungarian Air Force operates a total of 14 Gripen aircraft under lease , in 2011 , the country reportedly intended to purchase these aircraft outright . However , in January 2012 , the Hungarian and Swedish governments agreed to extend the lease period for a further ten years ; according to Hungarian Defence Minister Csaba <unk> , the agreement represented considerable cost savings . 
 Two Gripens were lost in crashes in May and June 2015 , leaving 12 Gripens in operation . Hungary will be back to 14 Gripen with the signing of a replacement contract . 
 = = = South Africa = = = 
 In 1999 , South Africa signed a contract with BAe / Saab for the procurement of 26 Gripens ( C / D standard ) with minor modifications to meet their requirements . Deliveries to the South African Air Force commenced in April 2008 . By April 2011 , 18 aircraft ( nine two @-@ seater aircraft and nine single @-@ seaters ) had been delivered . While the establishment of a Gripen Fighter Weapon School at Overberg Air Force Base in South Africa had been under consideration , in July 2013 Saab ruled out the option due to a lack of local support for the initiative ; Thailand is an alternative location being considered , as well as the Čáslav Czech air base . 
 Between April 2013 and December 2013 , South African contractors held prime responsibility for maintenance work on the Gripen fleet as support contracts with Saab had expired ; this arrangement led to fears that extended operations may not be possible due to a lack of proper maintenance . In December 2013 , <unk> awarded Saab a long @-@ term support contract for the company to perform engineering , maintenance , and support services on all 26 Gripens through 2016 . On 13 March 2013 , South African Defense Minister <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> stated that " almost half of the SAAF Gripens " have been stored because of an insufficient budget to keep them flying . In September 2013 , the SAAF decided not to place a number of its Gripens in long @-@ term storage ; instead all 26 aircraft would be rotated between flying cycles and short @-@ term storage . Speaking in September 2013 , Brigadier @-@ General John Bayne testified that the Gripen met the SAAF 's minimum requirements , as the country faced no military threats . 
 = = = Thailand = = = 
 In 2007 , Thailand 's Parliament authorized the Royal Thai Air Force to spend up to 34 billion baht ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 billion ) as part of an effort to replace Thailand 's existing Northrop F @-@ 5 fleet . In February 2008 , the Thai Air Force ordered six Gripens ( two single @-@ seat C @-@ models and four two @-@ seat D @-@ models ) from Saab ; deliveries began in 2011 . Thailand ordered six more Gripen Cs in November 2010 ; deliveries began in 2013 . Thailand may eventually order as many as 40 Gripens . In 2010 , Thailand selected the Surat Thani Airbase as the main operating base for its Gripens . The first of the six aircraft were delivered on 22 February 2011 . 
 Saab delivered three Gripens in April 2013 , and three more in September 2013 . In September 2013 , Air Force Marshal <unk> <unk> stated that Thailand is interested in purchasing six aircraft more in the near future , pending government approval . Thai Supreme Commander General <unk> <unk> has stated that the air force intends for the Gripen 's information systems to be integrated with Army and Navy systems ; the armed forces will officially inaugurate the Gripen Integrated Air Defence System during 2014 . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 The Empire Test Pilots ' School ( <unk> ) in the United Kingdom has used the Gripen for advanced fast jet training of test pilots since 1999 . It operates a D aircraft . 
 = = = Potential and future operators = = = 
 = = = = Botswana = = = = 
 Botswana has shown interest in the Gripen leading to Saab opening an office in Botswana in 2014 . The country is interested in purchasing eight surplus C and D model Gripens , with the order possibly being extended to 16 . The Gripens would replace the fourteen ex @-@ Canadian Air Force CF @-@ 5 fighters the Botswana Defence Force Air Wing ( BDF ) has been using since 1996 , that are up to 40 years old . 
 BDF Air Wing top officials believe acquisition of the fighter jet is a done deal . Whether eight or twelve or sixteen , the BDF is looking to replace its fighter jet fleet . 
 = = = = Brazil = = = = 
 In October 2008 , Brazil selected three finalists for its F @-@ X2 fighter programme : the Dassault Rafale B / C , the Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , and the JAS 39E / F Gripen NG . The Brazilian Air Force initially planned to procure at least 36 and possibly up to 120 later , to replace its Northrop F ‐ <unk> and Dassault Mirage <unk> aircraft . In February 2009 , Saab submitted a tender for 36 Gripen <unk> . On 5 January 2010 , reports claimed that the Brazilian Air Force 's final evaluation report placed the Gripen ahead of other contenders ; the decisive factor was reportedly lower unit cost and operational costs . Amid delays due to financial constraints , there were reports in 2010 of the Rafale 's selection , and in 2011 of the F / A @-@ 18 's selection . On 18 December 2013 , President Dilma Rousseff announced the Gripen NG 's selection . 
 Key decision factors were the domestic manufacturing opportunities , participation in developing the Gripen , and potential exports to Africa , Asia and Latin America ; Argentina and Ecuador are interested in procuring Gripens from or through Brazil , and Mexico is considered an export target . Another factor was the distrust of the US due to the NSA surveillance scandal . The Gripen is not immune to foreign pressure , the UK may use their 30 % component percentage in the Gripen to veto a sale to Argentina due to the Falkland Islands dispute ; thus Argentina is considering Russian or Chinese aircraft instead . Until Gripen E deliveries begin , Brazil intends to lease several Gripen C aircraft . 
 On 24 October 2014 , Brazil and Sweden signed a 39 @.@ 3 billion SEK ( US $ 5 @.@ 44 bn , R $ 13 bn ) contract for 28 Gripen E and 8 Gripen F aircraft to be delivered from 2019 to 2024 and maintained until 2050 ; the Swedish government will provide a subsidized 25 @-@ year , 2 @.@ 19 % interest rate loan for the purchase . At least 15 aircraft are to be assembled in Brazil , and Brazilian companies are to be involved in the full production run ; Gripen Fs are to be delivered later . An almost $ 1 billion price increase since selection is due to developments requested by Brazil , such as the " wide area display " ( <unk> ) , a panoramic 19 by 8 inches touchscreen display . The compensation package is set at US $ 9 billion , or 1 @.@ 7 times the order value . Two Brazilian pilots were trained in Sweden between November 2014 and April 2015 . The Brazilian Air Force has a requirement for 108 Gripens , to be delivered in three batches . The Brazilian Navy is interested in the Sea Gripen to replace its Douglas A @-@ <unk> Skyhawk carrier @-@ based fighters . Brazil and Sweden finalized the deal for the F @-@ 39 development in 2015 . 
 = = = = Colombia = = = = 
