 = = = = Post @-@ retirement appearances and WWE Hall of Famer ( 2007 – 2014 ) = = = = 
 Stratus and Lita made a special appearance on December 10 , 2007 during Raw 's 15th Anniversary special , attacking Jillian Hall . The following year , Stratus appeared on Raw in Toronto on May 5 , in a backstage segment involving Ron Simmons and Trevor Murdoch . 
 Stratus wrestled her first match in over two years on the December 22 , 2008 episode of Raw , when she and John Cena defeated Santino Marella and her former on @-@ screen protégé Beth Phoenix in a mixed tag team match . 
 On September 14 , 2009 , Stratus served as the guest hostess of Raw , and participated in a six @-@ person tag team match , teaming with Montel Vontavious Porter and Mark Henry to defeat Phoenix , Chris Jericho , and Big Show . 
 Stratus made a surprise appearance at the 2011 Elimination Chamber pay @-@ per @-@ view to announce that she would be a trainer on the revival of WWE Tough Enough , and stopped LayCool from attacking Kelly Kelly . The following month , on March 14 , she lost a match to Vickie Guerrero due to interference from LayCool and Dolph Ziggler . After the match , John Morrison and Raw guest star Nicole " Snooki " Polizzi came to her aid . At WrestleMania XXVII , Stratus , Snooki , and Morrison defeated the team of Ziggler and LayCool . The night after WrestleMania , on Raw , Stratus and Morrison defeated Guerrero and Ziggler . She also appeared on Raw on June 6 and SmackDown on September 16 . 
 The following year , on July 23 , 2012 , she made a guest appearance on Raw 's 1000th episode . 
 On the January 28 , 2013 , episode of Raw , Stratus was announced as a WWE Hall of Fame inductee as part of the 2013 class , making her the youngest inductee in WWE history . Stratus chose Stephanie McMahon to induct her into the Hall of Fame in April . 
 The following year , Stratus inducted Lita into the WWE Hall of Fame . 
 = = Other media = = 
 On June 3 , 2006 , she hosted the Canada 's Walk of Fame induction ceremony and performed a song and dance number inspired by the soundtrack from the film Chicago at the event . During the show , Stratus ad libbed a kiss with fellow Canadian actress Pamela Anderson . 
 From late November 2006 to mid @-@ January 2007 , Stratus temporarily moved to Muncie , Indiana for the CBS reality show Armed & Famous . She was given a spot in the series after Paul Heyman had mentioned her name to CBS . The concept was that she was one of five celebrities who trained as volunteer officers with the Muncie Police Department . After finishing her training , Stratus and her real life officer partner were followed around by a camera crew while going on legitimate police calls . Although the show was scheduled to broadcast seven episodes starting on January 10 , 2007 , CBS canceled the series after just four of the episodes were aired . After the cancellation of Armed & Famous , Stratus hosted The Second City 's Next Comedy Legend . The contest was similar to the style of America 's Next Top Model , with Stratus portraying the " Tyra Banks " role as contact between the contestants and judges . 
 Stratus is the host and subject of the show Stratusphere , which debuted in 2008 on the Travel + Escape television channel . The show follows Stratus as she visits different locations around the world to participate in local sports and adventure . Bill Harris wrote that , " Every week , Stratus embarks on a trip in search of exotic locations and daring physical challenges . In the first episode , for example , Stratus is in Kochi , India , where she learns the ancient martial art of <unk> , progressing from fighting with sticks to fighting with metal swords . Through the 10 @-@ episode run of Stratusphere , Stratus does everything from reindeer racing in Norway to bungee jumping in Bali . Her athleticism obviously sets Stratusphere apart from most travel shows . " Stratus also guest @-@ starred in the Canadian show Da Kink in My Hair new season , which started on February 12 , 2009 . In 2009 , Stratus became a spokesperson for sports betting website , Sports Interaction . 
 Stratus starred in the Canadian independent movie , Bail Enforcers , which marked her acting debut . She played a bounty hunter named Jules Taylor , which released on April 19 , 2011 , premiering at <unk> 2011 . The movie was then released on DVD as " Bounty Hunters " . 
 Stratus co @-@ starred in the 2015 film , <unk> , as the villainous Gina . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Stratus has appeared in nineteen WWE video games . She made her in @-@ game debut at WWF SmackDown ! 2 : Know Your Role and appears in WWF No Mercy , WWF SmackDown ! Just Bring It , WWE Raw , WWE WrestleMania X8 , WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth , WWE WrestleMania XIX , WWE Raw 2 , WWE SmackDown Here Comes the Pain , WWE Day of Reckoning , WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw , WWE WrestleMania 21 , WWE Day of Reckoning 2 , WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw 2006 , WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2007 , WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2010 , WWE 12 ( DLC ) , WWE 13 and WWE 2K16 ( DLC ) . 
 = = Yoga studio = = 
 In 2008 , Stratus opened a yoga studio named Stratusphere in the suburbs of Toronto , Ontario . The studio is billed as " Canada 's largest eco @-@ friendly yoga studio " . In 2009 , Stratusphere was awarded Top Choice Awards ' Best New Business award , and the following year , Stratus won the award for Business Woman of the Year . The studio won Top Choice Awards ' Best Yoga Studio award in 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stratigeas is of Greek and Polish descent and is the eldest daughter of John and Alice Stratigeas . Her sisters are named Christie and Melissa . Stratigeas married her high school sweetheart and boyfriend of fourteen years , Ron <unk> , on September 30 , 2006 . Several WWE Divas were in attendance at the wedding , and her bridal gown was featured on a cover of Today 's Bride magazine . Shortly after the wedding , Stratus got the call to be a part of Armed & Famous , so she filmed the show instead of going on her honeymoon . In 2013 , Stratigeas announced her pregnancy at the WWE Hall of Fame ceremony , and her first child , a son named Maximus , was born on September 30 , 2013 . Stratigeas is best friends with former wrestler Amy Dumas , a.k.a. " Lita " , even naming Dumas as the godmother to her son . 
 Stratigeas has also been involved with numerous charities such as Ronald McDonald House , Dreams Take Flight and the Special Olympics . From 2001 , she was a spokesperson for the World Natural Sports Association . On March 29 , 2008 , she participated in the Island Triathlon Series as part of a celebrity relay team to help raise money for Dignitas International . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Bail Enforcers ( 2011 ) 
 <unk> ( 2015 ) 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Chick Kick ( Roundhouse kick , sometimes to an oncoming opponent ) 2003 – 2006 
 Multiple bulldog variations 
 Diving - 2005 
 Running - 2000 @-@ 2002 
 Stratusfaction ( Springboard , with theatrics ) 2001 – 2006 
 Wheelbarrow - 2002 
 Sharpshooter – 2006 ; adopted from Bret Hart 
 Signature moves 
 Air Canada ( Thesz press followed by multiple punches , sometimes to an oncoming opponent ) 
 <unk> chop , with theatrics 
 Diving clothesline 
 Diving crossbody 
 Hangman 's choke 
 Headscissors takedown 
 <unk> ( Matrix evasion ) 
 <unk> Revolutions ( Handstand tilt @-@ a @-@ whirl headscissors takedown ) 
 Multiple pin variations 
 Backslide 
 Jumping roll @-@ up , sometimes while bridging 
 Springboard sunset flip 
 Victory roll 
 One @-@ armed neckbreaker slam , to an oncoming opponent 
 Spear 
 Spinebuster 
 Stratusphere ( Turnbuckle handstand transitioned into a frankensteiner ) 
 Stratus Splash ( Stinger splash ) 
 Super frankensteiner 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Albert 
 Kurt Angle 
 Carlito 
 Christian 
 Bubba Ray Dudley 
 Chris Jericho 
 Test 
 Tyson Tomko 
 Viscera 
 Val Venis 
 Jeff Hardy 
 Triple H 
 Nicknames 
 " The Quintessential WWE Diva " 
 " The Queen of Queens " 
 " Canada 's Greatest Export " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Time To Rock ' N Roll " by Lil ' Kim 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Cauliflower Alley Club 
 Iron Mike Mazurki Award ( 2016 ) 
 Fighting Spirit Magazine 
 Double X Award ( 2006 ) 
 Three Degrees Award ( 2006 ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Woman of the Year ( 2002 , 2003 , 2005 , 2006 ) 
 Woman of the Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) 
 World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 WWE Hardcore Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF / E Women 's Championship ( 7 times ) 
 WWE Hall of Fame ( Class of 2013 ) 
 Babe of the Year ( 2001 – 2003 ) 
 Diva of the Decade ( 2000s ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Worst Worked Match of the Year ( 2002 ) with Bradshaw vs. Christopher Nowinski and Jackie Gayda on Raw , July 7 
 = Ray Farquharson = 
 Ray Fletcher Farquharson MBE ( 4 August 1897 – 1 June 1965 ) was a Canadian doctor , university professor , and medical researcher . Born in Claude , Ontario , he attended and taught at the University of Toronto for most of his life , and was trained and employed at Toronto General Hospital . With co @-@ researcher Arthur Squires , Farquharson was responsible for the discovery of the Farquharson phenomenon , an important principle of endocrinology , which is that administering external hormones suppresses the natural production of that hormone . 
 He served in the First and Second World Wars , earning appointment as a Member of the Order of the British Empire for his medical work during the latter . He chaired the Penicillin Committee of Canada and served as a medical consultant for the Royal Canadian Air Force . He was awarded the Queen 's Coronation Medal in 1953 for his work for the Defence Review Board . Farquharson was also a charter member of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada . 
 Farquharson was heavily involved in Canadian medical research and education . As a member of the National Research Council of Canada , his " Farquharson Report " led to the establishment of the Medical Research Council of Canada , of which he was the first president . He received numerous honorary degrees from Canadian universities , and served on the first Board of Governors of York University . He died in 1965 , leaving a wife and two daughters . Farquharson was posthumously inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame in 1998 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Farquharson was born in Claude , Ontario ( a small town northwest of Toronto ) , on 4 August 1897 to Reverend William Farquharson , a Presbyterian minister , and Annie McDonald Coutts . His brother Charles also became a doctor , while another brother , Robert , became the managing editor for The Globe and Mail and was later an advisor at the Canadian Embassy to the United States . " <unk> " , as he was nicknamed by friends , received his early education at Durham and graduated from Harbord Collegiate Institute in Toronto . He briefly attended the University of Toronto 's medical school before being drafted into the Canadian Army on 15 May 1918 , serving in the Canadian Field Artillery ( 67th Battery ) as a gunner . He did not serve overseas , and was recalled from the military to complete his schooling , graduating in 1922 . He underwent post @-@ graduate study in various fields from 1922 until 1927 while serving as an intern and resident at Toronto General Hospital under Duncan Archibald Graham . 
 Farquharson was awarded research fellowships at Massachusetts General Hospital , where he worked with Joseph Charles Aub and William Salter , and at Harvard University before becoming an assistant professor at the University of Toronto . He published papers on the excretion of calcium in response to excessive acid in the body and " liver therapy " ( the consumption of liver ) as a treatment for spinal cord degeneration . In 1931 he married Christina Jane Fraser , with whom he had two daughters : Helen , who became a hematologist , and Catherine Jane . 
 = = Career = = 
 In addition to teaching at the University of Toronto , Farquharson established a private practice as a medical consultant , gaining a reputation as a " doctor 's doctor " for his treatment of other physicians . In 1934 he became the head of the therapeutics department at Toronto . He continued to publish research findings on various topics , including anorexia nervosa . Farquharson was a charter member of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada , which oversaw all Canadian postgraduate medical education ; he served on its council from 1939 to 1943 , and was the council 's president from 1945 to 1947 . Prior to enlisting in the Second World War , he gave testimony as an expert medical witness in court martial trials . 
 On 25 August 1943 , Farquharson enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) and was assigned to No. 1 Air Command , based in Trenton , Ontario . He was posted to the United Kingdom in 1944 and briefly returned to No. 1 Air Command before being released from service on 22 November 1945 with the rank of wing commander . During the war , he chaired the Penicillin Committee of Canada , which regulated the distribution of penicillin ( an antibiotic that largely replaced the sulfonamide used earlier in the war ) to the armed forces , and was a consultant to the RCAF 's Director of Medical Services . He was also consulted on medical matters by both the other branches of the Canadian armed forces and by various Allied medical groups . He supervised medical experiments involving penicillin therapy conducted in Ontario hospitals in 1943 – 44 , and was temporarily appointed Director of Medicine at Christie St. Veteran 's Hospital in Toronto . After V @-@ E Day , he travelled to Belgium to supervise the administration of penicillin therapy , and later became involved in the care and treatment of war veterans . For his service in the war , Farquharson was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire in January 1946 . His brother Charles also served in both world wars . 
 Farquharson was the director of medicine for Toronto veterans ' hospitals from 1945 to 1947 , and at the same time served as president of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada . In 1947 he was appointed to the Sir John and Lady Eaton Professor of Medicine chair at the University of Toronto . From 1947 until his retirement in 1960 , he was the Physician @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Toronto General Hospital . His well @-@ known patients included Canadian politician George A. Drew , who he advised to resign as head of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada and Leader of the Opposition following a near @-@ fatal attack of meningitis ; Drew did so , and was succeeded as party leader by John Diefenbaker , who later became Prime Minister of Canada . Farquharson established clinical teaching programs at Women 's College Hospital and <unk> Hospital , and expanded those already in place at St. Michael 's and Toronto Western . He also appointed the first full @-@ time clinical investigators to the Toronto medical school faculty and increased total faculty numbers from 40 to over 100 . He became a Fellow of the American College of Physicians in 1947 and of the Royal College of Physicians in 1950 . He was appointed a member of the Bacteriological Warfare Review Committee , established in 1950 by the Defence Research Board ( of which he was a member from 1949 to 1952 ) and chaired by Dr. Charles Best . For his service to the nation , he was awarded the Queen 's Coronation Medal in 1953 . 
 Through his research in endocrinology with colleague Arthur Squires , Farquharson discovered what became known as the " Farquharson Phenomenon " : that the introduction of continuous exogenous hormone doses suppresses the natural production of that hormone in the patient and causes temporary atrophy in the producing organ . This phenomenon became one of the basic principles of endocrinology and a key factor in the etiology of hormonal abnormalities . Farquharson also made significant contributions related to anemia and pigment metabolism . He was the first Canadian doctor to publicize Sheehan 's syndrome , and the first North American to report on <unk> 's disease . As an educator and researcher , he was an early promoter of laboratory testing in the evaluation of illness ; he was known for advocating both this and awareness of potential psychological issues in patients . 
 Farquharson became a member of the National Research Council of Canada in 1951 , and in 1957 was named the director of the Division of Medical Research . In 1958 , he chaired a Privy Council Committee tasked with producing a report on the state of medical research in Canada ; this charge was in response to a 1957 report by the Association of Canadian Medical Colleges to the Prime Minister , which suggested that medical research in Canada was underfunded . While researching his report , he visited the Soviet Union in 1959 as part of a contingent representing the Research Council ; he remarked on the country 's apparent emphasis on scientific research , and invited Soviet scientists to visit Canada . Farquharson concluded that existing government support for research in Canada failed to specifically address medical research as an independent discipline and was financially insufficient . His " Farquharson Report " led to the formation of the Medical Research Council of Canada in 1960 , over which he presided until his death . As president , Farquharson advocated for progressive medical education taught by practicing physicians and for continuing education via research for doctors . He was also able to increase the organization 's budget for awards and grants from C $ 4 million in 1963 to $ 9 million by 1965 . 
 Farquharson became the Regent of the American College of Physicians in 1958 after having spent three years as the organization 's Ontario representative . He joined the first Board of Governors of York University in 1959 , and was a member of the University of Toronto Senate in the same year . He was named a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 1960 . He was also a member of a number of medical organizations in both Canada and the US , and chairman or board member for some 20 medical research groups . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 In 1960 , having reached the University of Toronto 's compulsory retirement age , Farquharson left the university and the hospital . In recognition of his work for Toronto General Hospital , the twelve @-@ bed Clinical Investigation Unit was named after him in 1961 , and the Farquharson Foundation was established to support research conducted by the university 's teaching hospitals . Also in 1961 , Farquharson visited India , later remarking on the societal respect for doctors there . He also continued to advocate for support for universities . 
 Farquharson won the National Heart Foundation 's Award of Merit in 1960 , followed by the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers ' Association of Canada Health Research Foundation 's Medal of Honour in 1964 " for his clinical assessment of antibiotics [ and ] service as a leading medical educator " , becoming one of only 18 people to ever receive this award . He was featured on the cover of Modern Medicine in November 1963 . Farquharson was granted honorary degrees by a number of Canadian universities : the University of British Columbia in 1949 , the University of Saskatchewan in 1957 , Laval University in 1959 , Queen 's University in 1960 , the University of Alberta in 1960 , the University of Toronto in 1962 , and the University of Montreal in 1965 . He was named an honorary member of the Ontario Medical Association . He was also appointed a Knight of the Military and Hospitaller Order of St Lazarus of Jerusalem and an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine in London . 
 Farquharson died on 1 June 1965 at Ottawa Civic Hospital at age 68 after suffering a heart attack . He had been in Ottawa to attend a meeting of the Medical Research Council . The University of Toronto held a memorial service commemorating his contributions to the school and the medical community . 
 The Farquharson Life Sciences Building , the first science building at York University , was renamed in honour of Farquharson . A biography of Farquharson was planned , but was never completed . The Ray F. Farquharson Memorial Lecture was established in his memory ; the first such lecture was delivered by John Eager Howard of Johns Hopkins University in 1968 on the topic of calcium metabolism . He was posthumously inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame in 1998 alongside such notable figures as Tommy Douglas , Norman Bethune and Roberta Bondar . 
 Farquharson was credited by Professor William Goldberg of McMaster University with " attack [ ing ] racism as part of [ his ] clinical teaching " because he suggested patient race should only be mentioned if relevant to their diagnosis ; he is also credited with combating anti @-@ Semitism . He is considered one of the " Fathers of Canadian Medicine " in both medical research and education . According to one memorial , " no Canadian since Sir William Osler has left as great an imprint upon the practice of Medicine " . 
 = Early mainframe games = 
 Mainframe computers are computers used primarily by businesses and academic institutions for large @-@ scale processes . Before personal computers , first termed microcomputers , became widely available to the general public in the 1970s , the computing industry was composed of mainframe computers and the relatively smaller and cheaper minicomputer variant . During the mid to late 1960s , many early video games were programmed on these computers . Developed prior to the rise of the commercial video game industry in the early 1970s , these early mainframe games were generally written by students or employees at large corporations in a machine or assembly language that could only be understood by the specific machine or computer type they were developed on . While many of these games were lost as older computers were discontinued , some of them were ported to high @-@ level computer languages like BASIC , had expanded versions later released for personal computers , or were recreated for bulletin board systems years later , thus influencing future games and developers . 
 Early computer games began to be created in the 1950s , and the steady increase in the number and abilities of computers over time led to the gradual loosening of restrictions on access to mainframe computers at academic and corporate institutions beginning in the 1960s . This in turn led to a modest proliferation of generally small , text @-@ based games on mainframe computers , with increasing complexity towards the end of the decade . While games continued to be developed on mainframes and minicomputers through the 1970s , the rise of personal computers and the spread of high @-@ level programming languages meant that later games were generally intended to or were capable of being run on personal computers , even when developed on a mainframe . These early games include Hamurabi , an antecedent of the strategy and city @-@ building genres ; Lunar Lander , which inspired numerous recreations in the 1970s and 1980s ; Civil War , an early war simulation game ; Star Trek , which was widely ported , expanded , and spread for decades after ; Space Travel , which played a role in the creation of the Unix operating system ; and Baseball , an early sports game and the first baseball game to allow player control during a game . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mainframe computers are powerful computers used primarily by large organizations for computational work , especially large @-@ scale , multi @-@ user processes . The term originally referred to the large cabinets called " main frames " that housed the central processing unit and main memory of early computers . Prior to the rise of personal computers , first termed microcomputers , in the 1970s , they were the primary type of computer in use , and at the beginning of the 1960s they were the only type of computer available for public purchase . <unk> were relatively smaller and cheaper mainframe computers prevalent in the 1960s and 1970s , though they were still not intended for personal use . One definition from 1970 required a minicomputer to cost less than US $ 25 @,@ 000 . In contrast , regular mainframes could cost more than US $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 By the end of the 1960s , mainframe computers and minicomputers were present in many academic research institutions and large companies such as Bell Labs . While the commercial video game industry did not yet exist at that point in the early history of video games and would not until the early 1970s , programmers at these companies created several small games to be played on their mainframe computers . Most of these spread only to other users of the same type of computer and therefore did not persist as older computer models were discontinued ; several , however , inspired future games , or were later released in modified versions on more modern systems or languages . These early mainframe games were largely created between 1968 and 1971 ; while earlier games were created they were limited to small , academic audiences . Mainframe games also continued to be developed through the 1970s , but the rise of the commercial video game industry , focused on arcade video games and home video game consoles , followed by the rise of personal computers later in the decade , meant that beginning in the 1970s the audience and developers of video games began to shift away from mainframe computers or minicomputers , and the spread of general @-@ purpose programming languages such as the BASIC programming language meant that later mainframe games could generally be run on personal computers with minimal changes , even if initially developed on a mainframe . 
 = = Early games = = 
 The very first computer games began to appear in the 1950s , starting with Bertie the Brain , a computer @-@ based game of tic @-@ tac @-@ toe built by Dr. Josef Kates for the 1950 Canadian National Exhibition . While the status of these games as video games depends on the definition used , the games developed during this time period ran on the large antecedents of mainframe computers and were primarily developed for the purposes of academic research or to showcase the technological development of the computers on which they ran . Access to these computers , located almost exclusively in universities and research institutions , was restricted to academics and researchers , preventing any development of entertainment programs . Over the course of the decade , computer technology improved to include smaller , transistor @-@ based computers on which programs could be created and run in real time , rather than operations run in batches , and computers themselves spread to more locations . 
 By the 1960s , improvements in computing technology and the early development of relatively cheaper mainframe computers , which would later be termed minicomputers , led to the loosening of restrictions regarding programming access to the computers . At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , access to the TX @-@ 0 experimental computer was opened to students and employees of the university . This in turn led to the development of programs that in addition to highlighting the power of the computer also contained an entertainment aspect . The games created for the TX @-@ 0 by the small programming community at MIT included Tic @-@ Tac @-@ Toe , which used a light pen to play a simple game of noughts and crosses against the computer , and Mouse in the Maze , which let players set up a maze for a mouse to run through . When the Digital Equipment Corporation ( DEC ) PDP @-@ 1 computer was installed at MIT in 1961 , the community built a video game to showcase it 's abilities , Spacewar , which then became the first known video game to spread beyond a single computer installation as it was copied and recreated on other PDP @-@ 1 systems and later on other mainframe computers . 
 Over the course of the decade , computers spread to more and more companies and institutions , even as they became more powerful — by 1971 , it is estimated that there were over 1000 computers with monitors , rather than the few dozen at the beginning of the 1960s . While different computers could generally not run the same programs without significant changes to the programs code , due to differences in the physical hardware or machine languages , the expansion of the computing industry led to the creation of catalogs and user groups to share programs between different installations of the same series of computers , such as DEC 's PDP line . These catalogs and groups , such as the IBM program catalog and the Digital Equipment Computer Users ' Society ( DECUS ) , shared small games as well as programs , including , for example , " BBC Vik The Baseball <unk> " and " Three Dimensional Tic @-@ Tack @-@ Toe " in the April 1962 IBM catalog , and dice games and question and answer games in the DECUS newsletter . 
 By the latter half of the 1960s , higher @-@ level programming languages such as BASIC which were able to be run on multiple types of computers further increased the reach of games developed at any given location . While most games were limited to text @-@ based designs , rather than visual graphics like Spacewar , these games became more complicated as they reached more players , such as baseball and basketball simulation games . Access to the computers themselves was also extended to more people by systems such as the Dartmouth Time Sharing System ( <unk> ) , which connected several thousand users through many remote terminals around the campus to a central mainframe computer . By the 1967 – 68 school year the <unk> library of 500 programs for the system included , John Kemeny and Thomas Kurtz wrote , " many games " . Over a quarter of the system 's usage was for casual or entertainment purposes , and Kemeny and Kurtz noted that " we have lost many a distinguished visitor for several hours while he quarterbacked the Dartmouth football team in a highly realistic simulated game " . 
 = = 101 BASIC Computer Games = = 
 In 1971 , DEC employee David H. Ahl converted two minicomputer games , Hamurabi and Lunar Lander , from the FOCAL language to BASIC , partially as a demonstration of the language on the DEC PDP @-@ 8 minicomputer . Their popularity led him to start printing BASIC games in the DEC newsletter he edited , both ones he wrote and reader submissions . In 1973 , he released the book 101 BASIC Computer Games , containing descriptions and the source code for video games written in BASIC . The games included were written by both Ahl and others , and included both games original to the language and ported from other languages such as FOCAL . Many of these ports were originally mainframe computer games . 101 BASIC Computer Games was a landmark title in computer games programming , and was a best @-@ selling title with more than 10 @,@ 000 copies sold — more sales than computers in existence at the time . Its second edition in 1978 , titled BASIC Computer Games , was the first million @-@ selling computer book . As such , the BASIC ports of mainframe computer games included in the book were often more long @-@ lived than their original versions or other mainframe computer games . 
 Hamurabi in particular is mostly known for its appearance in Ahl 's book . The original game , a text @-@ based strategy video game of land and resource management , was developed by Doug Dyment at DEC in 1968 as The Sumer Game . Dyment created it as a computer game for fellow employee Richard Merrill 's newly invented FOCAL programming language . The game consists of ten rounds wherein the player , as the ancient Babylonian king Hammurabi , manages how much of their grain to spend on crops for the next round , feeding their people , and purchasing additional land , while dealing with random variations in crop yields and plagues . Multiple versions of the game were created for the FOCAL and FOCAL @-@ 69 languages , but an expanded , uncredited version of the game was included in 101 BASIC Computer Games as Hamurabi , and later versions of the game , even in FOCAL , referenced the new title over the old . Hamurabi influenced many later strategy and simulation games and is an antecedent to the city @-@ building genre . 
 The other game Ahl originally ported to BASIC , Lunar Lander , appeared in the book in three different forms . The original version of the game was called Lunar , and was originally written in FOCAL for the PDP @-@ 8 by Jim Storer while a high school student in the fall of 1969 . A different version called Rocket was written in BASIC by Eric Peters at DEC , and a third version , LEM , was written by William <unk> II in BASIC . Ahl converted Jim Storer 's FOCAL version to BASIC , changed some of the text , and published it in his newsletter . A year or so later , all three BASIC versions of the game appeared in 101 BASIC Computer Games , under the names <unk> ( Storer version ) , <unk> ( Peters version ) , and <unk> ( <unk> version ) . All three text @-@ based games required the player to control a rocket attempting to land on the moon by entering instructions to the rocket in response to the textual summary of its current position and heading relative to the ground . Ahl and Steve North converted all three versions to Microsoft BASIC , changed the name to Lunar Lander , and published them in Creative Computing magazine in 1976 ; that name was used the 1978 edition of BASIC Computer Games . 
 Another game from the book is Civil War , a text @-@ based computer game that puts the player against the computer in a simulation of the American Civil War . Civil War originated on multi @-@ user mainframe computers in 1968 , and simulates fourteen major battles of the conflict , with the human player as the South and the computer as the North . The player can control four direct variables which interact to determine a battle 's outcome : how much of their money to spend on food , salaries , and ammunition , and which of four offensive or four defensive strategies to use . The side with the fewest casualties wins a battle , and if the player wins eight or more battles they win the game . After appearing in 101 BASIC Computer Games , Civil War was later one of a number of text @-@ based games available on early 1980s pay @-@ to @-@ play systems . 
 Possibly the most popular of the mainframe games that appeared in Ahl 's book was Star Trek . The game is a text @-@ based computer game that puts the player in command of the Starship Enterprise on a mission to hunt down and destroy an invading fleet of Klingon warships . Unlike the other text @-@ based games , however , it did not use written responses to player input , but instead had character @-@ based graphics , with different characters used as graphical symbols to represent objects . It was initially developed by Mike Mayfield in 1971 on an SDS Sigma 7 mainframe . The game was also unlike many of the other mainframe games in the book in that it was originally written in BASIC ; by the time the book was published , it had been widely copied among minicomputer and mainframe systems and modified into several versions . It was one of these , renamed by Ahl as Space War , that appeared in 101 BASIC Computer Games . The 1978 version of the book contained a Microsoft BASIC port of Super Star Trek , an expanded version of the game first written in 1972 , and this version was ported to numerous personal computer systems of the era ; Ahl stated in the book that it was difficult to find a computer installation that did not contain a version of Star Trek . Multiple updated versions in a wide variety of languages have been made since . By 1980 , Star Trek was described by The Dragon magazine as " one of the most popular ( if not the most popular ) computer games around " , with " literally scores of different versions of this game floating around " . 
 = = Other games = = 
 Some mainframe games that did not appear in 101 BASIC Computer Games have still had a lasting impact . One such game was Space Travel , developed by Ken Thompson in 1969 , which simulates travel in the Solar System . The player flies their ship around a two @-@ dimensional scale model of the solar system with no objectives other than to attempt to land on various planets and moons . The player can move and turn the ship , and adjust the overall speed by adjusting the scale of the simulation . The ship is affected by the single strongest gravitational pull of the astronomical bodies . The game was developed at Bell Labs , and was ported during 1969 from the Multics operating system to the GECOS operating system on the GE 635 computer , and then to the PDP @-@ 7 minicomputer . While porting the game to the PDP @-@ 7 , Thompson developed ideas for his own operating system , which later formed the core of the Unix operating system . Space Travel never spread beyond Bell Labs or had an effect on future games , leaving its primary legacy as part of the original push for the development of Unix . 
 Another influential early mainframe game was Baseball , a sports game that was created on a PDP @-@ 10 minicomputer at Pomona College in 1971 by English major Don <unk> . Baseball was the first baseball video game that allowed players to manage the game as it unfolded , rather than just picking players at the beginning of a game . The program is documented at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown , New York . Baseball was continually updated through 1974 , and distributed to other PDP @-@ 10 installations . The text @-@ based game had each player control the pitcher or the batter ; they would enter their intention to , for example , pitch to or walk the batter , or switch hitters . The batting player could direct on @-@ base players to steal , and the batter to hit . The results of the play would be printed out onto paper as a verbose description , like a radio description of the game . <unk> went on to develop more sophisticated baseball games in 1983 with Intellivision World Series Baseball , and 1987 with Earl Weaver Baseball , as well as numerous other games . 
 = Thalaba the Destroyer = 
 Thalaba the Destroyer is an 1801 epic poem composed by Robert Southey . The origins of the poem can be traced to Southey 's school boy days , but he did not begin to write the poem until he finished composing Madoc at the age of 25 . Thalaba the Destroyer was completed while Southey travelled in Portugal . When the poem was finally published by the publisher Longman , it suffered from poor sales and only half of the copies were sold by 1804 . 
 The poem is divided into twelve " books " with irregular stanza structures and unrhymed lines of poetry . The story describes how a group of sorcerers work to destroy the <unk> family in an attempt to prevent a prophecy of their future doom from coming true . However , a young child named Thalaba is able to escape from the slaughter . After one of the sorcerers hunts down Thalaba to kill him , the sorcerer is defeated by a great storm and his powerful magical ring comes into Thalaba 's possession . With the ring , Thalaba travels across the Middle East to find a way to defeat the evil sorcerers . In the end , Thalaba is able to stay true to Allah and is guided by the prophet Mohammad in destroying the sorcerers . 
 Southey uses the poem to describe various superstitions and myths , with a heavy reliance on repetition of various themes that link the myths together . Although based in Islamic theology , most of the action is mechanical instead of emphasising possible moral truths that can be drawn from the plot . Though the main character is purported to be a Muslim , the story actually takes place thousands of years before Islam , in ancient Babylon . Critics gave the work mixed reviews , with some emphasising the strong morality within the work or the quality of the poetry . However , other critics felt that the lack of a strong lyrical structure and the use of Middle Eastern myths detracted from the poem . 
 = = Background = = 
 The basis for Southey wishing to write long poems came from his private reading of literature while attending Westminster School as a boy . In Summer 1799 , Southey completed writing Madoc and began working on Thalaba . He started to work with Coleridge , and both Coleridge 's " Kubla Khan " and Thalaba shared many sources . He then travelled to Burton where he continued to write the poem , which he called a romance at the time . 
 He soon after travelled to Portugal in April 1800 where he planned to finish Thalaba and send it back to England for publication . By July , he was able to complete the poem and in October the poem was edited and ready for publication . John Rickman served as Southey 's agent in selling the book . Although finished , Southey continued to work on fixing the end of the poem until January 1801 after receiving suggestions from his friends . After Portugal went to war with France and Spain , Southey left the country and he returned to England in June 1801 . The poem was published in 1801 by Longman with 1 @,@ 000 copies , but only sold half by 1804 . A revised edition was published in 1809 . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem is a twelve book work with irregular stanzas and lines that are not rhymed . The poem deals with Harun al @-@ Rashid and a group of sorcerers at <unk> that live under the sea . It was foretold that Thalaba , a Muslim , would be God 's champion and conquer the sorcerers . To pre @-@ empt the prophecy , the sorcerers kill the <unk> family . Unknown to them , Thalaba was able to escape from harm with his mother Zeinab . They flee through the desert and arrive at Irem , a ruined city . After Zeinab dies , Thalaba is raised by a leader of Irem named Moath . The sorcerers find out that Thalaba is still alive , and <unk> , one of their members , goes to find out Thalaba 's location . When <unk> arrives , he is stopped a <unk> , a sand storm , and his magic ring is lost . Thalaba finds the ring , which grants him great power . 
 A demon comes to steal the ring from Thalaba , but he is stopped by the young boy . This allows Thalaba to demand information about the sorcerers and why his family was killed . Time passes and Thalaba settles into a pastoral life at Irem and plans to marry Moath 's daughter , Oneiza . However , Thalaba decides that his duty prohibits him from such actions , and he leaves to fulfill his destiny . However , the sorcerer Lobaba tricks Thalaba and tries to steal the ring . After many failed attempts , Lobaba tries to convince Thalaba to harness the ring 's magic power , which would bring Thalaba harm . Instead , Thalaba argues against the use of magic in general and realises that Lobaba is evil . Although Thalaba attempts to kill Lobaba and fails by the sorcerer 's magic , a storm comes and destroys the sorcerer . 
 Thalaba travels past Baghdad onto the ruins of Babylon to find Haruth and Maruth , two angels that know about magic . While searching for them , he runs across Mohareb , an evil warrior . Mohareb offers to take Thalaba through the city and they travel through the cave of <unk> . <unk> , an individual punished to have snakes constantly eat at his brain , tries to stop them before Mohareb distracts him . The two continue to travel into the dwelling of Haruth and Maruth and , when Mohareb finds out that Thalaba is not evil , attacks him . However , the ring protects Thalaba . After Mohareb claims that magic was the only reason why Thalaba lives , Thalaba decides to get rid of the ring into a pit before the two resume fighting . Soon after , Mohareb is also thrown into the pit and Thalaba is able to ask the angels what he needs to defeat his enemies . He is simply told " faith " . 
 Thalaba travels to the land of Aloadin , who owns a great garden paradise , and he is invited to feast with the people , but he is unwilling to imbibe alcohol or be taken in by the dancing women that seek to entice him . The temptations overwhelm him to the point where he can no longer tolerate them and he flees . Shortly after leaving , he discovers one of the women being attacked by a man wanting to have his way with her . It is revealed that the woman was Oneiza , who was captured , and that Aloadin was a sorcerer . After saving Oneiza , Thalaba is determined to stop the sorcerer and he ends up killing him . Following this , they are praised by a Sultan that Aloadin wanted to kill , and Thalaba decides to marry Oneiza . Before they can finish their marriage , she dies and Thalaba is left to mourn over her grave . While mourning , a spirit that appears to be Oneiza begins to haunt Thalaba and claim that God disapproves of the young warrior . However , Moath comes and is able to recognise the spirit as a vampire . After killing the vampire , the real Oneiza comes to guide Thalaba onwards . 
 Thalaba travels to look for Simorg , the Bird of Ages , on the mountain <unk> . While wandering , he meets an old woman , Maimuna , who is a sorceress . She casts a spell upon him and he is sent to the land of Mohareb , by now an evil Sultan . However , Maimuna 's sister , Khawla , knows that if Thalaba is killed that Mohareb would also be killed and she seeks to kill Thalaba to remove Mohareb . Finding this out , Mohareb joins with Thalaba and returns the ring . After telling Thalaba to turn to the darker powers , Thalaba leaves . Khawla attempts to user her magic to kill Thalaba , but the ring protects him . When Maimuna tries to user her own magic against Thalaba , she witnesses the goodness of the universe and represents her evil ways . She repays him by using her magic to bring him back to the mountain , and Thalaba is able to return to his search for Simorg . After wandering through snow , Thalaba comes across the Font of Fire with the sleeping Laila trapped inside . It turns out she was placed there by her father , the sorcerer Okba and one of the murderers of Thalaba 's family . 
 Okba , old and worn out , comes and asks Thalaba to simply kill him and end his misery . However , Thalaba denies the request . The angel of death , Azrael , tells Thalaba that either Okba or Laila must die . Okba uses this chance to try and stab Thalaba , but Laila steps in between them and is killed . Okba curses God for his fate but Thalaba can only feel pity over the scene . After leaving , he is able to come to Simorg 's valley . Simorg directs Thalaba to take a sled to continue on his way while the spirit of Laila asks Thalaba to end Okba 's misery . However , Thalaba refuses to commit vengeance and he travels onwards until he arrives at a small boat waiting for him . He is taken down a river to the sea where Thalaba tosses away his magic ring . He is then taken to a cave that would lead him to the domain of the sorcerers . 
 Thalaba travels down into the cave and meets the warrior <unk> chained to rocks . Thalaba frees <unk> before travelling further until he meets an Efreet that guards a gate to the <unk> . After shooting an arrow into an eye of the Efreet , he is able to proceed forward where he meets Khawla and Mohareb . He is able to knock them away from him and quickly moves forward to find the powerful sword of his father . The sword of flames covers Thalaba in flames which causes the area to be filled with light . This scares the sorcerers who then try to attack him . After Thalaba defeats Mohareb and the sorcerers , the voice of Mohammad asks Thalaba what he wishes . Thalaba simply gives his will up to the Prophet before destroying an evil idol , which destroys the cave . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The story depicts how suffering is essential to completing one 's destiny . Southey 's purpose in Thalaba , however , is to describe as many of the various myths and superstitions that he can , and this interferes with the resolving of moral problems within the story . Instead , the moral lessons are formulaic and the events focus on awards given to those who are obedient . Southey 's emphasis on the actual mythic incidents over the moral events are backed up with more than 80 pages of his own notes that describe the various references to traditional myths or mythic creatures that are incorporated into the story . In terms of structure , the unilateral plot keeps Thalaba does not allow for an easy flow into various mythic incidents . Instances of the plot being supplanted by the myths can be found during the descriptions of the story of Irem , Haruth and Maruth , or others . 
 There is reliance on repetition of themes within the plot of Thalaba . Three times he attained a paradise that turns out to be false , and this is followed by the death of a woman who are gone until the very end when Thalaba is awarded entrance into a true paradise . The seeking out of mythic figures to guide him onto the next part of the tale is equally repetitive and has little result for the plot . Various instances of the sorcerers and sorceresses are added to the story to emphasise the evil of magic along with tempting Thalaba with power . However , the emphasis on magic hides the moral within Thalaba 's temptations . Although Thalaba does achieve his goal through moral submission , many of the quests and actions are arbitrary and repetitive . As such , they take away from any Islamic truth that could be found within the actions . 
 Other images , such as Thalaba reclaiming his father 's magic sword , are symbols that effectively reinforce Southey 's moral themes . However , these events represent the minority of the plot and are rarely relied on early in the story . To the contrary , the heavily represented magic ring is used to protect Thalaba with little explanation as to how it works and there is no moral statements tied to its use . As a whole , the poem is able to portray scenery and events in strongly descriptive manners , but the manner in doing this takes away from their meaning and effect . In terms of religious imagery , Islam within the poem is more similar to Zoroastrian thought and morality . Other religious images lose their power as Southey removes any mystical aspects of them , including <unk> being stripped of it being a symbol of harmony with life . In terms of the divine , there is a dual entity : Allah representing preservation and <unk> representing destruction . However , evil , though an opposite to good , is never explained but merely used to further the plot . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Ernest Bernhard @-@ Kabisch pointed out that " Few readers have been as enthusiastic about it as Cardinal Newman who considered it the most ' morally sublime ' of English poems . But the young Shelley reckoned it his favorite poem , and both he and Keats followed its lead in some of their verse narratives . " An anonymous review in the September 1801 British Critic claimed , " A more complete monument of vile and depraved taste no man ever raised [ ... ] He has , therefore , given a rhapsody of Twelve Books in a sort of irregular lyric , so unlike verse or sense , that if it were worth while to present our readers with a tissue of so coarse a texture , we could fill whole pages with specimens of its absurdity . We will have mercy , and give only a single example , which may be taken at random , for no part seems to be better than the rest . " 
 This was followed by an October 1801 anonymous review in the Monthly Mirror that argued , " It is a matter to be lamented , that , in times like the present , a work of letters can rarely be reviewed upon the ground of its own proper merits ... In the consideration of this romance , the judicious critic cannot but feel that one rule of good writing has been studiously observed . His work will not incur the censure passed by the late Mr. Collins upon his Persian Eclogues , namely , that , from erroneous manners , they were ' Irish . ' " The review continued , " He tells us it is metrical ... He will excuse our ears , but we cannot agree with him . Among the sins of our youth , we , like him , have traded in desultory versification , but have long been brought back to lyrical rhyme , and heroic blank verse . The reasons are obvious ... We recommend his beauties to the esteem , and his faults to the forgetfulness , of every reader . Upon the whole , he has our thanks for much amusement , and some information . " 
 An anonymous review in the January 1802 Monthly Magazine stated , " The fable or story of Thalaba is perhaps too marvellous : every incident is a miracle ; every utensil , an amulet ; every speech , a spell ; every personage , a god ; or rather a talismanic statue ; of which destiny and magic overrule the movements , not human hopes and fears — not human desires and passions , which always must excite the vivid sympathy of men . It offers , however , scope beyond other metrical romances " . The review concluded , " Whatever loss of interest this poem may sustain , as a whole , by an apparent <unk> of the vents and characters , is compensated by the busy variety , the picturesque imagery , and striking originality of the parts . " 
 Later in 1802 , Francis Jeffrey , editor of the Edinburgh Review , submitted a review on Thalaba . In the October 1802 edition , he claimed that Southey " belongs to a sect of poets , that has established itself in this country within these ten or twelve years , and is looked upon , we believe , as one of its chief champions and apostles ... As Mr Southey is the first author , of this persuasion , that has yet been brought before us for judgment , we cannot discharge our inquisitorial office conscientiously , without <unk> a few words upon the nature and tendency of the tenets he has helped to promulgate . The disciples of this school boast much of its originality . " This led to a discussion of Southey 's flaws : " Originality , however , we are persuaded , is rare than mere alteration ... That our new poets have abandoned the old models , may certainly be admitted ; but we have not been able to discover that they have yet created any model of their own . " He continued to discuss the flaws of the British Romantic poets before returning to Thalaba when he argued , " The subject of this poem is almost as ill chosen as the diction ; and the conduct of the fable as disorderly as the versification ... From this little sketch of the story , our readers will easily perceive , that it consists altogether of the most wild and extravagant fictions , and openly sets nature and probability at defiance . In its action it is not an imitation of anything ; and excludes all rational criticism , as to the choice and succession of its incidents . " 
 This was followed by a December 1803 review in the The Critical Review by William Taylor that said , 
 Perhaps no work of art so imperfect ever announced such power in the artist — perhaps no artist so powerful ever rested his fame on so imperfect a production — as Thalaba . The author calls it a metrical romance ; he might have called it a lyrical one ; for the story is told , as in an ode , by implication ; not directly , as in an <unk> . It is a gallery of successive pictures . Each is strikingly descriptive ... but the personages , like the figures of landscape @-@ painters , are often almost lost in the scene : they appear as the episodical or accessory objects . 
 The review concluded , " The style of Thalaba has a plasticity and variety , of which epic poetry offers no other example . The favourite formulas of every school of diction have been acquired , and are employed ... This stunning impression of the style gives pain , we believe , especially to mere English scholars , and to those whose comparison of art is narrow and confined , but falls within the limits of pleasure , and is even a cause of luxurious stimulation , to readers of a wider range and a more tolerant taste . " 
 In 1977 , Bernhardt @-@ Kabisch claimed that the poem was " probably the most influential and historically the most important of Southey 's long poems " and " What made Thalaba distinction as well as provocative was above all its flamboyant exoticism . " However , he pointed out that " The chief weakness is the diffuse and tortuous plot which eddies and meanders without any firm principle of progression as the hero posts from stage to mysterious stage . " 
 Sir Granville Bantock authored " Thalaba the Destroyer – Symphonic Poem " ( 1899 ) based on the poem . 
 = Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection = 
 Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection is a reissue of American singer Katy Perry 's third studio album Teenage Dream ( 2010 ) . It was released on March 23 , 2012 by Capitol Records , nearly two years after the original record . Perry collaborated with producers including Tricky Stewart to refine leftover material from the recording sessions at Playback Recording Studio for Teenage Dream . The final product features three newly recorded songs , which incorporate pop styles previously seen in the original album , an acoustic version of " The One That Got Away " and three additional official remixes . 
 Upon its release , Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection was met with generally mixed reviews from music critics , who were ambivalent towards the new songs ' production and questioned the decision to reissue Teenage Dream . The reissue boosted sales of the original Teenage Dream , reaching number seven on the U.S. Billboard 200 and at number six on the UK Albums Chart . In several international territories , the album charted moderately as an independent release , and has sold one million copies globally . 
 Two singles were released from Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection . The lead single " Part of Me " debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and was eventually certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , while the second single " Wide Awake " peaked at number two in the country . The record was further promoted with live performances during the 54th Annual Grammy Awards and the 2012 Billboard Music Awards , in addition to the autobiographical documentary film Katy Perry : Part of Me ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 2010 , Perry released her third studio album Teenage Dream . While recording the record in 2009 and 2010 , she collaborated with producers including Dr. Luke and Max Martin . Following its release , Teenage Dream became an worldwide commercial success ; it debuted at number one on both the U.S. Billboard 200 and the UK Albums Chart , and charted highly in several international territories . The project was met with generally mixed reviews from music critics , receiving an average score of 52 , based on 19 reviews on Metacritic , indicating " generally mixed or average reviews " . After its singles " California Gurls " , " Teenage Dream " , " Firework " , " E.T. " , and " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " each reached the top of the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , Teenage Dream became the second album in history to produce five number @-@ one singles on the chart after Michael Jackson 's Bad . 
 In October 2011 , producer Tricky Stewart confirmed that he was working with Perry to refine leftover material from Teenage Dream recording sessions for " something special she has going on " . Perry officially announced Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection in February 2012 , describing it as the " complete story " of the original album . She added that the expanded album would contain three newly recorded songs and four additional remixes to supplement the standard edition of the original album . " It was an incredible honor to tie [ Jackson 's ] Billboard Hot 100 record , but I 'm moving forward and had a few things left to get off my chest , " she said . 
 = = New material = = 
 Tricky Stewart stated that he and Perry " always knew that the records [ they ] created were special [ and ] at the time it was more contractual obligation [ that they did not make the album ] " . He elaborated that they were originally excluded from the project to balance the original record with tracks from other producers , in addition to Perry not needing more songs at the time . The expanded album begins with the twelve tracks included on the standard version of Teenage Dream . The newly recorded material for the reissue begins with an acoustic rendition of " The One That Got Away " as the thirteenth track . " Part of Me " is a power pop song that lyrically acts as an " emotional breakup anthem " . It was speculated that its concept was inspired by Perry 's relationship with her ex @-@ husband Russell Brand . 
 " Wide Awake " is a mid @-@ tempo pop ballad that sees inspiration from electronic and dance @-@ pop ; it lyrically discusses the end of a relationship , and was also reportedly influenced by Perry 's experience with Brand . " <unk> ' Up " is an uptempo , dance @-@ rock and techno song that sees the inclusion of " over @-@ sexualized " lyrical content . The seventeenth track is a remix of " E.T. " with new verses provided by Kanye West , while the eighteenth song is a remix of " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " featuring Missy Elliott . The nineteenth and final track " Tommie Sunshine 's <unk> Smash @-@ Up " incorporates elements of Perry 's earlier singles " California Gurls " , " Teenage Dream " , " Firework " , " E.T. " , " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " , and " The One That Got Away " . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 " Part of Me " was serviced as the lead single from Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection on February 13 , 2012 . It was met with generally favorable reviews from music critics , and became the twentieth song in the history of Billboard to debut at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and was also certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for exceeding sales of two million copies . The track also peaked at number one in New Zealand , and performed moderately in other international territories . " Wide Awake " was released as the second and final single from The Complete Confection on May 22 , 2012 . It peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , and charted moderately worldwide . The track was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Solo Performance at the 2013 ceremony , but lost to " Set Fire to the Rain " by Adele . 
 Perry performed " Part of Me " at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards on February 12 , 2012 , and sang " Wide Awake " at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards on May 20 . The Complete Confection was also promoted through the feature film Katy Perry : Part of Me ( 2012 ) , which followed Perry during her California Dreams Tour . A golden ticket to attend the premiere of the film was placed inside one American copy and one Canadian copy of the record . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly opined that the newly recorded material " runs stale " , but stated that the disc contained " some delectable musical snacks " including " <unk> ' Up " and the acoustic remix of " The One That Got Away " . Writing for PopMatters , Jesse Fox felt that the record is " obviously not perfect " , but suggested that its enjoyable nature helped Perry " [ pull ] it off like a bright , flamboyant , short @-@ lived , explosive , nearly abrasive , gasps @-@ inspiring firework . " A writer for Blogcritics appreciated The Complete Confection 's musical diversity , and thought that the lyrical content made the album a " journey in love , life and everything in between . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection boosted sales of the original Teenage Dream , which consequently re @-@ entered the top @-@ ten of the Billboard 200 at number seven with first @-@ week sales of 33 @,@ 000 copies . This resulted in a 190 % <unk> from the previous tracking week , in which the original record stood at number 31 . A similar situation occurred on the UK Albums Chart , where The Complete Confection helped Teenage Dream rise from number 34 to number six after the former was released . The Complete Confection peaked at number two on the Official New Zealand Music Chart , aided by the combined sales of the two versions . 
 Elsewhere , The Complete Confection performed moderately as an independently charting release . In Europe , the record respectively peaked at numbers 14 and 29 on the Belgian Flanders and Wallonia charts , both managed by Ultratop . It also reached number four on the French Albums Chart and number 18 on The Official Finnish Charts . The project was less successful on the Dutch MegaCharts and the Swedish Sverigetopplistan , where it respectively peaked at numbers 44 and 48 . In Oceania , it peaked at number five on the Australian ARIA Charts . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , the album has sold over 1 million copies worldwide as of 2013 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Teenage Dream : The Complete Confection . 
 Notes ) 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a vocal producer 
 " Tommie Sunshine 's <unk> Smash @-@ Up " contains elements of " California Gurls " , " Teenage Dream " , " Firework " , " E.T. " , " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " and " The One That Got Away " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Dr Pepper Ballpark = 
 Dr Pepper Ballpark ( formerly Dr Pepper / Seven Up Ballpark ) is the home ballpark of the Frisco RoughRiders Class AA minor league baseball club . Located in Frisco , Texas in the United States , the stadium has a capacity of 10 @,@ 316 . The ballpark is host to numerous functions in addition to minor league baseball games , including corporate and charity events , wedding receptions , city of Frisco events , and church services . Local soft drink manufacturer Dr Pepper Snapple Group holds naming rights and exclusive non @-@ alcoholic beverage rights in the park . 
 Since its opening in 2003 , the Dr Pepper Ballpark has won awards and garnered praise for its unique design , feel , and numerous facilities . In his design , park architect David M. Schwarz desired the creation of a village @-@ like " park within a ( ball ) park " . Dr Pepper Ballpark received the 2003 Texas Construction award for Best Architectural Design and was named the best new ballpark in the country by <unk> 
 = = History = = 
 In 2001 , Mandalay Sports Entertainment , owner of the Shreveport <unk> Class AA baseball team , reached an agreement with Southwest Sports Group to move the team to Frisco for the 2003 baseball season . As part of the deal , Southwest Sports Group assumed part @-@ ownership of both the team and the ballpark to be built following the 2002 season . The project , designed by David M. Schwarz Architectural Services and HKS Sports & Entertainment Group , broke ground on February 6 , 2002 . 
 The ballpark serves as the anchor for a 74 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 30 km2 ) $ 300 million development project near the intersection of State Highway 121 and the Dallas North Tollway . The project was jointly funded by the city of Frisco and Southwest Sports Group . Frisco put forth $ 67 million to build the complex , which was raised through special financing , unconnected to the city tax rate . On January 21 , 2003 , it was announced that local company Dr Pepper / Seven Up had purchased the naming rights for the new ballpark and retained exclusive non @-@ alcoholic beverage rights for an undisclosed amount . 
 The ballpark opened for its first game on April 3 , 2003 , a RoughRiders loss to the Tulsa Drillers . The RoughRiders earned their first victory in the ballpark the next day , with the RoughRiders ' Kurt <unk> hitting the park 's first home run . 
 Dr Pepper / Seven Up Ballpark was renamed Dr Pepper Ballpark on March 31 , 2006 . On that date , the RoughRiders ' Major League affiliate , the Texas Rangers , defeated the Florida Marlins in an exhibition game played at Dr Pepper Ballpark . The sold @-@ out game was the ballpark 's first major @-@ league game of any kind . Overall attendance ranked in the top 10 in all classes of minor league baseball during the RoughRiders ' first nine seasons . The stadium ranked first in all of Class AA for attendance from 2006 @-@ 2011 . Average attendance at RoughRiders games is 8 @,@ 000 . On average , there are 30 sell @-@ out games per season . 
 = = Other events at the ballpark = = 
 As baseball is not a year @-@ round event , Dr Pepper Ballpark is used for other functions throughout the year . The ballpark hosts corporate events , such as company softball games and movie nights , in addition to local charity events , such as 5K runs and bike races . Since 2004 , the park has hosted the " Tournament of Champions " high school baseball tournament . The Dr Pepper Ballpark was selected to host the 2005 and 2009 Texas League All @-@ Star Game . Beginning in January 2006 , Dr Pepper Ballpark has begun hosting the opening ceremonies of the annual TXU Energy Winter Games of Texas . The ballpark also hosts wedding receptions , the opening ceremonies for the Frisco Baseball and Softball Association , city of Frisco events , and church services . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Following its construction in 2003 , the Dr Pepper Ballpark received the Texas Construction award for Best Architectural Design for 2003 and the surrounding sports complex received the Best Sports and Entertainment award for 2003 . It was named the best new ballpark in the country by <unk> <unk> has also named the park No. 2 on its top ten minor league ballparks for 2004 and No. 7 for 2005 . 
 The design of the Dr Pepper Ballpark was spearheaded by David M. Schwarz . Schwarz had a stated goal of creating a " park within a ( ball ) park " in the stadium . To achieve this effect , the nine interconnected pavilions , where concessions , restrooms , and luxury suites are located , are built separately from the main seating area . The space between these pavilions allows for improved air flow in the Texas heat ; the wind can move through the buildings and is not impeded by their presence . Constructed of James Hardie fiber cement siding , architectural critics have commented that their layout and material choice enhances the village @-@ like feel of the ballpark , giving it a " coastal Galveston aesthetic " . Others have commented that the design is very reminiscent of Churchill Downs in Kentucky . 
 The seating area is populated by just under 8 @,@ 000 open @-@ air fold @-@ down stadium seats . Combined with general admission for standing room @-@ only and grass berm seating , the stadium can hold a capacity crowd of over 10 @,@ 000 . The concourse area , between the pavilions and the seating area , wraps completely around the ballpark . Critics have commented positively on the 360 ° views afforded by this construction choice . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 In addition to fixed stadium seats , the ballpark also features 26 luxury suites located on the second level of the ballpark , which feature patio balconies from which to view the game and closed @-@ circuit television feeds of the game . Also unusual , the bullpens for each team are built into the stands behind the first and third base lines . This has received a mixed reaction from critics , with some calling it " contrived " and " pointless " . In the outfield , seating is available on the grass area . This area is branded " San Juan Hill " , after the Battle of San Juan Hill in which the team 's namesake Rough Riders fought . 
 The park features a pool built just past the wall in right field , level with the top of the outfield fence . Groups can rent out the pool during the game . Four exclusive members @-@ only areas have also been set up around the park . The most prominent of these " Founder 's Areas , " is the JCPenney Club , a private , air @-@ conditioned bar and restaurant situated below the press box behind home plate . 
 = = Non @-@ architectural critical reaction = = 
 Critics have taken issue with ticket prices at the ballpark , set at $ 7 , $ 15 , and $ 18 . While less expensive than ticket prices for major league ballparks , prices are among the highest in all minor league classes . However , the ballpark has seen strong attendance despite these ticket prices . The ballpark runs a number of specials throughout the year including " Friends & Family " where 4 tickets , 4 hats and 4 value meals to a restaurant cost less than $ 10 a ticket . It also has a " High 5 Plan " where a block of 5 games ( roughly one game each month ) start at $ 9 a game , or a $ 19 ticket that includes all you can eat food and drink . In its inaugural season , Dr Pepper Ballpark had an attendance of 675 @,@ 620 , ranking it fourth overall in minor league baseball attendance for the year . The ballpark sold out for 53 RoughRiders home games that season . 
 = = Ground rules = = 
 The following are the baseball ground rules for the Dr Pepper Ballpark . 
 A baseball hit above the yellow line in outfield is considered a home run . 
 A baseball that hits the yellow fair line below the fence is in play . 
 A baseball that hits the yellow fair line above the fence is a home run . 
 No player is allowed to climb the stairwell leading into the bullpens to catch a ball . 
 If a ball gets caught in one of the grates leading into the stands the ball is considered dead and the base runner is allowed one base . 
 A player is only allowed to catch a fly ball on the first step of the dugout . If the player has one foot on the first step and his other foot on the second step the ball is ruled non @-@ playable and the player is not allowed to catch it . 
 If a player catches a ball and falls into the dugout the batter is ruled out and the base runner is allowed one base . 
 If a baseball hits anywhere on the dugout it is considered out of play . 
 If a baseball hits the green fence the ball is in play . 
 A player is allowed to lean on the tarp to catch a fly ball , but not stand on the tarp . 
 On the backstop at the top left and right corners is a metal wire that holds the backstop up and if a ball hits it and deflects foul , then the ball is foul ; however , if a ball deflects into fair play , then it is in play . 
 = The Tempest = 
 The Tempest is a play by William Shakespeare , believed to have been written in 1610 – 11 , and thought by many critics to be the last play that Shakespeare wrote alone . It is set on a remote island , where the sorcerer Prospero , rightful Duke of Milan , plots to restore his daughter Miranda to her rightful place using illusion and skilful manipulation . He conjures up a storm , the eponymous tempest , to lure his usurping brother Antonio and the complicit King Alonso of Naples to the island . There , his machinations bring about the revelation of Antonio 's lowly nature , the redemption of the King , and the marriage of Miranda to Alonso 's son , Ferdinand . 
 There is no obvious single source for the plot of The Tempest , but researchers have seen parallels in Erasmus 's <unk> , Peter Martyr 's De <unk> novo , and eyewitness reports by William Strachey and Sylvester <unk> of the real @-@ life shipwreck of the Sea Venture on the islands of Bermuda , and the subsequent conflict between Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Somers . In addition , one of Gonzalo 's speeches is derived from Montaigne 's essay Of the <unk> , and much of Prospero 's <unk> speech is taken word for word from a speech by Medea in Ovid 's poem Metamorphoses . The masque in Act 4 may have been a later addition , possibly in honour of the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick V in 1613 . The play was first published in the First Folio of 1623 . 
 The story draws heavily on the tradition of the romance , and it was influenced by tragicomedy , the courtly masque and perhaps the commedia dell 'arte . It differs from Shakespeare 's other plays in its observation of a stricter , more organised neoclassical style . Critics see The Tempest as explicitly concerned with its own nature as a play , frequently drawing links between Prospero 's " art " and theatrical illusion , and early critics saw Prospero as a representation of Shakespeare , and his renunciation of magic as signalling Shakespeare 's farewell to the stage . The play portrays Prospero as a rational , and not an occultist , magician by providing a contrast to him in Sycorax : her magic is frequently described as destructive and terrible , where Prospero 's is said to be wondrous and beautiful . Beginning in about 1950 , with the publication of Psychology of Colonization by Octave <unk> , The Tempest was viewed more and more through the lens of postcolonial theory — exemplified in adaptations like Aimé Césaire 's Une Tempête set in Haiti — and there is even a scholarly journal on post @-@ colonial criticism named after Caliban . 
 The Tempest did not attract a significant amount of attention before the ban on the performance of plays in 1642 , and only attained popularity after the Restoration , and then only in adapted versions . In the mid @-@ 19th century , theatre productions began to reinstate the original Shakespearean text , and in the 20th century , critics and scholars undertook a significant re @-@ appraisal of the play 's value , to the extent that it is now considered to be one of Shakespeare 's greatest works . It has been adapted numerous times in a variety of styles and formats : in music , at least 46 operas by composers such as Fromental Halévy , Zdeněk Fibich and Thomas Adès ; orchestral works by Tchaikovsky , Arthur Sullivan and Arthur Honegger ; and songs by such diverse artists as Ralph Vaughan Williams , Michael Nyman and Pete Seeger ; in literature , Percy Bysshe Shelley 's poem With a Guitar , To Jane and W. H. Auden 's The Sea and the Mirror ; novels by Aimé Césaire and The <unk> by Margaret Laurence ; in paintings by William Hogarth , Henry Fuseli , and John Everett Millais ; and on screen , ranging through a hand @-@ tinted version of Herbert Beerbohm Tree 's 1905 stage performance , the science fiction film Forbidden Planet in 1956 , Peter Greenaway 's 1991 Prospero 's Books featuring John Gielgud as Prospero , to Julie Taymor 's 2010 film version which changed Prospero to Prospera ( as played by Helen Mirren ) , and Des McAnuff 's 2010 Stratford Shakespeare Festival production which starred Christopher Plummer . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = Plot = = 
 The magician , Prospero , rightful Duke of Milan , and his daughter , Miranda , have been stranded for twelve years on an island after Prospero 's jealous brother Antonio ( aided by Alonso , the King of Naples ) deposed him and set him adrift with the 3 @-@ year @-@ old Miranda . Gonzalo , Alonso 's counselor , had secretly supplied their boat with some food , fresh water , " rich garments , linens , stuffs and necessaries " , and " volumes " ( books ) that Prospero prizes . Possessing magic powers due to his great learning , Prospero is reluctantly served by a spirit , Ariel , whom Prospero had rescued from a tree in which he had been trapped by the cruel witch , Sycorax , after he had refused to obey her . Prospero maintains Ariel 's loyalty by repeatedly promising to release the " airy spirit " from servitude . Sycorax had been exiled from Algiers to the island for wreaking havoc with her magic , and had died before Prospero 's arrival and without releasing Ariel . Sycorax ' son , Caliban , a deformed monster and the only non @-@ spiritual inhabitant before the arrival of Prospero , was initially adopted and raised by him . He taught Prospero how to survive on the island , while Prospero and Miranda taught Caliban religion and their own language . In slavery , Caliban has come to view Prospero as a usurper and has grown to resent him and his daughter . Prospero and Miranda in turn view Caliban with disappointment , contempt and disgust . Prospero only performs one act of magic himself directly on stage : he disarms Ferdinand , causing his nerves to become " in their infancy again " . The rest of his magic is through controlling spirits ( or mentioned as happening previously ) , which is how magicians of the time were believed to operate . 
 Prospero , having divined that his brother Antonio is on a nearby ship , has raised a tempest that causes the passengers to believe they are shipwrecked and marooned . Also on the ship are Antonio 's friend and fellow conspirator , King Alonso of Naples , Alonso 's brother and son ( Sebastian and Ferdinand , respectively ) and Alonso 's " trusted counselor " , Gonzalo . All these passengers are returning from the wedding of Alonso 's daughter Claribel and the King of Tunis . Prospero contrives to separate the shipwreck survivors into several groups by his spells , and so Alonso and Ferdinand are separated , each believing the other to be dead . 
 Three plots then alternate through the play . In one , Caliban falls in with Stephano and Trinculo , two drunkards , believing Stephano to be a " brave god " who " bears celestial liquor " . They attempt to raise a coup against Prospero , which ultimately fails . In another , Prospero works to encourage a romantic relationship between Ferdinand and Miranda ; the two fall immediately in love , but Prospero worries that " too light winning [ may ] make the prize light " , and compels Ferdinand to become his servant , pretending that he regards him as a spy . In the third subplot , Antonio and Sebastian conspire to kill Alonso and Gonzalo so that Sebastian can become King . Ariel thwarts them , at Prospero 's command . Ariel appears to the " three men of sin " ( Alonso , Antonio and Sebastian ) as a harpy , reprimanding them for their betrayal of Prospero . Prospero , who has witnessed this , leaves to visit Ferdinand and Miranda . The three guilty nobles run off , distracted and in a frenzy , and Gonzalo and the attendant lords chase after to prevent them from doing " what this ecstasy may now provoke them to " . 
 Prospero then explains that he tested Ferdinand , and <unk> a willing Miranda to him . He then asks Ariel to bring some other spirits and create a masque to entertain the young couple . These spirits present a blessing by Iris , Ceres , and Juno , followed by dancing . Prospero suddenly remembers the plot against his life , dismisses the spirits and Miranda and Ferdinand , and sets a trap for Caliban , Trinculo , and Stephano . They are chased offstage by goblins in the shape of hounds . 
 Prospero , all his enemies in his power , discovers that Ariel would pity them if he were " human " , and decides to forgive the people who tried to kill him . He tells Ariel to fetch the nobles while he breaks his charms . 
 In the conclusion , all the main characters are brought together before Prospero , who forgives Alonso , Antonio and Sebastian . Ariel is charged to prepare the proper sailing weather to guide the King 's ship back to the Royal fleet and then to Naples , where Ferdinand and Miranda will be married . After discharging this task , Ariel will finally be free . Prospero pardons Caliban , who is sent to prepare Prospero 's cell , to which Alonso and his party are invited for a final night before their departure . ( It is however not made clear whether , after their departure , Caliban will remain on the island or whether he will be taken to Naples ) . Prospero indicates that he intends to entertain them with the story of his life on the island . Prospero has resolved to break and bury his magic staff , and " drown " his book of magic , and in his epilogue , shorn of his magic powers , he invites the audience to set him free from the island with their applause . 
 = = Date and sources = = 
 = = = Date = = = 
 The Tempest is thought by most scholars to have been written in 1610 – 11 , and is generally accepted as the last play that Shakespeare wrote alone , although some have questioned either or both assertions . Scholars also note that it is impossible to determine if the play was written before , after , or at the same time as The Winter 's Tale , the dating of which has been equally problematic . Edward Blount entered The Tempest into the Stationers ' Register on 8 November 1623 . It was one of 16 Shakespearean plays that Blount registered on that date . 
 = = = Contemporary sources = = = 
 There is no obvious single origin for the plot of The Tempest ; it seems to have been created out of an amalgamation of sources . Since source scholarship began in the 18th century , researchers have suggested passages from Erasmus 's <unk> ( 1523 ) , ( translated into English 1606 ) and Richard Eden 's 1555 translation of Peter Martyr 's De <unk> novo ( 1530 ) . In addition , William Strachey 's A True Reportory of the <unk> and Redemption of Sir Thomas Gates , Knight , an eyewitness report of the real @-@ life shipwreck of the Sea Venture in 1609 on the island of Bermuda while sailing towards Virginia , is considered by most critics to be one of Shakespeare 's primary sources because of certain verbal , plot and thematic similarities . Although not published until 1625 , Strachey 's report , one of several describing the incident , is dated 15 July 1610 , and critics say that Shakespeare must have seen it in manuscript sometime during that year . E.K. Chambers identified the True Reportory as Shakespeare 's " main authority " for The Tempest , and the modern Arden editors say Shakespeare " surely drew " on Strachey and Montaigne for specific passages in the play . There has been , however , some scepticism about the alleged influence of Strachey in the play . Kenneth Muir argued that although " [ t ] here is little doubt that Shakespeare had read ... William Strachey 's True Reportory " and other accounts , " [ t ] he extent of the verbal echoes of [ the Bermuda ] pamphlets has , I think , been exaggerated . There is hardly a shipwreck in history or fiction which does not mention splitting , in which the ship is not lightened of its cargo , in which the passengers do not give themselves up for lost , in which north winds are not sharp , and in which no one gets to shore by clinging to wreckage " , and goes on to say that " Strachey 's account of the shipwreck is blended with memories of Saint Paul 's – in which too not a hair perished – and with Erasmus ' colloquy . " 
 Another Sea Venture survivor , Sylvester Jourdain , also published an account , A Discovery of The <unk> dated 13 October 1610 , and Edmond Malone argued for the 1610 – 11 date on the account by Jourdain and the Virginia Council of London 's A True Declaration of the Estate of the Colonie in Virginia dated 8 November 1610 . 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 The Tempest may take its overall structure from traditional Italian commedia dell 'arte , which sometimes featured a magus and his daughter , their supernatural attendants , and a number of rustics . The commedia often featured a clown known as Arlecchino ( or his predecessor , Zanni ) and his partner <unk> , who bear a striking resemblance to Stephano and Trinculo ; a lecherous Neapolitan hunchback who corresponds to Caliban ; and the clever and beautiful Isabella , whose wealthy and manipulative father , <unk> , constantly seeks a suitor for her , thus mirroring the relationship between Miranda and Prospero . 
 Gonzalo 's description of his ideal society ( 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 148 – 157 , 160 – 165 ) thematically and verbally echoes Montaigne 's essay Of the <unk> , translated into English in a version published by John Florio in 1603 . Montaigne praises the society of the Caribbean natives : " It is a nation ... that hath no kinde of <unk> , no knowledge of Letters , no intelligence of numbers , no name of magistrate , nor of <unk> <unk> ; no use of service , of riches , or of poverty ; no contracts , no successions , no <unk> , no occupation but idle ; no respect of <unk> , but common , no <unk> but natural , no manuring of lands , no use of wine , <unk> , or mettle . The very words that import lying , falsehood , treason , dissimulation , <unk> , <unk> , detraction , and pardon , were never heard of amongst them . " In addition , much of Prospero 's <unk> speech ( 5 @.@ 1 @.@ 33 – 57 ) is taken word @-@ for @-@ word from a speech by Medea in Ovid 's poem Metamorphoses . 
 = = Text = = 
 The Tempest presents relatively few textual problems in comparison with many of Shakespeare 's other plays . First published in the First Folio in December 1623 , the play is first in the volume , leading the section of comedies . The play has more stage directions than any of Shakespeare 's other plays , though they appear to have been written for readers instead of actors . Scholars infer from this that the editors of the volume , John Heminges and Henry Condell , included the directions to aid readers , and they were not necessarily Shakespeare 's . Scholars have also wondered about the masque in Act 4 , which some think was an interpolated afterthought , possibly added for the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick V in 1613 . However , other scholars see this as unlikely , arguing that taking the masque out of the play creates more problems than it solves . 
 = = Themes and Motifs = = 
 = = = The Theatre = = = 
 The Tempest is explicitly concerned with its own nature as a play , frequently drawing links between Prospero 's art and theatrical illusion ; the shipwreck was a spectacle that Ariel performed , while Antonio and Sebastian are cast in a troop to act . Prospero may even refer to the Globe Theatre when he describes the whole world as an illusion : " the great globe ... shall dissolve ... like this insubstantial pageant " . Ariel frequently disguises himself as figures from Classical mythology , for example a nymph , a harpy , and Ceres , acting as the latter in a masque and anti @-@ masque that Prospero creates . 
 Early critics , such as Thomas Campbell in 1838 , saw this " constant " allusion to theatre as an indication that Prospero was meant to represent Shakespeare ; the character 's renunciation of magic thus signaling Shakespeare 's farewell to the stage . This theory persists among later critics , and remains solidly within the critical canon . Curious , however , since ( if familiar with Shakespeare 's entire body of <unk> literary scholars must surely be ) , it can , then , be easily noted even to the layperson that this technique / comparison with the theatre is one Shakespeare employed often , and in many , if not all , of his writings . Among the many examples are these two noteworthy ones : " All the world 's a stage , and all of <unk> players ( actors , performers ) " is a phrase that begins the monologue from Shakespeare 's As You Like It , and is spoken by the melancholy Jacques in Scene VII of Act II . Another example is found during the final act of Macbeth , when the title character delivers his monologue that has come to be known as " The Tomorrow & Tomorrow Speech " . In it , toward the end of this monologue , Macbeth ruminates on the ( seeming ) futility of existence when declaring that " ... ( Life ) is like a poor <unk> who struts and frets his hour upon the stage , and then is heard no more " . Shakespeare seems to be likening a hopeful performer 's " 15 @-@ minutes of fame " and ( usually ) subsequent decline into obscurity with how fleeting and how utterly fast ones life goes by ... proceeding at such a fast pace as to make both life and the accomplishments therein seem not only irrelevant and relatively trivial , but momentary as well . It would , then , seem as though the actual value in making such references would not be so the writer could compare his or her own writing with itself or even with himself ... or even to compare the stageplay with itself ... but would be , rather , to notice the similarities that life in itself has to the theatre in order to help people to compare the likeness of the ( individual ) play ( and / or theatre in general ) with life as a <unk> all its anti @-@ mimetic likenesses and parallels and dramas contained therein . After all , numerous literary figures have noted that , " Life imitates art " . 
 = = = Magic = = = 
 Magic was a controversial subject in Shakespeare 's day . In Italy in 1600 , Giordano Bruno , known for his occult interests , was burnt at the stake for heresy . Outside the Catholic world , in Protestant England where Shakespeare wrote The Tempest , magic was also taboo ; not all " magic " , however , was considered evil . Several thinkers took a more rational approach to the study of the supernatural , with the determination to discover the workings of unusual phenomena . The German Henricus Cornelius Agrippa was one such thinker , who published in De <unk> Philosophia ( 1531 , 1533 ) his observations of " divine " magic . Agrippa 's work influenced Dr. John Dee , an Englishman and student of supernatural phenomena . When King James took the throne , Dee found himself under attack for his beliefs , but was able to defend himself successfully by explaining the divine nature of his profession . However , he died in disgrace in 1608 . 
 Shakespeare is also careful to make the distinction that Prospero presents himself as a rational , and not an occultist , magician . He does this by providing a contrast to him in Sycorax . Sycorax is said to have worshipped the devil and been full of " earthy and <unk> commands " . She was unable to control Ariel , who was " too delicate " for such dark tasks . Prospero 's rational goodness enables him to control Ariel where Sycorax can only trap him in a tree . Sycorax 's magic is frequently described as destructive and terrible , where Prospero 's is said to be wondrous and beautiful . Prospero seeks to set things right in his world through his magic , and once that is done , he renounces it , setting Ariel free . Of course , the problem is , Prospero never actually does any magical acts . Only Ariel does . The magic of Prospero is a matter of language alone . 
 = = = The soul = = = 
 The Tempest can be interpreted as Shakespeare 's last treatise on the human soul , in particular the Renaissance conception of the tripartite soul divided into vegetative , sensitive , and rational spheres , as described in Plato 's tripartite theory of soul and Christian Philosophy . This was later also described in Sigmund Freud 's id , ego and super @-@ ego which was first linked to The Tempest in the 1956 screenplay for Forbidden Planet by Cyril Hume , Irving Block , and Allen Adler . The film presents Caliban reinterpreted as the ' monster from the Id ' , although the theory is dismissed as ' obsolete ' in that imagined future , and was also dismissed by James E Phillips in 1964 . Prospero is exiled to an island with a symbol of his baser , ' vegetative ' nature – Caliban – and his higher , ' sensitive ' or supernatural side – Ariel . Some productions have seen the same actor play all three roles , making them symbols of the conflict within a fully actualised or awakened Prospero – that between crude selfish physicality and a higher , mystical side . In the screenplay for Forbidden Planet it is revealed that the id monster is an <unk> of Dr Morbius ' psyche . 
 According to this theory — one of many — for as long as Prospero is battling with these qualities and lost in books , he is banished from Milan . As the play finds its conclusion , he is both able to accept his base , brutal nature ( " this thing of darkness I acknowledge mine " he says when taking responsibility for Caliban ) while letting go of his connection with higher , powerful forces ( " then to the elements be free , and fare thou well " he says , setting Ariel free ) . Abandoning magic and acknowledging the brutal potential of his nature , he is allowed to return to his rightful place as Duke , subject to agreement from the audience : " as you from crimes would pardon 'd be , let your indulgence set me free . " 
 = = Criticism and interpretation = = 
 = = = Genre = = = 
 The story draws heavily on the tradition of the romance , a fictitious narrative set far away from ordinary life . Romances were typically based around themes such as the supernatural , wandering , exploration and discovery . They were often set in coastal regions , and typically featured exotic , fantastical locations and themes of transgression and redemption , loss and retrieval , exile and reunion . As a result , while The Tempest was originally listed as a comedy in the First Folio of Shakespeare 's plays , subsequent editors have chosen to give it the more specific label of Shakespearean romance . Like the other romances , the play was influenced by the then @-@ new genre of tragicomedy , introduced by John Fletcher in the first decade of the 17th century and developed in the Beaumont and Fletcher collaborations , as well as by the explosion of development of the courtly masque form by such as Ben Jonson and Inigo Jones at the same time . 
 = = = Dramatic structure = = = 
 The Tempest differs from Shakespeare 's other plays in its observation of a stricter , more organised neoclassical style . The clearest indication of this is Shakespeare 's respect for the three unities in the play : the <unk> of Time , Place , and Action . Shakespeare 's other plays rarely respected the three unities , taking place in separate locations miles apart and over several days or even years . The play 's events unfold in real time before the audience , Prospero even declaring in the last act that everything has happened in , more or less , three hours . All action is unified into one basic plot : Prospero 's struggle to regain his dukedom ; it is also confined to one place , a fictional island , which many scholars agree is meant to be located in the Mediterranean Sea . Another reading suggests that it takes place in the New World , as some parts read like records of English and Spanish conquest in the Americas . Still others argue that the Island can represent any land that has been colonised . 
 = = = Postcolonial = = = 
 In Shakespeare 's day , much of the world was still being colonized by European merchants and settlers , and stories were coming back from the Americas , with myths about the Cannibals of the Caribbean , faraway Edens , and distant tropical <unk> . With the character Caliban ( whose name is almost an anagram of Cannibal and also resembles " <unk> " , the term then used for natives in the West Indies ) , Shakespeare may be offering an in @-@ depth discussion into the morality of colonialism . Different views of this are found in the play , with examples including Gonzalo 's Utopia , Prospero 's enslavement of Caliban , and Caliban 's subsequent resentment . Caliban is also shown as one of the most natural characters in the play , being very much in touch with the natural world ( and modern audiences have come to view him as far nobler than his two Old World friends , Stephano and Trinculo , although the original intent of the author may have been different ) . There is evidence that Shakespeare drew on Montaigne 's essay Of Cannibals — which discusses the values of societies insulated from European influences — while writing The Tempest . 
 Beginning in about 1950 , with the publication of Psychology of Colonization by Octave <unk> , The Tempest was viewed more and more through the lens of postcolonial theory . This new way of looking at the text explored the effect of the coloniser ( Prospero ) on the colonised ( Ariel and Caliban ) . Though Ariel is often overlooked in these debates in favour of the more intriguing Caliban , he is nonetheless an essential component of them . The French writer Aimé Césaire , in his play Une Tempête sets The Tempest in Haiti , portraying Ariel as a mulatto who , unlike the more rebellious Caliban , feels that negotiation and partnership is the way to freedom from the colonisers . Fernandez <unk> sets his version of the play in Cuba , and portrays Ariel as a wealthy Cuban ( in comparison to the lower @-@ class Caliban ) who also must choose between rebellion or negotiation . Although scholars have suggested that his dialogue with Caliban in Act two , Scene one , contains hints of a future alliance between the two when Prospero leaves , Ariel is generally viewed by scholars as the good servant , in comparison with the conniving Caliban — a view which Shakespeare 's audience may well have shared . Ariel is used by some postcolonial writers as a symbol of their efforts to overcome the effects of colonisation on their culture . For example , Michelle Cliff , a Jamaican author , has said that she tries to combine Caliban and Ariel within herself to create a way of writing that represents her culture better . Such use of Ariel in postcolonial thought is far from uncommon ; the spirit is even the namesake of a scholarly journal covering post @-@ colonial criticism . 
 = = = Feminist = = = 
 The Tempest has only one female character , Miranda . Other women , such as Caliban 's mother Sycorax , Miranda 's mother and Alonso 's daughter Claribel , are only mentioned . Because of the small role women play in the story in comparison to other Shakespeare plays , The Tempest has attracted much feminist criticism . Miranda is typically viewed as being completely deprived of freedom by her father . Her only duty in his eyes is to remain chaste . Ann Thompson argues that Miranda , in a manner typical of women in a colonial atmosphere , has completely internalised the patriarchal order of things , thinking of herself as subordinate to her father . 
 The less @-@ prominent women mentioned in the play are subordinated as well , as they are only described through the men of the play . Most of what is said about Sycorax , for example , is said by Prospero . Further , Stephen Orgel notes that Prospero has never met Sycorax – all he learned about her he learned from Ariel . According to Orgel , Prospero 's suspicion of women makes him an unreliable source of information . Orgel suggests that he is sceptical of female virtue in general , citing his ambiguous remark about his wife 's fidelity . However , certain goddesses such as Juno , Ceres , Iris , and sea nymphs are in one scene of the play . 
 = = Performance History = = 
 = = = Shakespeare 's day = = = 
 A record exists of a performance of The Tempest on 1 November 1611 by the King 's Men before James I and the English royal court at Whitehall Palace on <unk> night . The play was one of the six Shakespearean plays ( and eight others for a total of 14 ) acted at court during the winter of 1612 – 13 as part of the festivities surrounding the marriage of Princess Elizabeth with Frederick V , the Elector of the Palatinate of the Rhine . There is no further public performance recorded prior to the Restoration ; but in his 1669 preface to the Dryden / Davenant version , John Dryden states that The Tempest had been performed at the Blackfriars Theatre . Careful consideration of stage directions within the play supports this , strongly suggesting that the play was written with Blackfriars Theatre rather than the Globe Theatre in mind . 
 = = = Restoration and 18th century = = = 
 Adaptations of the play , not Shakespeare 's original , dominated the performance history of The Tempest from the English Restoration until the mid @-@ 19th century . All theatres were closed down by the puritan government during the Commonwealth . Upon the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , two patent companies — the King 's Company and the Duke 's Company — were established , and the existing theatrical repertoire divided between them . Sir William Davenant 's Duke 's Company had the rights to perform The Tempest . In 1667 Davenant and John Dryden made heavy cuts and adapted it as The Tempest or , The Enchanted Island . They tried to appeal to upper @-@ class audiences by emphasising royalist political and social ideals : monarchy is the natural form of government ; patriarchal authority decisive in education and marriage ; and <unk> preeminent in inheritance and ownership of property . They also added characters and plotlines : Miranda has a sister , named Dorinda ; and Caliban a sister , also named Sycorax . As a parallel to Shakespeare 's Miranda / Ferdinand plot , Prospero has a foster @-@ son , Hippolito , who has never set eyes on a woman . Hippolito was a popular breeches role , a man played by a woman , popular with Restoration theatre management for the opportunity to reveal actresses ' legs . Scholar Michael Dobson has described Enchanted Island as " the most frequently revived play of the entire Restoration " and as establishing the importance of enhanced and additional roles for women . 
 In 1674 , Thomas Shadwell re @-@ adapted Dryden and Davenant 's Enchanted Island as an opera , usually meaning a play with sections that were to be sung and / or danced . Restoration playgoers appear to have regarded the Dryden / Davenant / Shadwell version as Shakespeare 's : Samuel Pepys , for example , described it as " an old play of Shakespeares " in his diary . The opera was extremely popular , and " full of so good variety , that I cannot be more pleased almost in a comedy " according to Pepys . The Prospero in this version is very different from Shakespeare 's : <unk> <unk> describes him as " reduced to the status of a Polonius @-@ like <unk> father , intent on protecting the chastity of his two sexually naive daughters while planning advantageous dynastic marriages for them . " Enchanted Island was successful enough to provoke a parody , The Mock Tempest , written by Thomas Duffett for the King 's Company in 1675 . It opened with what appeared to be a tempest , but turns out to be a riot in a brothel . 
 In the early 18th century , the Dryden / Davenant / Shadwell version dominated the stage . Ariel was — with two exceptions — played by a woman , and invariably by a graceful dancer and superb singer . Caliban was a comedian 's role , played by actors " known for their awkward figures " . In 1756 , David Garrick staged another operatic version , a " three @-@ act extravaganza " with music by John Christopher Smith . 
 The Tempest was one of the staples of the repertoire of Romantic Era theatres . John Philip Kemble produced an acting version which was closer to Shakespeare 's original , but nevertheless retained Dorinda and Hippolito . Kemble was much @-@ mocked for his insistence on archaic pronunciation of Shakespeare 's texts , including " <unk> " for " aches " . It was said that spectators " packed the pit , just to enjoy hissing Kemble 's delivery of ' I 'll rack thee with old cramps , / Fill all they bones with aches ' . " The actor @-@ managers of the Romantic Era established the fashion for opulence in sets and costumes which would dominate Shakespeare performances until the late 19th century : Kemble 's Dorinda and Miranda , for example , were played " in white ornamented with spotted furs " . 
 In 1757 , a year after the debut of his operatic version , David Garrick produced a heavily cut performance of Shakespeare 's script at Drury Lane , and it was revived , profitably , throughout the century . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 It was not until William Charles Macready 's influential production in 1838 that Shakespeare 's text established its primacy over the adapted and operatic versions which had been popular for most of the previous two centuries . The performance was particularly admired for George Bennett 's performance as Caliban ; it was described by Patrick MacDonnell — in his An Essay on the Play of The Tempest published in 1840 — as " maintaining in his mind , a strong resistance to that tyranny , which held him in the <unk> of slavery " . 
 The Victorian era marked the height of the movement which would later be described as " pictorial " : based on lavish sets and visual spectacle , heavily cut texts making room for lengthy scene @-@ changes , and elaborate stage effects . In Charles Kean 's 1857 production of The Tempest , Ariel was several times seen to descend in a ball of fire . The hundred and forty stagehands supposedly employed on this production were described by the Literary Gazette as " unseen ... but alas never unheard " . Hans Christian Andersen also saw this production and described Ariel as " isolated by the electric ray " , referring to the effect of a carbon arc lamp directed at the actress playing the role . The next generation of producers , which included William Poel and Harley Granville @-@ Barker , returned to a leaner and more text @-@ based style . 
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , Caliban , not Prospero , was perceived as the star act of The Tempest , and was the role which the actor @-@ managers chose for themselves . Frank Benson researched the role by viewing monkeys and baboons at the zoo ; on stage , he hung upside @-@ down from a tree and <unk> . 
 = = = 20th century and beyond = = = 
 Continuing the late @-@ 19th @-@ century tradition , in 1904 Herbert Beerbohm Tree wore fur and seaweed to play Caliban , with waist @-@ length hair and <unk> bearing , suggestive of a primitive part @-@ animal part @-@ human stage of evolution . This " missing link " portrayal of Caliban became the norm in productions until Roger Livesey , in 1934 , was the first actor to play the role with black makeup . In 1945 Canada Lee played the role at the Theatre Guild in New York , establishing a tradition of black actors taking the role , including Earle Hyman in 1960 and James Earl Jones in 1962 . 
 In 1916 , Percy MacKaye presented a community masque , Caliban by the Yellow Sands , at the Lewisohn Stadium in New York . Amidst a huge cast of dancers and <unk> , the pageant centres on the rebellious nature of Caliban but ends with his plea for more knowledge ( " I yearn to build , to be thine Artist / And ' <unk> this thine Earth among the <unk> / Beautiful ! " ) followed by Shakespeare , as a character , reciting Prospero 's " Our revels now are ended " speech . 
 John Gielgud played Prospero numerous times , and called it his favourite role . Douglas Brode describes him as " universally heralded as ... [ the 20th ] century 's greatest stage Prospero " . His first appearance in the role was in 1930 : he wore a turban , later confessing that he intended to look like Dante . He played the role in three more stage productions , lastly at the Royal National Theatre in 1974 . Derek Jacobi 's Prospero for The Old Vic in 2003 was praised for his portrayal of isolation and pain in ageing . 
 Peter Brook directed an experimental production at the Round House in 1968 , in which the text was " almost wholly abandoned " in favour of mime . According to Margaret Croydon 's review , Sycorax was " portrayed by an enormous woman able to expand her face and body to still larger proportions – a fantastic emblem of the grotesque ... [ who ] suddenly ... gives a horrendous yell , and Caliban , with black sweater over his head , emerges from between her legs : Evil is born . " 
 In spite of the existing tradition of a black actor playing Caliban opposite a white Prospero , colonial interpretations of the play did not find their way onto the stage until the 1970s . Performances in England directed by Jonathan Miller and by Clifford Williams explicitly portrayed Prospero as coloniser . Miller 's production was described , by David Hirst , as depicting " the tragic and inevitable disintegration of a more primitive culture as the result of European invasion and colonisation " . Miller developed this approach in his 1988 production at the Old Vic in London , starring Max von Sydow as Prospero . This used a mixed cast made up of white actors as the humans and black actors playing the spirits and creatures of the island . According to Michael Billington , " von Sydow 's Prospero became a white overlord manipulating a mutinous black Caliban and a collaborative Ariel keenly mimicking the gestures of the island 's invaders . The colonial metaphor was pushed through to its logical conclusion so that finally Ariel gathered up the pieces of Prospero 's abandoned staff and , watched by awe @-@ struck tribesmen , fitted them back together to hold his wand of office aloft before an immobilised Caliban . The Tempest suddenly acquired a new political dimension unforeseen by Shakespeare . " 
 Psychoanalytic interpretations have proved more difficult to depict on stage . Gerald Freedman 's production at the American Shakespeare Theatre in 1979 and Ron Daniels ' Royal Shakespeare Company production in 1982 both attempted to depict Ariel and Caliban as opposing aspects of Prospero 's psyche . However neither was regarded as wholly successful : Shakespeare Quarterly , reviewing Freedman 's production , commented , " Mr. Freedman did nothing on stage to make such a notion clear to any audience that had not heard of it before . " 
 In 1988 , John Wood played Prospero for the RSC , emphasising the character 's human complexity . The Financial Times reviewer described him as " a demented stage manager on a theatrical island suspended between smouldering rage at his usurpation and unbridled glee at his alternative ethereal power " . 
 Japanese theatre styles have been applied to The Tempest . In 1988 and again in 1992 Yukio Ninagawa brought his version of The Tempest to the UK . It was staged as a rehearsal of a Noh drama , with a traditional Noh theatre at the back of the stage , but also using elements which were at odds with Noh conventions . In 1992 , Minoru Fujita presented a Bunraku ( Japanese puppet ) version in Osaka and at the Tokyo Globe . 
 Sam Mendes directed a 1993 RSC production in which Simon Russell Beale 's Ariel was openly resentful of the control exercised by Alec McCowen 's Prospero . Controversially , in the early performances of the run , Ariel spat at Prospero , once granted his freedom . An entirely different effect was achieved by George C. Wolfe in the outdoor New York Shakespeare Festival production of 1995 , where the casting of <unk> Ellis as Ariel opposite Patrick Stewart 's Prospero charged the production with erotic tensions . Productions in the late 20th @-@ century have gradually increased the focus placed on sexual tensions between the characters , including Prospero / Miranda , Prospero / Ariel , Miranda / Caliban , Miranda / Ferdinand and Caliban / Trinculo . 
 The Tempest was performed at the Globe Theatre in 2000 with Vanessa Redgrave as Prospero , playing the role as neither male nor female , but with " authority , humanity and humour ... a watchful parent to both Miranda and Ariel . " While the audience respected Prospero , Jasper Britton 's Caliban " was their man " ( in Peter Thomson 's words ) , in spite of the fact that he spat fish at the groundlings , and singled some of them out for humiliating encounters . By the end of 2005 , BBC Radio had aired 21 productions of The Tempest , more than any other play by Shakespeare . Several critics feel that the play is autobiographical . Trevor Nunn , in the PBS miniseries Shakespeare Uncovered , states that he feels that Prospero is meant to represent Shakespeare himself , and that Prospero 's final farewell to magic is really Shakespeare 's final farewell to his audience . 
 The Cirque du Soleil touring production <unk> is inspired by The Tempest . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Tempest has more music than any other Shakespeare play , and has proved more popular as a subject for composers than most of Shakespeare 's plays . Scholar Julie Sanders ascribes this to the " perceived ' musicality ' or lyricism " of the play . 
 Two settings of songs from The Tempest which may have been used in performances during Shakespeare 's lifetime have survived . These are " Full Fathom Five " and " Where The Bee Sucks There Suck I " in the 1659 publication Cheerful Ayres or Ballads , in which they are attributed to Robert Johnson , who regularly composed for the King 's Men . It has been common throughout the history of the play for the producers to commission contemporary settings of these two songs , and also of " Come Unto These Yellow Sands " . 
 The Tempest has also influenced songs written in the folk and hippie traditions : for example , versions of " Full Fathom Five " were recorded by Marianne Faithfull for Come My Way in 1965 and by Pete Seeger for Dangerous Songs ! ? in 1966 . The Decemberists ' song " The Island : Come and See / The Landlord 's Daughter / You 'll Not Feel The Drowning " is thought by many to be based on the story of Caliban and Miranda . Michael Nyman 's Ariel Songs are taken from his score for the film Prospero 's Books . 
 Among those who wrote incidental music to The Tempest were : 
 Arthur Sullivan : His graduation piece , completed in 1861 , was a set of incidental music to " The Tempest " . Revised and expanded , it was performed at The Crystal Palace in 1862 , a year after his return to London , and was an immediate sensation . 
 Ernest Chausson : in 1888 he wrote incidental music for La <unk> , a French translation by Maurice <unk> . This is believed to be the first orchestral work that made use of the celesta . 
 Jean Sibelius : his 1926 incidental music was written for a lavish production at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen . An epilogue was added for a 1927 performance in Helsinki . He represented individual characters through instrumentation choices : particularly admired was his use of harps and percussion to represent Prospero , said to capture the " resonant ambiguity of the character " . 
 Malcolm Arnold , Lennox Berkeley , Arthur Bliss , Engelbert Humperdinck , Hector Berlioz , Willem <unk> and Henry Purcell . 
 At least forty @-@ six operas or semi @-@ operas based on The Tempest exist . In addition to the Dryden / Davenant and Garrick versions mentioned in the " Restoration and 18th century " section above , Frederic Reynolds produced an operatic version in 1821 , with music by Sir Henry Bishop . Other pre @-@ 20th @-@ century operas based on The Tempest include Fromental Halévy 's La <unk> ( 1850 ) and Zdeněk Fibich 's <unk> ( 1894 ) . 
 In the 20th century , Kurt <unk> 's <unk> premiered in 1948 and Frank Martin 's Der Sturm in 1955 . Michael Tippett 's 1971 opera The Knot Garden , contains various allusions to The Tempest . In Act 3 , a psychoanalyst , Mangus , pretends to be Prospero and uses situations from Shakespeare 's play in his therapy sessions . John Eaton , in 1985 , produced a fusion of live jazz with pre @-@ recorded electronic music , with a libretto by Andrew Porter . Michael Nyman 's 1991 opera Noises , Sounds & Sweet Airs was first performed as an opera @-@ ballet by Karine Saporta . This opera is unique in that the three vocalists , a soprano , contralto , and tenor , are voices rather than individual characters , with the tenor just as likely as the soprano to sing Miranda , or all three sing as one character . 
 The soprano who sings the part of Ariel in Thomas Adès ' 21st @-@ century opera is stretched at the higher end of the register , highlighting the androgyny of the role . Mike Silverman of the Associated Press commented , " Ades has made the role of the spirit Ariel a tour de force for coloratura soprano , giving her a vocal line that hovers much of the time well above high C. " 
 Luca Lombardi 's Prospero was premiered 2006 at Nuremberg Opera House . Ariel is sung by 4 female voices ( S , S , MS , A ) and has an instrumental alter ego on stage ( flute ) . There is an instrumental alter ego ( cello ) also for Prospero . 
 Choral settings of excerpts from The Tempest include Amy Beach 's Come Unto These Yellow Sands ( <unk> , from Three Shakespeare Songs ) , Matthew Harris ' Full Fathom Five , I Shall No More to Sea , and Where the Bee Sucks ( SATB , from Shakespeare Songs , Books I , V , VI ) , Ryan Kelly 's The Tempest ( SATB , a setting of the play 's Scene I ) , Jaakko <unk> 's Full Fathom Five and A Scurvy Tune ( SATB , from Four Shakespeare Songs and More Shakespeare Songs ) , Frank Martin 's Songs of Ariel ( SATB ) , Ralph Vaughan Williams ' Full Fathom Five and The Cloud @-@ <unk> 'd Towers ( SATB , from Three Shakespeare Songs ) , and David Willcocks ' Full Fathom Five ( SSA ) . 
 Orchestral works for concert presentation include Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky 's fantasy The Tempest ( 1873 ) , Fibich 's symphonic poem <unk> ( 1880 ) , John Knowles Paine 's symphonic poem The Tempest ( 1876 ) , Benjamin Dale 's overture ( 1902 ) , Arthur Honegger 's orchestral prelude ( 1923 ) , and Egon Wellesz 's <unk> <unk> ( five works 1934 – 36 ) . 
 Ballet sequences have been used in many performances of the play since Restoration times . A one @-@ act ballet of The Tempest by choreographer Alexei Ratmansky was premiered by American Ballet Theatre set to the incidental music of Jean Sibelius on October 30 , 2013 in New York City . 
 Ludwig van Beethoven 's 1802 Piano Sonata No. 17 in D minor , Op. 31 , No. 2 , was given the subtitle " The Tempest " some time after Beethoven 's death because , when asked about the meaning of the sonata , Beethoven was alleged to have said " Read The Tempest " . But this story comes from his associate Anton Schindler , who is often not trustworthy . 
 Stage musicals derived from The Tempest have been produced . A production called The Tempest : A Musical was produced at the Cherry Lane Theatre in New York City in December 2006 , with a concept credited to Thomas Meehan and a script by Daniel <unk> ( who also wrote the songs ) and Ryan Knowles . <unk> had previously been connected with another musical , entitled Tempest Toss ’ d . In September 2013 , The Public Theater produced a new large @-@ scale stage musical at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park , directed by Lear <unk> with a cast of more than 200 . 
 = = = Literature and art = = = 
 Percy Bysshe Shelley was one of the earliest poets to be influenced by The Tempest . His " With a Guitar , To Jane " identifies Ariel with the poet and his songs with poetry . The poem uses simple diction to convey Ariel 's closeness to nature and " imitates the straightforward beauty of Shakespeare 's original songs " . Following the publication of Darwin 's ideas on evolution , writers began to question mankind 's place in the world and its relationship with God . One writer who explored these ideas was Robert Browning , whose poem " Caliban upon <unk> " ( 1864 ) sets Shakespeare 's character pondering theological and philosophical questions . The French philosopher Ernest Renan wrote a closet drama , Caliban : Suite de La Tempête ( Caliban : Sequel to The Tempest ) , in 1878 . This features a female Ariel who follows Prospero back to Milan , and a Caliban who leads a coup against Prospero , after the success of which he actively imitates his former master 's virtues . W. H. Auden 's " long poem " The Sea and the Mirror takes the form of a reflection by each of the supporting characters of The Tempest on their experiences . The poem takes a Freudian viewpoint , seeing Caliban ( whose lengthy contribution is a prose poem ) as Prospero 's libido . 
 In 1968 Franco @-@ Caribbean writer Aimé Césaire published Une Tempête , a radical adaptation of the play based on its colonial and postcolonial interpretations , in which Caliban is a black rebel and Ariel is mixed @-@ race . The figure of Caliban influenced numerous works of African literature in the 1970s , including pieces by <unk> Lo <unk> in Uganda , Lemuel Johnson in Sierra Leone , Ngũgĩ wa Thiong 'o in Kenya , and David Wallace of Zambia 's Do You Love Me , Master ? . A similar phenomenon occurred in late 20th @-@ century Canada , where several writers produced works inspired by Miranda , including The <unk> by Margaret Laurence , Prospero 's Daughter by Constance Beresford @-@ Howe and The Measure of Miranda by Sarah Murphy . Other writers have feminised Ariel ( as in Marina Warner 's novel Indigo ) or Caliban ( as in Suniti Namjoshi 's sequence of poems <unk> of Caliban ) . 
 From the mid @-@ 18th century , Shakespeare 's plays , including The Tempest , began to appear as the subject of paintings . In around 1735 , William Hogarth produced his painting A Scene from The Tempest : " a baroque , sentimental fantasy costumed in the style of Van Dyck and Rembrandt " . The painting is based upon Shakespeare 's text , containing no representation of the stage , nor of the ( Davenant @-@ Dryden centred ) stage tradition of the time . Henry Fuseli , in a painting commissioned for the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery ( 1789 ) modelled his Prospero on Leonardo da Vinci . These two 18th @-@ century depictions of the play indicate that Prospero was regarded as its moral centre : viewers of Hogarth 's and Fuseli 's paintings would have accepted Prospero 's wisdom and authority . John Everett Millais 's Ferdinand Lured by Ariel ( 1851 ) is among the Pre @-@ Raphaelite paintings based on the play . In the late 19th century , artists tended to depict Caliban as a Darwinian " missing @-@ link " , with fish @-@ like or ape @-@ like features , as evidenced in Noel Paton 's Caliban . 
 Charles Knight produced the Pictorial Edition of the Works of Shakespeare in eight volumes ( 1838 – 43 ) . The work attempted to translate the contents of the plays into pictorial form . This extended not just to the action , but also to images and metaphors : Gonzalo 's line about " mountaineers <unk> like bulls " is illustrated with a picture of a Swiss peasant with a goitre . In 1908 , Edmund Dulac produced an edition of Shakespeare 's Comedy of The Tempest with a scholarly plot summary and commentary by Arthur Quiller @-@ Couch , lavishly bound and illustrated with 40 watercolour illustrations . The illustrations highlight the fairy @-@ tale quality of the play , avoiding its dark side . Of the 40 , only 12 are direct depictions of the action of the play : the others are based on action before the play begins , or on images such as " full fathom five thy father lies " or " sounds and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not " . 
 Fantasy writer Neil Gaiman based a story on the play in one issue of his comics series The Sandman . The comic stands as a sequel to the earlier Midsummer Night 's Dream issue . This issue follows Shakespeare over a period of several months as he writes the play , which is named as his last solo project , as the final part of his bargain with the Dream King to write two plays celebrating dreams . The story draws many parallels between the characters and events in the play and Shakespeare 's life and family relationships at the time . It is hinted that he based Miranda on his daughter Judith Shakespeare and Caliban on her suitor Thomas Quiney . 
 In the comic Locke & Key , by writer Joe Hill and co @-@ creator and artist Gabriel Rodriguez , the main characters father , Rendell Locke and his groups of friends in the school , stage a production of Shakespeare 's The Tempest in 1988 , in which they used the Keys during the play 's performance to create a grand spectacle . 
 Ilium and its sequel Olympos by Dan Simmons are heavily influenced by The Tempest , a portion of the plot devoted to a re @-@ imagining of The Tempest 's characters in a distant sci @-@ fi future . 
 As part of Random House 's Hogarth Shakespeare series of contemporary reimaginings of Shakespeare plays by contemporary writers , Margaret Atwood 's 2016 novel Hag @-@ Seed is based on The Tempest . 
 = = = Screen = = = 
 The Tempest first appeared on the screen in 1905 . Charles Urban filmed the opening storm sequence of Herbert Beerbohm Tree 's version at Her Majesty 's Theatre for a 2 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ minute flicker , whose individual frames were hand @-@ tinted , long before the invention of colour film . In 1908 , Percy Stowe directed a Tempest running a little over ten minutes , which is now a part of the British Film Institute 's compilation Silent Shakespeare . Much of its action takes place on Prospero 's island before the storm which opens Shakespeare 's play . At least two other silent versions , one from 1911 by Edwin Thanhouser , are known to have existed , but have been lost . The plot was adapted for the Western Yellow Sky , directed by William A. Wellman , in 1946 . 
 The 1956 science fiction film Forbidden Planet set the story on a planet in space , Altair IV , instead of an island . Professor Morbius ( Walter Pidgeon ) and his daughter <unk> ( Anne Francis ) are the Prospero and Miranda figures ( both Prospero and Morbius having harnessed the mighty forces that inhabit their new homes ) . Ariel is represented by the helpful Robbie the Robot , while Sycorax is replaced with the powerful race of the Krell . Caliban is represented by the dangerous and invisible " monster from the id " , a projection of Morbius ' psyche born from the Krell technology instead of Sycorax 's womb . 
 In the opinion of Douglas Brode , there has only been one screen " performance " of The Tempest since the silent era , he describes all other versions as " variations " . That one performance is the Hallmark Hall of Fame version from 1960 , directed by George Schaefer , and starring Maurice Evans as Prospero , Richard Burton as Caliban , Lee Remick as Miranda and Roddy McDowall as Ariel . It cut the play to slightly less than ninety minutes . Critic Virginia Vaughan praised it as " light as a soufflé , but ... substantial enough for the main course . " 
 In 1979 , animator George Dunning , director of Yellow Submarine , planned an animated version of The Tempest ; but died while working on it . 
 Also in 1979 , Derek Jarman produced a homoerotic Tempest that used Shakespeare 's language , but was most notable for its deviations from Shakespeare . One scene shows a corpulent and naked Sycorax ( Claire Davenport ) breastfeeding her adult son Caliban ( Jack Birkett ) . The film reaches its climax with Elisabeth Welch belting out Stormy Weather . The central performances were Toyah Willcox ' Miranda and Heathcote Williams ' Prospero , a " dark brooding figure who takes pleasure in exploiting both his servants " . 
 Several other television versions of the play have been broadcast ; among the most notable is the 1980 BBC Shakespeare production , virtually complete , starring Michael Hordern as Prospero . 
 Paul Mazursky 's 1982 modern @-@ language adaptation of The Tempest , with Philip Dimitrius ( Prospero ) as a disillusioned New York architect who retreats to a lonely Greek island with his daughter Miranda after learning of his wife Antonia 's infidelity with Alonzo , dealt frankly with the sexual tensions of the characters ' isolated existence . The Caliban character , the goatherd Kalibanos , asks Philip which of them is going to have sex with Miranda . John Cassavetes played Philip , Raul Julia Kalibanos , Gena Rowlands Antonia and Molly Ringwald Miranda . Susan Sarandon plays the Ariel character , Philip 's frequently bored girlfriend Aretha . The film has been criticised as " overlong and rambling " , but also praised for its good humour , especially in a sequence in which Kalibanos ' and his goats dance to Kander and Ebb 's New York , New York . 
 John Gielgud has written that playing Prospero in a film of The Tempest was his life 's ambition . Over the years , he approached Alain Resnais , Ingmar Bergman , Akira Kurosawa , and Orson Welles to direct . Eventually , the project was taken on by Peter Greenaway , who directed Prospero 's Books ( 1991 ) featuring " an 87 @-@ year @-@ old John Gielgud and an impressive amount of nudity " . Prospero is reimagined as the author of The Tempest , speaking the lines of the other characters , as well as his own . Although the film was acknowledged as innovative in its use of <unk> <unk> to create visual tableaux , resulting in " unprecedented visual complexity " , critical responses to the film were frequently negative : John Simon called it " contemptible and pretentious " . 
 The Swedish @-@ made animated film from 1989 called " <unk> till <unk> " ( directed by Per <unk> ) is an adaptation of the Shakespeare play , focusing on <unk> values . " <unk> till <unk> " was critically acclaimed for its stunning visuals drawn by <unk> and its at times quite dark and nightmare @-@ like sequences , even though the film was originally marketed for children . 
 Closer to the spirit of Shakespeare 's original , in the view of critics such as Brode , is Leon Garfield 's abridgement of the play for S4C 's 1992 Shakespeare : The Animated Tales series . The 29 @-@ minute production , directed by Stanislav Sokolov and featuring Timothy West as the voice of Prospero , used stop @-@ motion puppets to capture the fairy @-@ tale quality of the play . Disney 's animated feature Pocahontas has been described as a " politically corrected " Tempest . Another " offbeat variation " ( in Brode 's words ) was produced for NBC in 1998 : Jack Bender 's The Tempest featured Peter Fonda as Gideon Prosper , a Southern slave @-@ owner forced off his plantation by his brother shortly before the Civil War . A magician who has learned his art from one of his slaves , Prosper uses his magic to protect his teenage daughter and to assist the Union Army . 
 The PBS series Wishbone featured a television adaptation of " The Tempest " in its episode " <unk> " with Wishbone as Ariel . 
 In Julie Taymor 's 2010 film version of The Tempest , Prospero is a woman named Prospera , played by Helen Mirren . 
 South London was the setting for Rob Curry and Anthony Fletcher 's 2012 mockumentary version of " The Tempest " , which used the themes arising from Shakespeare 's connection with the discovery of the New World to explore contemporary multicultural Britain – particularly with regard to the London riots of 2011 . 
 The Stratford Shakespeare Festival of Canada presented a version in 2010 in which Christopher Plummer played Prospero . It was subsequently filmed in hi @-@ def and is now available on DVD . 
 The anime and manga series Blast of Tempest was heavily influenced by The Tempest and Hamlet . Where several dialogues and plot elements pays homage to the two works of Shakespeare , which are two stories of retribution , albeit with completely opposing outcome . 
 = Uniforms of the Confederate States military forces = 
 The Uniforms of the Confederate States military forces were the uniforms used by the Confederate Army and Navy during the American Civil War , from 1861 to 1865 . The uniform initially varied greatly due to a variety of reasons , such as location , limitations on the supply of cloth and other materials , State regulations that were different from the standard regulations , and the cost of materials during the war . 
 Texas units , for example , had access to massive stocks of Federal blue uniforms , which were acquired after Confederate forces captured a Federal supply depot in San Antonio in 1861 . These were worn as late as 1863 . 
 Early on , servicemen sometimes wore combinations of uniform pieces , making do with what they could get from captured Union soldiers , or from Union and Confederate dead , or just wear civilian clothing . 
 There are some controversies about some of the exact details of a few of the uniforms , since some of the records were lost or destroyed after the Civil War ended . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The original Confederate uniforms from all branches of the military closely followed the lines of the Union ’ s uniforms . This was until June 6 , 1861 , when the Confederate Council issued General Order 9 , the new regulations for the Confederate Infantry , Cavalry and Artillery . 
 The new uniforms were designed by Nicola Marschall , a German @-@ American artist who also designed the original Confederate flag . He was heavily influenced by the mid @-@ 1800s uniforms of the Austrian and French Armies . 
 Although the regular Confederate military had a paper strength of 6 @,@ 000 personnel , the first 100 @,@ 000 volunteers from all over the South participated in a variety of dress . Many were from state militia outfits , which had their own state @-@ issued uniforms . In the early battles , some Confederate units that wore dark blue uniforms were often mistaken on the field of battle for the enemy . Conversely , many Union units that were originally militia units went to war wearing gray . 
 It was not until the depot system was established in early 1862 by the Confederate Quartermaster in Richmond , Virginia , that uniforms were mass @-@ produced and supplied to troops . Until that time , the " commutation system " was in place ; this allowed soldiers to have their own uniforms made to the new CSA regulations and to be reimbursed by the CS government . The allowance for uniforms was $ 21 per six months . 
 Officers always had to buy their own uniforms until March 6 , 1864 , when General Order 28 was released ; this allowed Confederate officers to purchase uniforms from the same sources as the troops , and at cost price . 
 Following the Richmond Depot , other depots started up throughout the South to supply their respective regional forces . Major depots were in Columbus , Athens and Atlanta , Georgia for the Army of Tennessee and Houston , Texas and Shreveport , Louisiana for the Trans @-@ Mississippi forces . The use of the depot system meant that army @-@ wide uniformity was impossible , as different depots had unique uniforms ( Columbus Depot Jackets for instance , had breast pockets , whilst Richmond Depot Jackets did not ) . This resulted in a varied set of uniforms worn by different Confederate units . 
 As the war progressed , the image began to shift from the " ragged rebel " look to a well @-@ uniformed Army in the Eastern and Western theaters . In the last 12 months of fighting , these Confederate forces were well @-@ uniformed , the best they had ever appeared in terms of consistency , wearing clothing made of imported blue @-@ gray cloth , either manufactured locally or bought ready @-@ made under contract from British manufacturers , such as Peter Tait of Limerick , Ireland who became a major supplier of uniforms for the Confederacy . 
 Unfortunately , in the department of the Trans @-@ Mississippi , problems with the distribution of the plentiful uniforms made in Houston and Shreveport meant that the South Western forces went without proper uniforms for some part of the war . 
 Confederate headgear was to be the chasseur cap , or " kepi " , a French military cap . Often broad felt or straw hats or even slouch hats were worn instead . The Federal Army style forage cap was also popular . General Stonewall Jackson was famous for wearing the forage cap . Confederate Cavalry troops often wore Hardee hats , much like the Union Cavalry , which was a representative of the additional " flair " associated with the Cavalry troops . Two examples of CSA Cavalry officer 's famous for wearing these hats are Colonel John S. Mosby and General J.E.B. Stuart . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The use of wool in the uniform meant that the uniforms were not suited to the warm climates that were common in the South . This contributed to many Confederate soldiers suffering from <unk> on long marches . However , one understanding of the heavy woolen garments is that after the marching during the day time , when the soldiers would rest at night and cool themselves down , the thermal @-@ shock could render some men unable to function the next day . As such , the woolen garments would protect the soldiers from this , and keep them able to keep marching the next day to fulfill their duties . This was also the case with the better equipped U.S. Army . Many Confederate soldiers started the war with frock coats . However , cloth shortages and wartime wear insured that , by 1863 , waist @-@ length cadet gray or butternut shell jackets were generally worn by Confederates in the Eastern and Western Theater . Examples of frock coats being worn by enlisted men can be seen in photographs taken after the battles of Gettysburg , ( 1863 ) , and Spotsylvania , ( 1864 ) . 
 Gray was not chosen for camouflage , however , it did , at times , provide enough of a mask along tree lines during battle ; keeping the line of Infantry hidden long enough to strike effectively . At the time of the American Civil War , the usefulness of camouflage was not generally recognized . Gray was chosen for Confederate uniforms because gray dye could be made relatively cheaply and it was the standard uniform color of the various State Militias . The gray uniforms worn by early State volunteers was normally a shade of Cadet gray , which is not suitable for combat wear , as it gives away the position of the individual easily from its bright blue @-@ gray tones , and for this reason it was preserved by some men for dress @-@ parade functions . The gray mentioned is dull toned , often varying in color depending on the region and time during the conflict , resulting in a uniform that could blend in with the tree lines , or hide the men in the field wearing them . 
 Generally , the uniform jacket of the Confederate soldier was single breasted , made of gray or brown fabric , with a six to nine button front . The design of the garment featured several variations : a four to six piece body , and one or two piece sleeves , usually with lining , often of a cotton material . The fabric used in these jackets , ranged from the finer <unk> and <unk> used early in the war , to the cotton / wool blends of jeans , <unk> , and <unk> , to name several examples . The exact color of the fabric also ranged from the prewar bright cadet gray , similar to the fabric used by Virginia Military Institute , or West Point U.S. Military Academy dress uniforms , to the sumac and logwood dyed fabrics , that would eventually fade to the ragged butternut appearance . Epaulettes may have been used in the construction of the jacket , as was the case for the Richmond clothing bureau designed jackets , commonly called today , the Richmond Depot types I , II , and III . Belt loops were also in intermittent use , such as the Richmond and the Charleston clothing depots . Trimming on the jackets range from piped or taped collars , cuffs , and front lapel edges , to full facings on the collar and cuffs , commonly in light blue , dark blue , red , or black . Due to the difficulty in obtaining yellow dye ingredients as the war progressed , yellow was infrequently used by the Cavalry Corps throughout the conflict . 
 = = Confederate States Army uniforms = = 
 = = = General officers = = = 
 = = = = Rank insignias = = = = 
 = = = = Collar insignias and buttons = = = = 
 On the upright collar of full generals , lieutenant generals , major generals , and brigadier generals three stars were stitched within a wreath , all embroidered in gold coloring . The center star was slightly larger than the other stars . It was not possible to know which grade of general an officer was by his collar insignia . However , major generals and lieutenant generals wore two rows of nine buttons in groups of three down the front of the overcoat , and brigadier generals wore two rows of eight buttons in groups of two . However , Confederate Army Regulations had no distinction between the General Officer grades , and had only the insignia for Brigadier Generals recognized . At least three Generals officers did not wear the prescribed uniform : Robert E. Lee who wore the uniform of a Colonel , refusing to wear a generals insignia until the Confederate victory ; Joseph L. Hogg , who died of a fever ; and Benjamin McCulloch . 
 = = = Field and company officers = = = 
 = = = = Rank insignias = = = = 
 = = = = = Collar insignias = = = = = 
 Colonels wore three gold stars of the same size on their collar ; the same as generals , but without the wreath . While lieutenant colonels wore two stars on their collars , majors wore one star , which was placed in the middle of the collar . Captains had three gold horizontal bars , first lieutenants wore two bars , and second lieutenants wore one bar . However , the Confederate Congress often created new commissions , and did not always standardize rank insignia immediately . 
 = = = = Sleeve insignias , branch of service colors = = = = 
 Confederate Army officers indicated their military affiliation with different colored facing on their coats or jackets . The colors were red for artillery , yellow for cavalry , light blue for infantry , and black for medical . A very distinctive feature of the Confederate officers uniforms was the gold braid Austrian knots on their sleeves . More elaborate braiding indicated higher rank and some knots almost reached the shoulder . However , a general order , issued in 1862 , called for the Austrian knots not to be worn in the field , as this made officers conspicuous to enemy combatants . 
 = = = = Buttons = = = = 
 Field Grade officers , and Company Grade officers commonly wore two rows of seven equally spaced buttons each , despite regulations calling for the top two buttons to be spaced at four inches apart , coming closer together at the waist at 3 inches in distance . 
 = = = = Trousers = = = = 
 The Confederate trousers were very similar to those of the Union forces . Early on , the trousers were sky blue in color . They were most often made of wool , and were easily worn during long marches . If trousers did not arrive for the troops the soldiers would have to use their own pants to wear . Regimental and company officers wore the colors of their respective branch on the outer seam of their pants on one and one @-@ quarter inch stripes . Generals wore two and five @-@ eighths inch stripes on each pant leg . While the quartermasters , commissary , and engineer officers wore a single magenta , one and one @-@ quarter inch outer @-@ seam stripe . Non @-@ commissioned officers were to wear on their outer seams a one and one @-@ quarter inch cotton stripe or braid of colors appropriate to their army branch . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The " French " pattern kepi was the standard issue headgear to all army personnel , with a dark blue band , sides & crown for generals , staff officers , and engineers . <unk> worn by commissioned officers and enlisted personnel had two patterns , specified by regulations in 1861 and 1862 , respectively . The first pattern was a colored band , denoting the branch of service , with the crown and sides to be made of Cadet Gray cloth . The second pattern had a dark blue band for all branches , with the crown and sides colored according to the branch of service . The branch of service colors were as follows , Red for artillery , yellow for cavalry , and light or sky blue for infantry . 
 = = = Army enlisted men = = = 
 = = = = Rank insignias = = = = 
 = = = = = <unk> = = = = = 
 In the Confederate Army , chevrons were worn by sergeants ( three on each sleeve ) and corporals ( two on each sleeve ) 
 = = = = = Sword and sash = = = = = 
 When in full dress and sometimes also in battle , all ranks above Corporal ( i.e. all Sergeants ) in non @-@ mounted service branches carried the <unk> NCO Sword ( when available ) suspending on a leather belt ( as did their counterparts in the Union Army , except Hospital Stewards who carried a special Sword Model ) . Additionally all CSA Sergeant ranks were permitted worsted waist sashes : red for Artillery and Infantry ( and all others Service branches ) , but yellow for Cavalry . ( For their counterparts in the Union Army crimson worsted waist sashes for all service branches were only allowed to NCOs above Sergeant ( i.e. First Sergeant , Ordnance Sergeant , Hospital Steward , Sergeant Major etc . ) ) 
 = = = = Trousers = = = = 
 Army trousers were of similar pattern to the U.S. Army trousers , or civilian designs , depending on the area in which they were made . They were typically a shade of gray or brown , with a variety of medium blues also produced . The individual could also have them trimmed to reflect his militia un it , his Non @-@ commissioned officer status , or as a personal flare , to the ubiquitous service pants . Noncommissioned officers were to wear on their outer seams a one and one @-@ quarter inch cotton stripe or braid of colors appropriate to their army branch . 
 = = = = Belt = = = = 
 There were numerous types of belts produced for the Confederate Military during the Civil War . There were literally dozens of types of buckles used and produced by or for the Confederacy . The buckles ranged from single plates with hooks , to two piece interlocking buckles , to simple roller buckles and countless other variations . Many buckles use plates that bore the state seal or motto of their home states . The vast majority used simple roller buckle plates of the type found on a common dog collar . As the War progressed , more and more men used captured US belt plates , often wearing them upside down . 
 = = = Infantry uniforms = = = 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 The Confederate Infantry , the largest Corps of the Army , had a large variety of uniforms , and the greater amount of records . The initial Confederate Army Uniform consisted of a Kepi , double @-@ breasted tunic , trousers , and Jefferson <unk> / <unk> . The Kepi was not specified until the 1862 Regulations , as a sky @-@ blue kepi , reflecting the Infantry Corps , with a dark blue band , and leather visor . The <unk> was to be of Cadet gray , with two rows of yellow @-@ metal ( brass or gold ) buttons , ' solid ' cuff and collar facings in sky @-@ blue , and lined with a lighter gray fabric . The coat was of the same pattern specified as regulation for the field and company officers , as well as for the artillery and cavalry enlisted men . 
 These designs for the uniform , however , did not prevail , as the complexity of the uniform proved to be difficult for mass @-@ production . The simpler uniform turned out to be the regulations dictated by Judah Benjamin . He stated that the uniform should be that of : a gray jacket ; a blue , gray , or brown pair of trousers ; any slouch hat or cap @-@ type of head cover ; and any kind of foot @-@ wear to be worn for Confederate service in mid @-@ 1861 . His regulations , however , were overruled by the subsequent set of regulations of June 1861 , stating the Franco @-@ Austrian styled uniform to be issued and purchased to all Corps and by all officers , respectively . 
 The guidelines set by Judah Benjamin in 1861 soon became the choice of the Clothing Depots across the south as the war went into its second year . This easier to produce jacket , with the loosened hat and trouser regulations , made it easier to clothe Confederate Infantrymen . The typical uniform by the end of 1861 and beginning of 1862 was a slouch hat or kepi , a shell @-@ jacket , and a pair of sky @-@ blue or gray cloth trousers , with <unk> . 
 = = = = Jackets and coats = = = = 
 The jacket prescribed for Infantry use was of the same design for all service men . The design itself depended entirely on the region , time , and the source of fabrics . The Eastern Theater uniform jacket was the Richmond Depot design , with three primary types issued throughout the war . The jacket varied from a cadet gray , piped and trimmed jacket , looking much like a pre @-@ war militia jacket , to the jeans @-@ cloth jacket that was worn out in six months . The materials and uniforms imported from England were also issued to the troops through this facility . The Western and Deep Southern facilities manufactured similar uniforms , being jeans @-@ cloth , dyed with vegetable based grays , that would fade to brown or tan . The typical jackets issued had 5 @-@ 7 button fronts , with collar and cuff trim that varied from era , region and source , and an outside pocket on occasion . 
 The previous styles were the militia uniforms . These consisted of everything from the more sharp @-@ looking jackets and coats , which resembled the French or Northern Infantry uniforms , to the no @-@ flares " Battle @-@ Shirt " , meant for drilling and battles only . The uniform for these militia units varied by each company through a single county or parish , let alone the country itself . The militia uniforms were a menagerie of colors , from Cadet gray , dark blue , and hunter green , to Reds , buffs and gold tones . The other variety of CS Army uniform jackets and coats is the Zouave . This jacket was meant to be loose @-@ fitting and reflect the French @-@ African Zouave units . There were several units to consist of this uniform , including the " Richmond Zouaves " , in the 44th Virginia Infantry Regiment , the " Wheat 's Tigers " , of the 1st Louisiana Special Battalion , and " <unk> 's Zouaves " , of Louisiana . 
 = = = = Buttons = = = = 
 The buttons worn on the Infantryman 's clothing is not as minor a detail as it would sound . The average infantryman may have had his uniform made for him in Richmond , Virginia , however , the man enlisted in Georgia , and is now marching through the former state . In reflection to his loyalties to home , this man , for example , could have adorned his uniform with Georgia State buttons . This would indicate to his fellow soldiers his allegiance to both his state and his military unit . This was common practice during the war for both sides in the conflict . 
 The regulation infantry buttons for enlisted men described the button as to have a number on the front to reflect the unit designation ; for example , a soldier in the 1st Confederate Infantry Regiment would have a " 1 " on the buttons of his coat . These buttons are rare or non @-@ existent . However , the officer 's regulation button , consisting of the " block I " button , for Infantry , the A for Artillery , etc . ; was very common amongst soldiers , and replaced the efforts to produce the different , numbered buttons for each regiment in service . 
 As before , the uniform buttons could also reflect the state loyalties of an individual . All of the Confederate States made an effort to supply their respective State buttons to their troops . The states that did not join the Confederacy , but had men within its ranks , such as Maryland and Missouri , also made buttons , that have turned up on surviving uniforms . 
 The confederacy also implemented ready @-@ made supplies of button , consisting of the U.S. Government stockpiles throughout the war . These consisted of the Enlisted men 's coat button , ( an eagle with the shield of the U.S. , with the olive branch and arrows held in its talons , ) and the officer 's buttons , ( the same as before , but the shield is replaced by a blank shield , with the respective letter for each branch of service , I for infantry , A for artillery , C for cavalry , and D for dragoons ) . 
 = = = = Hats and kepis = = = = 
 The headgear of the typical Confederate Infantryman was the slouch hat , or the military Kepi . The Kepi is a short fatigue and dress cap that was easy to manufacture for the Army during the war . This type of hat had its drawbacks , however . It provided little weather protection , and was worn out easily after a few months of hard wear . The Infantryman design cap was sky @-@ blue with a dark blue band , but this was rarely seen outside of officer private @-@ purchase caps . More typical would be the plain gray / brown cap , with or without the branch of service trim . There are examples of deep @-@ south made caps that were trimmed in red cotton and wool , and issued to Infantry units , showing that any available clothing was issued to the troops as the war progressed . 
 The slouch hat was the preferred choice of many soldiers , including officers . The hat was normally a floppy , wide brimmed , woolen body head @-@ cover , meant to protect the individual from the sun , and inclement weather . It was normally a civilian hat , of brown , gray , or black wool . This simple hat saw widespread use throughout the Confederate Armies , and even with U.S. Army personnel . Occasionally , the hat was adorned with insignia of the wearer 's preference , and may have been pinned up for the drill in the use of the regular weapon of the time , the Rifled @-@ musket . 
 = = = Cavalry uniforms = = = 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 The first of the Cavalry uniforms were made by the cavalrymen themselves . By 1862 , the Confederate regulations ordered the uniform to become organized , being cadet gray and lined with a thin layer around the sleeve . The pant legs were light blue with a yellow strip rising from the bottom of the leg to the top . Non @-@ commissioned officers of the cavalry wore either regular clothes from home or a variety of different types of <unk> yellow was the prescribed branch of service color , but surviving uniforms show beyond a doubt that the vast majority of cavalrymen who used any branch of service color , used buff as yellow cloth was virtually non existent in the Confederacy . 
 = = = = Buttons = = = = 
 According to the June 1861 regulations , and later the 1862 and 1863 regulations , enlisted men were to wear a frock coat with the same button pattern as the Company and Field Grade officers . 
 = = = = Hats = = = = 
 A cap copying the French Kepi was the prescribed headgear for all three branches of the land service , adorned with the various branch of service colors , but Confederates preferred the slouch hat and surviving photographs show that as many or more men wore some type of slouch hat than wore the prescribed cap , especially as the War progressed . 
 The <unk> book says , " Although in some units hats seem dominate , the issuance of caps was widespread . For example , requisitions for the 19th Alabama Infantry throughout 1863 and early 1864 show a decided preference for hats , whereas those for the 17th Mississippi Infantry for the same period record only caps being received . One Confederate clothing facility in Charleston , South Carolina , was devoted entirely to the manufacture of caps . These were cut out by government employees at the depot and sent to 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 local " persons of a needy class " for assembly . " 
 = = = Artillery uniforms = = = 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 The first of the Artillery uniforms were a variety of handmade and personally customized uniforms . By 1862 , the Confederate uniforms became organized . They became cadet gray and were to be lined with a layer of red around the sleeve . The pant legs were light blue . Even after the uniforms were organized many of the artillerymen wore regular clothes due to the heat and discomfort caused by the regular uniforms . 
 = = = = Buttons = = = = 
 In the Confederate Artillery , a normal junior officer had two rows of seven evenly spaced buttons , grouped into pairs , while a senior officer could have as many as eight buttons in two rows . 
 = = = = Hats = = = = 
 The kepi was also standard issue to the artillerymen , they were made red to match that of the rest of their uniforms . During the summer months they were also allowed to wear straw hats because of the heat . 
 = = Confederate States Navy uniforms = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The first of the Navy uniforms were made in dark blue , but with the Southern style of rank insignia for the officers . The 1862 Confederate regulations ordered the uniform to be steel gray and lined with a dark black silk serge . They were also made in medium gray and cadet gray . They were made of wool , and these uniforms were not fit for the heat of the lower decks of a ship . Non @-@ commissioned officers wore a variety of uniforms , or even regular clothing . 
 = = = Shoulder straps = = = 
 According to the dress code of the Confederate Navy , shoulder straps were to be worn differently by each rank . 
 Admirals wore a shoulder strap of sky @-@ blue cloth , edged with black , that was four inches long and one inch and three @-@ eighths wide embroidered with gold one @-@ quarter of an inch in width . They had five stars spaced equally , the two on the ends six @-@ tenths of an inch in diameter , and the three intermediate stars six @-@ eighths of an inch in diameter . 
 Flag officers wore a shoulder strap of sky @-@ blue cloth , edged with black , that was four inches long and one inch and three @-@ eighths wide embroidered with gold one @-@ quarter of an inch in width . They had four stars spaced equally , the two on the ends six @-@ tenths of an inch in diameter , and the two intermediate stars six @-@ eighths of an inch in diameter . 
 captains wore the same shoulder straps as the flag officers , but with three equally spaced stars , each six @-@ tenths of an inch in diameter . 
 Commanders also had the same shoulder straps , but with only two stars . 
 Lieutenants had the same shoulder straps , with a single , central , star . 
 The shoulder straps worn by masters had the same design , but without any stars . 
 Passed midshipmen wore a strip of gold lace four inches in length and a half an inch wide . 
 For a midshipman , no shoulder straps were to be worn . 
 = = = Caps = = = 
 Confederate Naval Caps were made of steel gray cloth . They were not to be less than three inches and a half , nor more than four inches in height . They were also not to be more than ten , or less than nine inches and a half , at the top , and had a patent leather visor , to be worn by all officers in their service dress . 
 For a flag officer , the cap had an anchor in an open wreath of oak leaves , with four stars above the anchor . They were to be embroidered in gold as per pattern . 
 For a captain , the same as a flag officer 's , except that there were only three stars above the anchor , and the gold band was one and one @-@ half inches wide . 
 For a commander it was to be the same as for a captain , except that there were only but two stars . 
 For a lieutenant , the same as that of a captain , except there was only one star . 
 For a master , the same as for a captain , except that there was no star . 
 For a passed midshipman , an anchor without a wreath . 
 For a midshipman , no caps were to be worn . 
 = = Confederate States Marine Corps uniforms = = 
 The uniform used by the Confederate States Marine Corps resembled that prescribed for the Confederate Army . However , there is controversy about some of the exact details of the uniform , since the CSMC was not as large , and many of its records were destroyed . In 1865 , right after the war 's end , Lloyd J. Beall , commander of the CSMC , had a fire at his home which destroyed most of the CSMC 's records . It is clear , however , that the Marines were often equipped out of the stores of whichever garrison was nearest their location . One description has the Marines dressed in frock coats of a particular ( and undetermined ) shade of gray , and dark blue or black trousers . It appears that Confederate Marines wore forage caps although it is unclear if there was any ornamentation on the cover . Much of the gear worn by the CSMC was imported from Russia , and from Great Britain and its empire , mainly Canada . This created a fairly unusual look . 
 = Nauru reed warbler = 
 The Nauru reed warbler ( Nauruan : <unk> ) , Acrocephalus <unk> , is a passerine bird endemic to the island of Nauru in the Pacific Ocean . It is one of only two native breeding land @-@ birds on Nauru , the other being the Micronesian pigeon , and it is the only passerine found on the island . It is related to other Micronesian reed warblers , all of which evolved from one of several radiations of the genus across the Pacific . Related warblers on nearby islands include the Carolinian reed warbler , with which the Nauru species was initially confused , and the nightingale reed warbler , which was formerly sometimes considered the same species . 
 A medium @-@ sized warbler , the Nauru reed warbler has dark brown upperparts , cream underparts and a long , thin beak . It makes a low , cup @-@ shaped nest into which it lays two or three white eggs , and it feeds on insects . However , details about its behavior and ecology are little known . It is found throughout Nauru , which has changed substantially in recent decades due to phosphate mining . The Nauru reed warbler is potentially threatened by introduced predators and habitat loss , and its small range means that it could be vulnerable to chance occurrences , such as tropical cyclones . Reports of a similar warbler from nearby islands suggest that it might previously have been found elsewhere , but was driven to local extinction by introduced cats . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 Otto Finsch was the first naturalist to visit the island of Nauru , stopping for six hours on 24 July 1880 while travelling from the Marshall Islands to the Solomon Islands . His 1881 report included a warbler he initially identified as the Carolinian reed warbler . By 1883 he considered it to be a new species , Calamoherpe <unk> . The generic name Calamoherpe is now recognised as a synonym of Acrocephalus , leading to the current binomial name . The generic name Acrocephalus derives from the Greek akros , meaning " topmost " , and kephale , meaning " head " . The akros part of the name may have been given through confusion with acutus , and taken to mean " sharp @-@ pointed " , referring to the angular head shape typical of this genus . The synonym Calamoherpe is from the Greek <unk> , meaning " reed " , and herpes , meaning " creeping thing " . Finsch named the species after Ernst <unk> , a German ornithologist and collector and one of Finsch 's travelling companions . Since the original descriptions , little has been written about the species , and details about its ecology and behaviour are poorly known . 
 Though the Nauru reed warbler is generally accepted as a species , some authorities , such as H. E. Wolters in Die <unk> der Erde ( 1980 ) and Howard and Moore in A Complete Checklist of the Birds of the World ( 1991 ) , have considered it a subspecies of Acrocephalus <unk> , the nightingale reed warbler . Recent DNA studies have affirmed its status as a separate species . It is considered monotypic , meaning there are no recognised subspecies . The species is known by the English common names Finsch 's reed @-@ warbler , Nauru warbler , pleasant warbler , the Nauru reed @-@ warbler , and the Nauru reed warbler . In the native Nauruan language , it is known as <unk> . 
 A 2009 phylogenic study of the family <unk> did not include this species , and as recently as 2010 its relation with other members of the genus was unknown . A 2011 analysis of mitochondrial DNA showed that the Nauru reed warbler forms a clade with the Australian reed warbler , the <unk> , the southern <unk> reed warbler and a now @-@ extinct species from Pagan Island in the Marianas . The closest relative of the Nauru reed warbler appears to be the extinct warbler from Pagan . This is currently named as a subspecies of the nightingale reed warbler , A. <unk> <unk> , but that species is polyphyletic , and the Pagan form , which has been proposed as a new species , the Pagan reed warbler , is in a different clade to nightingale reed warblers from other islands . 
 The pattern of colonisation of the Pacific islands and eventually Australia by the Acrocephalus warblers from Asia was complex , with multiple colonisations of even remote archipelagos . Although the Hawaiian islands were colonised about 2 @.@ 3 million years ago , the other islands were reached much more recently , in the mid @-@ Pleistocene ( between 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 4 million years ago ) or even later . The nearest other warblers geographically to Nauru are the Carolinian reed warbler and the nightingale reed warbler . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Nauru reed warbler is a medium @-@ sized and warmly coloured reed warbler , with a relatively light build . The entirety of the upperparts are dark brown , with the rump and uppertail coverts slightly brighter than the tail and mantle . When closed , the wing is the same colour as the mantle , short and rounded . The wing does not reach the start of the tail feathers , which enhances the appearance of a long tail . Close inspection of the wing reveals darker centres to both the greater coverts and tertial feathers . Its face shows little contrast , as the ear coverts , crown , nape , chin and throat are all a similar shade of pale brown . The lores are a dark brown , and there is a pale , creamy supercilium , or " eyebrow " , extending from the beak to the ear coverts , which are a cinnamon @-@ brown , darkening and merging with the nape . The beak is long , thin and straight . 
 The underparts are much lighter , darkening towards the vent and undertail coverts . The chin is a dull cream , merging with the throat , which then browns towards the base . The centre of the breast is a dull brown @-@ yellow , while the sides are a reddish @-@ brown . The upper mandible of the beak is dark grey with pink edges , while the lower mandible is pink , darkening towards to the tip . The legs and feet are dark grey . The bird measures up to 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , with a wingspan of 6 @.@ 7 to 7 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 8 in ) . 
 The species exhibits no sexual dimorphism , and characteristics of the young are unknown . As the only passerine on the island , there is no chance that this species may be confused with any other . The Nauru reed warbler is slightly smaller than the Carolinian reed warbler , which is also lighter in colour , with a more contrasting eyebrow . The nightingale reed warbler is substantially larger , and the Oriental reed warbler has a duller colouration , with whiter underparts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Nauru reed warbler is endemic to the island of Nauru , in the Pacific Ocean . It is one of only two indigenous land birds which breed on the island , the other being the Micronesian pigeon . The warbler can be found throughout the island , thriving in the scrubland in areas previously used for phosphate mining , as well as the remaining patches of forest on the island 's central plateau . It is most common in the remains of forest found on the island 's steep slopes . It is also readily observed in gardens and ruderal areas on the island 's coast ; in 1881 , Finsch described the species as abundant , calling it " as common as the House @-@ Sparrow in England . " Biologist Donald Buden again found it widespread on the island in 2008 . 
 The species is sedentary , meaning that the birds do not naturally leave Nauru . Banaba is the nearest island , and despite being similar to Nauru , it lacks any warblers . However , it is possible that populations of the Nauru reed warbler existed on other islands until comparatively recently . On the Marshall Islands , traditional stories refer to a small bird , known variously as annañ , <unk> and <unk> . This bird was considered the property of chieftains . Though no physical descriptions exist of the species , it has been described as butterfly @-@ sized , pleasant @-@ smelling and as living among rocks on the shores of north @-@ western islands . Ethnographers Krämer and <unk> reported that the bird became extinct or extirpated around 1880 . Based on descriptions of birds seen on Jaluit , Paul Schnee hypothesised that the annañ may have been a Nauru reed warbler . The extinction of the annañ may have been due to hunting by cats , which were introduced to the Marshall Islands by the Russian Otto von Kotzebue in 1817 to hunt rats . They then multiplied before being spread by locals as pets , after which they started to become feral . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Nauru reed warbler nests are cup @-@ shaped and woven from grasses and twigs . They sometimes include <unk> filiformis vine or Casuarina <unk> needles . The nests are bound to upright stems in a way typical of warblers . Buden reported that the warblers nest in trees and shrubs at a height of 2 to 8 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 to 26 @.@ 2 ft ) . The species may also nest on the ground ; the young in ground nests may be more vulnerable to predation by rats . Eggs have variously been reported in December and July , and ornithologist A. Pearson suggested that the species may nest all year round . The clutch size has been reported as two or three eggs . Incubation and fledgling periods are unknown . Pearson reported lower nesting than Buden , recording nests in bushes and undergrowth between 45 and 300 centimetres ( 18 and 118 in ) from the ground , especially in forked branches of hibiscus and lime . Buden reported that the birds were more vocal in December than in March and April . The song has been described as similar to that of a song thrush , common blackbird , or willie wagtail , and it is delivered both day and night . 
 Finsch described the warbler as insectivorous , feeding primarily on dragonflies . Six species of dragonfly have been observed on the island ; <unk> aurora , Anax <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Pantala flavescens , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . Buden did not observe the species feeding on dragonflies , but did see three different feeding habits . Most frequently , the birds were seen moving through trees and shrubs , catching prey on the foliage . Other birds were seen perched close to the floor , darting to the ground , and returning to the perch with prey . In open areas , the birds were observed moving across the ground , " occasionally grasping a presumed prey item " . In coastal areas , they have been observed feeding in coconut trees . Potential predators for the birdlife of Nauru in general include feral cats and dogs , as well as the Polynesian rat and the <unk> rat . Feral cats and wild rats in particular are potential threats to the Nauru reed warbler . 
 = = Status = = 
 The IUCN lists the species as " Vulnerable " , because " its very small range leaves it susceptible to chance events , such as cyclones and the introduction of alien predators . " BirdLife International previously estimated that there were between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 Nauru reed warblers , based on 1993 data , but Buden 's 2006 estimate was 5 @,@ 000 birds of all ages led to a revised figure of 3 @,@ 000 mature individuals . In 2001 , it was observed that the removal of the phosphate deposits on the island meant that the vegetation was decreasing , presenting a potential threat to the species . In 2008 , however , Buden claimed that " habitat degradation and loss of native forest via mining operations has apparently had no major adverse effects on the population . " Nauru reed warblers were observed to be common on the island , and flourishing in the scrubland left by mining . 
 Unlike other birds on the island , the species is not hunted , and is protected under Schedule 1 of Nauru 's Wild Birds Preservation Ordinance 1937 . For conservation purposes , the IUCN recommends regular surveys of the population and the establishment of a monitoring programme through training local people . It also proposed raising conservation awareness by increasing the profile of the bird . 
 = Christine Chapel = 
 Christine Chapel is a fictional character who appears in all three seasons of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Original Series , as well as Star Trek : The Animated Series and the films Star Trek : The Motion Picture and Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . Portrayed by Majel Barrett , she was the ship 's nurse on board the Starfleet starship USS Enterprise . Barrett had previously been cast under her real name as Number One in the first pilot for the series , " The Cage " , due in part to her romantic relationship with the series creator Gene Roddenberry . But following feedback from the Network executives , she was not in the cast for the second pilot . 
 The character made her first appearance in " The Naked Time " following a re @-@ write of the script by Roddenberry . He had been inspired after Barrett read a proposal for the episode " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " and bleached her hair blonde to better fit a role in that episode . The change of color caused Roddenberry to believe that NBC executives might not notice that Barrett had returned against their wishes . The executives immediately recognized Barrett . The character was featured in several episodes covering several broad themes , such as showing her feelings for Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) , and why she joined Starfleet . By the time of The Motion Picture , Chapel was a Doctor and during the events of The Voyage Home , she was stationed at Starfleet Command . 
 Executive producer Robert H. Justman was initially critical of Barrett ’ s performance as Chapel , but recanted this opinion after her appearance as Lwaxana Troi in the Star Trek : The Next Generation . Barrett herself was not fond of the character , and David Gerrold felt that she only served to demonstrate Spock 's emotionless behaviour . Critics saw the character as being a degradation for Barrett compared to her first character . While the position of nurse was seen as a stereotype , the character 's promotion to doctor was praised . Certain episodes featuring her were criticised , such as " Amok Time " where the plot prevented her from having a relationship with Spock , and " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " were it was suggested she was featured to the detriment of other characters . Among fans , she was initially unpopular due to her feelings for Spock , but prior to the 2009 film Star Trek , there was a desire to see her return . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 Prior to working on Star Trek , Gene Roddenberry had been developing a variety of television pilots for Screen Gems . One actress he auditioned saw was Majel Leigh <unk> , later to use the name Majel Barrett . Later when he created the drama series The Lieutenant , he cast her in the episode " In the Highest Tradition " . They quickly became friends , and entered into a romantic relationship although Roddenberry was married at the time . During the development of the first pilot for Star Trek : The Original Series ( " The Cage " ) , Roddenberry wrote the part of Number One ( the ship ’ s second in command ) specifically for Barrett . There was reluctance from the NBC executives to agree to an actress who was almost unknown . Roddenberry did see other actresses for the part , but no one else was considered . 
 Executive producer Herbert Franklin Solow attempted to sell them on the idea that a fresh face would bring believability to the part , but they were aware that she was Roddenberry 's girlfriend . Despite this they agreed to her casting , not wanting to upset Roddenberry at this point in the production . After the pilot was rejected , a second pilot was produced . While it was generally explained that the network disliked a female character as the second @-@ in @-@ command of the Enterprise , Solow had a different opinion of events . He explained that " No one liked her acting ... she was a nice woman , but the reality was , she couldn 't act . " " Where No Man Has Gone Before " successfully took Star Trek to a series order . Barrett had been given the role of voicing the computer on the USS Enterprise , but was demanding that Roddenberry write her into the main cast . 
 After seeing the initial proposal for " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " , Barrett felt that she could play the woman who went into space to find her fiancé . She dyed her hair blonde in an attempt to fit the role . Barrett sought to surprise Roddenberry at his office , but he walked right past her , not recognizing who she was . It was only when he came back out give his secretary some papers that he realized it was Barrett . They had the idea that it might get her past the NBC executives and back onto the show . The character of Christine <unk> was subsequently changed to Christine Chapel by Roddenberry , as a play on the Sistine Chapel . No other actresses were considered for the role . 
 At the same time , story editor John D.F. Black wrote the initial script for " The Naked Time " , also early in the first season . The story featured a virus being transmitted amongst the ship 's crew , which removed their inhibitions . One element of Black 's story featured the addition of a nurse in sickbay , working to Doctor Leonard McCoy . Chapel was written into both these episodes by Roddenberry . The deception didn 't work , with NBC executive Jerry Stanley commenting simply " Well , well – look who 's back " to Solow . Roddenberry saw to it that the character of Christine Chapel would become a recurring one throughout the series , on @-@ par with Uhura . She remained unsatisfied with the role , but appreciated that since NBC had already fired her once , Roddenberry couldn 't expand the role . 
 For Star Trek : The Animated Series , Barrett was initially set to reprise the role of Chapel as well as voicing Uhura . Likewise James Doohan was to voice both his own Scotty as well as Hikaru Sulu . However , following the intervention of Leonard Nimoy , Nichelle Nichols and George Takei were both brought back to voice their own characters . Barrett returned in Star Trek : The Motion Picture as Chapel , which she described as a " very minimal role " , saying that " If no one had called me Commander Chapel , the audience wouldn 't really know that I was there . " Barrett said in the film franchise Chapel got lost along the way , not appearing in the second or third films despite her view that she was a main character in The Original Series . Nimoy brought back the character for Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home , and Barrett was grateful for his decision . The character was subsequently mentioned in the 2009 film Star Trek , which saw the characters from The Original Series re @-@ cast . Chapel was one of the suggested possibilities for Alice Eve to play in the sequel , Star Trek Into Darkness . It was later revealed that she was portraying Carol Marcus . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 In " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " , it is explained that Chapel abandoned a career in bio @-@ research for a position in Starfleet . She had hoped that this would reunite her with her fiancé Dr. Roger Korby ( Michael Strong ) , incommunicado following his expedition to the planet Exo III . Five years after Korby 's disappearance , Chapel was assigned to the USS Enterprise , under the command of Captain James T. Kirk . She served as head nurse , working under Dr. McCoy ( DeForest Kelley ) . 
 While on @-@ board the ship , she began to develop feelings for Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) , admitting as such in " The Naked Time " . Her actions in that episode resulted in the Psi 2000 intoxication unwittingly being further spread among the crew . The ship reached Exo III in " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " . Captain Kirk ( William Shatner ) and Chapel beam down and discover Korby had been exploiting a sophisticated android manufacturing technology on the planet . After Chapel is horrified to find out that Korby had transplanting his personality into an android replica , he kills himself in despair . Roddenberry later co @-@ wrote in The Making of Star Trek that the actions of that episode resulted in Chapel breaking her ties to Earth devotes herself to Starfleet service . 
 After Korby 's death , Chapel doubted if she should stay aboard , but elected to remain with the Enterprise throughout the five @-@ year mission . Chapel 's feelings for Spock were revisited and alluded to only a few times in the series , most notably in " Plato 's Stepchildren " . In the episode , the <unk> telekinetically force Chapel and Spock to kiss passionately . This humiliates Chapel despite her long @-@ standing feelings for him . In the episode " Amok Time " , she brings Spock some soup to help him through a sacred Vulcan ritual , the Pon farr . He angrily refuses the soup and throws it at the wall , but later thanks Chapel for her thoughtfulness . 
 Chapel appeared in two of the Star Trek films featuring The Original Series cast . In Star Trek : The Motion Picture , Chapel had become a doctor on @-@ board the Enterprise . Her second appearance was in Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home , where she and Janice Rand ( Grace Lee Whitney ) were stationed in Starfleet Headquarters in San Francisco . In the 2009 film Star Trek , a Nurse Chapel is mentioned by McCoy ( Karl Urban ) . In the 2013 film Star Trek Into Darkness , Carol Marcus ( Alice Eve ) tells Kirk ( Chris Pine ) that after being with him , Chapel left to become a nurse . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Cast and crew = = = 
 Executive producer Robert H. Justman didn 't care for Chapel ; he described her as a " wimpy , badly written , and ill @-@ conceived character . " He added that the additional camera lenses used by director Jerry <unk> in that episode for close @-@ ups of her quivering lip only " served to emphasise the lack of character written into the character . " He had complained to Roddenberry of Barrett 's acting skills , but stopped when he became aware of their relationship . It was only after Barrett 's first appearance as Lwaxana Troi in the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode " Haven " , that he came to realise that it was the Chapel character he disliked , not Barrett herself and told her that his opinion had changed . Barrett also didn 't care for the character of Chapel , saying " I 've never been a real aficionado of Nurse Chapel , I figured she was kind of weak and <unk> @-@ <unk> . " 
 Writer David Gerrold , who worked with the staff of The Original Series following his work on the episode " The Trouble with Tribbles " , described Chapel as being one of a second @-@ tier set of characters including Uhura , Scotty and Sulu , who were not given as much <unk> during the series as the main characters of Kirk , Spock and McCoy . He explained that she was the only one of the second level of characters whose motivations were explored , however , her primary focus on @-@ board the ship was simply to be in love with Spock . Gerrold explained that there was a need to demonstrate the " aloofness " of the Vulcan character , and so this resulted in a character whose love of him needed to be rebuffed , thus giving Chapel her purpose . He suggested that this caused Chapel to be disliked the fandom because " Female fans saw her as a threat to their own fantasies and male fans saw her as a threat to Spock 's Vulcan stoicism . " But added that those fans were surprised when they met Barrett at science fiction conventions , as they found her likeable in person . By the time of the 2009 film Star Trek , the character had become more popular among fans , who were asking if she would appear in the new films . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 In her essay " The Audience as Auteur . Women , Star Trek and ' <unk> ' " in the book Gene Roddenberry 's Star Trek : The Original Cast Adventures , Francesca Coppa said that she saw the switch from Number One to Chapel for Barrett as " degradation on every level : role , status and image " . The role was described as " consolation " in Cary O 'Dell 's book June Cleaver Was a Feminist ! : Reconsidering the Female Characters of Early Television , but it was felt that Barrett " made the most of it " . The position of a nurse was described by O 'Dell as a traditional female role , but that Chapel would stand up to McCoy 's orders when required . Her promotion to Doctor in The Motion Picture was praised by author Gladys L. Knight in her book Female Action Heroes : A Guide to Women in Comics , Video Games , Film , and Television . 
 Reviewer were critical of her relationship with Spock , with Jan Johnson @-@ Smith describing Chapel in American Science Fiction TV as " a woman condemned to forever lust after the elusive Vulcan " , and that she was one of several female characters in the series who were " depicted as recognisable stereotypes " . Coppa also discussed this , calling the character as being a typical damsel in distress , existing " merely to pine " . But the relationship was also seen positively , with Torie Atkinson , at Tor.com , said of Chapel in " Amok Time " that " her affection is so transparent and sweet . " In The Making of Star Trek by Roddenberry and Stephen E. Whitfield , her feelings towards Spock are said to not be unique as they are shared by many of the female crew on @-@ board the Enterprise . It is also further explained that McCoy is aware of her feelings , but displays " fatherly affection " towards her and never " <unk> " her for this . 
 Her appearances in episodes were commented on , with Wei Ming <unk> critical that the single @-@ mindedness of the plot for " Amok Time " in not allowing Spock to have sex with Chapel , or any other woman , and thus solve the problem of his Pon farr . But Eugene Myers at Tor.com praised Chapel , saying that the most interesting part of " What Are Little Girls Made Of ? " was that it was based primarily on her , while Keith DeCandido said that this resulted in the episode being the " Kirk @-@ and @-@ Chapel show " to the detriment of the other characters . 
 = Bound 2 = 
 " Bound 2 " is a song by American rapper Kanye West , featured as the final track from his sixth studio album , Yeezus ( 2013 ) . It was produced by West and Che Pope , with additional production being handled by Eric <unk> , Noah Goldstein , No ID and Mike Dean . The song features vocals from American soul singer Charlie Wilson and serves as the album 's second single . " Bound 2 " incorporates samples from " Bound " by Ponderosa Twins Plus One and the line " Uh @-@ huh , honey " from Brenda Lee 's " Sweet Nothin 's " . 
 The controversial music video features his wife Kim Kardashian West , topless , riding on a motorbike with West through various landscapes . " Bound 2 " received general acclaim from music critics , who referred to the song as one of the highlights of the album , comparing its soul influenced , sample @-@ based production to West 's debut studio album , The College Dropout ( 2004 ) . The song peaked at number 55 on the UK Singles Chart and 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 On June 1 , 2013 , West revealed the cover of his sixth studio album Yeezus and premiered a 13 @-@ second preview of " Bound 2 " . It was only one of three songs that were previewed prior to the album 's release , the others being " New Slaves " and " Black Skinhead " . 
 " Bound 2 " features substantial soul music samples , which critics noted as reminiscent of West 's production style in his earlier work . The song is predominantly built around a sample taken from " Bound " , a song by soul @-@ group Ponderosa Twins Plus One from their 1971 album , 2 + 2 + 1 = Ponderosa Twins Plus One . Interpolations from " Aeroplane ( Reprise ) " , written by Norman Whiteside and performed by Wee and the line " Uh @-@ huh , honey " from the song " Sweet Nothin 's " , written by Ronnie Self and performed by country singer Brenda Lee were also utilized in the song . Lee reacted to the sampling of her song on the track , saying : 
 As I 've said , it 's always nice to be recognized . It says a wonderful thing about Ronnie Self , who wrote the song . That 50 years after it was written , somebody in Kanye 's camp knew the song and said , ' Let 's use it . ' That 's a compliment to Ronnie . 
 On February 15 , 2014 , Hudson Mohawke played an original version of " Bound 2 " during a DJ set in Leeds . The earlier version features piano @-@ driven production and a much more stripped down ending compared to the album version . Rapper / Producer Tyler , The Creator revealed over Twitter that he helped produce the original version along with Hudson Mohawke . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 " Bound 2 " was revealed to be the second single released from Yeezus in August 2013 , following " Black Skinhead " . On September 9 , 2013 , West appeared on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon for the first time , to promote his upcoming Yeezus Tour . During his appearance , he performed " Bound 2 " with Charlie Wilson , The Roots and a male children 's choir . It was his first national television performance of the song . The song was also performed on the season premiere of Later ... with Jools Holland by West and Wilson on September 17 , 2013 . To take a more minimal approach , they were accompanied by just the song 's signature Ponderosa Twins sample and a brief piano intro for the Later ... with Jools Holland performance . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Bound 2 " received universal acclaim from music critics . Rolling Stone described " Bound 2 " as " maybe the most audacious song he 's ever written , not to mention the most beautiful . " Julian Kimble of Complex called the song " a brilliant way to end the album " and wrote that it " stands out as a love song — a dark , twisted fantasy of a love song , perhaps , but one that 's beautiful in its own way . " David Jeffries of AllMusic described " Bound 2 " as a " new wave beauty of a closer . " Writing for The A.V. Club , Evan Rytlewski referred to the song as " an overt homage to West 's bright early production , reimagining The College Dropout 's cheerful chipmunk soul . " Dan <unk> of XXL called it the album 's " emotional and musical highlight ... a perfect sendoff that reminds you of Kanye 's roots while pointing you in the direction of his future . " A writer for the Kitsap Sun cited " Bound 2 " as a " classic Yeezy effort " and " arguably the album 's best track . " 
 XXL positioned it at number 17 on their list of the best songs of 2013 . They said , " ' Bound 2 ' showed the doubters that he could still give them the soul @-@ soaked laments that everyone wanted , he just decided not to . But that doesn 't mean this song is a throwaway — the video might be more of one than the song itself — this is Kanye 's introspection colliding with his self @-@ doubt in a way that is eminently relatable to anyone with a pulse . " NME ranked " Bound 2 " at number 22 on their list of the 50 best songs of 2013 ; " in Kanye 's mind this is what constituted a pop song : sped up ' 70s soul samples , a totally unconventional structure and lyrical gems . " Pitchfork Media positioned " Bound 2 " at number 40 on their list of the top 100 tracks of 2013 . They commented , " On an album that takes itself awful seriously throughout , " Bound 2 " is something that <unk> the entire affair , leaving more questions than answers . " 
 The song was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration and Best Rap Song at the 2015 Grammy Awards . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On November 16 , 2013 , it was revealed that West would be premiering the music video for " Bound 2 " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show the following week . The Nick Knight @-@ directed music video was released on November 19 , 2013 . The video features his then @-@ fiancée Kim Kardashian , topless , riding atop West 's motorbike through Monument Valley and other landscapes . Eric Diep of XXL described it as , " a confident display of love and passion with little to no narrative . " Spin felt that " a pretty bad idea seen through so completely that it stops being a bad idea " . Tom Breihan from Stereogum found the video confusing , saying " it 'll take a little bit to figure out what all 's going on there " . Lanre Bakare of The Guardian described it as " self @-@ indulgent , idiosyncratic and a bit weird " . 
 On November 25 , 2013 , " Bound 3 " , a parody of the music video was released , starring actors James Franco and Seth Rogen . The parody is a shot @-@ for @-@ shot remake , filmed while they were shooting their upcoming movie The Interview . Afterwards , Kim Kardashian revealed through Twitter that she and West found the video to be very funny . On December 11 , 2013 , the music video was parodied in the South Park episode " The Hobbit " , where West is shown trying to convince the world that Kardashian is not a hobbit . On December 21 , 2013 , the video was parodied on Saturday Night Live , with cast members portraying the couple having sex while riding a red @-@ nosed reindeer . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 On December 23 , 2013 , Ricky Spicer of the Ponderosa Twins Plus One filed a lawsuit against West over the sample of the group 's song , " Bound , " alleging that he used Spicer 's voice without permission . Spicer asked that West pay him or cease and desist using his vocals . Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records , Universal Music Group , Island Def Jam , and Rhino Entertainment were all named in the lawsuit along with West . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 British drum and bass duo Sigma created a remix of the song entitled " Nobody to Love " featuring vocals from Daniel Pearce which was officially released on April 6 , 2014 . It topped the UK Singles Chart upon release , with sales of over 121 @,@ 000 copies in the first week . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Yeezus . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Unforgiven ( 2005 ) = 
 Unforgiven ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was the seventh annual Unforgiven event and took place on September 18 , 2005 , at the Ford Center in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma . The event featured wrestlers and other talent that performed on the Raw program . To date , it is the only WWE pay @-@ per @-@ view event ever to be held in the state of Oklahoma . 
 The main event was a standard wrestling match , in which Kurt Angle defeated WWE Champion John Cena , after Cena used the Championship belt on Angle , leading to a disqualification . In WWE , a championship cannot change hands via countout or disqualification , as a result , Cena retained the title . Two featured bouts on the undercard was another standard match , in which Shawn Michaels defeated Chris Masters . The other primary match was a steel cage match , where the ring is enclosed by a steel cage , in which Matt Hardy defeated Edge . 
 Unforgiven grossed over $ 485 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of approximately 8 @,@ 000 , and received about 243 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . This amount was higher than the following year 's event . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of third on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Eight professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card beforehand , which were planned with predetermined outcomes by WWE 's script writers . The buildup to these matches and scenarios that took place before , during and after the event were also planned by the script writers . The event featured wrestlers and other talent from Raw 's brand – a storyline expansion in which WWE assigned its employees . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick , as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . 
 The main rivalry written into Unforgiven was between John Cena and Kurt Angle , who were competing for Cena 's WWE Championship . At SummerSlam , Cena defeated Chris Jericho to retain the WWE Championship . A rematch was held on the August 22 episode of Raw , one of WWE 's primary television programs , when authority figure Eric Bischoff , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , announced a match between Cena and Jericho in a " You 're Fired " match , in which the loser would be fired . The match saw Cena win , and Bischoff was scripted to fire a pleading Jericho , who was carried out of the arena by security . This angle was written after WWE 's official website confirmed that Jericho signed a short @-@ term contract extension to stay with the company after his long @-@ term contract expired , which presumably ended after his loss to Cena . Kurt Angle came down to the ring and attacked Cena by lifting Cena on his shoulders and spinning 90 ° to slam him down to the mat , a move Angle calls the Angle Slam . As Cena was down , Bischoff announced that Angle was the new contender for the WWE Championship , claiming that Jericho " couldn 't get the job done " . Angle continued his attacks on Cena before their scheduled match at Unforgiven . On the August 29 episode of Raw , Cena was scheduled in a Handicap match , a match where one wrestler or team of wrestlers face off against a team of wrestlers with numerical superiority such as two against one , or three against two . He faced Tyson Tomko and Angle . Cena won the match by pinning Tomko after lifting Tomko onto his shoulders and slamming him down to the mat . Afterwards , Angle assaulted Cena , which led to Angle being scripted to smash Cena 's ankle across the ring post , thus giving Angle the advantage heading into Unforgiven . 
 Another major rivalry heading into the event was between Shawn Michaels and Chris Masters . This feud began the night after SummerSlam , where Michaels lost a match to Hulk Hogan . Michaels admitted he fell victim to Hogan 's leg drop , a move where Hogan drops his legs across the opponent 's head or chest . He concluded that Hogan was the better man and it was time to get " back to reality " . Mid @-@ way through Michaels ' speech , Masters interrupted him and informed Michaels that individuals like Hogan and Michaels did not know how to pass the torch to new wrestlers . Michaels went along with Masters ' comments and warned Masters to not group him with Hogan . Masters concluded by stating that he was not " trying " to steal the spotlight from Michaels , but that he was going to " take it " . Michaels responded by saying that he knew where Masters was coming from , which led to Michaels slapping Masters . The two then brawled , thus turning Michaels into an on @-@ screen hero , as he had been a villain in rivalry between Hogan . On the September 5 episode of Raw , Michaels was involved in the Masterlock Challenge , a challenge where the wrestler must break free from Master 's full Nelson submission hold , which he calls the Master Lock . Despite Michaels ' best efforts , he could not break free . Upset at the vigorous resistance of Michaels , Masters released the hold and hit Michaels with a steel chair before re @-@ applying the hold . The following week , Michaels issued a challenge to Masters at Unforgiven , in which he vowed to get revenge on Masters for his actions the previous week . 
 The other predominant rivalry heading into the event was between Matt Hardy and Edge , a real life issue transformed into a storyline . At SummerSlam , Edge defeated Hardy after dropping him onto the top of a ring post . This was scripted to caused Hardy to bleed heavily , which forced the referee to end the match and declare Edge the winner because Hardy could not continue . The next night on Raw , Hardy had a match with Rob Conway , in which Conway pinned Hardy for the win . After the match , Edge attacked Hardy . On the August 29 episode of Raw , Edge and Hardy were scheduled to compete in a Street Fight , a match where there are no disqualifications , no countouts , and scoring conditions can occur anywhere in the arena . The match ended in a no @-@ contest after Hardy and Edge brawled at the stage ramp . Hardy grabbed Edge by the side and threw both himself and Edge off the stage and into electrical equipment . Both Hardy and Edge laid motionless on the floor as sparks flew everywhere . Trainers and emergency medical technicians rushed to the scene and took both men away in ambulances for medical attention . The following week , Bischoff booked Hardy and Edge in a steel cage match at Unforgiven , where the ring would be enclosed by a steel cage . Following the announcement , Bischoff scheduled a match between Hardy and Snitsky , which Hardy lost . After the match , Snitsky threatened to hit Hardy with a ring bell but The Big Show came down . He was unable to stop Snitsky , and as a result , Snitsky succeeded in hitting Hardy with the bell . 
 The Divas rivalry heading into the event was between Ashley Massaro and the stable known as Vince 's Devils . A week after winning the Diva Search , Massaro was attacked by Torrie Wilson and Candice Michelle , who were traded to Raw , after they pretended to congratulate her , turning both Torrie and Candice into heels . After their villainous turns , Torrie and Candice aligned with Victoria to form Vince 's Devils , and the trio spent weeks tormenting her , which included Massaro suffering a pair of losses to Victoria and Torrie . On the September 12 edition of Raw , Trish Stratus returned from injury and helped Massaro fight off the Devils , leading to the announcement that Torrie and Victoria would face Massaro and Stratus at Unforgiven . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Rob Conway defeated Tajiri in a match taped for Heat , one of WWE 's secondary television programs . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first televised match was a standard wrestling match for the WWE Intercontinental Championship , which involved the champion Carlito and challenger Ric Flair . The match began with Flair taking down Carlito with a series of headlock takeovers . Carlito was able to hit Flair with his forearm , but Flair brought Carlito down with an Inverted atomic drop . Flair later went for the figure four leglock , but Carlito reversed it . After back and forth action between the two , Flair took the advantage and applied the figure four leglock on Carlito . By making him tap out , Flair became the new Intercontinental Champion , the oldest in WWE history at 56 . 
 The next match was a tag team match featuring the team of Trish Stratus and Ashley against the team of Victoria and Torrie Wilson ( with Candice Michelle as Victoria and Wilson 's manager ) . The match started off with Wilson and Stratus in the ring . Wilson tagged in Victoria , who applied a full @-@ body choke on Stratus , but Stratus started to work on Victoria 's arm . Victoria countered Stratus ' arm takedown . Stratus then performed a takedown by <unk> Victoria 's head with her legs and forcefully dragging her down to the mat . Back and forth action continued ; the match , however , came to an end when Stratus was able to perform a roundhouse kick on Victoria , giving the pinfall victory to Stratus and Ashley . 
 The third match was a standard match between The Big Show and Snitsky . The match began with Big Show and Snitsky brawling as the bell rang . Big Show was able to perform a big slap to the chest and headbutt . Snitsky then took the upper hand over Big Show , as he applied an armbar hold , after countering a chokeslam , a move where The Big Show lifts the opponent by the throat and slams them down to the mat . Big Show then made a comeback when he lifted Snitsky by the waist and slammed him down to the mat . Big Show then got the victory after a successful chokeslam . 
 The next match was another standard match involving Shelton Benjamin and Kerwin White . White tried to get in the ring , but Benjamin slid out and tripped him . Benjamin threw White into the ring barricade , which led him to throw him back in the ring as the bell rang to officially start the match . In the ring , Benjamin lifted and slammed White to the mat , which followed by a running forearm . White retaliated with a dropkick to Benjamin 's knee . The match concluded after White grabbed a golf club that he hid in the steel steps and tried to assault Benjamin with it . Benjamin , however , countered by throwing White up in the air and catching him by slamming him down to the mat . Benjamin covered White and got the pinfall victory . 
 The fifth match was a Steel Cage match contested between Matt Hardy and Edge , who was accompanied by Lita . As the bell rang , Hardy tried to throw Edge face @-@ first into the cage wall but did not succeed . Back and forth action took place until Hardy got the advantage over Edge . Lita began to climb up the outside of the cage , but Hardy hit the cage , making Lita fall off . As Lita distracted Hardy , Edge started to crawl out . Hardy noticed this , grabbed Edge , and threw him into a corner . Lita interfered , which led to Hardy grabbing Lita 's head in a forward position and forcefully pulling it down over his shoulders . Hardy turned around and was hit with a spear but he kicked out . Hardy knocked Edge off the turnbuckle Hardy got to the top of the cage and delivered a leg drop before covering Edge for the victory . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The next match was Rosey and The Hurricane taking on Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch for the World Tag Team Championship . The match started with Hurricane and Cade locked up ( that is , grappling ) . Cade managed to gain the advantage over Hurricane with some fists . During the match , Murdoch drove Hurricane 's head into the floor on the outside of the ring . WWE Medical trainers came to ringside to check on Hurricane . The match concluded when Cade pinned the legitimately injured Hurricane , to win the World Tag Team Championship . 
 The seventh match was a standard match between Shawn Michaels and Chris Masters . The match started with Masters applying the Masterlock on Michaels . After breaking the hold , Michaels hit Masters with his forearm and slapped his chest several times . Masters , however , dominated Michaels , focusing on his back by lifting and sitting Michaels onto his shoulders and slamming him down to the mat several times . He also lifted Michaels vertically in the air and stalled him there before slamming him down . Michaels fought back , as he drove his cocked elbow onto Masters ' chest . Masters was able to lock in the Masterlock once more . Michaels tried to use the corners to break the hold , but Masters kept it locked on . Michaels then leaped over the top rope and landed on the ring apron , causing the referee to order Masters to break the hold . Michaels countered with a Sweet Chin Music , thus Michaels got the pinfall victory over Masters . 
 The main event was between John Cena and Kurt Angle for the WWE Championship . The match began with Angle and Cena locking up , leading to Angle taking Cena down with a headlock takeover . Cena countered many attacks by Angle and was able to reverse the ankle lock . Cena tried to lift Angle onto his shoulders to slam him down to the mat , but Angle reversed it and lifted Cena on his shoulders and spun 90 ° to slam him down . Eric Bischoff came down the ramp and cheered for Angle , who had the Ankle Lock applied on Cena . Cena rolled out of the move , grabbed the championship belt , which Bischoff had brought with him , and hit Angle with it . The referee saw this and called for the bell . As a result , Cena was disqualified for hitting Angle with the championship , ultimately resulting in him retaining his title . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The feud between John Cena and Kurt Angle , with the involvement of Eric Bischoff , continued . During Raw episodes , it saw Angle and Bischoff interfere in Cena 's matches , and even deciding the outcome of Cena 's matches . On the October 17 episode of Raw , Bischoff announced that a standard match involving three wrestlers , termed as the Triple Threat match , for the WWE Championship , would take place between Cena , Angle and the fans ' choice at Taboo Tuesday . Bischoff was scripted to promote three series of qualifying matches , in which the winner would receive a spot on the ballot as a potential challenger to join Cena and Angle . The winners were The Big Show , Shawn Michaels and Kane . The following week , a Triple Threat match was scheduled between Big Show , Michaels and Kane . Michaels won the match after he hit both Big Show and Kane with a superkick and pinned Big Show for the win . The following week , Bischoff announced a match between Cena and Michaels . Late in the match , Angle attacked both Cena and Michaels . Cena , however , retaliated and got Angle up for an FU , but Michaels managed to hit Cena with a superkick . At Taboo Tuesday , Michaels won the fans ' choice to join Cena and Angle in the championship match . Cena , however , defeated Michaels and Angle to retain the WWE Championship , after pinning Shawn Michaels . 
 Triple H returned on the October 3 episode of Raw , WWE Homecoming , after a four @-@ month hiatus . He took part in a match , teaming up with Ric Flair , who was a fan favorite during Triple H 's absence , to take on Chris Masters and Carlito . The duo defeated Masters and Carlito ; after the match , Triple H turned on Flair and hit him with a sledgehammer . This led to a rivalry between Triple H and Flair . At Taboo Tuesday , Triple H and Flair met in a steel cage match , a stipulation chosen by the fans , for the WWE Intercontinental Championship . The match saw Flair retain the Intercontinental Championship , after escaping through the cage door . 
 The rivalry between Matt Hardy and Edge continued and culminated in a " Loser Leaves Raw Ladder match " , where the objective was to reach a briefcase suspended in the air using a ladder , at WWE Homecoming , which Edge won . As a result , Hardy was moved to the SmackDown ! brand . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Ford Center has a maximum capacity of 19 @,@ 599 . The event grossed over $ 485 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 8 @,@ 000 . The promotion 's pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue was $ 185 million . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the entire event a 6 out of 10 stars . The rating was lower than the Unforgiven event in 2006 , which rated 7 out of 10 stars . The steel cage match was rated a 7 out of 10 stars , as well as the Shawn Michaels and Chris Masters ' match . The divas tag team match and the singles match between Big Show and Snitsky , were rated 3 out of 10 stars each . 
 The event was released on DVD by Sony Music Entertainment on October 25 , 2005 . The DVD reached third on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of November 19 , 2005 , although falling thereafter . It remained in the chart for two consecutive weeks , until the week of December 3 , 2005 , when it ranked seventh . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Fight for You = 
 " Fight for You " is a song performed by American recording artist Jason Derulo , released as the fourth single from his second studio album , Future History , on December 2 , 2011 . The song was written by Derulo , Stevie Hoang , David Paich and Jeff Porcaro , while production was handled by RedOne , BeatGeek and Geo Slam . Musically , " Fight for You " is an urban @-@ pop ballad , that samples the song " Africa " ( 1982 ) by American rock band Toto . The lyrics revolve around how Derulo , the protagonist , has " got a girl in his life he isn 't ready to let go of just yet " . Hoang had originally recorded " Fight for You " for his third independent album , Unsigned ( 2011 ) with his original track featuring Iyaz . 
 The song 's production and Derulo 's vocal performance garnered positive reviews from music critics , however , some criticized its lack of originality . " Fight for You " attained moderate chart success , peaking at number five in Australia , and reaching the top twenty in the United Kingdom . The accompanying music video portrays a fictional relationship between Derulo and his love interest . Derulo performed the song at KDWB @-@ FM 's annual Jingle Ball in 2011 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Fight for You " was written by Jason Derulo , Stevie Hoang , David Paich and Jeff Porcaro , while production of the song was helmed by RedOne , BeatGeek and Geo Slam . " Fight for You " was originally recorded by Hoang , for his third independent album , Unsigned ( 2011 ) . His version of the song features British Virgin Island recording artist Iyaz . 
 Derulo 's version of " Fight for You " was recorded and engineered by Gelly Kusuma , Slam and Teddy Sky at Serenity West Recording Studio and Jim Henson Studios in Los Angeles , California . Derulo , RedOne , Laila Khayat , <unk> Khayat and Sky performed background vocals on the song . The recordings were later mixed by Trevor Muzzy . All instruments and programming were provided by RedOne , BeatGeek and Slam . In a cover story for the Daily Star , Derulo stated that " Fight for You " was the first song he worked on with RedOne , saying " I 'm glad it turned out so dope " . On working with RedOne , he said : " Red first became hot when he produced the album The Fame with Lady Gaga . He is one of the nicest guys I 've ever met . ... RedOne was a nice , humble , down @-@ to @-@ earth , special person " . 
 " Fight for You " was added to mainstream radio playlists in the United Kingdom on November 9 , 2011 . A digital extended play , featuring four remixes of the song , was released in Ireland and the UK on December 2 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fight for You " is an urban @-@ pop ballad with a length of four minutes and two seconds . According to Meena Rupani of DesiHits , the song finds Derulo as the male protagonist singing " that he 's got a girl in his life he isn 't ready to let go of just yet " . The song 's hook contains a sample of the song " Africa " ( 1982 ) by American rock band Toto . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy noted that " Fight for You " features " airy synths and bouncy castle @-@ sized beats " . Scott Shelter of PopCrush described the song as a " world music flavored track " . During an interview with New ! magazine , Derulo explained the concept of " Fight for You " , saying : " It 's very relationship @-@ based and the line [ " fight for you " ] means so much , whatever you believe in you should go for . The song is based on a personal experience , I was in a relationship and I put myself in that place again where you would do anything to keep the relationship together so I went back to that place . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Fight for You " garnered positive reviews from music critics for its catchy production and Derulo 's vocal performance . David Griffiths of 4Music called it a " catchy little ditty " that " is guaranteed to be stuck in your head for the rest of the day " . Shawn Kitchener of Entertainment Wise described the song as " the kind of sweet @-@ as @-@ candy R & B fodder " that could have been featured on the High School Musical soundtrack . Meena Rupani of DesiHits noted that the song 's lyrical theme is similar to " It Girl " , and that Derulo 's " vocals are enough to put any girl into a trance " . However , " Fight for You " also received unfavorable reviews from critics because of its lack of originality . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the song a three out of five star rating , calling Derulo " extremely lazy " for sampling " Africa " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian described the song as " languid " , while writing that the sample gives it " a bit of bounce " . Although Jess Holton of The Music Network described " Fight for You " as a " touching ballad " , she added that sampling " Africa " does not do the latter " any form of justice " . In an album review of Future History , Michael Cragg of BBC Music noted that the songs " revolve around the joys of being in a relationship or the pain of not being in one " , however disapproved of the lyrical content and sample in " Fight for You " , calling it " perhaps the worst offender " on the album . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 After the release of Future History , " Fight for You " debuted and peaked on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 83 on the issue dated October 15 , 2011 , and on the UK Singles Chart at number 117 on October 22 , 2011 . Upon its release as a single in the latter country , " Fight for You " managed to peak at number 15 on the UK Singles Chart , and at number four on the UK R & B Singles Chart . In Ireland , the song debuted at number 31 on December 1 , 2011 , and peaked at number 28 the following week . On the Danish Singles Chart , " Fight for You " debuted and peaked at number 27 on January 20 , 2012 . In Australia , the song debuted at number 27 on the ARIA Singles Chart on February 20 , 2012 . " Fight for You " peaked at number five in its third week , and spent a total of seven consecutive weeks inside the top @-@ ten . It was eventually certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 140 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The video for " Fight for You " premiered online on November 25 , 2011 . It begins with Derulo walking on a bridge in a city at night , before the video cuts to scenes of Derulo and his love interest hugging and drinking alcohol , as well showing him standing alone atop a roof of a building in Manhattan . Another scene finds Derulo and his love interest sharing a shower . The video continues to show the pair spending time together , including dining in restaurants , riding the subway , and dancing on the subway platform . David Greenwald of MTV Buzzworthy called it Derulo 's " <unk> " video to date . 
 = = = Live performances and cover version = = = 
 On December 3 , 2011 , Derulo performed " Fight for You " at radio station KDWB @-@ FM 's annual Jingle Ball , which took place at the Target Center in Minneapolis , Minnesota . The song was part of a set list , which included " Whatcha Say " , " In My Head " , " Ridin ' Solo " , " Don 't Wanna Go Home " and " It Girl " . According to Jon Bream of the Star Tribune , Derulo " turned it out with sweet vocals and smooth dancing " . On May 21 , 2012 , Taga Paa performed a cover of " Fight for You " on The Voice Australia . Rosemarie Lentini of The Daily Telegraph called it a " moving rendition " , while <unk> Cronin of The Gympie Times noted that Paa 's performance " had a few pitch issues " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital EP 
 " Fight for You " – 4 : 02 
 " Fight for You " ( <unk> Remix ) – 3 : 34 
 " Fight for You " ( Mync Edit ) – 3 : 25 
 " Fight for You " ( Mync Stadium Dub ) – 5 : 34 
 " Fight for You " ( Mync Stadium Mix ) – 5 : 34 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for Future History . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Anarchy Online = 
 Anarchy Online is a massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game ( MMORPG ) published and developed by Norwegian video game development company Funcom . Released in the summer of 2001 , the game was the first in the genre to include a science @-@ fiction setting , dynamic quests , <unk> , free trials , and in @-@ game advertising . The game 's ongoing storyline revolves around the fictional desert planet " Rubi @-@ Ka " , the source of a valuable mineral known as " Notum " . Players assume the role of a new colonist to Rubi @-@ Ka . With no specific objective to win Anarchy Online , the player advances the game through the improvement of a character 's skills over time . After more than 15 years , Anarchy Online has become one of the oldest surviving games in the genre . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fighting for military and political power on Rubi @-@ Ka are the Omni @-@ Tek corporation ( owners of the planet 's one thousand @-@ year lease ) , the Separatist Clans , Terrorist groups , extraterrestrial life , and ancient civilizations . The narrative was developed to be played out as a series of virtual " role @-@ play " events over the course of four years , influenced by the actions of those taking part in the game . 
 According to the game 's back story , the " Source " of all life deep inside the planet created the first forms of life , who called themselves the Xan . They began as a small , perfect , immortal civilization , living in peace and harmony . The <unk> ' eventual discovery and research of the Source 's power lead them to create powerful technology . They built a great civilization , but this made them greedy and arrogant . Two factions formed within the Xan , calling themselves the Redeemed and the <unk> . These groups fought over how best to use the Source — now strained and unstable from their tampering . They tried in vain to fix the problem , but discovered it was too late - the Source would soon destroy the planet . Rubi @-@ Ka was ripped apart in a cataclysm , leaving it a barren rock . The Source , and small fragments of the <unk> ' dead civilization , were thrown into another dimension known as the Shadowlands . The survivors left in search of other habitable planets , where they planted versions of their species ; they hoped that one would prosper and eventually return to Rubi @-@ Ka . Earth was one of their destinations . 
 In the year 28 @,@ 708 AD , a mining survey ship from the mega @-@ corporation Omni @-@ Tek rediscovered Rubi @-@ Ka . The Interstellar Confederation of Corporations ( ICC ) granted Omni @-@ Tek a one thousand @-@ year lease on the planet shortly after . It was a seemingly useless , arid landscape far from civilization , until the discovery of the mineral Notum , unique to Rubi @-@ Ka . Research of Notum and its properties led to major leaps forward in nanotechnology , making possible the creation of powerful new technology , as well as the resurrection of the dead . After terraforming a portion of Rubi @-@ Ka and constructing several cities , outposts , and transportation infrastructure , the company began importing colonists under contract as miners and other professions . 
 The first five hundred years of Omni @-@ Tek 's control of Rubi @-@ Ka were marked with an exemplary worker treatment record . However , as time passed , their policies degraded . Their scientists ' tinkering with the mutating effects of Notum on the colonists in a quest for efficiency lead to large numbers of failed experiments . Survivors of these experiments became the game 's four playable races , or Breeds , each designed by Omni @-@ Tek to specialize in a type of work . Together with the original " Solitus " race , the genetically engineered Herculean " Atrox , " the intelligent " <unk> , " and the nimble " <unk> , " they continued their labor in the midst of an increasingly hostile and totalitarian culture . This caused a significant number of workers to rebel , and begin to trade stolen Notum to a rival corporation . These rebel groups , collectively calling themselves the Clans , fought a series of wars with Omni @-@ Tek over the next several centuries . 
 = = = Player point of view = = = 
 Anarchy Online 's story , from the player 's point of view , began in 29 @,@ 475 , after the most recent peace treaty had been signed between Omni @-@ Tek and the Clans . ICC peacekeeping troops later moved into some cities to protect neutral observers of the war who had rejected their contractual obligations with Omni @-@ Tek , but did not align themselves with the Clans . Omni @-@ Tek , the Clans , and the neutral observers make up the game 's three playable factions and control much of Rubi @-@ Ka 's terraformed surface . 
 After scientists opened a portal to the Shadowlands , players found the Source , killing the guardian the Xan had left there to protect it . This prompted an alien race known as the <unk> <unk> to begin attacking Rubi @-@ Ka . The story 's current plots revolve around the fight by all sides for control of the planet . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players assume the roles of new colonists to Rubi @-@ Ka or the Shadowlands . The game world is occupied by human players and computer @-@ controlled characters , both friendly and hostile . The game begins with the player creating a unique character , choosing its name , gender , height , weight , and facial features . Each character is also one of the four humanoid " breeds " . The final choice is that of the character 's profession , similar to the character classes of other role @-@ playing games . 
 The game 's multiplayer nature and " free @-@ form " gameplay encourage creating personal networks , and cooperating and fighting with other players . Players interact with Anarchy Online 's interface via a keyboard and mouse . The game 's heads @-@ up display consists of a series of windows , menus and buttons located on the periphery of the screen . Players communicate with each other by typing text in chat windows , and occasionally through emotive character animations . Communication with computer @-@ controlled characters is executed via text windows , in which players chose from a menu of possible responses to the conversation being shown . Like most role playing games , Anarchy Online provides structure for role @-@ playing events . Most major cities include night clubs and other venues specifically for this . Events are organized either by players , or officially by Funcom staff . 
 Groups of players , large or small , are often required to complete objectives . In addition to forming teams and informal chat groups , joining a player organization is encouraged . These are , like guilds in similar games , officially recognized groups bound together for technical and social benefits . Organizations are able to build their own cities across the game world , control areas of land , run player markets , and access other special content . 
 Among the most distinct gameplay elements of Anarchy Online are dynamic missions . Missions , or quests , are a traditional gameplay element in the role playing genre . The player or team is given a set of tasks — usually related to the story — to complete somewhere in the game world ; in return , they are rewarded with experience points , items , and money . Dynamic missions are similar to traditional missions in purpose , but are created at the player 's request . Once they choose its difficulty and other options , the game generates a new indoor area filled with computer @-@ controlled enemies . The player or team are told to go to its location , and finish some task inside for their reward . Dynamic missions , like many other encounters in Anarchy Online , are " instanced " : each mission area is available only to the owners of the mission . 
 = = = Breeds or alien species = = = 
 All of the humanoid breeds in Anarchy Online follow traditional RPG archetypes . 
 = = = = Atrox = = = = 
 The Atrox is a warrior / tank archetype that have excellent strength and stamina but poor intelligence and psychic . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The <unk> follows a caster archetype and possess poor strength and stamina , but high intelligence and psychic . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The <unk> follows a traditional thief / rogue archetype and possess poor stamina and psychic but high agility and sense . 
 = = = = Solitus = = = = 
 Finally , the Solitus follows the typical human archetype and possesses average breed statistics of all choices . 
 Note that there is no limitations in breed @-@ profession combinations , although some breeds will encounter maximum statistic possible for certain traits earlier than others . 
 = = = Skill system = = = 
 Much of what characters can do , and how well they do it , is determined by the game 's eighty @-@ three distinct character skills . A skill is a numerical representation of a character 's proficiency in an area of skill , starting at zero . As players kill computer @-@ controlled enemies , they gain experience points for their character . After gaining enough points , the character levels up . The current maximum level is 220 . At each new level , the character is given some " skill points " , which are used to increase any combination of the eighty @-@ three skills that they choose . 
 Any character can access and increase any skill . The character 's profession , however , provides unique resources — " perks " , " alien perks " , " research " , and " nano programs " — that increase specific skill further . This makes each profession more adept at elements of gameplay than others . Doctors , for instance , can increase skills related to healing much higher than a Soldier because of these additional resources . Perks are chosen from a menu when the character reaches certain levels . Alien perks are gained when the player kills enough of a specific type of alien enemy . Research is gained by diverting a percentage of earned experience points toward personal or faction @-@ specific research projects , instead of new levels . Nano programs give temporary increases to certain skills . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 After targeting another character and initiating combat , the player and his opponent will damage each other automatically with their weapons . This continues until the player stops or the target is dead . Each profession 's unique nano programs , perks and research also provide combat abilities used by the player during the fight . These can heal the owner , cause additional damage , lower the skills of the enemy , blind them or otherwise hinder the enemy 's ability to fight . Once the target is dead , the player is able to loot money and items from the enemy 's body . After death , the character 's skills are reduced for several minutes , making them much less powerful in combat during that period . 
 Combat between two or more human players , known as " player vs player " , or " PvP " is encouraged by both the reward of special equipment , and the social nature of the game . Killing other players also rewards characters with a " PvP ranking " , permanently shown beside the player 's name , which represent how many other human players they have killed . Player versus player combat is controlled by the percentage of " suppression gas " in the area that dictates whether a player can start combat unprovoked with another player . Generally , this percentage approaches 100 % in major cities , providing safe havens , and decreases while moving to more remote areas . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Preliminary development for Anarchy Online began in 1995 at Funcom 's Oslo , Norway studios . Up until that point , the company had only developed offline video games for consoles , including the critically successful Speed Punks for the PlayStation . In a 2007 interview , former project leader Gaute <unk> said Funcom 's management wanted to put substantial resources into developing a new MMORPG ; they believed the genre 's user base would expand in the coming years . Unlike most other games in the genre , which had traditional role @-@ playing fantasy themes , Anarchy Online featured a science @-@ fiction theme . The game would also feature a relatively large playable area , and graphics that were , at the time , more advanced than existing MMORPGs . <unk> said he and many other developers saw the idea as " crazy , " describing the project as " very ambitious " . The project 's team grew steadily between 1995 and 2001 to include at least 70 developers . 
 In a 2001 interview , gameworld designer Morten <unk> said that the process of creating Rubi @-@ Ka 's virtual world had " taken more time and effort than anyone imagined when we first started . " The team took inspiration from a number of sources including science @-@ fiction books , movies , architecture in Oslo , and other games in the genre . They stated one of the biggest challenges as finding ways to encourage players to use the entire game world as they play , not to " gather in one corner " . <unk> said he wanted to give the world as much detail as possible to make the game " convincing " to the player . 
 Composers Morten Sørlie , Tor <unk> , and Bjørn Arve <unk> created the soundtrack and music of Anarchy Online . Using a system they call " Sample @-@ based Interactive Music " , the game mixes numerous music samples to create dynamic music . By starting , stopping , fading , and layering samples based on where the player is , and what they are doing , the game creates a continuous stream of background music . Bjørn Arve <unk> stated the music is inspired by the " traditional sound " of a film score , using both orchestral and electronic instruments . Longer full @-@ length versions of some songs were later released on compact disc with a special edition of the game in 2002 . 
 Anarchy Online was officially announced at the 2000 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) . GameSpot , and other online sites , published articles tracking the game 's development over the next year . It made its second appearance at E3 in May 2001 , one month before launch . Based on the beta version shown there , GameSpot stated they were " confident in the game 's progress , given what we 've seen " . At the European Computer Trade Show in 2001 it was awarded Multiplayer Game of Show . A public beta test began two weeks before launch , during which 100 @,@ 000 players downloaded and played pre @-@ release versions of the game , helping the company find bugs and other technical problems with the software . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Anarchy Online officially launched to the public on June 27 , 2001 in the United States and Norway and on September 28 of the same year in the rest of Europe . In addition to being distributed as a retail box from physical and online stores , Anarchy Online was one of the first MMORPGs available via online digital distribution . 
 During its first month of release many stability , registration , and billing issues hurt public perception of the game . Some gaming reporters claimed it was the worst launch of an MMO in the history of the genre . Funcom spent about 6 months fixing the game , particularly the beginning experience . The company then took the " fixed game " on a press tour to convince reporters to give it another try , even though reviews and scores had been printed months before . At the same time , the company needed to build subscribers , which was very difficult given the reputation of the game . Funcom introduced the first " free trial " of the game and gave out returned boxed copies for free at the 2002 Game Developer 's Conference . Some gaming publications informed their readers of the improved game , although they did not change their original scores . By the end of that year , Anarchy Online had recovered from the launch woes and won the MMO of the Year award from PC Gamer . The company went on to create expansions , including the Shadowlands expansion in 2003 that earned several Editor 's Choice awards . 
 Two months after its release in August 2001 , Funcom began offering free trial subscriptions , now common practice for other games in the <unk> genre . New players were able to sign up for accounts that remained free for a limited number of days . This required them to supply some personal information , including a credit card number . After their trial period , players could either cancel their accounts , or keep them to continue playing the game at the cost of the monthly subscription fee . 
 = = = Expansions = = = 
 Periodic free updates are released as content patches on an average of three per month since the game 's release . These fix bugs , and add relatively small amounts of new content . The patches are downloaded and installed automatically when players start the game software . Larger updates , called expansion packs and booster packs , are available for purchase to further extend the game , typically adding new playable areas , creatures , equipment , and story progression . Expansions tend to introduce large amounts of new content ; boosters are considered " too large " for a patch , but " not large enough " to warrant a full expansion . 
 = = = Free Play program = = = 
 On December 15 , 2004 , Funcom replaced trial subscriptions with a business model supported by in @-@ game advertising called the " Free Play " program . Under this program , new players are allowed indefinite access to the full original game without supplying a credit card number . With the exception of the first booster pack Notum Wars , the offer does not include access to content added with expansion or booster packs . Free subscribers are shown advertisements provided by Massive Incorporated , a company that supplies in @-@ game advertising . The ads appear on virtual billboards placed in high traffic areas of the game world . Paying customers have the option to replace these ads with ones for fictitious products related to the game . Free subscribers may also purchase paid points to participate in micro @-@ transactions and purchase in @-@ game items that do not directly impact combat related gameplay . 
 The Free Play program was originally set to last one year , but its length has been extended every year since its creation . As of June 2013 , the free to play program still exists . Former game director Craig Morrison stated in a 2008 interview that the program has " been a vital part of the success of the game . " In January 2008 , Funcom rebranded their subscription model as a " tier subscription system " , adding a third options for customers to access to the game . Customers can access the original game and Notum Wars booster pack for free via the Free Play program , pay the full monthly subscription fee for access to all expansion and booster packs , or pay a reduced monthly fee for access to only the Shadowlands expansion pack . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 The " Free Play " program , started in 2004 , allows new players indefinite access to the original game in return for viewing in @-@ game advertisements . Vital to the game 's continued operation , the program created 400 @,@ 000 new subscriptions in its first ten months , and had generated US $ 1 million in advertising revenue by 2006 . 
 Funcom announced in June 2007 that they would be updating the game 's 3D rendering engine . While the current engine — Funcom 's proprietary Dreamworld — had received incremental improvements with the Notum Wars booster in 2002 and Shadowlands expansion in 2003 , the 2008 announcement stated it would be completely replaced with more modern software to " release the game fresh " . Originally , a modified version of the open source rendering engine OGRE was used . Funcom released a short video demonstrating an early version of its implementation , and stated it would be completed by the end of 2008 . OGRE was dropped in May 2009 because it did not provide " the full <unk> " they had anticipated . Current game director Colin Cragg stated Anarchy Online 's " small development team " could not afford the " growing [ cost ] estimates " involved in making the necessary modifications to it . 
 Funcom decided to instead use a recent version of the Dreamworld engine , the same version used for their 2008 MMORPG Age of Conan . This new engine features improved water rendering , particle effects , and character animation . It also includes incremental improvements to technologies already used in Anarchy Online , such as the dynamic weather system . No new release date has been announced , although periodic status updates are published in the game 's official weekly development blog Friday With Means . 
 Also introduced in 2008 , Funcom added micro @-@ transactions to the game called paid points . Paid points may be acquired through several ways . First , players may purchase them outright via their account management page , which then becomes available to their characters in game . Alternatively , players are also awarded bonus paid points based on number of months of subscription purchased . These paid points may be used to purchase items that were given as pre @-@ order bonuses such as a fully decor @-@ able apartment in game , or newly created vehicles that are otherwise not available through in @-@ game currency called credits . All items available for purchase with paid points are strictly cosmetic in nature , with the exception of a Personal Scout Mech , a combat vehicle that was a pre @-@ order bonus for the Lost Eden expansion . 
 In 2010 , the player community became involved in development of the game , with community @-@ created inventory icons and planet map being accepted into the official game . 
 A game engine upgrade was originally slated for release in 2013 . The new engine , also used for Age of Conan and The Secret World , was planned to be supported concurrently with the previous engine . 
 This new ' dreamworld ' engine was successfully released to the public for use on the live servers on June 25 , 2015 . While the engine is still in a ' beta ' state , it is available for use with the ' live ' production servers . 
 = = = Server mergers = = = 
 For much of its existence , Anarchy Online featured two game servers for English @-@ speaking players , Atlantean and <unk> , and one for German @-@ speaking players , Die Neue Welt . In 2010 , Die Neue Welt was brought offline with most of its player population distributed between the two English @-@ speaking servers . In 2013 , the two remaining English servers , Atlantean and <unk> merged to form a single unifying server to host remaining Anarchy Online players . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After the launch of Anarchy Online and the subsequent technical problems , Funcom issued a statement to reviewers asking them to " hold back on a full review until we have solved these problems . " Some video game reviewers , such as Computer Games Magazine , published reviews anyway ; others , such as GameSpy who described the game as " nearly unplayable " , chose to wait one month before publishing a formal review . The troubled release has had a lasting effect on the game 's reputation , and is nearly always mentioned in the generally positive reviews of later expansion packs as a juxtaposition . 
 While Anarchy Online 's launch problems had a negative effect on initial critics , the game itself was generally reviewed favorably ; it scored an average of 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 from GameSpy , GameSpot , and IGN . GameSpy later described it as " a promising game with some big technical flaws . " IGN called it a " brilliant , engaging , profound MMORPG , " but added it came with " atrocious technical problems . " PC Gamer magazine said that it " will be [ ... ] the next great MMORPG , " but that the game needed " some serious work " before it would reach its potential ; they would award the game with Best Massively Multiplayer Game the next year . 
 Computer Games Magazine described Anarchy Online as a " ' science @-@ fiction ' Everquest " — EverQuest was a popular fantasy MMORPG at the time — in that it took the traditional fantasy elements of the genre and gave them " science @-@ y sounding " words . They went on to praise the game 's large , detailed game world , and its " evolutionary " user interface . GameSpy said the game 's soundtrack was " grand , cinematic , and very appropriate " in their review . PC Gamer magazine said that the intricate skill system gave the game " incredible character depth " . 
 The dynamic mission system was met with mixed reviews . PC Gamer called it a " brilliant " solution to camping — the practice of waiting for a computer - controlled character in the outdoor game world to appear so that it can be killed and items looted . Computer Games Magazine said that while the missions were a good idea in theory , they are " too simple and similar " , claiming that this caused players to become bored and camp for items outside anyway . Visually , they called the missions " cramped , boxy , and generally unappealing , " compared to the rest of the game . 
 The first booster pack Notum Wars was released in 2002 ; at that time , the first expansion pack Shadowlands had already been announced . Staci Krause of IGN noted the new character creation interface made the game 's introduction to new players easier . The " land control " areas , one of the major additions in Notum Wars , were described by Krause as " not only interesting , but fun . " She also said that the new additions to the game world , and improvements to the 3D rendering engine , " add to the sense that Rubi @-@ Ka is a busy planet . " Yahoo ! criticized the land control areas as being complicated and expensive , and said that participation in battles was difficult for players not in an organization . 
 The Shadowlands expansion was the most critically acclaimed by far , winning several Editor 's Choice Awards from IGN , CNet , GameSpot , GameSpy and others in 2003 . Critics applauded the size and scope of it , such as Andrew Park of GameSpot who called it " absolutely enormous . " Tom Chick of GameSpy praised the " distinctive and exotic " art direction of the new areas . Critics of Shadowlands noted that the expansion 's design was too " fantasy oriented " , as compared to the original game . 
 Alien Invasion , released in 2004 , did not receive the same abundance of praise as its predecessor , although most scores were above 7 out of 10 . The new content it introduced , in critics ' eyes , was not designed for new players . G4 TV wrote that it would be a " tough sell to new players " , but added it " offer [ s ] existing players a solid reason to keep playing . " GameSpy wrote that the expansion 's new features , such as improved user interface and chat system , " make the game more enjoyable to play . " 
 After twelve years , Anarchy Online has become one of the longest @-@ running MMORPGs in operation . Publications who had reviewed the game 's previous additions did not review the Lost Eden expansion in 2006 , or the Legacy of The Xan booster in 2009 . Games Radar 's Sarah Borger wrote of Lost Eden that the game 's aging graphics and user interface " make the world hard to interact with , " but she went on to acclaim the new player versus player content it added . 
 = = = Sales and subscriptions = = = 
 Five days after the game 's launch , public relations director Marit Lund announced that " 35 @,@ 000 registered accounts " had been created . By 2002 , the total number of subscriptions created since launch was stated as 150 @,@ 000 . After the release of the Shadowlands and Alien Invasion expansion packs , total subscriptions had risen to 700 @,@ 000 in late 2004 . Sales of the game , its expansion packs , and monthly customer subscriptions had generated US $ 28 million dollars by 2005 . 
 The " free play " program , started in 2004 , has had the most significant effect on subscriptions to date . ” More than 400 @,@ 000 new players " signed up for free subscriptions in the program 's first ten months according to Funcom CEO Trond Arne Aas . The next year , the number of free subscriptions created , independent of paid subscriptions , was stated as one million . The income from the program — which had generated $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 by its second year — supplements revenue from paid accounts . 
 Funcom attributed " higher than expected " company profits in 2006 to Lost Eden 's release in December of that year . Subscription revenue during this time was described as " steady " and " profitable " . Subscription revenue remained " steady " for the next three years , until 2009 when they were described as " slowly declining " . It was stated that close to two million subscriptions , both free and paid , had been created by July 2008 . 
 = George Kenney = 
 George Churchill Kenney ( 6 August 1889 – 9 August 1977 ) was a United States Army Air Forces general during World War II . He is best known as the commander of the Allied Air Forces in the Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , a position he held from August 1942 until 1945 . 
 Kenney enlisted as a flying cadet in the Aviation Section , U.S. Signal Corps in 1917 , and served on the Western Front with the 91st Aero Squadron . He was awarded a Silver Star and the Distinguished Service Cross for actions in which he fought off German fighters and shot two down . After hostilities ended he participated in the Occupation of the Rhineland . Returning to the United States , he flew reconnaissance missions along the border between the US and Mexico during the Mexican Revolution . Commissioned into the Regular Army in 1920 , he attended the Air Corps Tactical School , and later became an instructor there . He was responsible for the acceptance of Martin NBS @-@ 1 bombers built by Curtis , and test flew them . He also developed techniques for mounting .30 caliber machine guns on the wings of an Airco DH.4 aircraft . 
 In early 1940 , Kenney became Assistant Military Attaché for Air in France . As a result of his observations of German and Allied air operations during the early stages of World War II , he recommended significant changes to Air Corps equipment and tactics . In July 1942 , he assumed command of the Allied Air Forces and Fifth Air Force in General Douglas MacArthur 's Southwest Pacific Area . Under Kenney 's command , the Allied Air Forces developed innovative command structures , weapons , and tactics that reflected Kenney 's orientation towards attack aviation . The new weapons and tactics won perhaps his greatest victory , the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , in March 1943 . In June 1944 he was appointed commander of the Far East Air Forces ( FEAF ) , which came to include the Fifth , Thirteenth , and Seventh Air Forces . 
 In April 1946 , Kenney became the first commander of the newly formed Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) , but his performance in the role was criticized , and he was shifted to become commander of the Air University , a position he held from October 1948 until his retirement from the Air Force in September 1951 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Churchill Kenney was born in Yarmouth , Nova Scotia , Canada , on 6 August 1889 , during a summer vacation taken by his parents to avoid the humidity of the Boston area . The oldest of four children of carpenter Joseph Atwood Kenney and his wife Anne Louise Kenney , née Churchill , Kenney grew up in Brookline , Massachusetts . He graduated from Brookline High School in 1907 and later that year he entered the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , where he pursued a course in civil engineering . After his father left his family , Kenney quit MIT and took various jobs before becoming a surveyor for the Quebec Saguenay Railroad . 
 His mother died in 1913 and Kenney returned to Boston , where he took a job with Stone & Webster . In 1914 he joined the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad as a civil engineer , building a bridge in New London , Connecticut . After this was completed , he formed a partnership , the Beaver Contracting and Engineering Corporation , with a high school classmate , Gordon Glazier . The firm became involved in a number of projects , including the construction of a seawall at Winthrop , Massachusetts , and a bridge over the <unk> River . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The United States entered World War I in April 1917 , and Kenney enlisted as a flying cadet in the Aviation Section , U.S. Signal Corps on 2 June 1917 . He attended ground school at MIT in June and July , and received primary flight training at Hazelhurst Field in Mineola , New York , from Bert Acosta . He was commissioned as a first lieutenant on 5 November 1917 , and departed for France soon after . There , he received further flight training at Issoudun . This ended in February 1918 , when he was assigned to the 91st Aero Squadron . 
 The 91st Aero Squadron flew the Salmson <unk> , a reconnaissance biplane . Kenney crashed one on takeoff on 22 March 1918 . He broke an ankle and a hand , and earned himself the nickname " Bust ' em up George " . His injuries soon healed , and he recorded his first mission on 3 June . Kenney flew one of four aircraft on a mission near <unk> on 15 September 1918 that was attacked by six German Pfalz D.III scouts . His observer shot one of them down , and Kenney was credited with his first aerial victory . For this he was awarded a Silver Star . A second victory followed in similar circumstances on 9 October while he was flying near <unk> in support of the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . Once again , the formation he was flying with was attacked by German fighters . This time he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , which was presented by Brigadier General Billy Mitchell on 10 January 1919 . Kenney 's citation read : 
 For extraordinary heroism in action near <unk> , France , October 9 , 1918 . This officer gave proof of his bravery and devotion to duty when he was attacked by a superior number of aircraft . He accepted combat , destroyed one plane and drove the others off . Notwithstanding that the enemy returned and attacked again in strong numbers , he continued his mission and enabled his observer to secure information of great military value . 
 Kenney remained for a time with the Allied occupation forces in Germany , and was promoted to captain on 18 March 1919 . He returned to the United States in June 1919 . He was sent to Kelly Field , near San Antonio , Texas , and then to McAllen , Texas . As commander of the 8th Aero Squadron , he flew reconnaissance missions along the border with Mexico during the Mexican Revolution . Poor aircraft maintenance , rough landing strips and bad weather led to the squadron losing 22 of its 24 Airco DH.4 aircraft in just one year . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Kenney applied for one of a number of Regular Army commissions offered to reservists after the war , and was commissioned as a captain in the Air Service on 1 July 1920 . While he was in hospital in Texas recovering from an aviation accident , he met a nurse , Helen " Hazel " Dell Richardson , the daughter of a Mobile , Alabama , contractor , George W. Richardson . They were married in Mobile on 6 October 1920 . Hazel miscarried twins , and was warned by her doctor of the danger of another pregnancy , but she strongly wished to have a child . In 1922 , while the couple was living on Long Island , New York , a son , William Richardson Kenney , was born to them , but Hazel died soon afterward from complications . Kenney arranged to have the infant cared for by his neighbor , Alice Steward Maxey , another nurse . On 5 June 1923 Kenney married Maxey in her home town of Gardiner , Maine . 
 From July to November 1920 , Kenney was air detachment commander at Camp Knox , Kentucky . He then became a student at the Air Service Engineering School at McCook Field , near Dayton Ohio . He was the Air Service Inspector at the Curtiss Aeroplane and Motor Company in Garden City , New York , where he was responsible for the acceptance of the fifty Martin NBS @-@ 1 bombers that the Air Service had ordered from Curtis between 1921 and 1923 . Kenney inspected the aircraft , and test flew them . While there , he was reduced in rank from captain to first lieutenant on 18 November 1922 , a common occurrence in the aftermath of World War I when the wartime army was demobilized . He returned to McCook in 1923 , and developed techniques for mounting .30 caliber machine guns on the wings of a <unk> He was promoted to captain again on 3 November 1923 . His daughter , Julia Churchill Kenney , was born in Dayton in June 1926 . 
 In 1926 , Kenney became a student at the Air Corps Tactical School , at Langley Field , Virginia , the Air Corps ' advanced training school . He then attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , the Army 's advanced school where officers were taught how to handle large formations as commanders or staff officers . Most Air Corps officers , including Kenney , considered the course largely irrelevant to them , and therefore a waste of time , but nonetheless a prerequisite for promotion in a ground @-@ oriented Army . Afterwards , he returned to the Air Corps Tactical School as an instructor . He taught classes of attack aviation . He was particularly interested in low @-@ level attacks , as a means of improving accuracy . There were tactical problems with this , as low @-@ flying aircraft were vulnerable to ground fire . There were also technical problems to be solved , as an aircraft could be struck by its own bomb fragments . His interest in attack aviation would ultimately set him apart in an Air Corps where strategic bombardment came to dominate thinking . 
 Kenney reached the pinnacle of his professional education in September 1932 , when he entered the Army War College in Washington , D.C .. At the war college , committees of students studied a number of World War I battles ; Kenney 's committee examined the Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes . They updated actual war plans , Kenney 's study group working on War Plan Orange . They also had to write an individual paper ; Kenney wrote his on " The Proper Composition of the Air Force " . One benefit of the Army War College was that it brought Air Corps officers into contact with ground officers that they would later have to work closely with . Members of Kenney 's class included Richard Sutherland and Stephen Chamberlain , both of whom worked with him on committees . 
 Graduation from the Army War College was normally followed by a staff posting , and on graduation in June 1933 Kenney became an assistant to Major James E. Chaney in the Plans Division of the Office of the Chief of the Air Corps , Major General Benjamin Foulois . He performed various duties , including translating an article by the Italian air power theorist Giulio Douhet into English . In 1934 , he was involved with drafting legislation that granted the Air Corps a greater degree of independence . This legislation prompted the Army to create GHQ Air Force , a centralized , air force @-@ level command headed by an aviator answering directly to the Army Chief of Staff . Lieutenant Colonel Frank M. Andrews was chosen to command it , and selected Kenney as his Assistant Chief of Staff for Plans and Training . 
