 After reviewing Hamdan 's habeas petition , Judge James Robertson of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled in the detainee 's favor . He found that the United States could not hold a military commission unless it was first shown that the detainee was not a prisoner of war . 
 On July 15 , 2005 , a United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit three @-@ judge panel : Arthur Raymond Randolph , John G. Roberts , Jr. and Stephen F. Williams , unanimously reversed the decision of the District Court . Judge Randolph , who wrote the decision , cited the following reasons for the legality of the military commission : 
 Military commissions are legitimate forums to try enemy combatants because they have been approved by Congress . 
 The Geneva Convention is a treaty between nations and as such it does not confer individual rights and remedies . 
 Even if the Geneva Convention could be enforced in U.S. courts , it would not be of assistance to Hamdan at the time because , the war against al @-@ Qaeda was not between two countries , and the Convention guarantees only a certain standard of judicial procedure — a " competent tribunal " — without speaking to the jurisdiction in which the prisoner must be tried . 
 Under the terms of the Geneva Convention , al Qaeda and its members are not covered . 
 Congress authorized such activity by statute . 
 The judicial branch of the United States government cannot enforce the Convention , thus invalidating Hamdan 's argument that he cannot be tried until after his prisoner @-@ of @-@ war status is determined . 
 = = Supreme Court decision = = 
 On November 7 , 2005 , the Supreme Court issued a writ of certiorari to hear the case . The petition was filed on behalf of Hamdan by Neal Katyal of Georgetown University Law Center and Lt. Commander Charles Swift of the U.S. Navy , an alumnus of Seattle University School of Law . The Seattle law firm , Perkins <unk> , provided the additional legal counsel for Hamdan . 
 The case was argued before the court on March 28 , 2006 . Katyal argued on behalf of Hamdan , and Paul Clement , the Solicitor General of the United States , argued on behalf of the government . Chief Justice Roberts recused himself because he had previously ruled on this case as part of the three judge panel on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit . Critics called for Justice Antonin Scalia to recuse himself , since he had made allegedly improper comments about the decision of the case prior to hearing oral arguments ( " I 'm not about to give this man who was captured in a war a full jury trial . I mean it 's crazy " ) but he chose not to do so . 
 The Supreme Court announced its decision on June 29 , 2006 . The Court reversed the ruling of the Court of Appeals , holding that President George W. Bush did not have authority to set up the war crimes tribunals and finding the special military commissions illegal under both military justice law and the Geneva Conventions . 
 = = = Stevens ' opinion for the Court = = = 
 Associate Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the opinion for the Court , which commanded a majority only in part . 
 The Stevens opinion began with the issue of jurisdiction , denying the U.S. government 's motion to dismiss under Section 1005 of the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 ( DTA ) , which gave the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals " exclusive " jurisdiction to review decisions of cases being tried before military commissions . Congress did not include language in the DTA that might have precluded Supreme Court jurisdiction , making the government 's argument to the Court unpersuasive . The government 's argument that Schlesinger v. Councilman , 420 U.S. 738 ( 1975 ) , precludes Supreme Court review was similarly rejected . Councilman applied to a member of the U.S. military who was being tried before a military " court @-@ martial . " In contrast , Hamdan is not a member of the U.S. military , and would be tried before a military " commission , " not a court @-@ martial . To the court , the more persuasive precedent was Ex parte Quirin , in which the court recognized its duty to enforce relevant Constitutional protections by convening a special Term and expediting review of a trial by military convention . The opinion explicitly stated that , because DTA did not bar it from considering the petition , it was unnecessary to decide whether laws unconditionally barring habeas corpus petitions would unconstitutionally violate the Suspension Clause . 
 The opinion then addressed the substantive issues of the case . It explicitly did not decide whether the President possessed the Constitutional power to convene military commissions like the one created to try Hamdan . Even if he possessed such power , those tribunals would either have to be sanctioned by the " laws of war , " as codified by Congress in Article 21 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice ( UCMJ ) , or authorized by statute . As to the statutory authorization , there is nothing in the Authorization for Use of Military Force ( AUMF ) " even hinting " at expanding the President 's war powers beyond those enumerated in Art. 21 . Instead , the AUMF , the UCMJ , and the DTA " at most acknowledge " the President 's authority to convene military commissions only where justified by the exigencies of war , but still operating within the laws of war . 
 As to the laws of war , to the majority these necessarily include the UCMJ and the Geneva Conventions , each of which require more protections than the military commission provides . The UCMJ , Art. 36 ( b ) , which requires that rules applied in courts @-@ martial and military commissions be " uniform insofar as practicable . " Stevens found several substantial deviations , including : 
 The defendant and the defendant 's attorney may be forbidden to view certain evidence used against the defendant ; the defendant 's attorney may be forbidden to discuss certain evidence with the defendant ; 
 Evidence judged to have any probative value may be admitted , including hearsay , unsworn live testimony , and statements gathered through torture ; and 
 Appeals are not heard by courts , but only within the Executive Branch ( with an exception not here relevant ) . 
 These deviations made the commissions violate the UCMJ . 
 The majority also found that the procedures in question violate the " at least " applicable Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions . It found that the D.C. Court of Appeals erred in concluding that the Conventions did not apply : 
 It erroneously relied on Johnson v. Eisentrager , which does not legally control in Hamdan 's case because there was then no deviation between the procedures used in the tribunal and those used in courts @-@ martial ; 
 It erroneously ruled that the Geneva Conventions do not apply because Art. 3 affords minimal protection to combatants " in the territory of " a signatory ; and 
 Those minimal protections include being tried by a " regularly constituted court , " which the military commission is not . 
 Because the military commission does not meet the requirements of the Uniform Code of Military Justice or of the Geneva Convention , it violates the laws of war and therefore cannot be used to try Hamdan . 
 The Court did not hear the question that had decided the district court opinion , namely that Hamdan was entitled to a <unk> Art. 5 hearing instead of a Combatant Status Review Tribunal . 
 Hamdan observes that Article 5 of the Third Geneva Convention requires that if there be “ any doubt ” whether he is entitled to prisoner @-@ of @-@ war protections , he must be afforded those protections until his status is determined by a “ competent tribunal . ” . Because we hold that Hamdan may not , in any event , be tried by the military commission the President has convened pursuant to the November 13 Order and Commission Order No. 1 , the question whether his potential status as a prisoner of war independently renders illegal his trial by military commission may be reserved . 
 = = = = Plurality sections = = = = 
 Because Justice Anthony Kennedy did not join Stevens ' opinion as to several parts , largely on the grounds of judicial parsimony ( that is , having decided that the military commissions had no foundation , the core question of the case was decided and the Court did not need to go further ) , those sections were without a majority in support . 
 In one of these sections , Stevens addressed the issue of whether military commissions can try conspiracy charges . He argued that military commissions are not courts of general jurisdiction , which are able to try any crime ; that the court has traditionally held that offenses against the law of war are triable by military commission only when they are clearly defined as war crimes by statute or strong common law precedent ( cf . Quirin ) . Finally , he found that there was no support in statute or court precedent for law @-@ of @-@ war military commissions trying charges of " conspiracy , " either in the Geneva Conventions , in the earlier Hague Conventions or at the Nuremberg Trials . 
 = = = = Addressing the dissents = = = = 
 As is common in opinions to which there are dissents , Stevens ' opinion addressed the major arguments in dissent . For example : 
 The majority opinion says that Justice Scalia 's argument concerning the jurisdiction @-@ stripping statute ( section <unk> ( 1 ) ) ignores the effective date provision of that very statute ( section 1005 ( h ) ) 
 The majority opinion says that the government 's contention that the war started September 11 , 2001 undercuts Justice Thomas ' argument that it started in 1996 . 
 The majority opinion notes that language in the Congressional Record that the Scalia dissent cites was inserted into the Record after the legislation had been enacted , by Senators Lindsey Graham ( R @-@ SC ) and Jon Kyl ( R @-@ AZ ) , and includes falsified quotations attributed to other persons . 
 = = = Breyer 's concurrence = = = 
 Justice Breyer wrote a one @-@ page concurring opinion , joined by Justices Kennedy , Souter , and Ginsburg . Breyer contended that the commissions are not necessarily categorically prohibited , as long as Congress approves them : 
 Congress has denied the President the legislative authority to create military commissions of the kind at issue here . Nothing prevents the President from returning to Congress to seek the authority he believes necessary . ... Where , as here , no emergency prevents consultation with Congress , judicial insistence upon that consultation does not weaken our Nation 's ability to deal with danger . To the contrary , that insistence strengthens the Nation 's ability to determine — through democratic means — how best to do so . The Constitution places its faith in those democratic means . Our Court today simply does the same . 
 = = = Kennedy 's concurrence = = = 
 Justice Kennedy wrote an opinion concurring in part , joined as to parts I and II by Justices Souter , Ginsburg , and Breyer . 
 In Part One of Kennedy 's concurrence , he raises his concern for the separation of powers ; specifically , how one branch can control all the elements of a case , including avenues of review and appeal . 
 Part Two describes the differences between the procedures of the military commissions and the procedures prescribed by the UCMJ ( fewer jury members , different rules of evidence , et al . ) . These differences demonstrate that the commissions do not operate under the rules of military courts @-@ martial , and raise issues of neutrality with respect to the military judges involved . The negation of fairness safeguards renders the commission a judicial entity which is not a " regularly constituted court " , as required in the Geneva Convention . In sum , Kennedy writes that the commission exceeds congressional bounds , though the Congress is free to re @-@ write the law as they see fit . 
 The third and final Part lists some of Kennedy 's reservations . He would not say that the defendant must be present at all stages of the trial . There should be a reluctance to consider the applicability of Article 75 of Protocol I , since America never signed it and thus it is not binding . Kennedy writes that he feels it was not necessary to delve into the validity of the conspiracy charge , and he expresses no view on the merits of the other limitations of the commission noted in Part V of the Decision . 
 = = = Scalia 's dissent = = = 
 Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion that focuses primarily on issues of jurisdiction , and was joined by Justices Thomas and Alito . 
 Scalia calls the Court 's conclusion to hear the case " patently erroneous . " His first argument relies on the part of the Detainee Treatment Act ( DTA ) ( effective December 30 , 2005 ) that states " [ N ] o court , justice , or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus filed by or on behalf of an alien detained by the Department of Defense at Guantanamo Bay , Cuba . " § 1005 ( e ) ( 1 ) , 119 Stat . 2742 . Scalia 's opinion is that this clause suffices to deny the Supreme Court jurisdiction over the case , calling the majority 's reading of the effectiveness provisions of § 1005 ( h ) , a " mess " . He cites Bruner v. United States and other cases granting " immediate effect in pending cases , absent an explicit statutory reservation . " He wrote that in interpreting the language in the DTA , the majority ignored Supreme Court precedents which established that a statute excluding jurisdiction applies to pending cases unless it has clear language saying it does not . Scalia claimed that the majority had made this interpretation " for the <unk> of reasons " . He was referring to the majority 's use of Senate floor debate records to bolster their interpretation , writing that it " makes no difference " that the language in support of his position was inserted into the Congressional Record after the law was voted upon . He also accuses the majority of ignoring the President 's Signing Statement . 
 Furthermore , he anticipates that expanding the jurisdictions able to hear writs of habeas corpus from Guantanamo Bay would create excessive load on the court system . 
 In addition , Scalia states that the original military tribunal was not shown to be inadequate . Regarding the application of the Suspension Clause of the Constitution , Scalia points to Johnson v. Eisentrager . 
 In its second major argument , Scalia 's opinion argues that petitioners such as Hamdan held outside the territorial jurisdiction of the United States lack the right to the writ of habeas corpus . He points in a footnote to Hamdi v. Rumsfeld , under which he claims Hamdan " is already subject to indefinite detention " " after an adverse determination by his <unk> . " 
 Finally , Justice Scalia chastises the Court for taking equity jurisdiction of the case and draws an analogy with Schlesinger v. Councilman , 420 U.S. 738 ( 1975 ) . In that case , the Supreme Court declined passing judgment on the decision of a military court @-@ martial before it finished its work ; Scalia argues that likewise , the military commissions in Cuba have not yet ended their work regarding Hamdan and therefore should not be subject to judicial oversight . 
 = = = Thomas 's dissent = = = 
 Justice Clarence Thomas read his dissent from the bench when the decision was announced , the first time he did so since his dissent in Stenberg v. Carhart , 530 U.S. 914 ( 2000 ) . 
 In his dissent he asserted that the courts had no jurisdiction for this case for the reasons described in Scalia 's dissent above ; that Hamdan is an illegal combatant and therefore not protected by the Geneva convention ; that the Geneva convention doesn 't prohibit the special court council proposed ; and that the President already had authority to set up the special court council proposed . 
 Citing his dissent in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld , Thomas briefly reprised the roles granted by the Constitution to the three different branches in time of war . He argued that under the framework established in Ex parte Quirin and Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer , President Bush 's decision to try Hamdan before a military commission " is entitled to a heavy measure of deference , " inasmuch as Congress had authorized the President to use all necessary and appropriate force to prevent future acts of terrorism when it passed the Authorization for Use of Military Force . 
 Thomas disagreed strongly with the plurality 's determination that the legality of the charges against Hamdan are doubtful because he was charged " not with an overt act for which he was caught <unk> ... but with an ' agreement ' the inception of which long predated ... the [ relevant armed conflict ] . " He lambasted the plurality for second @-@ guessing the Executive 's judgment , arguing that the Court 's disagreement was based upon " little more than its unsupported assertions " and constituted " an unprecedented departure from the traditionally limited role of the courts with respect to war and an unwarranted intrusion on executive authority . " Thomas further disagreed with the plurality 's assumption that the date of the enactment of the AUMF constituted the start of war , suggesting that Osama bin Laden 's declaration of jihad in August 1996 could be considered a declaration of war . Under this view , the enactment by Congress of the AUMF did not mark the beginning of the conflict with al Qaeda , but rather authorized the Executive to use force to combat it . Additionally , Thomas wrote that under the common law of war , which is " flexible and evolutionary in nature , " war courts are permitted a degree of latitude in their jurisdiction . In holding otherwise , the plurality failed to properly defer to the judgment of the Executive and military commanders . 
 Referring to the Court 's recent decision in <unk> v. United States , Thomas noted with some incredulity that while the Justices that in the instant decision " disregard [ ed ] the commander @-@ in @-@ chief 's wartime decisions , " they had no trouble deferring to the judgment of the Corps of Engineers in upholding the agency 's " wildly implausible conclusion that a storm drain is a tributary of the waters of the United States . " " It goes without saying , " Thomas added , " that there is much more at stake here than storm drains . " 
 Thomas likewise disagreed with the plurality 's holding that even if the government had charged Hamdan with a crime that was clearly cognizable by military commission , the commission would still lack power to proceed because it does not comply with the terms of the UCMJ and the four Geneva Conventions signed in 1949 . He again emphasized that the jurisdiction of military commissions is not prescribed by statute but is rather " adapted in each instance to the need that called it forth . " Thomas argued that the Court 's conclusion that Article 36 of the UCMJ amounts to an attempt by Congress to curb the Executive 's power is " contrary to the text and structure of the UCMJ " and also inconsistent with prior decisions of the Court . Addressing Hamdan 's claims under the Geneva Convention , Thomas argued that these are foreclosed by the Court 's holding in Johnson v. Eisentrager , where the majority noted that the respondents could not assert " that anything in the Geneva Convention makes them immune from prosecution or punishment for war crimes . " Further , even if Hamdan 's claim under Common Article 3 was not foreclosed by Eisentrager , it is nevertheless meritless insofar as the President has accepted the determination of the Department of Justice that Common Article 3 of Geneva does not extend to al Qaeda detainees . Thomas asserted that the Court 's duty in this instance to " defer to the President 's understanding of the provision at issue " is made even more acute by the fact that he is acting pursuant to his authority as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . 
 = = = Alito 's dissent = = = 
 In a seven page dissent , Alito sided with Thomas and Scalia 's explanation of why they believe the courts had no jurisdiction for this case . He explained why he believed the military commission in this case was legal . Alito disagreed with the holding of the Court which found that military commissions did not meet the definition of " a regularly constituted court " as required in Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions . Alito argued that Common Article 3 was satisfied in Hamdan because the military commissions : 
 qualify as courts , 
 were appointed and established in accordance with domestic law , and 
 any procedural improprieties that might occur in particular cases can be reviewed in those cases . 
 Alito specifically disagreed with the opinions supporting the judgment which held that the military commission before which Hamdan would be tried is not " a regularly constituted court , " and that the military commission is " illegal , " because the commission 's procedures allegedly would not comply with 10 U.S.C. § 836 . Alito wrote that the military commission was " regularly " or " properly " constituted , using the example of the various types of local , state , federal and international courts and how " although these courts are ' differently constituted ' and differ substantially in many other respects , they are all ' regularly constituted . ' " 
 Alito stated that Geneva Convention Common Article 3 does not specifically rule out military commissions , and further points to the commentary in Article 66 , which was the article the Court used in support of its opinion . Alito argued that even if Common Article 3 recognizes a prohibition on " special tribunals , " which Article 66 does prohibit , such a prohibition is not applicable to Hamdan 's tribunal because the military commissions were " regular . " Further , because the Bush Administration might conduct the hundreds of such tribunals according to the same procedures , Alito concluded that " it seems that petitioner 's tribunal , like the hundreds of others respondents propose to conduct , is very much regular and not at all special . " 
 Alito wrote that " the commissions were appointed , set up , and established pursuant to an order of the President , just like the commission in Ex parte Quirin , 317 U. S. 1 ( 1942 ) , and the Court acknowledges that Quirin recognized that the statutory predecessor of 10 U.S.C. § 821 ' preserved ' the President 's power ' to convene military commissions . ' " Alito disagreed with Kennedy 's assertion that " an acceptable degree of independence from the Executive is necessary to render a commission ' regularly constituted ' by the standards of our Nation 's system of justice , " arguing that Kennedy " offers no support for this proposition ( which in any event seems to be more about fairness or integrity than regularity ) , " and further arguing that the commission in Quirin was no different from the present case . 
 Finally , Alito wrote that the commission procedures as a whole do not provide a basis for deeming the commissions to be illegitimate . He points to two procedural rules , which the Court found fault with : First , the rule " allowing the Secretary of Defense to change the governing rules ' from time to time ' ; " and second , the rule that " permits the admission of any evidence that would have ' probative value to a reasonable person ' " . Alito asserts these rules cannot make the commissions illegitimate . 
 On the first rule Alito argued that not all changes during the course of a trial prejudice the defendant , and that some may even help the defendant . In addition , " If a change is made and applied during the course of an ongoing proceeding and if the accused is found guilty , the validity of that procedure can be considered in the review proceeding for that case . " 
 On the second rule , Alito argued that this rule does not violate the international standard incorporated into Common Article 3 , because " rules of evidence differ from country to country " and " much of the world does not follow aspects of our evidence rules , such as the general prohibition against the admission of hearsay . " 
 = = Reaction to the decision = = 
 The impact of the decision on the petitioner ( Hamdan ) was that he can still be tried ; however , his trial must be in a court , such as a military court @-@ martial , or possibly a commission that has court @-@ like protections . 
 Shortly thereafter , the Military Commissions Act of 2006 may have raised again the issue of which court would hear cases such as Hamdan 's . The U.S. Department of Justice has filed notice with several federal judges , and given notice to hundreds of detainees , that the habeas petitions of alien unlawful enemy combatants ( or those whose status is to be determined ) are not within the jurisdiction of those courts . 
 The passage and signing of the Act follows through on President Bush 's expressed intention to get explicit Congressional authorization to use military tribunals . Press Secretary Tony Snow echoed the plan to appeal to Congress . 
 However , even among Senate Republicans , there were conflicting views . Senators Arlen Specter and Lindsey Graham ( the latter a former military prosecutor ) indicated Congress would work quickly to authorize tribunals , while influential Senator John Warner suggested a cautious and deliberative response . The potential for Congressional action also provided an avenue for politicking , as Republicans threatened Democratic members of Congress with being labeled weak on terrorism if they did not authorize tribunals . 
 On July 7 , 2006 the Secretary of Defense issued a memo " Application of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to the Treatment of Detainees in the Department of Defense " . This may be the basis of a July 11 , 2006 , statement by the Bush administration that all detainees at Guantanamo Bay and in U.S. military custody everywhere are entitled to humane treatment under the Geneva Conventions . This declaration appears not to cover CIA detainees and is ambiguous with respect to the interpretation of Common Article 3 and the definition of " humane treatment " . 
 There were some indications that the other detainees being held at facilities throughout the world ( e.g. , Bagram Air Base and black sites ) , might use the Supreme Court 's ruling to challenge their treatment . Their reasoning may be that since the Geneva Conventions afforded protection to Hamdan , its other protections might be effective for them as well . Commentators expressed mixed opinions about the strength of this argument . 
 = = = Implications for theories of executive power = = = 
 The decision may have important implications for other disputes relating to the extent of executive power and the unitary executive theory . In particular , it may undermine the Bush administration 's legal arguments for domestic wiretapping by the National Security Agency without warrants as required by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act . 
 = = = Charges dismissed / new charges = = = 
 On June 5 , 2007 , Hamdan and Canadian youth Omar Khadr , had all charges against them dismissed . The judges presiding over their military commissions ruled that the Military Commissions Act did not give them the jurisdiction to try Hamdan and Khadr , because it only authorized the trial of " unlawful enemy combatants " . Hamdan and Khadr 's Combatant Status Review Tribunals , like those of all the other Guantanamo captives , had confirmed them as " enemy combatants " . 
 In December 2007 , a tribunal determined that Hamdan was an " unlawful enemy combatant . " In August 2008 he was convicted by the military commission of the lesser of two charges and received a sentence of 66 months , reduced by time served to five and a half months . In November 2008 , the US transferred him to Yemen , where he served his last month . After release , he joined his family in Sana . In October 2012 , the US Appeals Court for the District of Columbia , overturned Hamdan 's conviction , acquitting him of the charge . 
 = = = Court documents = = = 
 Full text of the decision PDF ( 1 @.@ 31 <unk> ) 
 Full text ( HTML with links to precedents , statutes , and U.S. Constitution ) 
 Full text – in <unk> , HTML with links . 
 U.S. Supreme Court Official Reporter 's Transcript of Oral Argument PDF ( 301 KiB ) 
 Full text transcript of the oral argument PDF ( 301 KiB ) 
 Groups File Amicus Briefs in Case Involving Osama Bin Laden 's Driver , Physicians for Human Rights 
 Petition for a writ of certiorari : Brief for the respondents in opposition , US Department of Justice , December 2004 
 Text of the July 15th ruling PDF ( 67 @.@ 7 KiB ) , U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , July 15 , 2005 . 
 <unk> OF LEGAL <unk> AND <unk> AS <unk> <unk> IN <unk> OF <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> , v <unk> H. <unk> , <unk> OF <unk> , et al . , No. 05 @-@ 184 . 
 = = = Pentagon documents = = = 
 Military Commission Order No. 1 
 = = = News reports , commentary = = = 
 High Court Rejects Detainee Tribunals , Washington Post , June 29 , 2006 
 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld : The Supreme Court <unk> International Law , JURIST , June 30 , 2006 
 Hamdan , Common Article 3 and the True Spirit of the Law of War , JURIST , July 3 , 2006 
 U.S. Charges Yemeni Described as Bin Laden Bodyguard , Washington Post , July 14 , 2004 
 Fourth Guantanamo Detainee Is Charged , Washington Post , July 14 , 2004 
 Bin Laden driver charged in first Guantanamo hearing , USA Today , August 25 , 2004 
 Court permits terrorists to be tried by military commissions , Washington Legal Foundation , July 15 , 2005 
 Protecting America 's Freedom : National Security and Defense , Washington Legal Foundation , July 15 , 2005 
 " The Nation 's Second @-@ Highest Court " <unk> Military Commissions , <unk> , July 20 , 2005 
 Understanding Hamdan v. Rumsfeld 
 Why Hamdan is Right about Conspiracy Liability , JURIST 
 Why the Court Said No , David D. Cole , New York Review of Books , August 10 , 2006 
 " George Clooney To Direct Matt Damon In Aaron Sorkin 's War On Terror " . MTV . September 23 , 2009 . Archived from the original on September 23 , 2009 . 
 = New wave of British heavy metal = 
 The new wave of British heavy metal ( commonly abbreviated as NWOBHM ) was a nationwide musical movement that started in the United Kingdom in the late 1970s and achieved international attention by the early 1980s . Journalist Geoff Barton coined the term in a May 1979 issue of the British music newspaper Sounds to describe the emergence of new heavy metal bands in the late 1970s , during the period of punk rock 's decline and the dominance of new wave music . 
 Although encompassing diverse mainstream and underground styles , the music of the NWOBHM is best remembered for drawing on the heavy metal of the 1970s and infusing it with the intensity of punk rock to produce fast and aggressive songs . The DIY attitude of the new metal bands led to the spread of raw @-@ sounding , self @-@ produced recordings and a proliferation of independent record labels . Song lyrics were usually about escapist themes such as mythology , fantasy , horror and the rock lifestyle . 
 The NWOBHM began as an underground phenomenon growing in parallel to punk and largely ignored by the media . It was only through the promotion of rock DJ Neal Kay and Sounds ' campaigning that it reached the public consciousness and gained radio airplay , recognition and success in the UK . The movement involved mostly young , white , male and working – class musicians and fans , who suffered the hardships brought on by rising unemployment for years after the 1973 – 75 recession . As a reaction to their bleak reality , they created a community separate from mainstream society to enjoy each other 's company and their favourite loud music . The NWOBHM was heavily criticised for the excessive hype generated by local media in favour of mostly talentless musicians . Nonetheless , it generated a renewal in the genre of heavy metal music and furthered the progress of the heavy metal subculture , whose updated behavioural and visual codes were quickly adopted by metal fans worldwide after the spread of the music to Europe , North America and Japan . 
 The movement spawned perhaps a thousand metal bands , but only a few survived the advent of MTV and the rise of the more commercial glam metal in the second half of the 1980s . Among them , Iron Maiden and Def Leppard became international stars , and Motörhead and Saxon had considerable success . Other groups , such as Diamond Head , Venom and Raven , remained underground but were a major influence on the successful extreme metal subgenres of the late 1980s and 1990s . Many bands from the NWOBHM reunited in the 2000s and remained active through live performances and new studio albums . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Social unrest = = = 
 In the second half of the 1970s , the United Kingdom was in a state of social unrest and widespread poverty as a result of the ineffective social politics of both Conservative and Labour Party governments during a three @-@ year period of economic recession . As a consequence of deindustrialisation , the unemployment rate was exceptionally high , especially among working class youth . It continued to rise in the early 1980s , peaking in February 1983 . The discontent of so many people caused social unrest with frequent strikes , and culminated in a series of riots ( see 1981 Brixton riot , 1981 Toxteth riots ) . During this period , the mass of young people , deprived of the prospect of even relatively low @-@ skill jobs that were available to the previous generations , searched for different ways to earn money in the music and entertainment businesses . The explosion of new bands and new musical styles coming from the UK in the late 1970s was a result of their efforts to make a living in the economic depression that hit the country before the governments of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher . 
 The desperation and the violent reaction of a generation robbed of a safe future are well @-@ represented by the British punk movement of 1977 – 78 , whose rebellion against the establishment continued diluted in the new wave and post @-@ punk music of the 1980s . These self @-@ proclaimed punks were politically militant , relishing their anarchic attitude and stage practices like pogo dancing . They wore short and spiked hairstyles or shaved heads , often with safety pins and ripped clothes and considered musical prowess unimportant as long as the music was simple and loud . However , not all working @-@ class male youths embraced the punk movement ; some preferred to escape from their grim reality in heavy metal , which was equally effective in providing fun , stress relief , and peer companionship – otherwise denied because of their unemployment . 
 = = = Heavy rock in the UK = = = 
 The UK was a cradle of the first wave of heavy metal , which was born at the end of the 1960s and flowered in the early 1970s . Of the many British bands that came to prominence during that period , Led Zeppelin , Black Sabbath and Deep Purple achieved worldwide success and critical acclaim . The success of the music genre , usually called heavy rock at the time , generated a community of UK fans with strong ties to psychedelia , hippie doctrines and biker subculture . Each of these bands was in crisis in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1970s : Led Zeppelin were plagued by discord and personal tragedies and had drastically reduced their activities , Black Sabbath finally fired their charismatic but unreliable frontman Ozzy Osbourne , and Deep Purple disbanded . As a consequence , the whole movement lost much of its momentum and media interest , which were refocused on what British writer Malc Macmillan calls " the more fashionable or lucrative markets of the day " such as disco , glam , mod revival , new wave and electronic music . Just like progressive rock acts and other mainstream music groups of the 1970s , heavy rock bands were viewed as – in the words of journalist Garry Bushell – " lumbering dinosaurs " by a music press infatuated with punk rock and new wave . Some writers even declared the premature demise of heavy metal altogether . 
 The crisis of British heavy rock giants left space for the rise of other rock bands in the mid @-@ 1970s , like : Queen , Hawkwind , Budgie , Bad Company , Status Quo and Nazareth , all of which had multiple chart entries in the UK and had conducted successful international tours . The British chart results of the period show that there was still a vast audience for heavy metal in the country and upcoming bands Thin Lizzy , UFO and Judas Priest , also had tangible success and media coverage in the late 1970s . Foreign hard rock acts , such as Blue Öyster Cult and Kiss from the US , Rush from Canada , Scorpions from Germany , and especially AC / DC from Australia , climbed the British charts in the same period . 
 = = = Motörhead = = = 
 The band Motörhead was founded in 1975 by already experienced musicians . Their leader Ian " Lemmy " Kilmister was a former member of the space rock band Hawkwind , Larry Wallis had played with Pink Fairies , and Eddie Clarke had been a member of Curtis Knight 's Zeus . Their previous experience is one element which divides critics and fans over whether the band belongs to the new wave of British heavy metal . Some believe that the band should be considered an inspiration for the movement but not part of it , because they had signed recording contracts , toured the country , and had chart success before any NWOBHM band had stepped out of their local club scene . Motörhead were also the only metal band of the period recording songs with veteran BBC radio DJ John Peel for his Peel Sessions program and the first to reach No. 1 in the UK Albums Chart with the live album No Sleep ' til Hammersmith in June 1981 . Lemmy himself said , " the NWOBHM ... didn 't do us much good " , because Motörhead " came along a bit too early for it " . 
 Other critics view Motörhead as the first significant exponent of the movement and the first band to fully implement a crossover between punk rock and heavy metal . Their fast music , the renunciation of technical virtuosity in favour of sheer loudness , and their uncompromising attitude were welcomed equally by punks and heavy metal fans . Motörhead were supported by many NWOBHM bands on tour , and they also shared the stage with Lemmy 's friends punk band The Damned . Motörhead 's musical style became very popular during the NWOBHM , making them a fundamental reference for the nascent movement and for musicians of various metal subgenres in the following decades . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Identity and style = = = 
 The NWOBHM involved both musicians and fans who were largely young , male and white and shared class origin , ethic and aesthetic values . American sociologist Deena Weinstein , in her book Heavy Metal : The Music and Its Culture , describes the rise and growth of the movement as the achievement of maturity for heavy metal , after its birth in the early 1970s and before branching out into various subgenres in the following years . British heavy metal fans , commonly known as <unk> , metalheads or headbangers for the violent , rhythmic shaking of their heads in time to the music , dismissed the simplistic image of rebellious youth inherited from the counterculture of the 1960s and the psychedelic attachments characteristic of heavy rock in the 1970s , updating the shared principles and codes of the heavy metal subculture and definitely separating it from mainstream society . 
 Towards the end of the 1970s , British metalheads coalesced into a closed community of peers that exalted power and celebrated masculinity . According to Deena Weinstein 's analysis , their male camaraderie and the general absence of women in their ranks did not turn into machismo and misogyny . In the same article , she wrote that British heavy metal : " is not racist , despite its uniformly white performers , and its lyrics are devoid of racial references . " Another characteristic of the subculture was its latent homophobia , less violent but not dissimilar to British skinheads ' disposition ; in his book Running with the Devil : Power , Gender and Madness in Heavy Metal Music , Robert Walser calls it a " collective affirmation of heterosexuality " , and in a journal British sociologist John Clarke regards it as " a reaction against the erosion of traditionally available stereotypes of masculinity " . Headbangers showed little interest in political and social problems , finding in each other 's company , in the consumption of beer and in the music , the means to escape their bleak reality ; for this reason they were often accused of nihilism or escapism . In contrast with punks , they loved musicianship and made idols of virtuoso guitarists and vocalists , viewing the live show as the full realisation of their status . The fans were very loyal to the music , to each other and to the bands with whom they shared origins and from whom they required coherence with their values , authenticity and continuous accessibility . To depart from this strict code meant being marked as a " sell out " or " poseur " and being somewhat excluded from the community . The lyrics of the song " Denim and Leather " by Saxon reflect precisely the condition of British metalheads in those years of great enthusiasm . Access to this male @-@ dominated world for female musicians and fans was not easy and only women who adapted to their male counterparts ' standards and codes were accepted , as attested by Girlschool and Rock Goddess , the only notable all @-@ female metal bands of that era . 
 The music , philosophy and lifestyle of heavy metal bands and fans were often panned by both left @-@ wing critics and conservative public opinion , described as senseless , ridiculous to the limit of self @-@ parody , and even dangerous for the young generation . The 1984 mockumentary This Is Spinal Tap addressed many idiosyncrasies of British metal bands , showing comic sides of that world which external observers would judge absurd . Instead metal musicians regarded the movie 's content as much too real . 
 = = = Visual aspects = = = 
 The dress code of the British headbangers reflected the newly found cohesion of the movement and recalled the look of 1960s rockers and American bikers . The common elements were long hair and jeans , black or white T @-@ shirts with band logos and cover art and leather jackets or denim vests adorned with patches . Following the example of Judas Priest , elements of S & M fashion entered the metal wardrobe of the 1980s and it became typical to show off metallic studs and ornaments , or for metal musicians to wear spandex or leather trousers . Elements of militaria , such as bullet belts and insignia , were also introduced at this time . This style of dress quickly became the uniform of metalheads worldwide . 
 Most bands of the NWOBHM had the same look as their fans and produced rock shows without special visual effects . A notable exception was Iron Maiden , which created the grisly character Eddie the Head as a stage prop to enrich their performances very early in their career . Other exceptions were Demon , Cloven Hoof and Samson , which used various props , costumes and tricks in their shows , while Pagan Altar and Venom became well known for their elaborate scenography inspired by shock rock and Satanism . 
 = = = Musical and lyrical elements = = = 
 The NWOBHM – comprising bands with very different influences and styles – was promoted as both a movement and a distinct music genre only in its formative years during the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1970s . Especially in those early years , what characterised the flood of new music was its raw sound , due in large part to low @-@ budget productions , but also to the amateurish talents of many young bands . Those young musicians were also linked by a shared inspiration from the works of the aforementioned successful heavy rock bands of the late 1960s and 1970s , and kept a sort of continuity with the earlier acts , whose music had temporarily gone out of fashion but was still thriving underground . However , the media of the 1980s and the promotional literature of record labels typically placed rock music that employed loud guitars but was not classifiable as " punk " under the blanket term " heavy metal " , subsuming the entire spectrum of NWOBHM bands within a single music genre . 
 Following a largely organic and uncalculated impulse , many of these new bands infused classic heavy metal with the immediacy of pub rock and the intensity of punk rock , implementing to various degrees the crossover of genres started by Motörhead ; in general they shunned ballads , de @-@ emphasised harmonies and produced shorter songs with fast tempos and a very aggressive sound based on riffs and power chords , featuring vocals ranging from high pitched wails to gruff and low growls . Iron Maiden , Angel Witch , Saxon , Holocaust , Tygers of Pan Tang , Girlschool , Tank and More are notable performers of this style , which bands such as <unk> , Jaguar , Raven and Venom stretched to produce even more extreme results . Critics consider this new approach to heavy metal the greatest musical accomplishment of the NWOBHM and an important evolutionary step for the genre . 
 A style more melodic and more akin to the hard rock of bands like Rainbow , Magnum , UFO , Thin Lizzy and Whitesnake was equally represented during the NWOBHM . The music of Def Leppard , Praying Mantis , White Spirit , Demon , Shy , Gaskin , <unk> and many others , contained hooks as much as riffs , often retained a closer link with blues rock , included power ballads and featured keyboards , acoustic instruments and melodic and soaring vocals . After the peak of the movement in 1981 , this style was favoured by the media and gained greater acceptance among the British audience ; it became prevalent when bands usually playing the more aggressive style of metal adapted to the more popular sound , which resembled that of mainstream American acts . These changes in musical direction disoriented some fans and led them to reject those bands which were perceived as having compromised key elements of their musical identity in the pursuit of success . 
 These two styles do not exhaust all of the musical influences found in the British metal music of the early 1980s , because many bands were also inspired by progressive rock ( Iron Maiden , Diamond Head , Blitzkrieg , Demon , Saracen , Shiva , Witchfynde ) , boogie rock ( Saxon , Vardis , Spider , Le Griffe ) and glam rock ( Girl , Wrathchild ) . Doom metal bands Pagan Altar and Witchfinder General were also part of the NWOBHM and their albums are considered among the best examples of that already established subgenre . 
 British writer John Tucker writes that NWOBHM bands were in general fuelled by their first experiences with adult life and " their lyrics rolled everything into one big youthful fantasy " . They usually avoided social and political themes in their lyrics , or treated them in a shallow " street @-@ level " way , preferring topics from mythology , the occult , fantasy , science fiction and horror films . Songs about romance and lust were rare , but the frequent lyrics about male bonding and the rock lifestyle contain many sexist allusions . Christian symbolism is often present in the lyrics and cover art , as is the figure of Satan , used more as a shocking and macabre subject than as the antireligious device of 1990s ' black metal subculture . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = An underground movement ( 1975 – 78 ) = = = 
 Thin Lizzy , UFO and Judas Priest were already playing international arenas , when new heavy metal bands , composed of very young people , debuted in small venues in many cities in the UK . The country 's larger venues were usually reserved for chart @-@ topping disco music , because their use as rock music clubs was considered much less profitable . Like most British bands in the past , the new groups spent their formative years playing live in clubs , pubs , dance halls and social circles for low wages ; this training honed their skills , created a local fan base and enabled them to come in contact with managers and record label agents . 
 Angel Witch , Iron Maiden , Praying Mantis and Samson from London , Son of a Bitch ( later Saxon ) from Barnsley , Diamond Head from Stourbridge , Marseille from Liverpool , White Spirit from Hartlepool , Witchfynde from Derbyshire , Vardis from Wakefield , Def Leppard from Sheffield , Raven and Tygers of Pan Tang from around Newcastle , and Holocaust from Edinburgh were the most important metal bands founded between 1975 and 1977 that animated the club scene in their respective cities and towns . The first bands of the newborn musical movement competed for space in venues with punk outfits , often causing clubs to specialise , presenting only punk or only rock and hard rock . Differences in ideology , attitude and looks also caused heated rivalries between the two audiences . What punk and NWOBHM musicians had in common was their " do @-@ it @-@ yourself " attitude toward the music business and the consequent practice of self @-@ production and self @-@ distribution of recorded material in the form of audio cassette demos , or privately pressed singles , aimed initially at local supporters . It also led to the birth and diffusion of small independent record labels , often an extension of record shops and independent recording studios , which sometimes produced both punk and metal releases . Indie labels are considered important to the movement 's evolution , because they removed the intrusion of corporate business which had hindered rock music in the late 1970s , giving local bands the chance to experiment with more extreme forms of music . 
 While British and international media covered punk intensively , the new grassroots metal movement remained underground until 1978 , largely ignored by popular music magazines such as New Musical Express , The Face and Melody Maker and by radio stations . News about the bands and music circulated by word @-@ of @-@ mouth and fanzines , or through interested DJs , who travelled the country from club to club . Neal Kay was one of those DJs ; he started to work in 1975 at a disco club called The Bandwagon in Kingsbury , North West London , housed in the back @-@ room of the Prince of Wales pub and equipped with a massive sound system . He transformed his nights at The Bandwagon into The Heavy Metal Soundhouse , a spot specialising in hard rock and heavy metal music and a place to listen to albums of established acts and to demos of new bands , which circulated among fans through cassette trading . Besides participating in air guitar competitions and watching live shows , the audience could also vote for Kay 's selections . The DJ made a weekly Heavy Metal Top 100 list of the most requested songs at The Soundhouse , by both newcomers and established bands and sent it to record shops and to the music journal Sounds , the only paper that showed interest in the developing scene . Many young musicians realised that they were not alone in playing metal only through that weekly list , which included bands from all over the country . At the time , Geoff Barton was a staffer at Sounds who wrote features on the new up @-@ and @-@ coming metal bands and was pivotal in directing the developing subculture of metalheads with his articles . At the suggestion of his editor Alan Lewis and in an attempt to find a common stylistic element in the bands ' music , he used the term " New Wave of British Heavy Metal " for the first time in his review of a gig on the Metal Crusade tour featuring Angel Witch , Iron Maiden and Samson at The Music Machine in London on 8 May 1979 . The term soon became the identifier for the whole movement . 
 = = = First wave ( 1979 – 81 ) = = = 
 Compilation albums featuring bands from the nascent movement started to circulate , issued by Neat Records , Heavy Metal Records and Ebony Records , companies that became leaders in the independent metal label market during the 1980s . The fresh outlet of Neal Kay 's chart , the attention of Sounds and the many compilations issued by independent labels , focused the efforts of the new bands on producing demos and singles . Iron Maiden 's The Soundhouse Tapes is one of the best known collections of such demos . As Barton recalled : " There were hundreds of these bands . Maybe even thousands . Barely a day would go by without a clutch of new NWOBHM singles arriving in the Sounds office . " 
 Tommy Vance , a BBC radio host , took notice of the phenomenon and played singles by the new metal bands on his late night Friday Rock Show on BBC Radio 1 . Along with John Peel 's broadcast , Vance 's was the only corporate radio show to feature songs from underground metal acts , many of whom were invited to play live at BBC studios under the supervision of long @-@ time collaborator and producer , Tony Wilson . Alice 's Restaurant Rock Radio , a pirate FM radio station in London , also championed the new bands on air and with their own " roadshow " in rock pubs and clubs . 
 Despite the transition of the young bands from being local attractions to touring extensively in the UK , major record labels ' A & R agents still did not recognise the rising new trend . Thus , most new bands signed contracts with small independent labels , which could afford only limited printings of singles and albums and usually offered only national distribution . Many other bands , including Iron Maiden , Def Leppard and Diamond Head , self @-@ produced their first releases and sold them through mail order or at concerts . Saxon were the first to sign with an internationally distributed label , the French Carrere Records , followed by Def Leppard with Phonogram in August 1979 , and Iron Maiden with EMI in December 1979 . In early 1980 , EMI tested the market with the Neal Kay @-@ compiled album Metal for Muthas and a UK tour of the bands that had contributed to the compilation , eventually signing Angel Witch ( who were dropped after the release of their first single ) and Ethel the Frog . 
 Sounds gave Metal for Muthas a poor review , but the album was nevertheless a commercial success and may have been instrumental in encouraging major labels to sign a few more bands . A II Z , Fist , White Spirit and Praying Mantis were dropped after the release of their debut albums , while Tygers of Pan Tang , Samson , More , Demon and Girlschool had more success and lasted longer on major labels ' line @-@ ups . The new releases by these bands were better produced and some of them , with the support of intensive tours in the UK and Europe , obtained good chart results . The best chart performances of that period were for Iron Maiden 's debut album Iron Maiden and for Wheels of Steel by Saxon , which reached No. 4 and No. 5 on the UK Albums Chart respectively , while their singles " Running Free " , " Wheels of Steel " and " 747 ( Strangers in the Night ) " entered the UK Singles Chart Top 50 . The immediate consequence of that success was increased media coverage for metal bands , which included appearances on the British music TV shows Top of the Pops and The Old Grey Whistle Test . The emergence of many new bands in the period between 1978 and 1980 was another remarkable effect of the promotion of the movement to a relevant national phenomenon . 
 The momentum behind the NWOBHM also benefited already established bands , which reclaimed the spotlight with new and acclaimed releases . Ex @-@ Deep Purple singer Ian Gillan returned to sing heavy metal with the album Mr. Universe in 1979 and was on the forefront of the British metal scene with his band Gillan in the following years . His former Deep Purple band mate Ritchie Blackmore also climbed the UK charts with his hard rock group Rainbow 's releases Down to Earth ( 1979 ) and Difficult to Cure ( 1981 ) . Black Sabbath recovered and returned to success with the albums Heaven and Hell ( 1980 ) and Mob Rules ( 1981 ) , featuring the ex @-@ Rainbow singer Ronnie James Dio . 1980 saw several other entries by hard rock and heavy metal bands in the top 10 of the British charts : MSG 's first album peaked at No. 8 , Whitesnake 's Ready an ' Willing at No. 6 , Judas Priest 's best @-@ seller British Steel and Motörhead ' s Ace of Spades at No. 4 , while Back in Black by AC / DC reached number one . 
 As proof of the successful revival of the British hard rock and metal scene , tours and gigs of old and new acts were sold out , both at home and in other European countries , where the movement had spread . Groups arising from the NWOBHM were no longer precluded from world tours and were often chosen as opening acts for major bands in arenas and stadiums . Iron Maiden supported Kiss in Europe in 1980 , embarking on their first world tour as headliners in 1981 , as well as opening for Judas Priest and UFO in the US . Def Leppard visited the US for the first time in 1980 for a three @-@ month trek supporting Pat Travers , Judas Priest , Ted Nugent , AC / DC and Sammy Hagar . Saxon opened for Judas Priest in Europe and for Rush and AC / DC in the US in 1981 . NWOBHM bands were already present on the roster of the famous Reading Festival in 1980 , and were quickly promoted to headliners for the 1981 and 1982 events . The 1980 edition was also remarkable for the violent protests against Def Leppard , whose declared interest in the American market was received badly by British fans . In addition to Reading , a new festival called Monsters of Rock was created in 1980 at Castle Donington , England , to showcase only hard rock and heavy metal acts . 
 = = = Into the mainstream ( 1982 – 83 ) = = = 
 The NWOBHM eventually found space in newspapers and music magazines other than Sounds , as journalists caught up with the " next big thing " happening in the UK . Melody Maker even published a weekly heavy metal chart based on record shop sales . Sounds ' publisher exploited his support of the movement to launch the first issue of Kerrang ! , a colour magazine directed by Geoff Barton devoted exclusively to hard rock and heavy metal , in June 1981 . Kerrang ! was an unexpected success and soon became the reference magazine for metalheads worldwide , followed shortly by the American Circus and Hit Parader , the German Metal Hammer and the British Metal Forces . The attention of international media meant more record sales and more world tours for NWOBHM bands , whose albums entered many foreign charts . Their attempts to climb the British charts culminated in Iron Maiden 's The Number of the Beast topping the UK Albums Chart on 10 April 1982 and staying at number 1 for two weeks . The album charted at number 33 in the US , where the band acquired a reputation as Devil @-@ worshippers due to the album cover 's depiction of a hellish scene . 
 The success of the music produced by the movement and its passage from underground phenomenon to mainstream genre , prompted its main promoter Geoff Barton to declare the NWOBHM finished in 1981 . He felt disappointed by the low quality of the new bands and frustrated by the ease with which record labels exploited enthusiasm for heavy metal . Coincidentally , in the same year , the Bandwagon was closed and the Prince of Wales pub was subsequently demolished to build a restaurant . Although the movement had lost some of its appeal for diehard fans , as evidenced by the increased popularity of American @-@ influenced AOR releases on sales @-@ based national polls , it retained enough vitality to launch a second wave of bands , which rose from the underground and released their first albums in 1982 and 1983 . 
 NWOBHM bands had been touring steadily in the United States , but had not yet received enough FM radio airplay there to make a significant impression on American charts . Def Leppard remedied that , releasing Pyromania at the beginning of 1983 , an album with a more melodic and FM @-@ friendly approach in comparison with the more aggressive sound of their earlier music . The band 's goal of reaching a wider international audience , which included many female fans , was attained completely in the US , where Pyromania peaked at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 chart behind Michael Jackson 's Thriller . Thanks to a string of hit singles and the heavy rotation of their music videos on the recently launched MTV , the album had sold more than six millions copies in the US by 1984 and made Def Leppard superstars . The overwhelming international success of Pyromania induced both American and British bands to follow Def Leppard 's example , giving a decisive boost to the more commercial and melodic glam metal and heralding the end of the NWOBHM . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The UK had been a home for music video pioneers . When MTV started broadcasting in 1982 , the importance of videos abruptly grew , changing from an occasional promotional fancy to an indispensable means of reaching an audience . MTV filled its programs with many hard rock and heavy metal videos , but these were too expensive for bands who either had no recording contract or had signed to small , independent labels . Moreover , music videos exalted the visual appeal of a band , an area where some British metal groups were deficient . So the NWOBHM suffered the same decline as other musical phenomena that were based on low @-@ budget productions and an underground following . Many of its leaders , such as Diamond Head , Tygers of Pan Tang , Angel Witch and Samson , were unable to follow up on their initial success ; their attempts to update their look and sound to match new expectations of the wider audience not only failed , but also alienated their original fans . By the mid @-@ 1980s , image @-@ driven , sex @-@ celebrating glam metal emanating from Hollywood 's Sunset Strip , spearheaded by Van Halen and followed by bands such as Mötley Crüe , Quiet Riot , Dokken , Great White , Ratt and W.A.S.P. , quickly replaced other styles of metal in the tastes of many British rock fans . New Jersey act Bon Jovi and the Swedish Europe , thanks to their successful fusion of hard rock and romantic pop , also became very popular in the UK , with the former even headlining the 1987 Monsters of Rock Festival . Record companies latched on to the more polished glam metal subgenre over the NWOBHM bands , which maintained a fan base elsewhere in Europe , but found themselves crowded out of the UK and US markets by the success of these American groups . 
 While the attention devoted to the NWOBHM bands waned , a new succession of far less mainstream metal subgenres began to emerge and attract many British metalheads . Power metal and thrash metal , both stemming from the NWOBHM and maintaining much of its ethos , were gaining critical acclaim and commercial success in the second half of the 1980s with their even faster and heavier sound . Bands such as Helloween , Savatage , Metallica , Slayer , Megadeth , and Anthrax captured much of the market share of those metalheads who were not content with the sound or style of more mainstream , pop @-@ oriented metal bands . 
 The N.W.O.B.H.M. Encyclopedia by Malc Macmillan lists more than 500 recording bands established in the decade between 1975 and 1985 and related to the movement . Probably as many bands were born in the same time interval , but never emerged from their local club scene , or recorded nothing more than demos or limited pressings of self @-@ produced singles . The disinterest of record labels , bad management , internal struggles and wrong musical choices that turned off much of their original fan base , resulted in most groups disbanding and disappearing by the end of the decade . A few of the best known groups , such as Praying Mantis in Japan and Saxon , Demon and Tokyo Blade in mainland Europe , survived in foreign markets . Some others , namely Raven , Girlschool and Grim Reaper , tried to break through in the US market signing with American labels , but their attempts were unsuccessful . 
 Two of the more popular bands of the movement , however , went on to considerable , lasting success . Iron Maiden has since become one of the most commercially successful and influential heavy metal bands of all time , even after adopting a more progressive style . Def Leppard became even more successful , targeting the American mainstream rock market with their more refined hard rock sound . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 The widespread popularity of the Internet in the late 1990s / early 2000s helped NWOBHM fans and musicians to reconnect and rekindle their shared enthusiasm . The NWOBHM experienced a minor revival , highlighted by the good sales of old vinyl and collectibles and by the demand for new performances . Statements of appreciation by metal bands of the 1990s , the success of tribute bands , the re @-@ issues of old albums and the production of new thoroughly edited compilations , attracted the media 's attention and encouraged many of the original groups to reunite for festival appearances and tours . According to Macmillan and AllMusic reviewer Eduardo Rivadavia , probably the most important of those compilation albums was New Wave of British Heavy Metal ' 79 Revisited , compiled by Metallica 's drummer Lars Ulrich and former Sounds and Kerrang ! journalist Geoff Barton . It was released in 1990 as a double CD , featuring bands as obscure as Hollow Ground right through to the major acts of the era . 
 A new publication called Classic Rock , featuring Barton and many of the writers from Kerrang ! ' s first run , championed the NWOBHM revival and continues to focus much of its attention on rock acts from the 1980s . Starting in the 2000s , many reunited bands recorded new albums and revisited their original styles , abandoned in the second half of the 1980s . Their presence , at metal festivals and on the international rock club circuit , has been constant ever since . 
 = = Influences and legacy = = 
 The NWOBHM triggered a renaissance in a stagnant rock genre , but took on heavy criticism for the excessive local media hype surrounding a legion of typically mediocre musicians . Detractors think that , unlike heavy metal of the preceding decades , their music was unoriginal and included no classic rock recordings . Nevertheless , these bands and their diverse output offered a blueprint that counterparts across the Western world would later emulate and expand . The collision of styles that characterized the NWOBHM is now seen as key to the diversification of heavy metal in the second half of the 1980s into various subgenres that came to the fore in the 1990s . The stardom of Def Leppard in the US provided a catalyst for the growth of glam metal , just as bands like Angel Witch , Witchfynde , Cloven Hoof and especially Venom generated the music , lyrics , cover art and attitude that sparked black metal in its various forms in Europe and America . Motörhead , Iron Maiden , Raven , Tank , Venom and other minor groups are viewed as precursors of speed metal and thrash metal , two subgenres which carried forward the crossover with punk , incorporating elements of hardcore while amplifying volume , velocity and aggressive tone . Starting around 1982 , distant points such as North America , West Germany , and Brazil each became the locus of its own distinctive thrash metal scenes – East Coast and Bay Area , Teutonic , and Brazilian thrash metal . Their debt to the NWOBHM was acknowledged for example by Metallica 's Lars Ulrich , an active fan and avid collector of NWOBHM recordings and memorabilia . Under his influence , the set lists of Metallica 's early shows were filled with covers of British metal groups . The sound of the NWOBHM even " cross @-@ pollinated " a subgenre of punk , as UK 82 street punk bands like Discharge blended punk music with elements of metal . 
 The birth of speed metal in the early 1980s was also pivotal for the evolution of power metal in the latter half of the decade , as exemplified by Helloween from Germany , and Manowar , Savatage , and Virgin Steele from the US . 
 Since the beginning of the NWOBHM , North American bands like Anvil , Riot , Twisted Sister , Manowar , Virgin Steele , The Rods , Hellion , Cirith Ungol , and Exciter had a continuous exchange with the other side of the Atlantic , where their music was appreciated by British metalheads . In this climate of reciprocity , Manowar and Virgin Steele initially signed with the British indie label Music for Nations , while Twisted Sister recorded their first two albums in London . 
 The sound of Japanese bands Earthshaker , Loudness , Anthem and other minor groups was also influenced by the NWOBHM , whose British sound engineers were used for their early albums . The Japanese band Bow Wow even transferred to England to be part of the British metal scene . 
 Germany , Sweden , Denmark , Belgium , Netherlands , France and Spain promptly welcomed the new British bands and spawned imitators almost immediately . Acts like Accept , Grave Digger , Sinner and Warlock from Germany , E. F. Band from Sweden , Mercyful Fate from Denmark , Killer and Ostrogoth from Belgium , Picture and Bodine from the Netherlands , Trust and Nightmare from France , and <unk> Rojo and Ángeles del Infierno from Spain , formed between 1978 and 1982 and were heavily influenced by the sound of the NWOBHM . Many of these bands signed with the Dutch Roadrunner Records or with the Belgian Mausoleum Records , independent labels that also published recordings of British NWOBHM acts . 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Glastonbury Tor = 
 Glastonbury Tor is a hill at Glastonbury in the English county of Somerset , topped by the roofless St Michael 's Tower , a Grade I listed building . The whole site is managed by the National Trust , and has been designated a scheduled monument . 
 The conical hill of clay and Blue Lias rises from the Somerset Levels . It was formed when surrounding softer deposits were eroded , leaving the hard cap of sandstone exposed . The slopes of the hill are terraced , but the method by which they were formed remains unexplained . Artefacts from human visitation have been found , dating from the Iron Age to Roman eras . 
 Several buildings were constructed on the summit during the Saxon and early medieval periods ; they have been interpreted as an early church and monks ' hermitage . The head of a wheel cross dating from the 10th or 11th century has been recovered . The original wooden church was destroyed by an earthquake in 1275 , and the stone Church of St Michael built on the site in the 14th century . Its tower remains , although it has been restored and partially rebuilt several times . Archaeological excavations during the 20th century sought to clarify the background of the monument and church , but some aspects of their history remain unexplained . The Tor is mentioned in Celtic mythology , particularly in myths linked to King Arthur , and has a number of other enduring mythological and spiritual associations . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The origin of the name " Glastonbury " is unclear , but when the settlement was first recorded in the late 7th and early 8th centuries it was called <unk> . Of the latter name , <unk> is obscure , and may derive from an Old English word or Celtic personal name . It may derive from a person or kindred group named Glast . The second half of the name , <unk> , is Anglo @-@ Saxon in origin and could refer to either a fortified place such as a burh or , more likely , a monastic enclosure . 
 Tor is an English word referring to a high rock or a hill , deriving from the Old English torr . The Celtic name of the Tor was Ynys <unk> , or sometimes Ynys <unk> , meaning " Isle of Glass " . At this time the plain was flooded , the isle becoming a peninsula at low tide . 
 = = Location and landscape = = 
 The Tor is in the middle of the Summerland Meadows , part of the Somerset Levels , rising to an elevation of 518 feet ( 158 m ) . The plain is reclaimed fen above which the Tor is clearly visible for miles around . It has been described as an island but actually sits at the western end of a peninsula washed on three sides by the River Brue . 
 The Tor is formed from rocks dating from the early Jurassic Period , namely varied layers of Lias Group strata . The uppermost of these , forming the Tor itself , are a succession of rocks assigned to the Bridport Sand Formation . These rocks sit upon strata forming the broader hill on which the Tor stands ; the various layers of the Beacon Limestone Formation and the Dyrham Formation . The Bridport Sands have acted as a caprock protecting the lower layers from erosion . The iron @-@ rich waters of Chalice Well , a spring at the base of the Tor , flow out as an artesian well impregnating the sandstone around it with iron oxides that have reinforced it to produce the caprock . Iron @-@ rich but oxygen @-@ poor water in the aquifer carries dissolved iron ( II ) " ferrous " iron , but as the water surfaces and its oxygen content rises , the oxidised iron ( III ) " ferric " iron drops out as insoluble " rusty " oxides that bind to the surrounding stone , hardening it . 
 The low @-@ lying damp ground can produce a visual effect known as a Fata Morgana when the Tor appears to rise out of the mist . This optical phenomenon occurs because rays of light are strongly bent when they pass through air layers of different temperatures in a steep thermal inversion where an atmospheric duct has formed . The Italian term Fata Morgana is derived from the name of Morgan le Fay , a powerful sorceress in Arthurian legend . 
 = = = Terraces = = = 
 The sides of the Tor have seven deep , roughly symmetrical terraces . Their formation remains a mystery with many possible explanations . They may have been formed as a result of natural differentiation of the layers of Lias stone and clay used by farmers during the Middle Ages as terraced hills to make ploughing for crops easier . Author Nicholas Mann questions this theory . If agriculture had been the reason for the creation of the terraces , it would be expected that the effort would be concentrated on the south side , where the sunny conditions would provide a good yield , but the terraces are equally deep on the northern side , which would provide little benefit . Additionally , none of the other slopes of the island have been terraced , even though the more sheltered locations would provide a greater return on the labour involved . Alternatively , the flattened paths may have been created by the hooves of grazing cattle . 
 Other explanations have been suggested for the terraces , including the construction of defensive ramparts . Iron Age hill forts including the nearby Cadbury Castle in Somerset show evidence of extensive fortification of their slopes . The normal form of ramparts is a bank and ditch , but there is no evidence of this arrangement on the Tor . South Cadbury , one of the most extensively fortified places in early Britain , had three concentric rings of banks and ditches supporting an 18 @-@ hectare ( 44 @-@ acre ) enclosure . By contrast , the Tor has seven rings and very little space on top for the safekeeping of a community . It has been suggested that a defensive function may have been linked with <unk> 's Ball Dyke , a linear earthwork about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) east of the Tor . It consists of an embankment with a ditch on the east side . The purpose and provenance of the dyke are unclear . It is possible that it was part of a longer defensive barrier associated with New Ditch , three miles to the south @-@ west , which is built in a similar manner . It has been suggested by Ralegh Radford that it is part of a great Celtic sanctuary , probably 3rd century BC , while others , including Philip Rahtz , date it to the post @-@ Roman period and link it to the Dark Age occupation on Glastonbury Tor . The 1970 excavation suggests the 12th century or later . The historian Ronald Hutton suggests that the terraces are the remains of a medieval " spiral walkway " created for pilgrims to reach the church on the summit , similar to that at Whitby Abbey . 
 Another suggestion is that the terraces are the remains of a three @-@ dimensional labyrinth , first proposed by Geoffrey Russell in 1968 . He states that the classical labyrinth ( <unk> ) , a design found all over the Neolithic world , can be easily transposed onto the Tor , so that by walking around the terraces a person eventually reaches the top in the same pattern . Evaluating this hypothesis is not easy . A labyrinth would very likely place the terraces in the Neolithic era , but given the amount of occupation since then , there may have been substantial modifications by farmers and / or monks and conclusive excavations have not been carried out . In a more recent book , Hutton writes that " the labyrinth does not seem to be an ancient sacred structure " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Christian = = = 
 Some Neolithic flint tools recovered from the top of the Tor show that the site has been visited , perhaps with lasting occupation , since prehistory . The nearby remains of Glastonbury Lake Village were identified at the site in 1892 , which confirmed that there was an Iron Age settlement in about 300 – 200 BC on what was an easily defended island in the fens . There is no evidence of permanent occupation of the Tor , but finds , including Roman pottery , do suggest that it was visited on a regular basis . 
 Excavations on Glastonbury Tor , undertaken by a team led by Philip Rahtz between 1964 and 1966 , revealed evidence of Dark Age occupation during the 5th to 7th centuries around the later medieval church of St. Michael . Finds included postholes , two hearths including a metalworker 's forge , two burials oriented north @-@ south ( thus unlikely to be Christian ) , fragments of 6th century Mediterranean amphorae ( vases for wine or cooking oil ) , and a worn hollow bronze head which may have topped a Saxon staff . 
 = = = Christian settlement = = = 
 During the late Saxon and early medieval period there were at least four buildings on the summit . The base of a stone cross demonstrates Christian use of the site during this period and it may have been a hermitage . The broken head of a wheel cross dated to the 10th or 11th centuries was found part way down the hill and may have been the head of the cross that stood on the summit . The head of the cross is now in the Museum of Somerset in Taunton . 
 The earliest timber church , which was dedicated to St Michael , is believed to have been constructed in the 11th or 12th century from which post holes have since been identified . Associated monk cells have also been identified . 
 St Michael 's Church was destroyed by an earthquake on 11 September 1275 . According to the British Geological Survey , the earthquake was felt in London , Canterbury and Wales , and was reported to have destroyed many houses and churches in England . The force was greater than 7 MSK , with its epicentre in the area around Portsmouth or Chichester , South England . 
 A second church , also dedicated to St Michael , was built of local sandstone in the 14th century by the Abbot Adam of Sodbury , incorporating the foundations of the previous building . It included stained glass and decorated floor tiles . There was also a portable altar of Purbeck Marble ; it is likely that the Monastery of St Michael on the Tor was a daughter house of Glastonbury Abbey . In 1243 Henry III granted a charter for a six @-@ day fair at the site . 
 St Michael 's Church survived until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1539 when , except for the tower , it was demolished . The Tor was the place of execution where Richard Whiting , the last Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey , was hanged , drawn and quartered along with two of his monks , John Thorne and Roger James . The three @-@ storey tower of St Michael 's Church survives . It has corner buttresses and perpendicular bell openings . There is a sculptured tablet with an image of an eagle below the parapet . 
 = = = Post @-@ dissolution = = = 
 In 1786 , Richard Colt Hoare of Stourhead bought the Tor and funded repair of the tower in 1804 , including the rebuilding of the north @-@ east corner . It was then passed on through several generations to the Reverend George Neville and included in the Butleigh Manor until the 20th century . It was then bought as a memorial to a former Dean of Wells , Thomas Jex @-@ Blake , who died in 1915 . 
 The National Trust took control of the Tor in 1933 , but repairs were delayed until after the Second World War . During the 1960s , excavations identified cracks in the rock , suggesting the ground had moved in the past . This , combined with wind erosion , started to expose the footings of the tower , which were repaired with concrete . Erosion caused by the feet of the increasing number of visitors was also a problem and paths were laid to enable them to reach the summit without damaging the terraces . After 2000 , enhancements to the access and repairs to the tower , including rebuilding of the parapet , were carried out . These included the replacement of some of the masonry damaged by earlier repairs with new stone from the Hadspen Quarry . 
 A model of Glastonbury Tor was incorporated into the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . As the athletes entered the stadium , their flags were displayed on the terraces of the model . 
 = = Mythology and spirituality = = 
 The Tor seems to have been called Ynys yr <unk> ( meaning " The Isle of Avalon " ) by the Britons and is believed by some , including the 12th and 13th century writer Gerald of Wales , to be the Avalon of Arthurian legend . The Tor has been associated with the name Avalon , and identified with King Arthur , since the alleged discovery of his and Queen Guinevere 's neatly labelled coffins in 1191 , recounted by Gerald of Wales . Author Christopher L. Hodapp asserts in his book The Templar Code for Dummies that Glastonbury Tor is one of the possible locations of the Holy Grail , because it is close to the monastery that housed the <unk> Cup . 
 With the 19th century resurgence of interest in Celtic mythology , the Tor became associated with Gwyn ap Nudd , the first Lord of the Otherworld ( Annwn ) and later King of the Fairies . The Tor came to be represented as an entrance to Annwn or to Avalon , the land of the fairies . The tor is supposedly a gateway into " The Land Of The Dead ( Avalon ) . 
 A persistent myth of more recent origin is that of the Glastonbury Zodiac , a purported astrological zodiac of gargantuan proportions said to have been carved into the land along ancient hedgerows and trackways , in which the Tor forms part of the figure representing Aquarius . The theory was first put forward in 1927 by Katherine Maltwood , an artist with an interest in the occult , who thought the zodiac was constructed approximately 5 @,@ 000 years ago . But the vast majority of the land said by Maltwood to be covered by the zodiac was under several feet of water at the proposed time of its construction , and many of the features such as field boundaries and roads are recent . 
 The tor and other sites in Glastonbury have also been significant in Goddess worship , with the flow from the Chalice Well representing menstrual flow and the tor being seen as either a breast or the whole figure of the Goddess . This has been celebrated with an effigy of the Goddess leading an annual procession up the Tor . 
 = Santa Ana River = 
 The Santa Ana River is the largest river entirely within Southern California in the United States . Its drainage basin spans four counties . It rises in the San Bernardino Mountains and flows past the cities of San Bernardino and Riverside , before cutting through the northern tip of the Santa Ana Mountains and flowing southwest past Santa Ana to drain into the Pacific Ocean . The Santa Ana River is 96 miles ( 154 km ) long , and drains a watershed of 2 @,@ 650 square miles ( 6 @,@ 900 km2 ) . 
 For its size the Santa Ana drainage basin is quite diverse . It ranges from high peaks of inland mountains in the north and east , to the hot , dry interior and semi @-@ desert basin , to flat coastal plains in the west . Its climates range from dry alpine to chaparral and desert , and the watershed as a whole is very arid . Relatively little water actually flows in the river or most of its tributaries . One of its largest tributaries , the San Jacinto River , rarely reaches the Santa Ana except in extremely wet years . The relative lack of vegetation also makes the river prone to flash flooding . Even so , a wide variety of animal and plant life has always been dependent on the river . 
 People have lived on the Santa Ana River for at least 9 @,@ 000 years . There were four distinct indigenous groups in the area , all of which depended heavily on the river for their livelihoods . The river was first crossed by Europeans in 1769 , when it received its name from members of the Spanish Portola expedition . Because it is one of the largest water sources in the four @-@ county region , many large ranchos developed alongside the river and one of its major tributaries , Santiago Creek . This period of growth culminated in the establishment of many large cities on the river , including Santa Ana , Riverside and Anaheim , all of which derived their names from the River . In the early 20th century , devastating floods poured down the Santa Ana River , leading to much of the river being channelized and dammed in recent times . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Santa Ana River rises in Santa Ana Canyon in the southern San Bernardino Mountains , at the confluence of two tiny streams , Heart Bar Creek and Coon Creek , at an elevation of 6 @,@ 991 feet ( 2 @,@ 131 m ) . Its highest sources are Dollar Lake , at 9 @,@ 288 feet ( 2 @,@ 831 m ) , and Dry Lake , at 9 @,@ 068 feet ( 2 @,@ 764 m ) , both on the northern flank of San Gorgonio Mountain , at the headwaters of a small left tributary , the South Fork Santa Ana River . The river initially flows west through this broad and deep gorge , and about 18 miles ( 29 km ) from its headwaters , receives its first major tributary from the right : Bear Creek , flowing southwest from well @-@ known Big Bear Lake . The river turns south , passing through the Seven Oaks Dam , flowing out of its canyon into the arid interior basin of San Bernardino County and Riverside County , and receives Mill Creek from the left as it winds westwards towards the city of San Bernardino . As it passes through the urban area , it receives City Creek from the right and enters a flood control channel flanked by earthen levees on both sides . 
 Not long after the confluence with City Creek , Lytle Creek enters from the right . Lytle Creek is one of the largest tributaries of the Santa Ana river , rising in three forks in the San Gabriel Mountains and flowing southeast , becoming the Lytle Creek Wash before discharging into the main stem . From there , the Santa Ana flows southwest , and after passing through the city of Riverside , it discharges into the normally dry flood control reservoir formed by Prado Dam . Two major tributaries of the river join in the reservoir area : Chino Creek from the right , and Temescal Creek from the left . Temescal Creek drains the largest area of all the tributaries , because it provides the outflow from Lake Elsinore , into which the San Jacinto River flows . It is also one of the longest , at 32 miles ( 51 km ) in length . Except during the wettest years , Temescal Creek contains little or no water because Lake Elsinore is not high enough to overflow . 
 After flowing out of the Prado Dam , the Santa Ana River cuts a second Santa Ana Canyon , a water gap , between the northern Santa Ana Mountains and the Puente Hills and Chino Hills , crossing into Orange County . The river roughly bisects the county as it flows southwest towards the ocean . The river is then entirely diverted into spreading grounds for groundwater recharge of the aquifer of north Orange County , providing about half of the entire county 's municipal water . Downstream of there , the river serves only for flood control and waste drainage purposes , and typically has no more than a trickle of water . Passing the cities of Orange and Anaheim , it receives Santiago Creek from the east as it enters the city of Santa Ana . Here , the river is entirely confined to a concrete flood control channel between earthen levees . After crossing under Interstate 5 the riverbed again becomes earthen for a time and then becomes concrete again through most of Santa Ana and past the 405 Freeway . It flows to its mouth between Huntington Beach and Costa Mesa . The river accretes in a small lagoon before flowing out to sea at the northern end of Santa Ana River County Beach . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 One of the largest river basins in Southern California and the largest on the South Coast , the Santa Ana River watershed covers 2 @,@ 650 square miles ( 6 @,@ 900 km2 ) in parts of four California counties . The main stem of the river flows through three of these counties , and tributaries drain parts of Los Angeles County into the Santa Ana . The watershed is characterized by the flat , arid basin of the Inland Empire and the coastal plain of north @-@ central Orange County , and is bisected by the Santa Ana Mountains , which run nearly perpendicular to the river — northwest to southeast . There are over 50 major tributaries to the once free flowing and perennial river . The Temescal Creek valley constitutes a major portion and physiographic feature of the Santa Ana River watershed . The area drained by Temescal Creek and the San Jacinto River constitute some 45 % of the watershed and extend its boundaries as far south as the Anza @-@ Borrego State Park area . 
 About 4 @.@ 8 million people lived in the Santa Ana River basin as of 2000 . Most of the population is concentrated close to the river in urban centers such as San Bernardino , Riverside , and Santa Ana . In the Inland Empire , most people live in a thin ribbon of land along the river , while the rest of the land is used for agriculture and ranching . In Orange County , however , nearly all the land is urban . As a result , the Santa Ana River watershed can be thought of as having two distinct parts , separated by the Santa Ana Mountains . Some major bodies of water in the watershed include Lake Elsinore , Lake Irvine , Lake Mathews , Lake Perris , Diamond Valley Lake , Lake Skinner , and Big Bear Lake . Only one , Lake Elsinore , is naturally formed . The rest are all formed by dams constructed by county or state water agencies . As an example , Diamond Valley Lake is for the California State Water Project . 
 Several major Southern California drainage basins border on that of the Santa Ana River . In the northwest is the San Gabriel River , another major river with its mouth in Long Beach . On the southwest , the San Diego Creek watershed forms much of the boundary within Orange County . Some of the rivers and streams that drain the area between the southwestern boundary of the watershed and the Pacific Ocean are Aliso Creek , San Juan Creek , San Mateo Creek , the Santa Margarita River , and the San Luis Rey River . On the east are the drainage basins of the Whitewater River and the Coachella Valley , flowing into the Salton Sea , and on the north is the Mojave River , which flows into the endorheic basin of the Mojave Desert . 
 However , the area that the river drains in Orange County downstream of Santiago Creek is extremely narrow , because of the diversion of its former Orange County drainage area to the Talbert and Huntington Beach flood control channels , which empty into the Pacific very near the mouth of the Santa Ana . Most of the Santa Ana through Orange County now functions as a conduit to carry runoff from upstream areas directly to the Pacific and drains very little area downstream of the Santiago Creek confluence . About 21 @.@ 4 square miles ( 55 km2 ) of land that originally drained to the Santa Ana River in Orange County now is drained by the two flood control channels , colloquially called the " Talbert watershed " . The river originally had many different outlets to the Pacific , one of which even extended as far north as the San Gabriel River or as far south as Newport Bay . In fact , the original mouth of the river which drained eventually into the Pacific Ocean , was located at what is today the entrance to Newport Harbor . Based on a U.S. Coastal Survey from 1878 , Newport Bay was predominantly a river estuary with few open channels . The river flowed into the bay bringing with it heavy silt and making boating difficult . To eventually create Newport Harbor , sand that was deposited by the Santa Ana River had to be kept from choking the bay . In 1920 , the Bitter Point Dam was built to divert the river away from the bay and on its current course to the ocean at Huntington Beach . Stone jetties were built to form the new river mouth . All of the Islands in Newport Harbor are the product of dredging and man made forming from the sands and silt deposited over time by the Santa Ana River . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Ancient igneous , metamorphic and sedimentary rock underlie and form the geologic base of the Santa Ana River . Most of the strata in the flat valleys and basins of the watershed are underlain by thousands of feet of sediment deposited by transient seas during climate changes and by erosion . Most of the mountains in and rimming the basin consist of granite batholiths only about 75 million years old . However , much of the rock overlying the highlands , above elevations of 8 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 to 2 @,@ 700 m ) , is ancient metamorphic rock up to 1 @.@ 7 billion years old . This rock originally formed at the bottom of the ancient Pacific Ocean and was uplifted to the highest peaks of the mountains . Even in ice ages , glaciers have rarely occurred on Southern California mountains , so the rock has remained there for tens of millions of years without significant erosion . 
 Diverse and complex faulting and geologic instability have shaped the Santa Ana River watershed . The San Andreas Fault runs across the northern section of the watershed and is responsible for causing the uplift of the San Bernardino Mountains , part of the Transverse Ranges of Southern California . The Elsinore – Whittier Fault Zone crosses the Santa Ana River further downstream , near the Orange County / Riverside County line . This fault caused the rising of the Santa Ana Mountains , Puente Hills , East Orange Hills , Chino Hills , Loma Ridge , and the other mountain ranges and ridges that run northwest @-@ southeast across the lower section of the watershed , comprising the coastal Peninsular Ranges . While the larger San Andreas Fault allowed the Transverse Ranges to rise to above 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) in many places , the Peninsular Ranges are only about half that height . 
 During the last glacial period , when climate change during the Wisconsinian Glaciation caused rivers in Southern California to increase greatly in volume , the Santa Ana was able to cut across the Peninsular Ranges , creating the only gap across the range . During this period , the Santa Ana changed course multiple times , creating wind gaps in the Peninsular Range and occasionally entrenching into the channel of the ancestral San Diego Creek . The river later returned to its old course and abandoned the San Diego Creek channel , leaving it a wind gap across the Huntington Beach / Newport Beach mesa . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Hundreds of species of animals and plants characterize the Santa Ana River 's diversity of climates and vegetation zones . There are over ten of these vegetation zones in the watershed — including the sparsely vegetated alpine and subalpine zones in the mountains , mid @-@ elevation forests of pine , lodgepole and oak , chaparral , coastal sage scrub , the increasingly rare riparian forest and marshes along the river bed , lined with trees and rushes , and the thinly vegetated coastal areas virtually flush with sea level . The watershed supports up to 200 bird species , fifty mammal species , 13 reptile species , 7 amphibian species , and 15 fish species , including steelhead trout . 
 The largest portion of the watershed , the Inland Empire portion , is dominated by a hot , dry desert climate that supports sparse wildlife , while the climate and vegetation of the San Jacinto River and Temescal Creek watershed is similar to that of the southern Central Valley . Downstream of the desert was once the coastal sage scrub and dry grassland community of the Orange County coastal plain , but that region has been almost entirely lost to urbanization . <unk> the arid portions of the watershed are the chaparral zones , consisting of sclerophyllous , thick , low bushes and small trees . The chaparral generally is found between elevations of 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) and 6 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) , and occurs mainly closer to the coast on the windward side of the Peninsular Ranges . The scrub oak is one of the most common plants in chaparral regions , forming a dense groundcover that makes it difficult for humans and large animals such as mountain lions , coyotes , and bobcats to traverse . Chaparral growth is determined by wildfires and droughts , and depends on the semi @-@ arid climate of the region . 
 Perennial and seasonal streams often are lined with live oak and sycamore , which transition into the riparian zones of the main stem Santa Ana River . The inland riparian marshes upstream of the Riverside / Orange County line , although degraded by pollution , have otherwise been mostly left in their natural state . Although much of the riparian system along the river has been degraded , one of the largest places where it occurs is the enormous marsh behind Prado Dam , an area closed to development because it functions as a flood control basin , similar to the Sepulveda Dam . The Santa Ana sucker , a small bottom @-@ dwelling fish , once was found throughout riparian zones , but now is rarely seen in the Santa Ana River drainage . Near the mouth , the river was once abundant in salt marshes , which stretched for miles on either side of the river , even near Upper Newport Bay , which has also served as an alternate mouth of the river . 
 The alpine and subalpine zones , despite their high elevation ( above 9500 feet , 2900 meters ) and significant rainfall ( at least 35 inches , 89 cm per year , except in drought years ) , are sparsely vegetated . The windswept terrain of the alpine zone is primarily small brush and weeds , while trees — mostly small gnarled pines and junipers — occur in canyons and shielded depressions in the subalpine zone . Inland elevations above 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) support much denser forest . Jeffrey pine , ponderosa pine , black oak , lodgepole pine , and willow constitute most of the forested lands . The mountain habitats of the watershed support many animals typical of Californian mountain regions , including squirrels , chipmunks , black bears , mule deer , and many species of migratory birds . In the canyons of the San <unk> , the river is abundant in rainbow trout and is lined with alders , willow and cottonwoods . Where the river and its large upper tributaries empty out of the mountain canyons into the Inland Empire basin , they are surrounded by the alluvial scrub zone , a mix of desert and upper riparian vegetation . Along the main stem , this zone begins at the base of Seven Oaks Dam and ends at the Lytle Creek confluence . 
 Historically , the Santa Ana was named " the best stream in Southern California [ for steelhead trout habitat ] " . The steelhead is an anadromous fish , similar to salmon , that migrates up rivers and streams to spawn . Unlike salmon , which usually only reproduce once , steelhead may reproduce multiple times and have a much longer life span . Steelhead was once found along the entire main stem of the Santa Ana River , as well as on some of its main tributaries — Santiago Creek , San Antonio and Chino Creeks , Cucamonga Creek , Lytle Creek , City Creek , and Mill Creek . Few , if any , steelhead were present in Temescal Creek ( although one of its tributaries was stocked in the 1930s ) and none inhabited the San Jacinto River , because it is disconnected from most of the Santa Ana River system . Up to the 1950s , significant numbers of steelhead trout still migrated in from the ocean . Because of pollution and modifications to the river , very few steelhead still use the river . There is a population of wild stream resident coastal rainbow trout upstream of Seven Oaks Dam and in the upper reaches of a few tributaries . Despite the rarity of steelhead , in recent years fin samples from 13 trout were collected from Harding Canyon in the Santiago Creek tributary of the Santa Ana River and genetic analysis has shown them to be of native and not hatchery stocks . 
 Invasive species — those that are not native to the region — have caused problems in the watershed for many years . One of the most troublesome invasive species is the giant reed , which plagues many coastal Southern California waterways . The giant reed is similar to a tall grass or thin bamboo , but grows quickly and can take over native stands of vegetation , block the streambed , hurts the habitat of native animals , and increases the hazard of wildfires . Perhaps the largest effect that giant reed has is its usage of water . To support its fast growth rate , the giant reed population in the Santa Ana River watershed can consume 56 @,@ 200 acre feet ( 69 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water per year . 
 Other invasive species also have affected the Santa Ana River . One of the most prominent is the brown @-@ headed cowbird , which feeds off parasites and insects identified with cattle , which were brought to Southern California during the Spanish Rancho period . The brown @-@ headed cowbird is a " brood parasite " , or a bird that lays its eggs in another bird 's nest . One of the most afflicted birds is the least Bell 's vireo , whose population also suffers from the loss of riparian habitat . The least Bell 's vireo is considered an endangered species , as is the southwestern willow flycatcher , whose habitat is often shared with the other bird . The saltcedar is another invasive large weed that also , like the giant reed , uses large amounts of water . Unlike giant reed , the saltcedar has deeper roots , not only making it more difficult to remove but allowing it to access and use up deep groundwater . However , the saltcedar is similar in that it also provides little usable habitat for native animals . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First peoples = = = 
 Human habitation on the Santa Ana River dates back 9 @,@ 000 to 12 @,@ 000 years ago , close to the early stages of the Holocene period . The first Native Americans to live in the area were nomadic tribes that traveled from place to place , grazing animals on fertile grasslands and gathering fruits and seeds for food . The ancestors of these early people originated from the Shoshone and Uto @-@ Aztecan people of the northwestern United States . Eventually , the human population of the watershed reached a peak of about 15 @,@ 000 . About 8 @,@ 000 years ago , the climate experienced a change becoming more arid and the originally nomadic tribes began to stay in individual places longer , becoming semi @-@ nomadic . However , they did not establish agriculture , nor did they raise animals or live in villages . Like many Native American tribes in California , acorns were a staple food of many of the inland valley people . People closer to the ocean often fished and hunted small animals , often from tide pools and coastal stream areas , for food . 
 Several major premodern Native American groups eventually gained control of lands along the river : the <unk> or <unk> people in the upper basin , the <unk> in the southeastern basin , the Cahuilla in the desert areas of the watershed , and the Tongva people in the lower basin . The <unk> generally lived in the mountain headwaters of the Santa Ana River and its tributaries rimming the present @-@ day Inland Empire basin , in present @-@ day San Bernardino County , as well as in the foothills of the San Bernardino Mountains . The Tongva lived on the flat coastal plains of present @-@ day Orange County south of the Santa Ana Mountains . They were also the larger of the two groups , controlling all the coastal lands from the San Gabriel Mountains in the north to Aliso Creek in the south , including all of the Los Angeles Basin . 
 = = = Spanish period = = = 
 When Spanish explorer Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo sailed along the Southern California coast on his voyage of 1542 , he passed the mouth of the Santa Ana River without noting it . Neither did any of the subsequent Spanish sea @-@ borne explorers leave any written notice of the river mouth . 
 It was not until 1769 that Gaspar de Portolà led the first overland expedition northwards through coastal Southern California — still a largely unexplored part of the Alta California province of New Spain — and gave the river its name . On July 28 , the party camped " about three leagues " from where the Santa Ana River exits the canyon through the northern Santa Ana Mountains , near present @-@ day Olive . Fray Juan <unk> , one of the members of the expedition , wrote in his diary that he called the spot " Jesus de los <unk> " , referring to an earthquake that struck while they were camped alongside there . Crespi also noted that the soldiers were calling the river " Rio de Santa Ana " , probably because they had recently celebrated Saint Anne 's Day . That name remains today ( the second oldest place name in Orange County , after Santiago Creek ) , and the name of the mountain range and city were derived from the river . 
 Although no missions were actually located along the Santa Ana River or within the watershed , the river basin was nearly depleted of native people because the Spanish forced them to work at nearby missions , including Mission San Gabriel <unk> and Mission San Luis Rey . The affected tribes were usually renamed after the missions , resulting in tribal names such as <unk> and <unk> . Difficult working and living conditions and European diseases such as smallpox killed much of the native population during the roughly 50 @-@ year @-@ long Mission Period . The Secularization Act of 1833 , passed by the newly independent country of Mexico , eventually brought an end to the Mission Period . The post @-@ Mission Period native population was almost entirely devastated . The population was very little , their native religions were nearly lost , and most of their land had been taken by Spanish settlers . Although the Mexican government 's original intention with the Secularization Act was to provide the Native Americans with their own land and property , most of the provisions made by the act never actually happened . Spanish settlers continued to press into the remaining tribal lands , and eventually , the tribes were forced into the surrounding desert lands or into the high mountains . 
 Following the Mission Period came the Rancho Period . This occurred when the enormous land holdings of the missions were subdivided into ranchos owned by individuals . Some of the new private ranchos were merely converted mission ranchos . The first private rancho along the Santa Ana River was Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana , a 62 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 253 km2 ) rancho on the left bank of the lower Santa Ana River . This rancho was acquired by Don Juan Pablo Grijalva as early as 1801 . Other ranchos on the river followed , including ones in inland areas that had not been exploited in the Mission Period . The ranchos ( beginning with the missions ) established the tradition of raising cattle in coastal Southern California , a custom upheld until the late 19th century . Agriculture , however , although established , was not yet a major industry . A flood that raged down the Santa Ana in 1825 caused the river 's course to change temporarily to an outlet at Newport Bay , depositing sediment that partially created Balboa Island . Spread throughout the ranchos on the Santa Ana River were a few towns , military outposts and trading posts . The Santa Ana River valley was one of the most prosperous regions in Southern California for many decades . 
 = = = American settlement = = = 
 In the late 1840s , California fought for its independence from Mexico in the Mexican – American War . The Santa Ana river played an important part in the victory of the Americans over the Mexican army . In 1847 , one year after the Bear Flag Revolt , a Mexican military force set out northwards to attack a smaller American force in the Los Angeles area . However , the Santa Ana River flooded , preventing the Mexicans from crossing the river to attack the Americans . When the river 's flow finally subsided , the American forces had been reinforced enough to drive the Mexicans out of the region . 
 When the California Republic was assimilated into the United States in 1848 , American settlers began to move into the Santa Ana River region in great numbers . The Mexican ranchos were divided into smaller individual properties , and irrigated agriculture began on a large scale . The city of Santa Ana Viejo , the original location of Santa Ana , was founded in this period . In 1854 , Mormons settled in the upper Inland Empire area and started the city of San Bernardino , gaining prosperity by using water from the river , as well as Lytle Creek and Mill Creek , to irrigate crops . The cattle industry began to decline as farms began to replace ranches . Soon , white settlers in the region were more numerous than Hispanics as well . The California Gold Rush around this time was responsible for attracting many of these people to the state , but many remained in Southern California afterwards . 
 In 1860 , a much closer gold rush occurred in the San Bernardino Mountains when prospector William Holcomb discovered significant deposits , just over the northern drainage divide of the Santa Ana River . This discovery exploded into a full @-@ scale gold mining operation in days . The Santa Ana River served as a conduit for miners traveling to the region and many of the forests in the upper basin experienced clearcutting as a result of the high resource demands of the boom . Gold was also discovered in Lytle Creek in that same year . Following the gold rush , the cultivation of citrus became the mainstay of the economy of the lower Santa Ana River area . Through the late 19th century , citrus fields covered much of the coastal plain and led to the naming of Orange County . 
 = = = Floods , droughts and legacy = = = 
 Notwithstanding the increased prosperity in the 1860s , this decade was also the scene of a series of natural disasters . In the Great Flood of 1862 , heavy rains dropped by a series of winter storms caused the Santa Ana to burst its banks , flooding thousands of acres of land and killing 20 to 40 people in the greatest flood it had experienced in recorded history . The levees along the river burst in many places , flooding part of the Inland Empire into a continuous body of water several miles wide stretching from the mouth of Santa Ana Canyon to where the river cuts through the Santa Ana Mountains . Downstream in Orange County , the river overwhelmed nearly all the existing <unk> and transformed the coastal plain into a transient inland sea . The flow , now calculated as a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ year flood , peaked at roughly 9 @,@ 000 cubic meters per second ( 320 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ) , over half the average flow of the Mississippi River . Even after the flood , detrimental conditions continued in the region . For the two years following the flood , an intense drought caused the deaths of tens of thousands of head of livestock . Despite all of the hardships experienced in the three years , after conditions finally returned to normal , the Santa Ana River watershed again became a prospering agricultural region . The cities of Santa Ana and Riverside were established in 1869 and 1870 , respectively . 
 1934 and 1938 saw a further pair of devastating floods that in part brought an end to the area 's citrus industry . In 1938 , the Santa Ana again burst its banks and flooded Anaheim and Orange in up to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water , stripping away thousands of acres of rich topsoil and destroying many of the citrus groves . Almost 60 people were killed in the disaster and about 68 @,@ 400 acres ( 277 km2 ) of land were flooded , despite the fact that the flow in the river was only one @-@ third of that of the 1862 flood . With the extreme damage from the floods , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers made the decision to dam and concrete the river beginning in the 1940s , and declared it as the greatest flood hazard in the U.S. west of the Mississippi River . Prado Dam , built in 1941 , was designed to capture floodwaters from the Inland Empire about 30 miles ( 48 km ) upstream from the river 's mouth . The dam 's impoundment , Prado Flood Control Basin , was designed to handle a 70 @-@ year flood . 
 With the increased flood protection afforded by the Prado Dam , major industrial development migrating south from the Los Angeles Basin , and the Southern California housing boom in the 1950s and 1960s , the Santa Ana River watershed began its third and final transition — from agricultural to urban . The population of the Santa Ana River basin increased dramatically , but brought with it the threat of greater damage from floods , somewhat compromising the protection afforded by Prado Dam . Because housing and urban areas encroached on the river 's historic floodplain — an area once occupied by farms — and the river became confined to a narrow channel — a flood similar to the ones surrounding the turn of the 20th century would cause much more damage . The construction of roads and buildings also heightened the runoff that would flow into the river during rainfall , a process known as urban runoff . In fact , the river flooded again in 1969 , and while much of the runoff from the Inland Empire was captured behind Prado Dam — probably saving Orange County from an even greater flood — Santiago Creek , a large tributary flowing from the Santa Ana Mountains , eroded its banks until it swept away portions of residential communities in the cities of Tustin and Orange . 
 In 1964 , the Santa Ana River Mainstem Project , which involved concreting the lower 30 @.@ 4 miles ( 48 @.@ 9 km ) of the river , was first proposed . Construction work began in 1989 , and today , through much of Orange County , the river 's channel is essentially an enormous box culvert . The second dam , Seven Oaks Dam , was completed in 1999 . This dam captures flood runoff from Santa Ana Canyon before it can enter the Inland Empire . The dam was designed to withstand a 350 @-@ year flood . Today , the river lies mainly between levees and concrete channels , and especially in its lower course , functions only as a flood drainage channel . 
 = = Present @-@ day activities = = 
 = = = Pollution and restoration = = = 
 As with many Southern California rivers , the Santa Ana is heavily polluted and used . The main stem above Seven Oaks Dam is free @-@ flowing , as are many of its upper tributaries . Once the river enters the Inland Empire basin , however , much of its flow is diverted for municipal and agricultural water use . Most of the flow in the river below the city of San Bernardino consists of effluent from 45 wastewater treatment plants and dry season urban runoff , which is collected behind Prado Dam . Any flow that makes it downstream to Orange County is diverted by another pair of dams into approximately 1 @,@ 100 acres ( 4 @.@ 5 km2 ) of groundwater recharge basins , providing approximately 218 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 269 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of municipal water for the county every year , or one @-@ third of its water supply . Downstream of that dam , the river gathers further urban runoff before finally making it into the Pacific . The Santa Ana River is included on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 's ( EPA ) list of " 304 ( l ) ' toxic hot spots ' list of impaired waterways " . 
 A number of organizations have been formed to try to gain public interest in restoring the river . One of the most prominent is the Santa Ana Watershed Project Authority ( <unk> ) , formed by five municipal water districts in the Santa Ana River area . A second one is the Santa Ana River <unk> Association . Both have conducted studies as to what beneficial uses the Santa Ana River would have aside from water supply and flood control , as well as the removal of some of the concreted sections of the lower river . This set of studies is known as the " Use @-@ <unk> Analysis " , which was submitted to the state Congress , which approved it . However , upon submission to the EPA , it was rejected . As a result , little work has been done to repair the ecological damage that has been caused by urbanization along the river . Other projects include the Santa Ana Watershed Planning Advisory Committee , and the Santa Ana River Watershed Alliance ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 There are many recreational opportunities along the Santa Ana River . The Santa Ana River watershed includes parts of the Cleveland National Forest , San Bernardino National Forest , Angeles National Forest , Mount San Jacinto State Wilderness Area , Chino Hills State Park , and Lake Perris State Recreation Area . Big Bear Lake , Lake Elsinore , and Lake Irvine are popular recreational lakes in the watershed . The river never actually flows through any of these lakes , but they each have drainage to the river via tributaries . 
 The Santa Ana River bicycle path which , when complete , will run from the river 's mouth at Huntington Beach to near the San Bernardino Mountains , currently extends about 30 miles ( 48 km ) along the river to Prado Dam . The proposed distance along the trail is over 70 miles ( 110 km ) . In Riverside County , the Hidden Valley Wildlife Area also has 25 miles ( 40 km ) of recreational paths . Some entities have been opting for a Santa Ana River Park , which would encompass a strip of land on either side of the river for its entire course . The city of Redlands would like to develop riverside green space near the historic downtown district . The Santa Ana River Lakes , located near Anaheim , are a popular recreational fish farm fed with water from the river . Ultimately , the trail could link a network of river @-@ bottom parks . In 2014 , naturalists navigated the stretch of river flanked by Chino Hills State Park on the north and the Cleveland National Forest on the south . The rafts made it 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before the vegetation was impenetrable but they were convinced there were possibilities of improving public access and recreational opportunities . 
 = = Crossings = = 
 The Santa Ana River has 70 significant crossings , bridges and dams . This list places them from mouth to source . 
 = = = Archival collections = = = 
 Guide to the Santa Ana River Report . Special Collections and Archives , The UC Irvine Libraries , Irvine , California . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Santa Ana Watershed Association 
 Santa Ana River Watershed Alliance 
 = Neilston = 
 Neilston ( Scots : <unk> , Scottish Gaelic : Baile <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ] ) is a village and parish in East Renfrewshire in the west central Lowlands of Scotland . It is in the Levern Valley , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southwest of Barrhead , 3 @.@ 8 miles ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) south of Paisley , and 5 @.@ 7 miles ( 9 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ southwest of Renfrew , at the southwestern fringe of the Greater Glasgow conurbation . Neilston is a dormitory village with a resident population of just over 5 @,@ 000 people . 
 Neilston is mentioned in documents from the 12th century , when the feudal lord Robert de Croc , endowed a chapel to Paisley Abbey to the North . Neilston Parish Church — a Category B listed building — is said to be on the site of this original chapel and has been at the centre of the community since 1163 . Little remains of the original structure . Before industrialisation , Neilston was a scattered farming settlement composed of a series of single @-@ storey houses , many of them thatched . Some domestic weaving was carried out using local flax . Water power from nearby streams ground corn and provided a suitable environment for bleaching the flax . 
 The urbanisation and development of Neilston came largely with the Industrial Revolution . Industrial scale textile processing was introduced to Neilston around the middle of the 18th century with the building of several cotton mills . Neilston became a centre for cotton and calico bleaching and printing in the 18th century , which developed into a spinning and dying industry , and continued into the early 20th century . Although Neilston is known as a former milling village , agriculture has played , and continues to play , an economic role . The annual Neilston Agricultural Show is an important trading and cultural event for farmers from southwest Scotland each spring . 
 Although heavy industry died out in the latter half of the 20th century , as part of Scotland 's densely populated Central Belt , Neilston has continued to grow as a commuter village , supported by its position between Paisley and Glasgow , from roughly 1 @,@ 000 people in 1800 to 5 @,@ 168 in 2001 . Expansion continues due to several new housing developments . 
 = = History = = 
 Local historians have proposed various theories for the origin of the name Neilston . Although the first element is likely to derive from either the Gaelic forename " Niall " ( genitive " <unk> " ) or else from the French Nigel , there is disagreement as to whether the second element represents the English " stone " or " town " . The earliest mention of Neilston is in the <unk> of Paisley Abbey , which mentions that the Anglo @-@ Norman knight , Robert Croc of <unk> ( Crookston ) , assigned the patronage of <unk> to the monks of St Mirren 's in 1163 , on condition that masses should be regularly said for the benefit of his soul . G. W. S. Barrow suggested that the settlement may be identified with the follower of Walter fitz Alan , Lord of Kyle and Strathgryfe ( and liege lord of Robert Croc ) , named Nigel de Cotentin . 
 Despite this , some writers have given etymological explanations which post @-@ date 1163 . For instance , it has been written that " Neil " was a General of King Haakon IV of Norway , who , fleeing from the Battle of Largs ( 1263 ) , was overtaken in this locality and put to death . According to the custom of the age a burial mound was supposedly erected over his grave and the locality ultimately received the name of the General . In a similar semi @-@ legendary popular etymology , Neilston 's origin was said to derive from a stone erected over the grave of a Highland chief named Neil who was allegedly killed at the Battle of Harlaw ( 1411 ) , in the reign of King James I of Scotland . 
 Before its recorded history began , and possibly before its founding , the territory of what became Neilston is known to have formed part of the ancient Kingdom of Strathclyde . Evidence attests that Neilston is much older than its larger neighbour Barrhead , as the first recorded mention of Barrhead was almost 600 years after Neilston 's mention in the <unk> of Paisley Abbey of 1163 . The chartulary dealt with the foundation of the <unk> Monastery in Paisley and its relationship to a chapel in Neilston , which were both answerable to Rome via the <unk> Movement . Because of its chapel , which later became a parish church , Neilston was the most important settlement in the Levern Valley and much of rural Renfrewshire . 
 In the Middle Ages Neilston 's position in the Barrhead Gap , a pass linking Ayrshire to Glasgow , gave it strategic importance . Robert Croc may have had a fort or watchtower at <unk> in Neilston in the 12th century . " <unk> " is a corruption of " dun " meaning castle or fort , and the prefix perhaps implies the lack of physical warmth within the tower or the greeting received by unwelcome guests . Despite this distinction of local importance , Neilston remained a scattered community of small dwellings and farms , changing only with the arrival of the Industrial Revolution . 
 In the 17th century Neilston shared in a national hysteria about witchcraft that plagued Scotland . In 1650 a number of people from <unk> , Linwood and Neilston were accused of witchcraft . However , they passed certain tests which would disprove them to be witches . In 1697 , Christian Shaw of <unk> succeeded in convincing a Minister that she was a victim of witchcraft . A Commission of Enquiry , which included the Laird of <unk> , was appointed to investigate . As a result of the investigation , later known as the Paisley Witch Trials , four women and three men were arrested and eventually condemned to death and executed at Paisley . The Minister of Neilston Church , the Reverend David Brown , officiated at the hanging ; he preached to them before the execution " beseeching them to turn to God , God having exercised a great deal of long @-@ suffering towards them " . 
 The foundations of a textile industry in Neilston were laid by the monks of Paisley Abbey who mastered the local woollen trade in the Middle Ages . Neilston became a centre for cotton and calico bleaching and printing in the 18th century . This developed into a spinning and dying industry and continued into the early 20th century . <unk> and textile processing brought rapid socioeconomic growth to the village . Neilston was one of the earliest centres of textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution ; the process of bleaching linens was introduced into Neilston in 1765 , and a mill in the parish was the second erected in Scotland . By 1780 , cotton manufacturing and bleaching had become the main industry in Neilston ; the clear busy waters of the River Levern being well suited for power and processing . In the " Old " Statistical Account of Scotland ( 1792 ) , compiled under the direction of Sir John Sinclair of <unk> , Neilston was noted to have two cotton mills employing together more than 300 people , over half of them children . The local Minister was concerned for the children 's welfare , remarking on how they missed school to work in the mills where their lungs would be filled with cotton fluff and their skin spoiled by machine oil . 
 Crofthead Mill ( known locally as Neilston Mill ) was established in 1792 . It was one of seven large cotton mills on the banks of the River Levern between Neilston and <unk> , and although it closed for business in the early 1990s , it is the only industrial structure from this period still standing . Because of the large size of the complex , coupled with its short distance from the main residential core of Neilston , it was described in 1830 , at the peak of the industry 's prosperity , as " a little town of its self " . Other mills and factories have existed but have been demolished , including Broadley Spinning and Weaving Factory , and <unk> village and Spinning Mill . 
 Following its period of rapid industrialisation , in 1904 about 400 mill houses were constructed forming <unk> Terrace and its neighbouring streets in what was then the non @-@ contiguous Holehouse area of the Parish of Neilston . Additional housing schemes in the 1920s and 1930s led to Holehouse and old Neilston becoming a single continuously connected urban area , described as that of a " sizable small township " . Since this time , much rebuilding and further expansion has taken place . Gentrification projects since 2000 have included the refurbishment of the parish church in 2004 , an experimental public space renewal initiative in 2005 and the renovation of Nether Kirkton House , a mansion . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Neilston is represented by several tiers of elected government . Neilston Community Council forms the lowest tier of governance whose statutory role is to communicate local opinion to local and central government . It is one of ten community councils of the East Renfrewshire council area . East Renfrewshire Council , the unitary local authority for Neilston , is based at Giffnock , close to the border with the City of Glasgow , and is the executive , deliberative and legislative body responsible for local governance . The Scottish Parliament is responsible for devolved matters such as education , health and justice , while reserved matters are dealt with by the Parliament of the United Kingdom . 
 The territory of what became Neilston anciently formed part of the Kingdom of Strathclyde . It has lain within the county boundaries of Renfrewshire from a very early time . Neilston emerged as a parish and administrative unit in 1170 , and was for many years under the lordship of the <unk> of Caldwell whose tombs are at the parish church . The parish was 8 miles ( 13 km ) in length and by from 2 miles ( 3 km ) to 4 miles ( 6 km ) in breadth , encompassing six sevenths of what is now the town of Barrhead . Neilston Parish Council , a local body with limited power , was established in 1895 , following the Local Government ( Scotland ) Act 1894 , and abolished in 1930 following the Local Government ( Scotland ) Act 1929 . In 1890 , Neilston fell under the authority of Renfrewshire County Council , where it remained until 1975 when the county was superseded by the regional council area of Strathclyde . In 1903 , Neilston was within the Paisley Small Debt Court District and Poor Combination . From 1975 to 1996 , Neilston was in the Renfrew District of Strathclyde until the two @-@ tier regions and districts of Scotland were abolished . Since 1996 it has formed part of the unitary East Renfrewshire council area ; East Renfrewshire Council is the local authority . Neilston remains part of Renfrewshire for purposes of registration and Lieutenancy . 
 Neilston forms part of the multi member ward 1 of East Renfrewshire Council , namely Neilston , <unk> and Newton Mearns North . Four Councillors are elected using the proportional Single <unk> Vote ( STV ) system . The current elected members are Charlie Gilbert ( Conservative ) Paul O 'Kane ( Labour ) Elaine Green ( Labour ) and Tony Buchanan ( SNP ) . 
 Neilston is part of the county constituency of East Renfrewshire , electing one MP to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom Parliament . Kirsten Oswald of the SNP was elected as MP for East Renfrewshire in the 2015 General Election . Before the constituency 's creation in 2005 , Neilston lay in the Eastwood constituency . For purposes of the Scottish Parliament , Neilston forms part of the Renfrewshire South Constituency , represented by Hugh Henry of the Labour Party . In addition to this Neilston is represented by seven regional MSPs from the West of Scotland electoral region . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 55 ° 47 ′ 4 ″ N 4 ° 25 ′ 24 ″ W ( 55 @.@ 784 ° , <unk> ° ) Neilston is in Scotland 's Central Lowlands . The community is 430 feet ( 131 m ) above sea level , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southwest of Barrhead , 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) south of Paisley , and 10 miles ( 16 km ) southwest of Glasgow . The chief river is the Levern , which has its source at Long Loch . It flows eastwards through Neilston towards Barrhead , before uniting its waters with those of the White Cart Water . 
 The topography of Neilston is irregular ; to the east nearly flat , and to the south and west , rising to heights of 400 feet ( 122 m ) to 900 feet ( 274 m ) above the level of the River Clyde . The highest points are Neilston Pad and the <unk> @-@ law , at about 853 feet ( 260 m ) and 900 feet ( 274 m ) above sea level , respectively . Neilston Pad is characterised by a craggy face on its eastern side . Between these hills is the narrow valley of the River Levern , along which passes the turnpike road to Glasgow and Paisley . The soil in the eastern parts of Neilston is a dry loam , occasionally intermixed with gravel . Amongst the hilly areas of the village , the soil is less fertile , whilst in all other rural parts , the land is moss covered moor . The local geology is represented by basalt . The surrounding landscape is dominated by <unk> , the resistant core of an ancient and long extinct volcano , known locally as ' the Craigie ' . 
 Neilston experiences a temperate maritime climate , like much of the British Isles , with relatively cool summers and mild winters . Regular but generally light precipitation occurs throughout the year . Several lakes and small lochs have formed around Neilston : Long Loch , Loch <unk> , and Loch <unk> . <unk> the Brae ( Scots language for " above the hill " ) is the site of a spring . There are a number of small named @-@ localities in and around Neilston : Arthurlie , Holehouse , Crofthead , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Hollows , Broadley , Nether Kirkton and <unk> . 
 Neilston 's built environment is characterised by its mixture of 19th- and 20th @-@ century detached cottages , single and two @-@ story buildings . Several mansion houses were built for the owners of former mills and factories . Many of Neilston 's dwellings are painted in whites or ivories . In his book Ordnance Survey of Scotland ( 1884 ) , Francis Hindes Groome remarked that Neilston " presents an old @-@ fashioned yet neat and compact appearance " , a view echoed by Hugh McDonald in Rambles Round Glasgow ( 1910 ) , who stated that Neilston " is a compact , neat , and withal somewhat old @-@ fashioned little township " , although continued that it has " few features calling for special remark " . It is frequently described as a quiet dormitory village , although some sources from around the turn of the 20th century describe Neilston as a town . There is a mixture of suburbs , semi @-@ rural , rural and former @-@ industrial locations in Neilston , but overwhelmingly the land use in central Neilston is sub @-@ urban . The territory of Neilston is not contiguous with any other settlement , and according to the General Register Office for Scotland , does not form part of Greater Glasgow , the United Kingdom 's fifth largest conurbation . 
 The <unk> Burn and glen , at the north of Neilston , have become associated with a witch because at low water the numerous pot @-@ holes or rock @-@ cut basins have worn into one another , giving unusual shapes . Locals named some of these the witch 's floor , hearth , cradle , water @-@ stoup and grave . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the United Kingdom Census 2001 , the census locality ( village and sub @-@ area ) of Neilston had a total resident population of 5 @,@ 168 , or 6 % of the total of East Renfrewshire . This figure , combined with an area of 0 @.@ 45 square miles ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) , provides Neilston with a population density figure of 11 @,@ 484 inhabitants per square mile ( 4 @,@ 434 / km2 ) . This is higher than the average population density of Scotland ( at 166 / sq mi or 64 / km2 ) and nearby Glasgow ( at 8 @,@ 526 / sq mi or 3 @,@ 292 / km2 ) . 
 The median age of males and females living in Neilston was 37 and 38 years respectively , compared to 37 and 39 years for those in the whole of Scotland . Forty six percent were married , 3 @.@ 2 % were cohabiting couples , 11 @.@ 3 % were lone parent families and 25 @.@ 5 % of households were made up of individuals . 
 The place of birth of the village 's residents was 98 @.@ 5 % United Kingdom ( including 94 % from Scotland ) , 0 @.@ 4 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 4 % from other European Union countries , and 0 @.@ 8 % from elsewhere in the world . The economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 was 45 @.@ 4 % in full @-@ time employment , 11 @.@ 4 % in part @-@ time employment , 5 @.@ 2 % self @-@ employed , 3 @.@ 5 % unemployed , 4 % students with jobs , 4 % students without jobs , 11 @.@ 4 % retired , 4 % looking after home or family , 6 @.@ 8 % permanently sick or disabled , and 3 @.@ 5 % economically inactive for other reasons . Compared with the average demography of Scotland , Neilston has low proportions of people born outside the United Kingdom , and people over 75 years of age . 
 Following the Scottish Reformation in 1560 , there was no Roman Catholic place of worship in Neilston until 1861 ; it has been said that there was no resident Roman Catholic community in the parish in this time , the parishioners instead being Presbyterian . It was not until around the time of the Second Industrial Revolution , when the demand for labour was great , that Irish people began to come to Neilston and other parts of Scotland in increasing numbers , many of them because of The Great Hunger in the mid @-@ 19th century . As a result , Neilston , like neighbouring Glasgow , is home to a significant number of Catholic Irish @-@ Scots . St Thomas 's , part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Paisley , was built around 1861 to accommodate the new Catholic community . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Long existing as a rural settlement , Neilston 's economy was historically driven by farming , although a trade in handloom woven garments from the village 's cottage industry also existed from very early times . Grain mills and watermills were operating in Neilston by 1667 . 
 Due to its supply of hydropower from the River Levern , Neilston , like neighbouring Barrhead , developed factories and cotton mills after the arrival of the Industrial Revolution . Neilston fostered a flourishing textile processing industry . At the peak of business , the River Levern was lined with <unk> , cotton mills and calico <unk> . Passing through the ownership of a series of successful companies , Crofthead Mill was once the biggest producer of spun cotton in Renfrewshire . Thread from Crofthead , and thus Neilston , was traded across the world . It is claimed that thread from Crofthead Mill held together the boots of the climbing team led by Chris Bonington on the British Everest Expedition in 1975 . 
 Neilston Agricultural Show is a cattle show , sheepdog trial and sports and arts festival held near the village on the first Saturday of every May with a tradition beginning in the early 19th century . It began as a result of a dispute between two farmers from the village . Each farmer had a prized bull that he said was better than the other 's . In a bid to settle the argument , the farmers arranged a contest that would be judged by the other farmers in the area . It is not documented who had the better bull , but the contest grew into an annual event that has become a local custom . 
 Although agriculture continues to a limited extent on the village 's outskirts , Neilston 's textile processing industry has diminished . Since deindustrialisation , Neilston is a commuter village with significant numbers of its inhabitants travelling to the major urban centres of Glasgow , Paisley and Barrhead for work . The village has retained a selection of amenities from local shops for local people , leisure facilities , and schooling however . The Barrhead News , a local newspaper published by Clyde and Forth Press , reports on Neilston , Barrhead , <unk> and Darnley . 
 In 2005 the Clydesdale Bank closed its branch at Neilston , leaving it without a bank . In 2006 Neilston Development Trust utilised the Land Reform Act to purchase the bank building for community usage with the aid of a grant of £ 210 @,@ 000 from the Big Lottery Fund . This was the first time this legislation had been successfully used in an urban area . The premises are used as a community café , a service information point , office space and meeting rooms . The trust has been involved in a community energy project , the Neilston Community Wind Farm , which installed four turbines with a capacity of <unk> in 2013 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 A chapel at Neilston was first recorded in 1163 in a charter of Paisley Abbey . It was commissioned by Sir Robert Croc , as part of a feudal requirement by the High Steward of Scotland , Walter fitz Alan . The original Neilston Kirk was one storey high , and was rebuilt in 1762 to accommodate the growing population of the parish . The only remaining parts of the original building are a Gothic window in a back wall and the burial vault of the Mure family of Caldwell , including the tomb of Laird , scholar and MP for Renfrewshire , William Mure ( 1799 – 1860 ) . Between 1796 and 1798 the roof was taken off the church and an additional storey constructed , making space for a gallery to accommodate the growing population of Neilston . The structure has a spire , a clock , and 940 sittings . The old graveyard is centuries old and has a headstone dating from the 15th century . The church is part of the Church of Scotland , and has a Category B listing from Historic Scotland . 
 In 1559 , in the Scottish Reformation , an image of Mary mother of Jesus was taken from Neilston Parish Church and thrown into a pool of the River Levern . The pool ever since has been known as the Midge Hole . One of Neilston Parish Church 's most celebrated ministers was Dr Alexander Fleming and his Life ( 1883 ) contains much of interest relating to Neilston . In 1826 , despite enlargement of the church , it was too small to accommodate the population and the <unk> demanded payment of seat rents for those attending services . Dr Fleming proceeded to preach from a tent erected in the graveyard for a period of about eight years , insisting that " the people of the Parish are entitled to hear the gospel without money or price . " The case went to the House of Lords and although it was not successful , the parishioners were subsequently able to return to the church and take their places without paying rent and with no further opposition from the <unk> . In 2003 , in a major refurbishment , six skeletons were found beneath the floorboards of the church . Initially sealed off as a crime scene , archeologists from the University of Glasgow confirmed the skeletons were around 400 years old . A local historian suggested they could be the bones of former priests . 
 Other listed buildings in Neilston include Nether Kirkton House and Crofthead Mill , both Category B. Nether Kirkton House is a mansion and the former home of whisky heiress Marion Buchanan , and Crofthead Mill is Neilston 's largest and oldest cotton mill , dating in part from 1792 but predominantly 1880 after much of the original building was destroyed by fire . The mill is now used by J & M Murdoch & Son Ltd . , a transport , waste disposal and recycling company . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Travellers historically used the Levern Valley as a route to and from the Ayrshire coast . An ancient road from Glasgow to Kilmarnock known as the Flush was the most common path and can still be seen near Neilston . The major <unk> road ( <unk> Road ) from Irvine to Braehead runs to the north of Neilston . The nearest motorway is the <unk> , of which Junction 4 at Newton Mearns is the interchange for Neilston . 
 Neilston railway station , opened 1 May 1903 , is the western terminus of the Cathcart Circle Lines from Glasgow Central station . The station is managed by Abellio ScotRail and is 11 @.@ 7 miles ( 18 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Glasgow Central . It was constructed when the Lanarkshire and Ayrshire Railway built its line through the village to the coast at Ardrossan . Neilston Low was a Glasgow , Barrhead and Kilmarnock Joint Railway station , but closed in 1966 . 
 The closest airport is Glasgow International , 6 miles ( 10 km ) north of Neilston . 
 = = Education = = 
 A school for children of landowners and wealthy farmers was established in Neilston Parish by 1600 , under the supervision of the Kirk Session ; ordinary peasants remained illiterate . Neilston has two primary schools , but no secondary schools . St Thomas 's Primary School is a feeder Roman Catholic primary school for St Luke 's High School in Barrhead . Neilston Primary School is a non @-@ denominational feeder primary school for both Barrhead High School in Barrhead and Eastwood High School in Newton Mearns . 
 Neilston Primary School was built in the late 1960s with an open @-@ plan extension completed in 1991 . The school roll was 350 in June 2005 . St Thomas 's Primary , linked with the local Catholic chapel of the same name , was built in 1964 in <unk> Road beside the chapel where the old building was demolished . The school roll was 186 in 2007 . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Neilston Juniors F.C. is a football club within the Scottish Junior Football Association . Formed in 1945 , they operate from the Brig O ' Lea Stadium in Neilston and play in red and white kits . Their nickname is ' The Farmer 's Boys ' , and their anthem is the folk song , A Farmer 's Boy . 
 Neilston Leisure Centre has a 25 @-@ metre ( 82 ft ) swimming pool and a gym . Activities in the leisure centre include casual swimming , swimming lessons , pool fun sessions , fitness classes , sauna , gym sessions , the bi @-@ annual witch hunt staged on pig square and is home to the Neilston webbed feet swimmers association ( <unk> ) . It has a mural from the 1960s . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Neilston forms part of the Western water and sewerage regions of Scotland . Waste management is provided by the East Renfrewshire local authority . Water is supplied by Scottish Water , a government @-@ owned corporation of the Scottish Government . Neilston 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is Scottish Power . There are no hospitals in Neilston — the nearest are in the larger settlements of Paisley , Glasgow and Newton Mearns — but some local health care is provided by the Doctors Surgery in central Neilston . The NHS board is NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde . Strathclyde Fire and Rescue is the statutory fire and rescue service which operates in Neilston . The nearest fire station is in Barrhead . Policing in Neilston is provided by Police Scotland . The Strathclyde Partnership for Transport , a public body in Scotland , has direct operational responsibilities , such as supporting ( and in some cases running ) local bus services , and managing integrated ticketing in Neilston and other areas from the former Strathclyde region . Transport Scotland manages the local rail network . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Gregor Fisher , acclaimed comedian who portrayed Rab C. Nesbitt , was raised by his aunt and uncle in Neilston . Shamus O 'Brien was a Scottish American football striker born in Neilston in 1907 . In his career in the United States , O 'Brien spent eight seasons in the first American Soccer League and another five in the second American Soccer League . John Robertson who built the engine for the steamship PS Comet in 1811 , was born in Neilston in 1782 . A granite obelisk in his honour is erected opposite the parish church . The Stevenson family of lighthouse designers and civil engineers , which included Robert , Alan and Thomas , as well as Treasure Island writer Robert Louis Stevenson , came of a family that farmed land in Neilston parish . People from Neilston are called <unk> . 
 = Glastonbury = 
 Glastonbury / <unk> / is a small town in Somerset , England , situated at a dry point on the low @-@ lying Somerset Levels , 23 miles ( 37 km ) south of Bristol . The town , which is in the Mendip district , had a population of 8 @,@ 932 in the 2011 census . Glastonbury is less than 1 mile ( 2 km ) across the River Brue from Street , which is now larger than Glastonbury . 
 Evidence from timber trackways such as the Sweet Track show that the town has been inhabited since Neolithic times . Glastonbury Lake Village was an Iron Age village , close to the old course of the River Brue and Sharpham Park approximately 2 miles ( 3 km ) west of Glastonbury , that dates back to the Bronze Age . Centwine was the first Saxon patron of Glastonbury Abbey , which dominated the town for the next 700 years . One of the most important abbeys in England , it was the site of Edmund Ironside 's coronation as King of England in 1016 . Many of the oldest surviving buildings in the town , including the Tribunal , George Hotel and Pilgrims ' Inn and the Somerset Rural Life Museum , which is based in an old tithe barn , are associated with the abbey . The Church of St John the Baptist dates from the 15th century . 
 The town became a centre for commerce , which led to the construction of the market cross , Glastonbury Canal and the Glastonbury and Street railway station , the largest station on the original Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway . The Brue Valley Living Landscape is a conservation project managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust and nearby is the Ham Wall National Nature Reserve . 
 Glastonbury has been described as a New Age community which attracts people with New Age and Neopagan beliefs , and is notable for myths and legends often related to Glastonbury Tor , concerning Joseph of Arimathea , the Holy Grail and King Arthur . Joseph is said to have arrived in Glastonbury and stuck his staff into the ground , when it flowered miraculously into the Glastonbury Thorn . The presence of a landscape zodiac around the town has been suggested but no evidence has been discovered . The Glastonbury Festival , held in the nearby village of Pilton , takes its name from the town . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 During the 7th millennium BCE the sea level rose and flooded the valleys and low @-@ lying ground surrounding Glastonbury so the Mesolithic people occupied seasonal camps on the higher ground , indicated by scatters of flints . The Neolithic people continued to exploit the reedswamps for their natural resources and started to construct wooden trackways . These included the Sweet Track , west of Glastonbury , which is one of the oldest engineered roads known and was the oldest timber trackway discovered in Northern Europe , until the 2009 discovery of a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old trackway in Belmarsh Prison . Tree @-@ ring dating ( dendrochronology ) of the timbers has enabled very precise dating of the track , showing it was built in 3807 or 3806 BC . It has been claimed to be the oldest road in the world . The track was discovered in the course of peat digging in 1970 , and is named after its discoverer , Ray Sweet . It extended across the marsh between what was then an island at Westhay , and a ridge of high ground at Shapwick , a distance close to 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) . The track is one of a network of tracks that once crossed the Somerset Levels . Built in the 39th century BC , during the Neolithic period , the track consisted of crossed poles of ash , oak and lime ( Tilia ) which were driven into the waterlogged soil to support a walkway that mainly consisted of oak planks laid end @-@ to @-@ end . Since the discovery of the Sweet Track , it has been determined that it was built along the route of an even earlier track , the Post Track , dating from 3838 BC and so 30 years older . 
 Glastonbury Lake Village was an Iron Age village , close to the old course of the River Brue , on the Somerset Levels near Godney , some 3 miles ( 5 km ) north west of Glastonbury . It covers an area of 400 feet ( 120 m ) north to south by 300 feet ( 90 m ) east to west , and housed around 100 people in five to seven groups of houses , each for an extended family , with sheds and barns , made of hazel and willow covered with reeds , and surrounded either permanently or at certain times by a wooden palisade . The village was built in about 300 BC and occupied into the early Roman period ( around 100 AD ) when it was abandoned , possibly due to a rise in the water level . It was built on a morass on an artificial foundation of timber filled with brushwood , bracken , rubble and clay . 
 Sharpham Park is a 300 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) historic park , 2 miles ( 3 km ) west of Glastonbury , which dates back to the Bronze Age . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 The origin of the name Glastonbury is unclear but when the settlement is first recorded in the 7th and the early 8th century , it was called <unk> . The burg element is Anglo @-@ Saxon and could refer either to a fortified place such as a burh or , more likely , a monastic enclosure , however the <unk> element is obscure , and may derive from an Old English word or from a Saxon or Celtic personal name . It may derive from a person or kindred group named Glast . 
 Hugh Ross Williamson cites a tale about St. Collen , one of the earliest hermits to inhabit the Tor before the Abbey was built by St. Patrick , which has the Saint summoned by the King of the Fairies , Gwyn , to the summit of the Tor . Upon arrival there he beholds a hovering mansion inhabited by handsomely dressed courtiers and King Gwyn on a throne of gold ; holy water disperses the apparition . This is from Druid mythology , in which the mansion is made of glass so as to receive the spirits of the dead , which were supposed to depart from the summit of the Tor . This was the chief reason why the chapel , and later the church , of St. Michael were built on the high hill ; St. Michael being the chief patron against diabolic attacks which the monks believed the Fairy King to be numbered among . Accordingly , Williamson posits that the Tor was named after the glassy mansion of the dead . 
 William of Malmesbury in his De Antiquitate <unk> Ecclesie gives the Old Celtic <unk> ( or Ynys <unk> ) as its earliest name , and asserts that the founder of the town was the eponymous Glast , a descendant of Cunedda . 
 Centwine ( 676 – 685 ) was the first Saxon patron of Glastonbury Abbey . In 1016 Edmund Ironside was crowned king at Glastonbury . After his death later that year he was buried at the abbey . To the southwest of the town centre is Beckery , which was once a village in its own right but is now part of the suburbs . Around the 7th and 8th centuries it was occupied by a small monastic community associated with a cemetery . 
 Sharpham Park was granted by King Eadwig to the then abbot Æthelwold in 957 . In 1191 Sharpham Park was conferred by the soon @-@ to @-@ be King John I to the Abbots of Glastonbury , who remained in possession of the park and house until the dissolution of the monasteries in 1539 . From 1539 to 1707 the park was owned by the Duke of Somerset , Sir Edward Seymour , brother of Queen Jane ; the Thynne family of Longleat , and the family of Sir Henry Gould . Edward Dyer was born here in 1543 . The house is now a private residence and Grade II * listed building . It was the birthplace of Sir Edward Dyer ( died 1607 ) an Elizabethan poet and courtier , the writer Henry Fielding ( 1707 – 54 ) , and the cleric William Gould . 
 In the 1070s St Margaret 's Chapel was built on Magdelene Street , originally as a hospital and later as almshouses for the poor . The building dates from 1444 . The roof of the hall is thought to have been removed after the Dissolution , and some of the building was demolished in the 1960s . It is Grade II * listed , and a Scheduled ancient monument . Hospital of St Mary Magdalene , Glastonbury In 2010 plans were announced to restore the building . 
 During the Middle Ages the town largely depended on the abbey but was also a centre for the wool trade until the 18th century . A Saxon @-@ era canal connected the abbey to the River Brue . Richard Whiting , the last Abbot of Glastonbury , was executed with two of his monks on 15 November 1539 during the dissolution of the monasteries . 
 During the Second Cornish Uprising of 1497 Perkin Warbeck surrendered when he heard that Giles , Lord Daubeney 's troops , loyal to Henry VII were camped at Glastonbury . 
 = = = Early modern = = = 
 In 1693 Glastonbury , Connecticut was founded and named after the English town from which some of the settlers had emigrated . It is rumored to have originally been called " Glistening Town " until the mid @-@ 19th century , when the name was changed to match the spelling of Glastonbury , England , but in fact , residents of the Connecticut town believe this to be a myth , based on the Glastonbury Historical Society 's records . A representation of the Glastonbury thorn is incorporated onto the town seal . 
 The Somerset towns charter of incorporation was received in 1705 . Growth in the trade and economy largely depended on the drainage of the surrounding moors . The opening of the Glastonbury Canal produced an upturn in trade , and encouraged local building . The parish was part of the hundred of Glaston Twelve Hides , until the 1730s when it became a borough in its own right . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 By the middle of the 19th century the Glastonbury Canal drainage problems and competition from the new railways caused a decline in trade , and the town 's economy became depressed . The canal was closed on 1 July 1854 , and the lock and aqueducts on the upper section were dismantled . The railway opened on 17 August 1854 . The lower sections of the canal were given to the Commissioners for Sewers , for use as a drainage ditch . The final section was retained to provide a wharf for the railway company , which was used until 1936 , when it passed to the Commissioners of Sewers and was filled in . The Central Somerset Railway merged with the Dorset Central Railway to become the Somerset and Dorset Railway . The main line to Glastonbury closed in 1966 . 
 In the Northover district industrial production of <unk> , woollen slippers and , later , boots and shoes , developed in conjunction with the growth of C & J Clark in Street . Clarks still has its headquarters in Street , but shoes are no longer manufactured there . Instead , in 1993 , redundant factory buildings were converted to form Clarks Village , the first purpose @-@ built factory outlet in the United Kingdom . 
 During the 19th and 20th centuries tourism developed based on the rise of antiquarianism , the association with the abbey and mysticism of the town . This was aided by accessibility via the rail and road network , which has continued to support the town 's economy and led to a steady rise in resident population since 1801 . 
 Glastonbury received national media coverage in 1999 when cannabis plants were found in the town 's floral displays . 
 = = Mythology and legends = = 
 Glastonbury is notable for myths and legends concerning Joseph of Arimathea , the Holy Grail and King Arthur . Many long @-@ standing and cherished legends were disproved in a four @-@ year study by archaeologists at the University of Reading , who , amongst other findings , discovered that the connection with King Arthur and his Queen , <unk> , was created deliberately by the monks in 1184 to meet a financial crisis caused by a devastating fire . Other myths dispelled include the visit by Jesus , the building of the oldest church in England , and the flowering of the walking stick . The study made new archaeological finds ; its leader found Glastonbury to be a remarkable archaeological site . The new results were reported on the Glastonbury Abbey Web site , and were to be incorporated into the Abbey 's guidebook ; however , the leader of the study , who became a trustee of Glastonbury , said " We are not in the business of destroying people ’ s beliefs ... A thousand years of beliefs and legends are part of the intangible history of this remarkable place " . 
 The legend that Joseph of Arimathea retrieved certain holy relics was introduced by the French poet Robert de Boron in his 13th @-@ century version of the grail story , thought to have been a trilogy though only fragments of the later books survive today . The work became the inspiration for the later Vulgate Cycle of Arthurian tales . 
 De Boron 's account relates how Joseph captured Jesus ' blood in a cup ( the " Holy Grail " ) which was subsequently brought to Britain . The Vulgate Cycle reworked Boron 's original tale . Joseph of Arimathea was no longer the chief character in the Grail origin : Joseph 's son , Josephus , took over his role of the Grail keeper . The earliest versions of the grail romance , however , do not call the grail " holy " or mention anything about blood , Joseph or Glastonbury . 
 In 1191 , monks at the abbey claimed to have found the graves of Arthur and Guinevere to the south of the Lady Chapel of the Abbey Church , which was visited by a number of contemporary historians including Giraldus Cambrensis . The remains were later moved and were lost during the Reformation . Many scholars suspect that this discovery was a pious forgery to substantiate the antiquity of Glastonbury 's foundation , and increase its renown . 
 An early Welsh poem links Arthur to the Tor in an account of a confrontation between Arthur and <unk> , who had kidnapped Queen Guinevere . According to some versions of the Arthurian legend , Lancelot retreated to Glastonbury Abbey in penance following Arthur 's death . 
 Joseph is said to have arrived in Glastonbury by boat over the flooded Somerset Levels . On disembarking he stuck his staff into the ground and it flowered miraculously into the Glastonbury Thorn ( or Holy Thorn ) . This is said to explain a hybrid Crataegus monogyna ( hawthorn ) tree that only grows within a few miles of Glastonbury , and which flowers twice annually , once in spring and again around Christmas time ( depending on the weather ) . Each year a sprig of thorn is cut , by the local Anglican vicar and the eldest child from St John 's School , and sent to the Queen . 
 The original Holy Thorn was a centre of pilgrimage in the Middle Ages but was chopped down during the English Civil War . A replacement thorn was planted in the 20th century on <unk> hill ( originally in 1951 to mark the Festival of Britain ; but the thorn had to be replanted the following year as the first attempt did not take ) . The <unk> Hill Holy Thorn was vandalised in 2010 and all its branches were chopped off . It initially showed signs of recovery but now ( 2014 ) appears to be dead . A new sapling has been planted nearby . Many other examples of the thorn grow throughout Glastonbury including those in the grounds of Glastonbury Abbey , St Johns Church and Chalice Well . 
 Today Glastonbury Abbey presents itself as " traditionally the oldest above @-@ ground Christian church in the world , " which according to the legend was built at Joseph 's behest to house the Holy Grail , 65 or so years after the death of Jesus . The legend also says that as a child , Jesus had visited Glastonbury along with Joseph . The legend probably was encouraged during the medieval period when religious relics and pilgrimages were profitable business for abbeys . William Blake mentioned the legend in a poem that became a popular hymn , " Jerusalem " ( see And did those feet in ancient time ) . 
 = = = Glastonbury zodiac = = = 
 In 1934 artist Katherine Maltwood suggested a landscape zodiac , a map of the stars on a gigantic scale , formed by features in the landscape such as roads , streams and field boundaries , could be found situated around Glastonbury . She held that the " temple " was created by Sumerians about 2700 BC . The idea of a prehistoric landscape zodiac fell into disrepute when two independent studies examined the Glastonbury Zodiac , one by Ian Burrow in 1975 and the other by Tom Williamson and Liz Bellamy in 1983 . These both used standard methods of landscape historical research . Both studies concluded that the evidence contradicted the idea of an ancient zodiac . The eye of Capricorn identified by Maltwood was a haystack . The western wing of the Aquarius phoenix was a road laid in 1782 to run around Glastonbury , and older maps dating back to the 1620s show the road had no predecessors . The Cancer boat ( not a crab as in conventional western astrology ) consists of a network of 18th @-@ century drainage ditches and paths . There are some Neolithic paths preserved in the peat of the bog formerly comprising most of the area , but none of the known paths match the lines of the zodiac features . There is no support for this theory , or for the existence of the " temple " in any form , from conventional archaeologists . Glastonbury is also said to be the centre of several ley lines . 
 = = Governance and public services = = 
 The town council is made up of 16 members , and is based at the Town Hall , Magdalene Street . The town hall was built in 1818 and has a two @-@ storey late Georgian ashlar front . It is a Grade II * listed building . 
 Glastonbury is in the local government district of Mendip , which is part of the county of Somerset . It was previously administered by Glastonbury Municipal Borough . The Mendip district council is responsible for local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , the library , road maintenance , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning . 
 The town 's retained fire station is operated by Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service , whilst police and ambulance services are provided by Avon and Somerset Constabulary and the South Western Ambulance Service . There are two doctors ' surgeries in Glastonbury , and a National Health Service community hospital operated by Somerset Primary Care Trust which opened in 2005 . 
 There are 4 electoral wards within Glastonbury having in total the same population as is mentioned above . 
 Glastonbury falls within the Wells constituency , represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . The Member of Parliament is Conservative , James Heappey , who replaced Tessa <unk> of the Liberal Democrats in the 2015 General Election . It is within the South West England ( European Parliament constituency ) , which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 Glastonbury is twinned with the Greek island of Patmos , and Lalibela , Ethiopia . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The walk up the Tor to the distinctive tower at the summit ( the partially restored remains of an old church ) is rewarded by vistas of the mid @-@ Somerset area , including the Levels which are drained marshland . From there , on a dry point , 158 metres ( 518 ft ) above sea level , it is easy to appreciate how Glastonbury was once an island and , in the winter , the surrounding moors are often flooded , giving that appearance once more . It is an agricultural region typically with open fields of permanent grass , surrounded by ditches with willow trees . Access to the moors and Levels is by " droves " , i.e. , green lanes . The Levels and inland moors can be 6 metres ( 20 ft ) below peak tides and have large areas of peat . The low @-@ lying areas are underlain by much older Triassic age formations of Upper Lias sand that protrude to form what would once have been islands and include Glastonbury Tor . The lowland landscape was formed only during the last 10 @,@ 000 years , following the end of the last ice age . 
 The low @-@ lying damp ground can produce a visual effect known as a Fata Morgana . This optical phenomenon occurs because rays of light are strongly bent when they pass through air layers of different temperatures in a steep thermal inversion where an atmospheric duct has formed . The Italian name Fata Morgana is derived from the name of Morgan le Fay , who was alternatively known as <unk> , Morgain , Morgana and other variants . Morgan le Fay was described as a powerful sorceress and antagonist of King Arthur and Queen Guinevere in the Arthurian legend . 
 Glastonbury is less than 1 mile ( 2 km ) across the River Brue from the village of Street . At the time of King Arthur the Brue formed a lake just south of the hilly ground on which Glastonbury stands . This lake is one of the locations suggested by Arthurian legend as the home of the Lady of the Lake . Pomparles Bridge stood at the western end of this lake , guarding Glastonbury from the south , and it is suggested that it was here that Sir Bedivere threw Excalibur into the waters after King Arthur fell at the Battle of Camlann . The old bridge was replaced by a reinforced concrete arch bridge in 1911 . 
 Until the 13th century , the direct route to the sea at Highbridge was prevented by gravel banks and peat near Westhay . The course of the river partially encircled Glastonbury from the south , around the western side ( through Beckery ) , and then north through the Panborough @-@ Bleadney gap in the Wedmore @-@ Wookey Hills , to join the River Axe just north of Bleadney . This route made it difficult for the officials of Glastonbury Abbey to transport produce from their outlying estates to the abbey , and when the valley of the River Axe was in flood it backed up to flood Glastonbury itself . Some time between 1230 and 1250 a new channel was constructed westwards into Meare Pool north of Meare , and further westwards to Mark Moor . The Brue Valley Living Landscape is a conservation project based on the Somerset Levels and Moors and managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust . The project commenced in January 2009 and aims to restore , recreate and reconnect habitat , ensuring that wildlife is enhanced and capable of sustaining itself in the face of climate change , while guaranteeing farmers and other landowners can continue to use their land profitably . It is one of an increasing number of landscape scale conservation projects in the UK . 
 The Ham Wall National Nature Reserve , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) west of Glastonbury , is managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds . This new wetland habitat has been established from out peat diggings and now consists of areas of reedbed , wet scrub , open water and peripheral grassland and woodland . Bird species living on the site include the bearded tit and the bittern . 
 The Whitelake River rises between two low limestone ridges to the north of Glastonbury , part of the southern edge of the Mendip Hills . The confluence of the two small streams that make the Whitelake River is on Worthy Farm , the site of the Glastonbury Festival , between the small villages of Pilton and Pylle . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Glastonbury has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 or 2 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 or 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Glastonbury is a centre for religious tourism and pilgrimage . As with many towns of similar size , the centre is not as thriving as it once was but Glastonbury supports a large number of alternative shops . 
 The outskirts of the town contain a DIY shop a former sheepskin and slipper factory site , once owned by Morlands , which is slowly being redeveloped . The 31 @-@ acre ( 13 ha ) site of the old Morlands factory was scheduled for demolition and redevelopment into a new light industrial park , although there have been some protests that the buildings should be reused rather than being demolished . As part of the redevelopment of the site a project has been established by the Glastonbury Community Development Trust to provide support for local unemployed people applying for employment , starting in self @-@ employment and accessing work @-@ related training . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 According to the Glastonbury Conservation Area Appraisal of July 2010 , there are approximately 170 listed buildings or structures in the town 's designated conservation area , of which eight are listed grade I , six are listed grade II * and the remainder are listed grade II . 
 The Tribunal was a medieval merchant 's house , used as the Abbey courthouse and , during the Monmouth Rebellion trials , by Judge Jeffreys . It now serves as a museum containing possessions and works of art from the Glastonbury Lake Village which were preserved in almost perfect condition in the peat after the village was abandoned . The museum is run by the Glastonbury Antiquarian Society . The building also houses the tourist information centre . 
 The octagonal Market Cross was built in 1846 by Benjamin Ferrey . 
 The George Hotel and Pilgrims ' Inn was built in the late 15th century to accommodate visitors to Glastonbury Abbey , which is open to visitors . It has been designated as a Grade I listed building . The front of the 3 @-@ storey building is divided into 3 tiers of panels with traceried heads . Above the right of centre entrance are 3 carved panels with arms of the Abbey and Edward IV . 
 The Somerset Rural Life Museum is a museum of the social and agricultural history of Somerset , housed in buildings surrounding a 14th @-@ century barn once belonging to Glastonbury Abbey . It was used for the storage of arable produce , particularly wheat and rye , from the abbey 's home farm of approximately 524 acres ( 2 @.@ 12 km2 ) . <unk> and winnowing would also have been carried out in the barn , which was built from local " shelly " limestone with thick timbers supporting the stone tiling of the roof . It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building , and is a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 The Chalice Well is a holy well at the foot of the Tor , covered by a wooden well @-@ cover with wrought @-@ iron decoration made in 1919 . The natural spring has been in almost constant use for at least two thousand years . Water issues from the spring at a rate of 25 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 110 @,@ 000 l ; 30 @,@ 000 US gal ) per day and has never failed , even during drought . Iron oxide deposits give the water a reddish hue , as dissolved ferrous oxide becomes oxygenated at the surface and is precipitated , providing chalybeate waters . As with the hot springs in nearby Bath , the water is believed to possess healing qualities . The well is about 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) deep , with two underground chambers at its bottom . It is often portrayed as a symbol of the female aspect of deity , with the male symbolised by Glastonbury Tor . As such , it is a popular destination for pilgrims in search of the divine feminine , including modern Pagans . The well is however popular with all faiths and in 2001 became a World Peace Garden . 
 Just a short distance from the Chalice Well site , across a road known as Well House Lane , can be found the " White Spring " , where a temple has been created in the 21st century . Whilst the waters of the Chalice Well are touched red with iron , the water of the latter is white with calcite . Both springs rise from caverns underneath the Tor and it is claimed that both have healing in their flow . 
 The building now used as the White Spring Temple was originally a Victorian @-@ built well house , erected by the local water board in 1872 . Around that time , an outbreak of cholera in the area caused great concern and the natural caves were dug out , and a stone collection chamber was constructed to ensure the flow of a quality water supply . Study of the flow of water into the collection chamber has shown that the builders also tapped into other springs , besides the White Spring and judging from the high iron content of one of these springs , it appears that a small offshoot of Chalice Well finds its way under Well House Lane to emerge beside the White Spring . However , after building the reservoir , the water board soon discovered that the high <unk> content of the water caused pipes to block and by the end of the 19th century water was piped into Glastonbury from out of town . After lying derelict for many years , the water board sold off the well house , which is now maintained by a group of volunteers as a " water temple " . On the outside of the building is a tap where visitors and locals can collect the water of the White Spring . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Glastonbury Canal ran just over 14 miles ( 23 km ) through two locks from Glastonbury to Highbridge where it entered the Bristol Channel in the early 19th century , but it became uneconomic with the arrival of the railway in the 1840s . 
 Glastonbury and Street railway station was the biggest station on the original Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway main line from Highbridge to Evercreech Junction until closed in 1966 under the Beeching axe . Opened in 1854 as Glastonbury , and renamed in 1886 , it had three platforms , two for Evercreech to Highbridge services and one for the branch service to Wells . The station had a large goods yard controlled from a signal box . The site is now a timber yard for a local company . Replica level crossing gates have been placed at the entrance . 
 The nearest railway station is at Castle Cary but there is no direct bus route linking it to Glastonbury . There are convenient bus connections between Glastonbury and the railway stations at Bristol Temple Meads ( over an hour travelling time ) and at Taunton . 
 The main road in the town is the A39 which passes through Glastonbury from Wells connecting the town with Street and the M5 motorway . The other roads around the town are small and run across the levels generally following the drainage ditches . Local bus services are provided by <unk> , <unk> Bus , National Express and local community groups . Glastonbury 's bus services have suffered in cuts made from 2012 to 2014 . The main routes are to Bristol via Wells , to Bridgewater , to Yeovil via Street and to Taunton . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are several infant and primary schools in Glastonbury and the surrounding villages . Secondary education is provided by St Dunstan 's Community School . As of 2009 , the school had 639 students between the ages of 11 and 16 years . It is named after St. Dunstan , an abbot of Glastonbury Abbey , who went on to become the Archbishop of Canterbury in 960 AD . The school was built in 1958 with major building work , at a cost of £ 1 @.@ 2 million , in 1998 , adding the science block and the sports hall . It was designated as a specialist Arts College in 2004 , and the £ 800 @,@ 000 spent at this time paid for the Performing Arts studio and facilities to support students with special educational needs . 
 Strode College in Street provides academic and vocational courses for those aged 16 – 18 and adult education . A tertiary institution and further education college , most of the courses it offers are A @-@ levels or Business and Technology Education Councils ( <unk> ) . The college also provides some university @-@ level courses , and is part of The University of Plymouth Colleges network . 
 = = Religious sites and faith groups = = 
 Glastonbury may have been a site of religious importance in pre @-@ Christian times . The abbey was founded by Britons , and dates to at least the early 7th century , although later medieval Christian legend claimed that the abbey was founded by Joseph of Arimathea in the 1st century . This fanciful legend is intimately tied to Robert de Boron 's version of the Holy Grail story and to Glastonbury 's connection to King Arthur , which dates at least to the early 12th century . Glastonbury fell into Saxon hands after the Battle of Peonnum in 658 . King Ine of Wessex enriched the endowment of the community of monks already established at Glastonbury . He is said to have directed that a stone church be built in 712 . The Abbey Church was enlarged in the 10th century by the Abbot of Glastonbury , Saint Dunstan , the central figure in the 10th @-@ century revival of English monastic life . He instituted the Benedictine Rule at Glastonbury and built new cloisters . Dunstan became Archbishop of Canterbury in 960 . In 1184 , a great fire at Glastonbury destroyed the monastic buildings . Reconstruction began almost immediately and the Lady Chapel , which includes the well , was consecrated in 1186 . 
 The abbey had a violent end during the Dissolution and the buildings were progressively destroyed as their stones were removed for use in local building work . The remains of the Abbot 's Kitchen ( a grade I listed building . ) and the Lady Chapel are particularly well @-@ preserved set in 36 acres ( 150 @,@ 000 m2 ) of parkland . It is approached by the Abbey Gatehouse which was built in the mid @-@ 14th century and completely restored in 1810 . 
 The Church of St Benedict was rebuilt by Abbot Richard Beere in about 1520 . This is an Anglican church and is linked with the parishes of St John 's Church in Glastonbury and St Mary 's & All Saints Church in the village of Meare as a joint benefice . 
 Described as " one of the most ambitious parish churches in Somerset " , the current Church of St John the Baptist dates from the 15th century and has been designated as a Grade I listed building . The church is laid out in a cruciform plan with an aisled nave and a <unk> of seven bays . The west tower has elaborate buttressing , panelling and battlements and at 134 ½ feet ( about 41 metres ) , is the second tallest parish church tower in Somerset . Recent excavations in the nave have revealed the foundations of a large central tower , possibly of Saxon origin , and a later Norman nave arcade on the same plan as the existing one . A central tower survived until the 15th century , but is believed to have collapsed , at which time the church was rebuilt . The interior of the church includes four 15th @-@ century tomb @-@ chests , some 15th @-@ century stained glass in the chancel , medieval vestments , and a domestic cupboard of about 1500 which was once at Witham Charterhouse . 
 In the centuries that followed the Reformation , many religious denominations came to Glastonbury to establish chapels and meeting houses . For such a relatively small town , Glastonbury has a remarkably diverse history of Christian places of worship , further enriched by the fact that several of these movements saw break @-@ away factions , typically setting up new meeting places as a result of doctrinal disagreements , leaving behind them a legacy which would require a highly specialized degree of study in order to chart their respective histories and places of practice . Amongst their number have been Puritans / Undetermined Protestants , Quakers , Independents , Baptists , Presbyterians , Congregationalists , Wesleyan and Primitive Methodists , <unk> , Plymouth Brethren , Jehovah 's Witnesses and Pentecostals . 
 The United Reformed Church on the High Street was built in 1814 and altered in 1898 . It stands on the site of the Ship Inn where meetings were held during the 18th century . It is Grade II listed . 
 Glastonbury Methodist Church on Lambrook Street was built in 1843 and has a galleried interior , typical of a non @-@ conformist chapel of that period , but an unusual number of stained glass windows . Close by the front of the church is an ancient pond , which was later covered to form a brick @-@ arched reservoir . This is mentioned in property deeds of 1821 , and is still accessible , containing approximately 31 @,@ 500 gallons of water . 
 The Methodist Church on Lambrook street was originally the Glastonbury Wesleyan Methodist Chapel . A Primitive Methodist Chapel was built on <unk> Street in 1844 , with an adjoining house added for a minister in 1869 . This chapel was closed in 1968 , since which time it has had a number of different uses , being described in 2007 as the Maitreya Monastery , prior to which it had been the Archangel Michael Soul Therapy Centre . 
 The Catholic Church of Our Lady St Mary of Glastonbury was built , on land near to the Abbey , in 1939 . A statue based on a 14th @-@ century metal seal was blessed in 1955 and crowned in 1965 restoring the Marian shrine that had been in the Abbey prior to the reformation . 
 The Bove Town Gospel Hall was registered for the <unk> of marriages in 1964 This has been a place of worship in the town since at least 1889 , when it was listed as a mission of the Plymouth Brethren . Jehovah 's Witnesses originally occupied a Kingdom Hall on Archer 's Way from 1942 . This transferred to Church Lane in 1964 , and subsequently to its present site on Old Wells Road . 
 In April 2012 , it was reported by The Guardian newspaper that , according to the Pilgrim Reception Centre in the town , Glastonbury had around seventy different faith groups . Some of these groups attended a special ceremony to celebrate this diversity , held in the Chalice Well Gardens on 21 April of that year . 
 The pagan Glastonbury Goddess Temple was founded in 2002 and registered as a place of worship the following year . It is self @-@ described as the first temple of its kind to exist in Europe in over a thousand years . 
 The 22nd Jagannatha Ratha @-@ yatra Krishna Festival took place in Glastonbury on Sunday 4 October 2015 . Devotees of the Krishna Consciousness movement travelled to the town from London , Bath , Bristol and elsewhere to join with locals in a procession and <unk> . 
 Sufism has been long established in Glastonbury . <unk> are held weekly in private homes , and on the first Sunday of every month a <unk> is held at St Margaret 's Chapel in Magdalene Street . A Sufi charity shop was established in Glastonbury in 1999 , and supports missionary work in Africa . This shop was opened after Sheikh Nazim came to Glastonbury to visit the Abbey . Here he declared , “ This is the spiritual heart of England ... It is from here that the spiritual new age will begin and to here that Jesus will return " . 
 The Glastonbury Order of Druids was formed on Mayday 1988 . 
 Glastonbury has a particular significance for members of the Bahá 'í Faith in that Wellesley Tudor Pole , founder of the Chalice Well Trust , was one of the earliest and most prominent adherents of this faith in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Sports = = 
 The local football team is Glastonbury Town F.C. They joined the Western Football League Division Two as Glastonbury in 1919 and won the Western Football League title three times in their history . They changed their name to Glastonbury Town in 2003 . For the 2010 – 11 season , they were members of the Somerset County Football League Premier Division . 
 Glastonbury Cricket Club competes in the West of England Premier League , one of the ECB Premier Leagues , the highest level of recreational cricket in England and Wales . The club plays at the Tor Leisure Ground , which used to stage Somerset County Cricket Club first @-@ class fixtures . 
 The town is on the route of the Samaritans Way South West . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Glastonbury has been described as a New Age community where communities have grown up to include people with New Age beliefs . 
 In a 1904 novel by Charles Whistler entitled A Prince of Cornwall Glastonbury in the days of Ine of Wessex is portrayed . It is also a setting in the Warlord Chronicles , a trilogy of books about Arthurian Britain written by Bernard Cornwell . Modern fiction has also used Glastonbury as a setting including The Age of Misrule series of books by Mark <unk> in which the Watchmen appear , a group selected from Anglican priests in and around Glastonbury to safeguard knowledge of a gate to the Otherworld on top of Glastonbury Tor . John Cowper Powys 's novel A Glastonbury Romance is set in Glastonbury and is concerned with the Grail . 
 The first Glastonbury Festivals were a series of cultural events held in summer , from 1914 to 1926 . The festivals were founded by English socialist composer Rutland Boughton and his librettist Lawrence Buckley . Apart from the founding of a national theatre , they envisaged a summer school and music festival based on utopian principles . With strong Arthurian connections and historic and prehistoric associations , Glastonbury was chosen to host the festivals . 
 The more recent Glastonbury Festival of Performing Arts , founded in 1970 , is now the largest open @-@ air music and performing arts festival in the world . Although it is named for Glastonbury , it is held at Worthy Farm between the small villages of Pilton and Pylle , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) east of the town of Glastonbury . The festival is best known for its contemporary music , but also features dance , comedy , theatre , circus , cabaret and many other arts . For 2005 , the enclosed area of the festival was over 900 acres ( 3 @.@ 6 km2 ) , had over 385 live performances and was attended by around 150 @,@ 000 people . In 2007 , over 700 acts played on over 80 stages and the capacity expanded by 20 @,@ 000 to 177 @,@ 000 . The festival has spawned a range of other work including the 1972 film Glastonbury Fayre and album , 1996 film Glastonbury the Movie and the 2005 DVD Glastonbury Anthems . 
 The Children 's World charity grew out of the festival and is based in the town . It is known internationally ( as Children 's World International ) . It was set up by Arabella Churchill in 1981 to provide drama participation and creative play and to work creatively in educational settings , providing social and emotional benefits for all children , particularly those with special needs . Children 's World International is the sister charity of Children 's World and was started in 1999 to work with children in the Balkans , in conjunction with Balkan Sunflowers and Save the Children . They also run the Glastonbury Children 's Festival each August . 
 Glastonbury is one of the venues for the annual West Country Carnival . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Glastonbury has been the birthplace or home to many notable people . Peter King , 1st Baron King was the recorder of Glastonbury in 1705 . Thomas Bramwell Welch the discoverer of the pasteurisation process to prevent the fermentation of grape juice was born in Glastonbury in 1825 . The judge John Creighton represented Lunenburg County in the Nova Scotia House of Assembly from 1770 to 1775 . The fossil collector Thomas Hawkins lived in the town during the 19th century . 
 The religious connections and mythology of the town have also attracted several authors . The occultist and writer Dion Fortune ( Violet Mary Firth ) lived and is buried in Glastonbury . Her old house is now home to the writer and historian Geoffrey Ashe , who is known for his works on local legends . Frederick Bligh Bond , archaeologist and writer . Eckhart Tolle , a German @-@ born writer , public speaker , and spiritual teacher lived in Glastonbury during the 1980s . Eileen Caddy was at a sanctuary in Glastonbury when she first claimed to have heard the " voice of God " while meditating . Her subsequent instructions from the " voice " directed her to take on Sheena Govan as her spiritual teacher , and became a spiritual teacher and new age author , best known as one of the founders of the Findhorn Foundation community . Sally Morningstar , a Wiccan High Priestess and the author of at least twenty @-@ six books on magic , astrology , Ayurveda , Wicca , divination and spirituality teaches Hedge Witchcraft and Natural Magic in Glastonbury , and lives in Somerset . 
 Popular entertainment and literature is also represented amongst the population . Rutland Boughton moved from Birmingham to Glastonbury in 1911 and established the country 's first national annual summer school of music . Gary Stringer , lead singer of Reef , was a local along with other members of the band , as are the band <unk> . The juggler Haggis McLeod and his late wife , Arabella Churchill , one of the founders of the Glastonbury Festival , lived in the town . The author and dramatist Nell Leyshon and she has set much of her work in the local area . Sarah Fielding , the 18th @-@ century author and sister of the novelist Henry Fielding , lived in the town . Michael Aldridge , a character actor who appeared as Seymour in the television series Last of the Summer Wine , was born in Glastonbury . The conductor Charles Hazlewood lives locally and hosts the " Play the Field " music festival on his farm nearby . Bill Bunbury moved on from Glastonbury to become a writer , radio broadcaster , and producer for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 
 Athletes and sports players have also been resident . Cricketers born in the town include Cyril Baily in 1880 , George Burrough in 1907 , and Eustace <unk> in 1878 . The footballer Peter <unk> was born in Glastonbury in 1950 . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Glastonbury is twinned with : 
 <unk> , France 
 Patmos , Greece . 
 = Cyclone Firinga = 
 Cyclone Firinga produced record @-@ breaking rainfall on the French overseas department of Réunion . It was the sixth named storm of the season , having developed on January 24 , 1989 in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . Given the name Firinga , it moved generally southwestward for much of its duration . While the cyclone was approaching Mauritius late on January 28 , it attained peak winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Firinga passed 50 km ( 31 mi ) west of the island , producing 190 km / h ( 120 mph ) wind gusts that destroyed 844 homes . Heavy crop damage occurred on the island , and damage nationwide was estimated at $ 60 million ( 1989 USD ) . One person was killed in Mauritius . 
 After passing Mauritius , Firinga struck Réunion early on January 29 with wind gusts as strong as 216 km / h ( 134 mph ) . The storm dropped torrential rainfall in the southern portion of the island , including 24 ‑ hour totals of 1 @,@ 309 mm ( 51 @.@ 5 in ) at Pas de Bellecombe and 1 @,@ 199 mm ( 47 @.@ 2 in ) at Casabois , both of which set records for the locations . The rains caused widespread river flooding and resulted in 32 mudslides . Firinga isolated several towns due to flooding and left power and water outages . A total of 2 @,@ 746 houses were damaged or destroyed , leaving 6 @,@ 200 people homeless . Damage was estimated at around ₣ 1 billion ( 1989 francs , $ 157 million 1989 USD ) , and there were 10 deaths on the island . Firinga later dissipated on February 7 after having weakened and executed a loop to the southeast . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On January 24 , both the Météo France office in Réunion ( MFR ) and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began tracking a tropical disturbance in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , about halfway between the east coast of Madagascar and Diego Garcia ; the latter agency designated it as Tropical Cyclone 08S . After initially moving to the southeast , the system later turned to the southwest and gradually intensified . Given the name Firinga , the system intensified into a moderate tropical storm on January 26 . Two days later , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane while Firinga was approaching Mauritius . Late on January 28 , the cyclone passed about 50 km ( 31 mi ) northwest of the island . Shortly thereafter , MFR upgraded Firinga to tropical cyclone status , estimating 10 minute maximum sustained winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) . At the same time , the JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 165 mph ( 105 mph ) . 
 Shortly after 0600 UTC on January 29 , Firinga made landfall on Réunion while at peak intensity . It quickly crossed the island and began weakening ; MFR downgraded the storm below cyclone status at 1200 UTC that day . The JTWC followed suit on January 30 , and the next day Firinga began turning to the south . On February 1 , the JTWC discontinued advisories , although MFR continued tracking the storm . After turning to the east and executing a loop to the southwest , Firinga was last observed on February 7 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On January 28 while Firinga was approaching Réunion , officials on the island issued a level 1 tropical cyclone alert on the Organisation de la <unk> de <unk> Civile ( <unk> ) plan . By the next day , this was raised to a level 3 when landfall was imminent . The government of Mauritius also warned the citizens of the approach of the storm . 
 Before affecting Réunion , the cyclone passed near Mauritius with wind gusts up to 190 km / h ( 120 mph ) . Much of the island lost power , water , and telephone access ; the water system was disrupted when cleaning systems were damaged . The storm destroyed over 70 % of the island 's crops , including wrecking 5 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 500 tons ) of sugar . In addition , Firinga destroyed 844 houses in Mauritius . Throughout the island , the cyclone killed one person , injured 507 , and left about $ 60 million ( 1989 USD ) in damage . 
 While in the vicinity of Réunion , Firinga produced a minimum pressure of 962 mbar ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) at Pointe des Galets . Sustained winds throughout the island reached at least 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) with gusts of over 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) . The peak gust was 216 km / h ( 134 mph ) at Saint @-@ Pierre , and the capital Saint @-@ Denis reported gusts of 178 km / h ( 111 mph ) . In addition to the winds , Firinga dropped record heavy rainfall on Réunion , including a report of 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) that broke the record for an hour total at Plaine des Cafres , and 600 mm ( 24 in ) that broke the record for a six @-@ hour total at Saint @-@ Joseph . Totals over 24 hours included 1 @,@ 309 mm ( 51 @.@ 5 in ) at Pas de Bellecombe , and 1 @,@ 199 mm ( 47 @.@ 2 in ) at Casabois , both of which set records for the locations . Rainfall was lighter along the east and west coasts of the island , but highest in the central plains and in the south , where totals were 1 in 50 year events . Due to the strong winds possibly disrupting instruments , rainfall totals may have been higher than what were recorded . Firinga also produced high waves along the island , reaching 17 m ( 56 ft ) along the eastern coast . The high rainfall resulted in the Rivière Langevin to overflow its banks , causing significant flooding in Saint @-@ Denis . The highest flow rate was 1 @,@ 100 m3 / s / s ( 38 @,@ 846 ft3 / s / s ) along the Rivière des Remparts . Several rivers changed their courses due to the high volume of water , and high sediment carried by rivers disrupted lagoon systems . The high rainfall caused 32 landslides throughout Réunion , most of which were small ; however , one in La Plaine @-@ des @-@ Palmistes damaged a road . 
 The floods damaged roads , buildings , and farmlands along their path . At Salazie , the storm destroyed a bridge , which restricted traffic to Cilaos . Coastal roads were damaged , with several washed out near Saint @-@ Pierre ; one road had a cut 60 m ( 200 ft ) in length . The Rivière Langevin destroyed a bridge , and flooding near Bras @-@ Piton wrecked 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) of roads . Road damage alone was estimated at ₣ 137 million ( 1989 francs , $ 26 million USD ) . At least four towns were isolated due to storm damage . High winds left 60 % of the island without power , mostly in the southern portion including Saint @-@ Joseph and Cilaos . The latter town also lost telephone service . Widespread areas lost water access due to flooding washing out two main water lines , affecting about 60 @,@ 000 people . High winds left heavy crop damage , mostly to banana trees and vegetables . In L 'Étang @-@ Salé , all of the fruit trees were knocked down , and in Entre @-@ Deux , 5 @,@ 000 hens and several livestock died . In Sainte @-@ Marie , a landslide wrecked about half of the sugar crop . Island @-@ wide , Firinga destroyed 970 houses and damaged 1 @,@ 776 others , leaving 6 @,@ 200 people homeless . Most of the damaged houses were in Saint @-@ Pierre , and the heaviest damage generally occurred in towns along floodplains . During the storm , 10 people died throughout Réunion , four of whom in the town of Le Tampon . There were also 62 injuries . Overall damage was initially estimated at around ₣ 1 billion ( 1989 francs , $ 157 million 1989 USD ) . On the island , Firinga was the third significant cyclone of the 1980s , after Cyclone Hyacinthe in 1980 and Cyclone Clotilda in 1987 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On Mauritius , power and water were gradually restored following the storm , and people without power used generators . The United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs provided $ 10 @,@ 000 ( 1989 USD ) to the country to purchase water tanks and saws . 
 After the storm , officials in Réunion declared a disaster area for the island . The government started an emergency relief fund to provide assistance to the affected families . The European Economic Community donated ₣ 1 @.@ 42 million francs ( $ 222 @,@ 000 1989 USD ) due to the storm . Residents on the island assisted each other by providing lodging and donating clothing . France sent 15 @,@ 000 ration kits , 1 @,@ 500 beds and blankets , and 20 cisterns to the island in the aftermath of Firinga . In addition , 400 troops and 50 vehicles were dispatched from an insular military base in order to assist the affected populations . Within two days , crews in Réunion restored water access to about 20 @,@ 000 people . Conditions returned to normal in northern Réunion within about a day . In the southern portion , however , it took up to four weeks for life to return to normal . The significant amount of flooding damaged the coral reef system due to excessive runoff . Due to dead animals being washed into the ocean , diving at the reefs was banned for several weeks . The waves had damaged the coral reef system to such extent that there was no regrowth after seven years . 
 = USS West Corum ( ID @-@ 3982 ) = 
 USS West Corum ( ID @-@ 3982 ) was a cargo ship for the United States Navy in 1919 . The ship was built as SS West Corum and reverted to that name at the end of her Navy service . During World War II , the ship was United States Army transport ship USAT West Corum , later renamed to Will H. Point ( sometimes listed as William H. Point ) . 
 SS West Corum was a steam @-@ powered ship built for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) as part of the West boats , a series of steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States for the World War I war effort . She was the 13th ship built by Columbia River Shipbuilding Company in Portland , Oregon . She was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) of the United States Navy in January 1919 . After one overseas trips for the Navy , she was decommissioned in May 1919 and returned to the USSB . 
 Early in her civilian career , she sailed between New York City and Bordeaux , but later shifted to sailing to Antwerp . For most of the 1920s , West Corum sailed to Argentine ports . By 1939 , West Corum had been laid up in New Orleans . In 1940 , she was reconditioned , transferred to the United States Army , and renamed USAT Will H. Point . During World War II , the ship sailed primarily in the Pacific Ocean , calling at ports in Australia , Alaska , and the U.S. West Coast . Will H. Point was laid up in the reserve fleet in Astoria , Oregon , in January 1947 and sold for scrapping in July of that same year . 
 = = U.S. Navy career = = 
 Upon completion of West Corum in February 1919 , three months after the end of fighting in World War I , she was handed over to the United States Navy for use in the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) on 10 February . She was commissioned as USS West Corum ( ID @-@ 3982 ) the same day with Lieutenant Commander Alfred G. Thompson , USNRF , in command . 
 West Corum took on a load of wheat flour and sailed on 24 February for the East Coast . After transiting the Panama Canal , she arrived at Norfolk , Virginia , on 19 March . Sailing soon after , she headed for Constantinople , Turkey , where she delivered her cargo on 18 April . On 1 May , West Corum set out from Constantinople for the United States via Gibraltar . She arrived in Norfolk on 6 June and was decommissioned three days later and returned to the USSB . 
 = = Civilian career = = 
 Many details of West Corum 's post @-@ Navy career are unknown , but mentions in shipping reports in contemporary newspapers offer hints at her activities . The New York Times reports on West Corum 's impending arrival from Bordeaux in October 1919 , and from Antwerp in May and August 1920 . By November 1920 , West Corum had apparently begun sailing to Argentine ports . 
 Most newspaper mentions of West Corum do not report what sorts of cargo she carried , but a January 1922 Associated Press story in The Christian Science Monitor reveals her cargo for one voyage from Argentina . In what the news item said was the first full load of cargo leaving Buenos Aires in nearly a year , West Corum carried 107 @,@ 000 animal hides , estimated to be enough for 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pairs of shoes , along with consignments of wool and linseed . The ship continued calling at Buenos Aires and Santa Fe , Argentina , as late as 1927 , but by 1939 , West Corum had been laid up in a reserve fleet at New Orleans . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In June 1940 , the United States Maritime Commission ( USMC ) opened bidding for the reconditioning of ten laid up cargo ships , which included West Corum . According to the Los Angeles Times , the USMC , a successor to the USSB , was forced to act because of a " critical shortage " of U.S. Navy auxiliary ships . Though there is no specific information available regarding West Corum , the cost of reconditioning West Honaker , another of the laid up West boats , was $ 77 @,@ 777 . In November , West Corum was one of different group of ten ships taken up by the United States Army for defense service . 
 The ship 's movements under Army control are largely unknown , but in January 1941 , The New York Times reported that USAT West Corum had arrived in New York from Puerto Rico . Between February and March 1941 , the ship was renamed USAT Will H. Point ( though some sources indicate William H. Point instead ) in honor of a former officer in the Quartermaster Corps . 
 Some other destinations for Will H. Point during her Army service are known . On 15 June 1941 , the ship became the first ship to dock at the newly completed port facilities at Anchorage , Alaska . From September 1943 to January 1944 , Will H. Point sailed between ports in Australia and New Guinea . Sailing mostly in convoys , Will H. Point visited Gladstone , Brisbane , Caloundra , Townsville , and Milne Bay . 
 After the war 's end , Will H. Point is listed in the Chicago Daily Tribune as returning 11 U.S. Army personnel from Pearl Harbor to San Francisco in July 1946 . The following January , Will H. Point entered the National Defense Reserve Fleet at Astoria , Oregon , and was withdrawn for scrapping in August . 
 = Sava Mutkurov = 
 Sava <unk> Mutkurov ( Bulgarian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( 16 December [ O.S. 4 December ] 1852 – 15 March [ O.S. 3 March ] 1891 ) was a Bulgarian officer ( Major General ) and politician . One of only three recipients of the Order of Bravery 1st grade , he was among the chief architects of the Bulgarian unification ( 1885 ) and , as an officer in the young Bulgarian Army , one of its defendants in the Serbo – Bulgarian War ( 1885 ) . He also served as one of the regents of the Principality of Bulgaria after Prince Alexander of Battenberg 's abdication ( 1886 – 1887 ) and was Minister of War in Stefan Stambolov 's government ( 1887 – 1891 ) . 
 = = Early years and Bulgarian unification = = 
 Sava Mutkurov was born in the city of Tarnovo in the central Danubian Plain ( then part of the Ottoman Empire , today in north central Bulgaria ) in 1852 . He studied for two years at the Military Medical Academy in the imperial capital Constantinople ( Istanbul ) , but graduated instead from the Cadet Infantry School in the Russian city of Odessa in 1872 . As a soldier in the Imperial Russian Army , Mutkurov participated in the Serbo – Turkish War of 1876 along with other Bulgarian volunteers . He was also involved in the Russo – Turkish War of 1877 – 1878 which brought about the Liberation of Bulgaria . During that war , he was the commander of a company in the 54th Minsk Infantry Regiment of the Russian Army . 
 After the Liberation of Bulgaria and the establishment of the Principality of Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia in 1878 , Mutkurov settled in Eastern Rumelia , where he joined the provincial police or militia . He served first with the 1st Plovdiv Battalion and thereafter with the general staff . As an eminent man of arms in Eastern Rumelia , Mutkurov was one of the main leaders of the Bulgarian unification on 6 September 1885 , the bloodless revolution that united the Principality of Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia . Mutkurov joined the Bulgarian Secret Revolutionary Central Committee which stood behind the unification . At the time a captain , along with Dimitar <unk> he was <unk> to the Bulgarian monarch Prince Alexander of Battenberg . The two were received by the prince in Shumen , where they notified him of the forthcoming events and requested his approval . The prince did not wish to be publicly involved in an anti @-@ Ottoman revolution , and is unclear whether he at all believed a revolution was likely to break out in Eastern Rumelia so soon . During the revolution , Mutkurov commanded some of the troops that surrounded the residence of the provincial governor Gavril <unk> and demanded his resignation . 
 = = Serbo – Bulgarian War and regency = = 
 Following the unification , from 6 to 8 September , Mutkurov was a member of the interim provincial government presided by the Commissar of South Bulgaria , Georgi <unk> . Mutkurov was one of the commanders of the Bulgarian Army in the Serbo – Bulgarian War of 1885 caused by the Kingdom of Serbia 's disapproval of the Bulgarian unification . In the conflict , a Bulgarian victory that defended the revolution , Mutkurov headed the troops fighting at <unk> on 13 November and was also in charge of the central and right wing forces during the Pirot Offensive on 14 and 15 November . After the war Mutkurov was appointed chief of the Plovdiv garrison and commanded the 5th Infantry Brigade . 
 Sava Mutkurov also played an important part in the turbulent events of 1886 . In the wake of a pro @-@ Russian coup d 'état aiming to dethrone Prince Alexander , Mutkurov and Stefan Stambolov organized a counter @-@ coup which was widely supported by the population . Mutkurov was appointed by Stambolov as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the troops loyal to Prince Alexander , and soldiers from his Plovdiv garrison were transferred to the capital Sofia to arrest or drive out the plotters . The events nevertheless led to Prince Alexander 's abdication on 7 September 1886 under Russian pressure . Until the election of another Bulgarian monarch , Prince Ferdinand of Saxe – Coburg and Gotha , on 14 August 1887 , Mutkurov was one of the three regents of Bulgaria , along with Stambolov and <unk> Karavelov ( soon replaced by Georgi Zhivkov ) . He was also part of the delegation that welcomed the new prince as he arrived in Svishtov to assume the throne . 
 = = Minister of War and death = = 
 On 1 September 1887 that year , Mutkurov became Minister of War in Stefan Stambolov 's Popular Liberal Party government . Mutkurov was a loyal friend and trusted man of the premier Stambolov , who even made him his brother @-@ in @-@ law . He was not , however , favoured by Prince Ferdinand . The monarch 's desire was to replace him with his own confidant , Mutkurov 's enemy Hristo Popov , as Minister of War . Mutkurov served in the government until 16 February 1891 , when he withdrew due to deteriorating health and was promoted to Major General . He died of a heart attack on 15 March on a visit to Naples , Kingdom of Italy , and was interred at the Church of the Holy Saviour in Sofia . 
 Despite his active involvement in practically all major events in Bulgarian history during his lifetime , Mutkurov has been described as " very reserved and taciturn " even though he was also " honest and firm " . Writer Simeon Radev regards Mutkurov as a " phlegmatic person " and his contemporary and accomplice in the unification <unk> <unk> would go as far as to say that " by the time Mutkurov opened his mouth , the market would close up " . Together with the other two long @-@ serving regents of 1886 – 1887 , Stambolov and Zhivkov , Mutkurov was one of only three persons to receive the Order of Bravery 1st grade , the oldest and highest Bulgarian military decoration . 
 = USS Galena ( 1862 ) = 
 USS Galena was a wooden @-@ hulled broadside ironclad built for the United States Navy during the American Civil War . The ship was initially assigned to the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron and supported Union forces during the Peninsula Campaign in 1862 . She was damaged during the Battle of Drewry 's Bluff because her armor was too thin to prevent Confederate shots from penetrating . Widely regarded as a failure , Galena was reconstructed without most of her armor in 1863 and transferred to the West Gulf Blockading Squadron in 1864 . The ship participated in the Battle of Mobile Bay and the subsequent Siege of Fort Morgan in August . She was briefly transferred to the East Gulf Blockading Squadron in September before she was sent to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania for repairs in November . 
 Repairs were completed in March 1865 and Galena rejoined the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron in Hampton Roads the following month . After the end of the war , the ship was decommissioned at Portsmouth , New Hampshire in June . She was transferred to Hampton Roads in 1869 , condemned in 1870 , and broken up for scrap in 1872 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the United States received word of the construction of the Confederate casemate ironclad , CSS Virginia , Congress appropriated $ 1 @.@ 5 million on 3 August to build one or more armored steamships . It also ordered the creation of a board to inquire into armored ships . The U.S. Navy advertised for proposals for " iron @-@ clad steam vessels of war " on 7 August and Gideon Welles , the Secretary of the Navy , appointed the three members of the Ironclad Board the following day . Their task was to " examine plans for the completion of iron @-@ clad vessels " . 
 Well before this date , Cornelius Bushnell had commissioned a design for an armored sloop from naval architect Samuel H. Pook in June for $ 1 @,@ 500 anticipating an order from the Union Navy to counter the Confederate ironclad already known to be building . Bushnell expected that order because his bid , at a higher cost , for building the steam Unadilla @-@ class gunboat Owasco had already been accepted provided that he subcontract the construction to Charles Mallory & Sons Shipyard of Mystic , Connecticut . In exchange , the Navy asked if Bushnell could give a price on an armored gunboat . He could and subcontracted the building of his design to Maxon , Fish & Co . , also of Mystic , on 20 July , the day after a bill to authorize construction of a number of armored ships was introduced in the Senate . The building of the Galena 's wooden hull began two days later . 
 The Ironclad Board initially accepted two of the sixteen designs submitted in early September , the armored frigate that became USS New Ironsides and Bushnell 's design . The board required a guarantee from Bushnell that his ship would float despite the weight of its armor and he needed to have his design reviewed by a naval constructor to that end . Cornelius H. DeLamater recommended that Bushnell consult with his friend John Ericsson . The two first met on 9 September and again on the following day , after Ericsson had time to evaluate Galena 's design and give his guarantee . During this second meeting Ericsson showed Bushnell his own design , the future Monitor . Bushnell got Ericsson 's permission to show the model of his design to Welles and the latter told Bushnell to show it to the board . Despite a preliminary rejection , the board accepted Ericsson 's proposal on 16 September after he explained his design in person the previous day . 
 The three ironclad ships differed substantially in design and degree of risk . The Monitor was the most innovative design by virtue of its low freeboard , shallow @-@ draft iron hull , and total dependence on steam power . The riskiest element of its design was its rotating gun turret , something that had not previously been tested by any navy . Ericsson 's guarantee of delivery in 100 days proved to be decisive in choosing his design despite the risk involved . The wooden @-@ hulled Galena 's most novel feature was her armor of interlocking iron rails . New Ironsides was much influenced by the French ironclad Gloire and was the most conservative design of the three , which copied many of the features of the French ship . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Galena 's original design dated 28 June was for a schooner @-@ rigged corvette with three masts , 162 feet ( 49 @.@ 4 m ) long at the waterline with a beam of 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) , a depth of hold of 10 feet 8 inches ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) and an estimated displacement of 800 long tons ( 810 t ) . The ship 's sides were protected by wrought iron plates 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick , backed by 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) of india rubber and the 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) side of the hull . The ship 's deck consisted of armor 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) . A revised design was submitted to the Ironclad Board , for which a contract was awarded on 28 September , in which the sloop was enlarged , probably because it was uncertain if the original design could support the proposed armor 's weight . 
 As built , Galena was 180 feet ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) long between perpendiculars and 210 feet ( 64 @.@ 0 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 36 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) , a depth of hold of 12 feet 8 inches ( 3 @.@ 9 m ) , and a draft of 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) . The ship displaced 950 long tons ( 970 t ) and had 738 tons burthen . The number of masts was reduced to two and the amount of tumblehome greatly increased . Her crew numbered 150 officers and enlisted men . On her only ocean voyage in her original configuration , Galena rolled heavily . 
 While under construction , the armor scheme was modified . The rubber backing was replaced by an additional 5 ⁄ 8 inch ( 16 mm ) of iron although Commodore Joseph Smith , Chief of the Bureau of Yards and Docks and Pook were uncertain if the ship could support this weight . To reduce the weight several alternatives were proposed . One proposal was to reduce the thickness of the protection to 1 ⁄ 2 inch ( 13 mm ) for a distance from 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) from the bow and stern and the other was to reduce the armor 's thickness above the sills of the gun ports to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) and the deck armor 's thickness to 1 / 2 inch over 2 1 / 2 inches of wood . It is unknown exactly how the situation was resolved , but one report on 31 March 1862 suggests that the two proposals were combined as it said that the armor was two inches thick above the gun ports , except around the stern where it was 1 / 2 inch thick . 
 Galena was powered by a single @-@ cylinder horizontal Ericsson vibrating @-@ lever steam engine , which drove one propeller . The 800 @-@ indicated @-@ horsepower ( 600 kW ) engine used steam generated by two boilers and gave the ship a top speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . It had a bore of 48 inches ( 1 @,@ 219 mm ) and a stroke of 36 inches ( 914 mm ) . During her trip to Hampton Roads after commissioning , the ship reached a speed of 7 – 8 knots ( 13 – 15 km / h ; 8 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 2 mph ) using her sails . 
 The ship was armed with two 6 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 163 mm ) , 100 @-@ pounder Parrott rifles in pivot mounts fore and aft and four 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) smoothbore Dahlgren guns . Each nine @-@ inch gun weighed approximately 9 @,@ 000 pounds ( 4 @,@ 100 kg ) . They could fire a 70 – 90 @-@ pound ( 31 @.@ 8 – 40 @.@ 8 kg ) shell to a range of 3 @,@ 450 yards ( 3 @,@ 150 m ) at an elevation of 15 ° . The muzzle @-@ loading Parrott rifles fired a 70 – 100 @-@ pound ( 31 @.@ 8 – 45 @.@ 4 kg ) shell and had a maximum range of approximately 2 @,@ 250 yards ( 2 @,@ 060 m ) . The 20 @-@ caliber guns weighed about 9 @,@ 800 pounds ( 4 @,@ 400 kg ) each . 
 = = Career = = 
 Galena 's keel was laid down by Maxson , Fish & Co. in 1861 and she was launched on 14 February 1862 . The ship was commissioned on 21 April 1862 with Commander Alfred Taylor in command . Galena arrived in Hampton Roads on 24 April , after having suffered several engine breakdowns en route , and was assigned to Flag Officer L.M. Goldsborough 's North Atlantic Blockading Squadron . Commander John Rodgers relieved Taylor the same day . When Goldsborough inspected the ship shortly after her arrival he ordered that her spars be cut away and the nuts on the inside of her hull to be covered with sheet iron to prevent them from breaking loose when the ship was hit . 
 Galena prepared for action on 4 and 7 May when the ironclad Virginia sortied into Hampton Roads , but the Virginia did not attack . On 8 May , the ship , together with the gunboats Port Royal and Aroostook , sailed up the James River with orders to cooperate with Major General George B. McClellan 's Army of the Peninsula and harass retreating Confederate forces . The ships silenced one battery and ran past another covering the river without damage before Galena ran aground later that day . She was not damaged , although she required a day and a half of work before she was freed . Rodgers ' ships were reinforced by the ironclads Monitor and Naugatuck on 12 May and they reached City Point the following day . 
 = = = Battle of Drewry 's Bluff = = = 
 On the morning of 15 May , Galena led her squadron up to Drewry 's Bluff , about 8 miles ( 13 km ) from Richmond , where the Confederates had blocked the river and placed a battery on the 90 @-@ foot ( 27 m ) bluff to cover the obstacles . Galena anchored some 600 yards ( 550 m ) from the bluff and opened fire at 07 : 45 , while the wooden ships remained further downriver . Monitor attempted to fire on the battery as well , but her guns could not elevate enough to reach it . Galena engaged the Confederate position for over three hours , until her ammunition was nearly exhausted . Her fire was largely ineffective , although her shells did manage to kill seven and wound eight members of the battery . In return , the ship was hit an estimated 44 times on her port side , of which 13 hits penetrated her armor and she had three large holes punched through her spar deck . She suffered 13 crewmen killed and a further 11 wounded . In a letter to his wife , Rodgers said that " her sides look as though she had an attack of smallpox " . Two sailors and one marine aboard Galena were awarded the Medal of Honor for their actions during the battle : Fireman Charles Kenyon , Quartermaster Jeremiah Regan , and Corporal John F. Mackie . Mackie was the first member of the U.S. Marine Corps to receive the medal . 
 Galena remained on the James River after the battle and returned to City Point . She shelled Confederate soldiers along the river banks and bombarded City Point to cover a landing force which set fire to the depots . On 27 June , Major General McClellan came aboard the ship to locate a new camp which was later established near Harrison 's Landing . On 30 June , McClellan was compelled to withdraw down the James , covered by gunfire from Galena and the other gunboats . They continued to support his forces until they were transferred to Northern Virginia . Galena patrolled the river to defend transports and supply ships against Confederate raids and ambushes until she was detached from the James River Flotilla in September 1862 Galena and Monitor were retained at Newport News , Virginia , in case the Confederate ironclads building at Richmond sortied into Hampton Roads . 
 Galena departed Hampton Roads on 19 May 1863 and arrived at Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , two days later , where she was decommissioned for repairs and reconstruction . Most of her ineffective armor was removed , except around the engines and boilers ; her armament was increased to eight nine @-@ inch Dahlgren guns and a single 100 @-@ pounder Parrot rifle , and she was rebuilt as a ship @-@ rigged sloop with three masts . 
 Recommissioned on 15 February 1864 , Galena , now under the command of Lieutenant Commander C. H. Wells , sailed on 18 February for the Gulf of Mexico and the West Gulf Blockading Squadron . The ship became icebound at New Castle , Delaware , until she was towed out to sea by an ice boat , and was forced to put into port for repairs . She departed Norfolk on 10 May and arrived at Pensacola , Florida on 20 May for blockade duty off Mobile , Alabama , during which she shelled Fort Morgan and fired upon various blockade runners as they attempted to evade the blockade . 
 = = = Battle of Mobile Bay = = = 
 Rear Admiral David Farragut , commander of the West Gulf Blockading Squadron , was to split his ships into two columns . The four monitors would comprise the starboard column , closest to Ft . Morgan , and their mission was to bombard the fort while the wooden ships in the other column passed by , and to sink the ironclad ram CSS Tennessee . Once past the fort the wooden ships were to prevent the escape of the Confederate wooden gunboats to Mobile . To ensure that his wooden ships could get past Ft . Morgan , Farragut ordered that they be lashed together in pairs so that one ship could pull the other if the Confederates succeeded in knocking out its boilers or engines . 
 Galena was tied to the port side of the larger sloop Oneida and the pair were the last ships in the port column when the battle began on the morning of 5 August . While passing the fort , Oneida had her starboard boiler disabled by a shell hit and her crew was attempting to reroute her steam to both engines when she was engaged by Tennessee at a range of 200 yards ( 180 m ) . The ironclad only managed to fire three shots that did little damage . Galena was struck six times while passing the fort with little damage , although her rigging was badly cut up . Two crewmen were wounded and another died of his wounds . Four of Galena 's sailors were awarded the Medal of Honor for their actions during the battle : Seaman William Gardner , Quartermaster Thomas Jordan , Quartermaster Edward S. Martin , and Coxswain Edward B. Young . 
 Galena intermittently bombarded Fort Morgan until it surrendered on 23 August and sailed from Mobile Bay on 31 August to temporarily serve as a part of the East Gulf Blockading Squadron at Key West , Florida . The transfer was made permanent on 24 September and she was ordered to the Philadelphia Navy Yard for repair a month later . The ship did not arrive until 4 November and repairs did not begin until 22 November . Galena was recommissioned on 29 March 1865 and was reassigned to the North Atlantic Blockading Squadron . She reached Newport News on 2 April where the ship patrolled the mouth of the Nansemond River and in the James River until her departure on 6 June for Portsmouth , New Hampshire . 
 Galena was decommissioned there on 17 June until she was recommissioned on 9 April 1869 for transfer to back to Hampton Roads , where she was again decommissioned on 2 June . Condemned by survey in 1870 , Galena was broken up in 1872 at the Norfolk Navy Yard . 
 = Hockey Hall of Fame = 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame is located in Toronto , Ontario , Canada . Dedicated to the history of ice hockey , it is both a museum and a hall of fame . It holds exhibits about players , teams , National Hockey League ( NHL ) records , memorabilia and NHL trophies , including the Stanley Cup . Originally founded in Kingston , Ontario , the Hockey Hall of Fame was first established in 1943 under the leadership of James T. Sutherland . The first class of honoured members was inducted in 1945 , before the Hall of Fame had a permanent location . It moved to Toronto in 1958 after the NHL withdrew its support for the International Hockey Hall of Fame in Kingston , Ontario . Its first permanent building opened at Exhibition Place in 1961 . In 1993 , the Hall was relocated to a former Bank of Montreal building in Downtown Toronto , where it is now located . 
 An 18 @-@ person committee of players , coaches and others meets annually in June to select new honourees , who are inducted as players , builders or on @-@ ice officials . In 2010 , a subcategory was established for female players . The builders ' category includes coaches , general managers , commentators , team owners and others who have helped build the game . Honoured members are inducted into the Hall of Fame in an annual ceremony held at the Hall of Fame building in November , which is followed by a special " Hockey Hall of Fame Game " between the Toronto Maple Leafs and a visiting team . As of 2015 , 268 players ( including four women ) , 104 builders and 16 on @-@ ice officials have been inducted into the Hall of Fame . The Hall of Fame has been criticized for focusing mainly on players from the National Hockey League and largely ignoring players from other North American and international leagues . 
 = = History = = 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame was established through the efforts of James T. Sutherland , a former President of the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association ( CAHA ) . Sutherland sought to establish it in Kingston , Ontario as he believed that the city was the birthplace of hockey . In 1943 , the NHL and CAHA reached an agreement that a Hall of Fame would be established in Kingston . Originally called the " International Hockey Hall of Fame " , its mandate was to honour great hockey players and to raise funds for a permanent location . The first nine " honoured members " ( players Hobey Baker , Charlie Gardiner , Eddie Gerard , Frank McGee , Howie Morenz , Tommy Phillips , Harvey Pulford , Hod Stuart and Georges Vézina ) were inducted on April 30 , 1945 , although the Hall of Fame still did not have a permanent home . The first board of governors consisted of Red Dutton , Art Ross , Frank Sargent ( president of the CHA ) , Lester Patrick , Abbie E. H. Coo , Wes McKnight , Basil E. O 'Meara , J. P. Fitzgerald and W. A. Hewitt . 
 Kingston lost its most influential advocate as permanent site of the Hockey Hall of Fame when Sutherland died in 1955 . By 1958 , the Hockey Hall of Fame had still not raised sufficient funds to construct a permanent building in Kingston . Clarence Campbell , then President of the NHL , grew tired of waiting for the construction to begin and withdrew the NHL 's support to situate the Hall in Kingston . In the same year , the NHL and the Canadian National Exhibition ( CNE ) reached an agreement to establish a new Hall of Fame building in Toronto , in the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame located at Exhibition Place . The temporary Hockey Hall of Fame opened as an exhibit within the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame in August 1958 , and 350 @,@ 000 people visited it during the 1958 CNE fair . Due to the success of the exhibit , NHL and CNE decided that a permanent home in the Exhibition Place was needed . The NHL agreed to fully fund the building of the new facility on the grounds of Exhibition Place , and construction began in 1960 . The first permanent Hockey Hall of Fame , which shared a building with the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame , was opened on August 26 , 1961 , by Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker . Over 750 @,@ 000 people visited the Hall in its inaugural year . Admission to the Hockey Hall of Fame was free until 1980 , when the Hockey Hall of Fame facilities underwent expansion . 
 By 1986 , the Hall of Fame was running out of room in its existing facilities and the Board of Directors decided that a new home was needed . The Hall vacated the Exhibition Place building in 1992 , and its half was taken over by the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame . The building was eventually demolished — a portion of the building 's facade was preserved as an entrance to BMO Field stadium . Development of the new location , the former Bank of Montreal at the corner of Yonge and Front Streets in Toronto , began soon after . The building , now part of Brookfield Place , was designed by Frank Darling and S. George Curry . The new Hockey Hall of Fame officially opened on June 18 , 1993 . The new location has 4 @,@ 700 m2 ( 50 @,@ 600 sq ft ) of exhibition space , seven times larger than that of the old facility . The Hockey Hall of Fame now hosts more than 300 @,@ 000 visitors each year . 
 = = Operations and organization = = 
 The first curator of the new Hall of Fame was Bobby Hewitson . Following Hewitson 's retirement in 1967 , Lefty Reid was appointed to the position . Reid was curator of the Hockey Hall of Fame for the next 25 years , retiring in 1992 . Following Reid 's retirement , former NHL referee @-@ in @-@ chief Scotty Morrison , who was the president of the Hockey Hall of Fame since 1986 , was appointed curator . Morrison supervised the relocation of the Hall of Fame and its exhibits . The current curator is Phil Pritchard . 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame is led by Lanny McDonald , Chairman of the Board , and Chief Executive Officer , Jeff <unk> . It is operated as a non @-@ profit business called the " Hockey Hall of Fame and Museum " ( <unk> ) , independent of the National Hockey League . The Hall of Fame was originally sponsored by the NHL and Hockey Canada and revenue is generated mainly through admissions . 
 = = Exhibits = = 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame has 15 exhibit areas covering 60 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 600 m2 ) . Visitors can view trophies , memorabilia and equipment worn by players during special games . The Esso Great Hall , described as " a Cathedral to the icons of Hockey " , contains portraits and biographical information about every Hall of Fame honoured member . The centrepiece of the Great Hall is the Stanley Cup ; for part of the year a replica is put on display when the presentation cup travels outside of the Hall of Fame . The original version of the Cup and the older rings , as well as all of the current National Hockey League trophies , are displayed in the bank vault , an alcove off the Great Hall . The Hall of Fame induction ceremony is annually held in the Great Hall . 
 The NHL Zone is a large area featuring displays relating to the NHL . Current teams and players are highlighted in the NHL Today area , while the NHL Retro displays include memorabilia and information about every NHL team past and present . The NHL Legends area features rotating exhibits focusing on honoured members ; and NHL Milestones displays exhibits of noteworthy records including Darryl Sittler 's ten @-@ point game and Wayne Gretzky 's all @-@ time points record . The Stanley Cup dynasties exhibit features displays that include memorabilia from the rosters of nine teams considered to be dynasties because they dominated the NHL for several years at a time . This area also has a replica of the Montreal Canadiens ' dressing room as it existed at the old Montreal Forum . The Panasonic Hometown Hockey section is dedicated to grass roots hockey in North America ; it includes exhibits about various leagues and sections on women 's and disabled hockey leagues . Special exhibits in the past included an exhibit in 2000 showcasing Gretzky memorabilia . 
 Interactive displays are featured in the NHLPA Be A Player Zone . At the Source For Sports Shoot Out , visitors take shots using real pucks at a computer simulation of goaltender Ed Belfour . Its counterpart , Lay 's Shut Out , has visitors playing goaltender , blocking shots from computer simulations of players Wayne Gretzky and Mark Messier . The TSN / RDS Broadcast Zone provides a look at how hockey broadcasting works and allows users to record messages that may be displayed on both the Hockey Hall of Fame 's website , and the TSN / RDS networks . 
 While many of the Hall of Fame exhibits are dedicated to the NHL , there is a large section devoted to hockey leagues and players outside North America . On June 29 , 1998 , the World of Hockey Zone opened . It is a 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 600 m2 ) area dedicated to international hockey , including World and Olympic competition and contains profiles on all IIHF member Countries . 
 = = Hall of Fame = = 
 = = = Selection process = = = 
 As of 2009 , new members can be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame as players , builders or on @-@ ice officials . The builders ' category includes coaches , general managers , commentators , team owners and others who have helped build the game . The category for on @-@ ice officials was added in 1961 and a " veteran player " category was established in 1988 . The purpose of the category was to " provide a vehicle for players who may have been overlooked and whose chances for election would be limited when placed on the same ballot with contemporary players " . Eleven players were inducted into that category , but in 2000 , the Board of Directors eliminated it ; the players who had been inducted under this category were merged into the player category . 
 Candidates for membership in the Hockey Hall of Fame are nominated by an 18 @-@ person selection committee . The committee consists of Hockey Hall of Fame members , hockey personnel and media personalities associated with the game ; the membership is representative of " areas throughout the world where hockey is popular " , and includes at least one member who is knowledgeable about international hockey and one member who is knowledgeable about amateur hockey . Committee members are appointed by the Board of Directors to a three @-@ year term . The terms of the committee members are staggered so that each year there are six newly appointed or reappointed members . As of 2015 , the selection committee consists of : chairman John Davidson , James M. Gregory ( Chairman Emeritus ) , and committee members Scotty Bowman , David Branch , Brian Burke , Colin Campbell , Bob Clarke , Eric <unk> , Mike Emrick , Michael Farber , Marc de Foy , Mike Gartner , Anders Hedberg , Igor Larionov , Lanny McDonald , David Poile , Luc Robitaille , Peter Stastny and Bill Torrey . 
 Each committee member is allowed to nominate one person in each category per year . Nominations must be submitted to the Chairman of the Board of Directors by April 15 of the nomination year . The committee then meets in June where a series of Secret ballot votes is held ; any player with the support of 75 % of the members of the committee present is inducted . If the maximum number of players does not receive 75 % after the first round of voting , then run @-@ off votes are held . Players with less than 50 % are dropped from consideration for that year and voting continues until either the maximum number of inductees is reached or all remaining nominees receive between 50 % and 75 % . In any given year , a maximum of four players , two builders , and one on @-@ ice official are inducted as members . Player and on @-@ ice officials must have not participated in a professional or international game for a minimum of three years to be eligible for nomination . Builders may be " active or inactive " . 
 The waiting period was waived for ten players deemed exceptionally notable ; Dit Clapper ( 1947 ) , Maurice Richard ( 1961 ) , Ted Lindsay ( 1966 ) , Red Kelly ( 1969 ) , Terry Sawchuk ( 1971 ) , Jean Béliveau ( 1972 ) , Gordie Howe ( 1972 ) , Bobby Orr ( 1979 ) , Mario Lemieux ( 1997 ) , and Wayne Gretzky ( 1999 ) . Following Gretzky 's induction , the Board of Directors determined that the waiting period would no longer be waived for any player except under " certain humanitarian circumstances " . Three Hall of Fame members came out of retirement after their induction and resumed a career in the National League : Gordie Howe , Guy Lafleur and Mario Lemieux . Chris Pronger was inducted while still technically an active player ; in his case , he had signed a contract that would have caused severe hardship to his team had he formally retired , so , after suffering career @-@ ending injuries , he instead spent three years on the NHL 's injured reserve list waiting for the contract to expire . 
 On March 31 , 2009 , the Hall of Fame announced new by @-@ law additions which will be implemented on January 1 , 2010 . Starting in 2010 , male and female players are considered for induction separately and a maximum of two women can be inducted as players per year . The by @-@ law also clarifies that a builder does not need to have been a coach , manager or executive to be inducted . Although they remain separate categories , the builders and on @-@ ice officials are considered on the same ballot and a combined maximum of two can be inducted each year . The Board of Directors will now meet at least once every five years to consider potential changes to the limits . 
 There is also a category for " Media honourees " . The Elmer Ferguson Memorial Award is awarded by the Professional Hockey Writers ' Association to " distinguished members of the newspaper profession whose words have brought honour to journalism and to hockey " . The Foster Hewitt Memorial Award is awarded by the NHL Broadcasters ' Association to " members of the radio and television industry who made outstanding contributions to their profession and the game during their career in hockey broadcasting " . The voting for both awards is conducted by their respective associations . While media honourees are not considered full inductees , they are still honoured with a display at the Hockey Hall of Fame . The ceremonies associated with these awards are held separately from the induction of the members of the Hall of Fame . Some of the award winners have also been inducted into the Hall of Fame as builders , including Foster Hewitt . 
 = = = Induction ceremony = = = 
 The induction ceremony was held at the Hall of Fame from 1959 until 1974 . In 1975 , it was held at the Royal York Hotel in Toronto and would be held there until 1979 . From 1980 to 1992 , the ceremony was held at various different locations in Toronto , except for 1986 , 1987 and 1991 when the ceremonies were held in Vancouver , Detroit and Ottawa respectively . Since 1993 , it has been held at the current Hall of Fame building . The ceremony was first broadcast by The Sports Network in 1994 . In 1999 the " Hockey Hall of Fame game " was established , a contest between the Toronto Maple Leafs and a visiting team , with a special ceremony honouring that year 's inductees held before the game . Robert <unk> of the Edmonton Sun reports that many , including Edmonton Oilers president Kevin Lowe , believe the induction ceremony should be held on a night when there are no NHL games scheduled . This would allow a more representative portion of the hockey world to attend . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 The Hall of Fame has been criticised for inducting several lacklustre candidates in the early 2000s decade due to " a shortage of true greatness " . Since then , some have claimed that the Hall of Fame has become too exclusive . The Hall of Fame has also been criticised for failing to induct international players and critics have claimed that the Hall has been far too focused on the National Hockey League . A common statement is that it is more of an " NHL Hall of Fame " than a general Hockey Hall of Fame . Partially in response to these claims , the Hall of Fame opened an International Hockey exhibit and announced that it would start looking at more international players for induction . Valeri Kharlamov was inducted in 2005 , and is one of the few modern @-@ day inductees to never play in the NHL . The Hall of Fame has also been criticised for overlooking World Hockey Association players and over representing the Original Six era from 1942 to 1967 . For several years , the Hall of Fame was criticized for overlooking female hockey players before the Hall of Fame announced that women would be given separate consideration . In 2010 , Angela James and <unk> Granato were the first women to be inducted into the Hall of Fame . 
 One of the most discussed potential nominees is Paul Henderson , who scored the winning goal in the final moments of the deciding eighth game of the 1972 Summit Series between Canada and the Soviet Union . This is one of the best @-@ known moments in hockey and Canadian sports history . While there is little question of the historical significance of that goal , Henderson 's NHL statistics are not at a level comparable to those players usually selected for induction . His candidacy led to many debates among hockey fans and columnists . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Conn Smythe served as the Hall 's chairman for several years , but resigned in June 1971 when Harvey " Busher " Jackson was posthumously elected into the Hall . Smythe said that it made him sick to think of Jackson alongside such Toronto Maple Leafs players as " Apps , Primeau , Conacher , Clancy and Kennedy . If the standards are going to be lowered I 'll get out as chairman of the board . " Jackson was notorious for his off @-@ ice lifestyle of drinking and broken marriages . Smythe would not condone the induction and even tried to block it because he considered Jackson a poor role model . Frank J. Selke , head of the selection committee defended the selection on the belief that a man should not be shut out " because of the amount of beer he drank " . 
 On March 30 , 1993 , it was announced that Gil Stein , who at the time had been president of the National Hockey League for nine months but had been bypassed for the new job of commissioner in favor of Gary Bettman , would be inducted into the Hall of Fame . There were immediate allegations that he had engineered his election through manipulation of the hall 's board of directors . Due to these allegations , NHL commissioner Gary Bettman hired two independent lawyers , Arnold Burns and Yves Fortier , to lead an investigation . They concluded that Stein had " improperly manipulated the process " and " created the false appearance and illusion " that his nomination was the idea of Bruce McNall . They concluded that Stein pressured McNall to nominate him and had refused to withdraw his nomination when asked to do so by Bettman . There was a dispute over McNall 's role and Stein was " categorical in stating that the idea was Mr. McNall 's " . They recommended that Stein 's selection be overturned , but it was revealed Stein had decided to turn down the induction before their announcement . 
 In 1989 , Alan Eagleson , a longtime executive director of the National Hockey League Players Association , was inducted as a builder . He resigned nine years later from the Hall after pleading guilty to mail fraud and embezzling hundreds of thousands of dollars from the National Hockey League Players ' Association pension funds . His resignation came six days before a vote was scheduled to determine if he should be expelled from the Hall . Originally , the Hall of Fame was not going to become involved in the issue , but was forced to act when dozens of inductees , including Bobby Orr , Ted Lindsay and Brad Park , campaigned for Eagleson 's expulsion , even threatening to renounce their membership if he was not removed . He became the first member of a sports hall of fame in North America to resign . 
 = 2007 – 08 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 2007 – 08 season was the 110th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . The club ended their Premier League campaign in third position , having led the table for two @-@ thirds of the season . Arsenal made it into the quarter @-@ finals of the UEFA Champions League , but were eliminated on aggregate score against Liverpool . The team exited the FA Cup in the fifth round to Manchester United and lost in the semi @-@ finals of the Football League Cup to Tottenham Hotspur . 
 Arsenal sold striker and club record goalscorer Thierry Henry to Barcelona , in the transfer window . Other departures included first team players Fredrik Ljungberg and José Antonio Reyes to West Ham United and Atlético Madrid respectively ; defender Bacary Sagna and striker Eduardo were the notable purchases from AJ Auxerre and Dinamo Zagreb , respectively . 
 A strong start to the season saw Arsenal top the league table by September . Defeat against Sevilla in November ended a run of 28 matches undefeated and it was not until a month after did the team lose in the league for the first time , away at Middlesbrough . Arsenal extended their league lead to five points in February , but a career @-@ threatening injury to Eduardo against Birmingham City coincided with the team going on a run of four draws in the Premier League . Manchester United soon overtook them in first and defeat to Chelsea in March moved Arsenal down in third place , where they remained at the end of the season . 
 32 different players represented the club in four competitions and there were 16 different goalscorers . Emmanuel Adebayor was Arsenal 's top goalscorer in the 2007 – 08 season ; he scored 30 goals in 48 appearances . 
 = = Background = = 
 The previous season was a transitional period for Arsenal . The club transferred a number of first @-@ team players such as defenders Sol Campbell and Lauren to Portsmouth and winger Robert Pirès to Spanish club Villarreal . After lengthy negotiations , Ashley Cole moved to Chelsea on the final day of the summer transfer window , in exchange for £ 5m and defender William Gallas . Arsenal played their home games at the newly constructed Emirates Stadium and drew their first game against Aston Villa . After they were defeated by Bolton Wanderers , manager Arsène Wenger admitted that his team were unlikely to make a serious challenge for the Premier League . However , even though they were a young and inexperienced team , Arsenal reached the final of the League Cup , where they were beaten 2 – 1 by Chelsea . Elimination in the UEFA Champions League in the knockout stage ( two @-@ legged matches played home and away ) and FA Cup in the space of four days followed – the club lost three games in succession for the first time since October 2002 . Arsenal eventually finished fourth in the league , level on points with third @-@ placed Liverpool . 
 = = Transfers = = 
 At the end of the 2006 – 07 season , Arsenal transferred Fabrice Muamba to Birmingham City and released Mart Poom , who subsequently joined Watford on a free transfer . Jérémie Aliadière moved to Middlesbrough in a £ 2 million deal and club captain and record goalscorer Thierry Henry left to join Barcelona for a reported fee of £ 16 million . Henry commented that his decision to leave Arsenal was because of the departure of chairman David Dein and the uncertainty over Wenger 's future . Midfielder Fredrik Ljungberg and striker José Antonio Reyes departed the club in July 2007 , moving to West Ham United and Atlético Madrid respectively . Other players Arturo Lupoli , Ryan Garry and Joe O <unk> left the club on free transfers . Defender Matthew Connolly , who joined Colchester United on loan for a six @-@ month period later signed for Queens Park Rangers . 
 Legia Warsaw goalkeeper Łukasz Fabiański was the first player Arsenal recruited of the new season . Next to arrive was striker Eduardo , who signed from Dinamo Zagreb , shortly followed by French defender Bacary Sagna . Lassana Diarra was purchased on transfer deadline day from Chelsea , but later transferred to Portsmouth in January after he was frustrated at limited playing time : " I read that the club [ Arsenal ] wanted to keep me . But when you want to keep someone , you do it by playing them . This hasn 't been the case . " 
 In 
 Out 
 Loans out 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 = = Premier League = = 
 A total of 20 teams competed in the Premier League in the 2007 – 08 season . Each team played 38 matches ; two against every other team and one match at each club 's stadium . Three points were awarded for each win , one point per draw , and none for defeats . At the end of the season the top two teams qualified for the group stages of the UEFA Champions League ; teams in third and fourth needed to play a qualifier . 
 The provisional fixture list was released on 14 June 2007 , but was subject to change in the event of clashes with other competitions , inclement weather , or matches being selected for television coverage . 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal started their league campaign at home to Fulham on 12 August 2007 . A mistake by goalkeeper Jens Lehmann , " screw [ ing ] an attempted return pass against his own knee " , allowed striker David Healy to score , just under 52 seconds . However , a late penalty scored by Robin van Persie and a goal from Alexander Hleb resulted in the team winning the match . In their next match , away to Blackburn Rovers , another error by Lehmann – this time letting David Dunn 's shot slip through his fingers and into the goalnet , meant the team drew 1 – 1 . Cesc Fàbregas scored the winning goal against Manchester City , ten minutes before the end of the match . The result was followed with what The Guardian described as a " fluent attacking display " at home to Portsmouth , on the first day of September . Arsenal faced local rivals Tottenham Hotspur after a week @-@ long international break and went a goal behind when Gareth Bale ’ s free @-@ kick beat goalkeeper Manuel Almunia , past the net . Emmanuel Adebayor scored the equaliser in the second half , before Fàbregas " piloted a 30 @-@ yarder beyond Paul Robinson in the 80th minute . " In stoppage time , Adebayor flicked the ball up and volleyed it into the top corner of Tottenham 's goal ; the result meant Arsenal went top of the league table , for the first time in the season . A week after , Adebayor scored a hat @-@ trick ( three goals ) in a 5 – 0 win against Derby County . Van Persie scored the only goal against West Ham United on 29 September 2007 to maintain the lead at the top . 
 Two goals from Van Persie helped Arsenal beat Sunderland 3 – 2 at home , on the first weekend of October . Second half goals from defender Kolo Touré and midfielder Tomáš Rosický against Bolton Wanderers , gave the team a seventh straight victory in the league . Arsenal played Liverpool on 28 October 2007 , a match billed as the " first great test " of their title credentials . Steven Gerrard gave Liverpool an early lead , from a free @-@ kick , but as the match went on , Arsenal began to dominate possession , eventually rewarded when Fábregas equalised in the 80th minute , from a Hleb through ball . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 November began with a home match against Manchester United . Going into the match , both clubs were level on points and goal difference , at the top of the league . In the 45th minute , Gallas inadvertently scored an own goal to give United the lead , before Fábregas equalised early in the second half . Cristiano Ronaldo scored what was thought to be the winning goal , eight minutes from the end , but Arsenal equalised for the second time in the match via Gallas . The draw pleased Wenger , who after the game noted his team were " ... still charge of the title race because we are top with a game in hand " . A win against Reading at the <unk> Stadium on 12 November 2007 brought about Arsenal 's 1,000th Premier League goal , scored by Adebayor . Reading striker Dave Kitson afterwards praised Arsenal 's performance and asserted they were " the best team on the planet " : " The thing that amazes you most is they are not just passing to each other – they are passing so that person can run on to the ball and then his mind is already made up what he is going to do next . It is just magic , it is unbelievable . " 
 Late goals scored by Gallas and Rosický at home to Wigan Athletic kept Arsenal three points clear of Manchester United in the league table , at the end of November . The win at Villa Park against Aston Villa in December , moved Arsenal five points clear at the top of the league table , and provoked speculation as to whether the club could go another league season unbeaten ; Wenger responded , " People will talk ... just let us play . " The team played out a 1 – 1 draw at Newcastle United four days after and lost against Middlesbrough , ending a record of 22 league matches unbeaten . Arsenal beat Chelsea 1 – 0 on 16 December 2007 and needed a late goal , scored by from substitute Nicklas Bendtner to win against Tottenham Hotspur . In spite of a draw at Portsmouth on Boxing Day , which moved Arsenal down to second place , a win against Everton helped the club move past Manchester United to the first @-@ place spot . 
 On 1 January 2008 , Eduardo and Adebayor each scored to earn Arsenal a win against West Ham United . The team dropped two points against Birmingham City , but a 3 – 0 victory at Fulham meant that Arsenal retained their first @-@ place status . Goals scored by Mathieu Flamini , Adebayor and Fábregas helped Arsenal beat Newcastle United in the final week of January . The team became the first to reach 60 points in February , after winning 3 – 1 against Manchester City ; Wenger described the feat as " phenomenal " . Manchester City 's defeat of Manchester United the following week meant a 2 – 0 win at home to Blackburn Rovers put Arsenal five points clear in first spot , with 12 matches to play . 
 The team then faced Birmingham City at St Andrew 's . Shortly after kick @-@ off , defender Martin Taylor was sent off and took no further part in the game , after his tackle on Eduardo . The player 's challenge left the Arsenal striker with a broken leg ; he was ruled out from action for the rest of the season . James McFadden scored through a free @-@ kick in the 28th minute , before two Theo Walcott goals in the second half put Arsenal in the lead . In stoppage time , Gaël Clichy was penalised for a foul on Stuart Parnaby in the penalty area ; McFadden scored Birmingham 's awarded penalty to draw the match 2 – 2 . It prompted Gallas to throw a tantrum : he attacked an advertising board situated on the side of the pitch and rested alone on the pitch , while his players headed for the dressing room . Wenger after the match called for a permanent football ban on tackler Taylor ; he later retracted the comment . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 A late equaliser at home to Aston Villa preserved Arsenal 's lead at the top of the Premier League to only a point . A goalless draw at Wigan Athletic , was followed by a fourth consecutive draw in the league , at home to Middlesbrough . On the same day , Manchester United moved above Arsenal , who recorded a 1 – 0 win against Derby County . Prior to the trip to Stamford Bridge to face Chelsea , Wenger believed his team 's poor form was over and asserted that Arsenal would go on to win the league as they were " the most consistent team . " After Gallas missed a chance to score in the first half , Sagna put Arsenal in front , heading the ball into the goal net , from a corner in the 59th minute . Didier Drogba equalised for Chelsea in the 73rd minute and nine minutes later scored the winner , from a Nicolas Anelka flick @-@ on . The result pushed Chelsea up into second place and moved Arsenal down one ; both clubs were five and six points behind Manchester United respectively at the top . Wenger admitted the defeat was a " big setback " , going on to express that " Chelsea played long balls and we couldn 't deal with it . " At the Reebok Stadium on 29 March 2008 , Arsenal played Bolton Wanderers . The team went two goals down in the first half , both scored by Matthew Taylor and lost Abou Diaby , who was sent off for a foul on <unk> <unk> . The team 's " dramatic " comeback however , in the form of a winning goal in stoppage time , secured their first league win at Bolton Wanderers ' ground in six years . 
 A 1 – 1 draw against Liverpool in early April , sandwiched in between Champions League legs between both teams " disappointed " Wenger , who refused to concede winning the title . Defeat to Manchester United at Old Trafford on 13 April 2008 , however ended any realistic chance of overtaking the leaders , as United , the champions , needed two more wins to retain the title . Arsenal beat relegation @-@ threatened Reading 2 – 0 the week after . Adebayor scored a hat @-@ trick against Derby County on 28 April 2008 , which made him the first player to score three goals , home and away against the same side in the same season . The win secured third place , pleasing Wenger who felt the team had a " great future – I believe we were really unlucky not to win something this year . " Arsenal won their remaining two fixtures against Everton and Sunderland by a single goal , ending the campaign four points behind champions Manchester United . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 = = = = Classification = = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Third qualifying round = = = 
 As Arsenal finished fourth in the league the previous season , the club played a qualifying round against Sparta Prague to ensure progression into the group stages . Goals from Fàbregas and Hleb in the away leg earned a 2 – 0 win and a 3 – 0 victory at home meant Arsenal qualified for a 10th successive season in the competition . 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 The club were drawn in Group H , along with UEFA Cup holders Sevilla , Slavia Prague of the Czech Republic and Romania 's Steaua București . Arsenal started their campaign in good stead , beating Sevilla by three goals to nil and followed the result with a 1 – 0 victory against Steaua Bucureşti . Against Slavia Prague at the Emirates , Arsenal equalled their best ever victory in a European competition , by scoring seven goals . Walcott , who scored his first two goals of the season in the match , earned the praise of manager Wenger – " Once Theo scored his first , you saw him much more . When they opened up the space , you could see his runs and pace , and the fact he is clinical in front of goal . " Qualification into the knockout stages was ensured with a draw away to Slavia Prague on 7 November 2007 . Defeat against Sevilla at the Estadio Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán was Arsenal 's first loss since April 2007 , ending a run of 28 matches undefeated in all competitions . The result moved them down into second place , and in spite of winning their final group match against Steaua București at home , Arsenal ended two points behind group winners Sevilla . 
 = = = Knockout stage = = = 
 = = = = First knockout round = = = = 
 Arsenal was drawn against Champions League holders Milan in the knockout stages . In the first leg , Arsenal was held to a draw at home , with their best chance of winning the match coming in stoppage time ; Adebayor headed the ball against the crossbar . A week later at the San Siro , the team produced a performance " with style , intelligence and discipline " , to win the match by two goals to nil . In doing so , they progressed into the last eight and became the first English team to beat Milan , away from home . 
 = = = = Quarter @-@ finals = = = = 
 In the quarter @-@ finals , Arsenal played against fellow English club Liverpool , with the first leg at home . Adebayor scored the first goal – he headed the ball from a corner , before Dirk Kuyt equalised three minutes later . Arsenal missed a chance to score a second goal , had Bendtner not managed to inadvertently clear Fàbregas ' strike . In the return leg at Anfield , Arsenal made the better start of the two teams and took the lead when Diaby scored from a tight angle in the 13th minute . Sami Hyypiä equalised from a header before Fernando Torres received a long pass and <unk> to shoot the ball with his right foot , sending it into the top @-@ left hand corner of Arsenal 's goal . With five minutes remaining of the second half , substitute Walcott " covered some 80 yards at pace " to get past the Liverpool defenders and passed the ball for Adebayor , in the middle of the pitch to score . Touré moments after was adjudged to have fouled Ryan Babel and conceded a penalty kick ; Gerrard converted the ball into the net to make the scoreline 4 – 3 on aggregate . In stoppage time Babel scored Liverpool 's fourth , meaning they faced Chelsea in the semi @-@ finals . Wenger in his post @-@ match news conference questioned the " dodgy decision " to give Liverpool a penalty and commented the defeat was " not down to mental strength ... It was down to a lack of experience defensively . " 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the FA Cup in the third round , where they were drawn to play Championship opposition Burnley . Goals from Eduardo and Bendtner , in either half of the match ensured victory for a " second @-@ string " team . Against Newcastle United a fortnight later , a 3 – 0 victory meant Arsenal progressed into the fifth round , where they faced Manchester United away . The match played on 16 February 2008 , ended in a " embarrassingly one @-@ sided victory " for the home team ; defender Emmanuel Eboué was notably dismissed for a high challenge on Patrice Evra . 
 = = League Cup = = 
 Arsenal began their League Cup campaign in the third round , drawn at home to Newcastle United . They made nine changes from the previous starting eleven – Eduardo paired up with Bendtner in the front two . Bendtner scored the opening goal seven minutes from the end of normal time ; Denílson added a second goal to ensure Arsenal 's progression . Fourth @-@ round opponents Sheffield United were easier to defeat , with Eduardo scoring a brace ( two goals ) . The quarter @-@ final pitted Arsenal away to Blackburn Rovers , in a match played on 18 December 2007 . Diaby gave Arsenal the lead with a volley after six minutes and Eduardo extended the lead , before Roque Santa Cruz pulled a goal back for Blackburn , three minutes from the end of the first half . Santa Cruz scored the equaliser and his second of the match , heading in a cross by David Bentley . In stoppage time , <unk> was sent off for a two @-@ footed challenge on Dunn . In spite of playing with one less player , Arsenal regained the lead . Alex Song passed the ball to Eduardo , who held off his opponent Ryan Nelsen and with minimal effort placed it past Brad Friedel . The performance prompted Wenger to assert that his team could win the cup , while opposing manager Mark Hughes commented that Arsenal 's blend of young players were capable of following in the footsteps of Manchester United 's fledglings , managed by Alex Ferguson . 
 Arsenal was drawn against Tottenham Hotspur in the two @-@ legged semifinal . In the first leg , at the Emirates , Arsenal scored a late equaliser to even the tie at 1 – 1 . However , a 5 – 1 victory for Tottenham in the return leg meant it was their first victory over their north London rivals in nine years . Wenger after the game defended his policy to play a young side , adding : " The only regret I have is to have played the players who should not have played . " 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 [ L ] – Out on loan , [ S ] – Sold 
 Source : 
 = Scottish Challenge Cup = 
 The Scottish Professional Football League Challenge Cup , commonly known as the Scottish League Challenge Cup or Scottish Challenge Cup , is an association football knock @-@ out cup competition run by the Scottish Professional Football League ( SPFL ) . Traditionally contested by members of the SPFL and its predecessor , the Scottish Football League ( <unk> ) , below the top level of the Scottish football league system , the Challenge Cup is being expanded to 54 entrants for the 2016 – 17 tournament with the inclusion of under @-@ 20 teams of the twelve Scottish Premiership clubs , and four teams each from the Highland League and Lowland League . There will be also be two teams each from the NIFL Premiership and Welsh Premier League , the first time the competition has featured teams from outside Scottish football . 
 The competition was first held during the 1990 – 91 season as the B & Q Centenary Cup to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the formation of the <unk> . It was intended to be a one @-@ off competition but was continued due to its popularity . The first winner of the tournament was Dundee , who defeated Ayr United . Falkirk are the most successful team in the tournament , with four wins , most recently in 2012 . The most recent winner was Rangers , who defeated Peterhead in the 2016 final . 
 = = Format = = 
 The Challenge Cup is a knock @-@ out tournament . Within a regionalised format , clubs are paired at random and the first club drawn listed as the home team . The winner of each match progresses to the next round and the loser is eliminated from the tournament . Every match , including the final , is a one @-@ legged tie that lasts 90 minutes plus any additional stoppage time . If no clear winner has been determined after 90 minutes of normal time , 30 minutes of extra time is played . If the score is still level after extra time then the winner is decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 Beginning with the 2016 – 17 season , the competition has been expanded to 54 entrants . All Scottish Professional Football League ( SPFL ) clubs will participate , with the thirty clubs from the Championship , League One and League Two now joined by under @-@ 20 teams from the twelve Premiership clubs . Also participating by invitation will be four teams each from the Highland and Lowland Leagues and four entrants from outside Scottish football – two each from the NIFL Premiership in Northern Ireland and the Welsh Premier League in Wales . Teams are seeded to enter the competition over any of the first four rounds , after which eight teams will remain to contest the quarter @-@ finals . The final is played at a neutral venue . 
 = = History = = 
 The competition was created in the 1990 – 91 season to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the formation of the Scottish Football League in 1890 . It was intended to run for only one season but continued due to its popularity . This was reflected in high attendances at matches in the later rounds of the tournament including a full capacity crowd of 11 @,@ 500 at Fir Park in the first final . The cup was sponsored by DIY retail company B & Q and named the B & Q Centenary Cup for the first year and continued as the B & Q Cup for four seasons afterwards . The competition was run for three seasons without a sponsor due to the league covering the tournament costs and prize money , but was unsustainable and resulted in it being cancelled for one season in 1998 – 99 before being re @-@ established in 1999 with a new sponsor . Although it is not as popular as competitions like the Scottish Cup , it provides smaller clubs with a realistic opportunity of winning a trophy due to the absence of top @-@ tier clubs from the tournament . When Stenhousemuir won the final in 1995 it was regarded as the club 's greatest achievement in its 111 @-@ year history . Attendances at matches in the earlier rounds of the tournament are not dissimilar to average home attendances in league competition but as the competition reaches the latter stages they generally increase ; Annan Athletic 's record attendance of 1 @,@ 575 was set in a semi @-@ final match against Falkirk in 2011 . 
 The number of competitors has varied in relation to the number of clubs with Scottish Football League membership . The first tournament featured the 28 clubs in the First and Second Divisions which reduced to 26 until 1994 when the league was expanded and restructured into three divisions ; increasing the number of eligible clubs to 30 . In the 2010 – 11 competition the two highest ranked clubs from the Highland Football League with a Scottish Football Association licence were invited to compete , in order to bring the number of competitors to 32 . Before the change in 2010 , several clubs received a random bye in the first round in order to even out the number of fixtures . The Challenge Cup continued under the auspices of the Scottish Professional Football League after the Scottish Football League merged with the Scottish Premier League in 2013 . One change at this time was that the two invitational places were split , with only one place filled by a Highland League club ( with a valid SFA club licence ) and the other place going to the winner of a preliminary round tie between clubs from the East of Scotland League and the South of Scotland League . This was simplified in the 2014 – 15 season , with the two additional places going to the Highland League champion ( <unk> Rangers ) and the Lowland League champion ( Spartans ) . From 2016 – 17 the competition has been further expanded with the addition of Scottish Premiership under @-@ 20 teams , additional places for the Highland and Lowland Leagues , which now have four representatives each , and two teams each from Northern Ireland and Wales . 
 = = Venues = = 
 In the rounds before the final , the venue of each match is determined when the fixtures are drawn ; the first club drawn in a fixture is named the home team and chooses the venue for the match , usually its own home ground . The venue may be switched to that of the away team or changed to a neutral venue for security reasons such as being unable to host a club with a large travelling fan base or the venue being unavailable . 
 = = = Final venue = = = 
 The final match of the tournament is played at a neutral venue , usually one that is geographically close or equidistant to where the clubs contesting the match are based . Eight different venues have hosted the final . Fir Park in Motherwell was the first , in 1990 , and has since hosted three more finals , the last in 1997 . McDiarmid Park in Perth has been the most frequent venue , staging it nine times between 1994 and 2015 . Other venues to host the final more than once are Broadwood Stadium ( Cumbernauld ) , Excelsior Stadium ( Airdrie ) and <unk> Stadium ( Livingston ) . The 2016 final was held at Hampden Park , the national stadium in Glasgow , due to the large support of finalists Rangers . 
 = = Winners and finalists = = 
 A total of 24 clubs have reached the final , of whom 16 have won the competition . The first winners were Dundee in 1990 . The most successful club is Falkirk with four wins from four final appearances . Ross County , Hamilton Academical and Queen of the South have also reached the final four times , all winning and losing twice each . Three clubs have reached the final in successive seasons ; Ayr United did so in the first two years of the tournament but lost both . The only teams to have successfully defended their title are Hamilton Academical and the original Airdrieonians . It is possible for the winner of the tournament to be unable to defend their title ; if a club is promoted from the Scottish Championship ( second tier ) in the same season to the Scottish Premiership ( first tier ) , the club becomes ineligible to compete in the tournament . This has happened to Falkirk twice , Inverness Caledonian Thistle , St Mirren and Rangers . 
 Most winners and finalists have been from the second tier , while only four teams have won the competition from below this division . Stenhousemuir became the first team to do so in 1995 , followed by Stranraer a year later in 1996 and Alloa Athletic in 1999 . The most recent club to win from below the second tier was Queen of the South , in 2013 . All winners and runners @-@ up from below the second tier have been from the third tier . 
 = = Finals = = 
 The winner of the tournament is decided by a final elimination match which lasts 90 minutes plus any additional stoppage time . If the score is level and a winner has not been determined after 90 minutes of normal time , 30 minutes of extra time is played , followed by a penalty shoot @-@ out if the score is still level . Eight finals have gone to extra time , with two being decided in this period of play . The further six have been decided by penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = = Performance by club = = = 
 Clubs shown in italics are no longer in existence . 
 = = Sponsorship and media coverage = = 
 The Scottish Challenge Cup has been sponsored several times since it was introduced in 1990 . The sponsor has been able to determine the name of the competition . There have been four sponsors since the competition 's formation as well as several name changes within the duration of each sponsorship . The competition relies on revenue earned from sponsorship although it has been able to run without a sponsor over two periods but had to be suspended for one season in 1998 – 99 as a consequence . 
 1990 – 1995 : B & Q ( B & Q Centenary Cup ( until 1991 ) then B & Q Cup ) 
 1995 – 1998 : No sponsor 
 1999 – 2006 : Bell 's whisky ( Bell 's Challenge Cup ( until 2002 ) then Bell 's Cup ) 
 2006 – 2008 : No sponsor 
 2008 – 2011 : MG Alba ( ALBA Challenge Cup ) 
 2011 – 2014 <unk> ( <unk> Cup ) 
 2014 – 2016 : <unk> ( <unk> Training Cup ) 
 2016 – Present : Irn @-@ Bru ( Irn @-@ Bru Cup ) 
 Selected games have been broadcast live on the Scottish Gaelic language television channel BBC Alba since 2008 , which is run jointly by former sponsor MG Alba and the BBC . Every final since the 2008 final has been broadcast live on the channel and the arrangement was extended for three more years in 2012 despite the end of MG Alba 's sponsorship of the competition in 2011 . With the expansion of the competition to include teams from Northern Ireland and Wales from 2016 @-@ 17 , additional contracts for live match coverage have been agreed with Premier Sports and S4C . 
 = Doolittle ( album ) = 
 Doolittle is the second studio album from the American alternative rock band Pixies , released in April 1989 on 4AD . The album 's offbeat and dark subject material , featuring references to surrealism , Biblical violence , torture and death , contrasts with the clean production sound achieved by the newly hired producer Gil Norton . Doolittle was the Pixies ' first international release , with Elektra Records as the album 's distributor in the United States and PolyGram in Canada . 
 Pixies released two singles from Doolittle , " Here Comes Your Man " and " Monkey Gone to Heaven " , both of which were chart successes on the US chart for Modern Rock Tracks . The album itself reached number eight on the UK Albums Chart , an unexpected success for the band . In retrospect , album tracks such as " Debaser " , " Wave of Mutilation " , " Monkey Gone to Heaven " , " Gouge Away " , and " Hey " are highly acclaimed by critics , while the album , along with debut LP Surfer Rosa , is often seen as the band 's strongest work . 
 Doolittle has continued to sell consistently well in the years since its release , and in 1995 was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . The album has been cited as inspirational by many alternative artists , while numerous music publications have ranked it as one of the most influential albums ever . A 2003 poll of NME writers ranked Doolittle as the second @-@ greatest album of all time , and Rolling Stone placed the album at 226 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following their highly regarded but commercially unsuccessful 1988 album Surfer Rosa , the band embarked on a European tour with fellow Bostonians Throwing Muses , before beginning a tour of North American states . During this time Black Francis , the group 's frontman and principal songwriter , began to write new material for a future album , with songs such as " Dead " , " Hey " , " Tame " , and " There Goes My Gun " emerging through the course of the year . Versions of the newly composed songs were recorded during several sessions for John Peel 's radio show in 1988 , while a live recording of " Hey " appeared on a free EP circulated with a 1988 edition of Sounds . 
 In mid @-@ 1988 , the Pixies began to record demo sessions while on breaks from touring . The band headed to the Boston recording studio Eden Sound , which at the time comprised a small room in the basement of a hair salon . They recorded at the studio for a week , in circumstances similar to the previous year 's the Purple Tape sessions . Francis gave the demo tape and upcoming album the provisional title of Whore , though he later claimed his natural father had originally suggested the name . Francis has clarified that he was thinking of the word " in the more traditional sense ... the operatic , biblical sense , ... as in the great whore of Babylon " . After completing the demo tape , band manager Ken Goes suggested two producers for the album ; Liverpudlian Gil Norton and American Ed Stasium . The band had previously worked with Norton while recording the single version of " Gigantic " in May 1988 . Francis had no preference , although Ivo Watts @-@ Russell , head of the band 's label 4AD , wanted Norton to produce the Pixies ' next album . He was hired as producer , with Stasium not even approached for the position . 
 Norton arrived in Boston on October 31 , 1988 , and first visited Francis ' apartment to review the album 's demos . The two talked about arrangements , and spent two days intensively analyzing the album 's songs . Norton learned to gauge Francis ' reaction to changing arrangements , and later observed that the frontman " doesn 't like to do anything twice " . Norton spent a further two weeks in pre @-@ production to familiarise himself with the Pixies ' sound . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording sessions for the album began on October 31 , 1988 , at Downtown Recorders in Boston , Massachusetts , at the time a professional 24 @-@ track studio . 4AD allowed the Pixies a budget of $ 40 @,@ 000 , excluding producer 's fees . This was a modest sum for a 1980s major label album ; however , it quadrupled the amount spent on the band 's previous album , Surfer Rosa . Along with Norton , two assistant recording engineers and two second assistants were assigned to the project . The sessions lasted three weeks , concluding on November 23 , with " nearly a song a day " being recorded . 
 Production and mixing began on November 28 . The band relocated to Carriage House Studios , a residential studio in Stamford , Connecticut , to oversee production and record further tracks . Norton recruited Steve Haigler as mixing engineer , whom he had worked with at Fort Apache Studios . During production , Haigler and Norton added layers of guitars and vocals to songs , including overdubbed guitars on " Debaser " and double tracking vocals on " Wave of Mutilation " . During the recordings , Norton advised Francis to alter several songs ; a noted example being " There Goes My Gun " which was originally intended as a much faster Hüsker Dü @-@ style song . However , at Norton 's advice , Francis slowed down the tempo . 
 Norton 's suggestions were not always welcome , and several instances of advice to add verses and increase track length contributed to the front man 's building frustration . Eventually , Francis took Norton to a record store , where he handed him a copy of Buddy Holly 's Greatest Hits , in which most of the songs are about two minutes long . He told Norton , " If it 's good enough for Buddy Holly ... " In a Rolling Stone interview , Francis later recalled that " this record is him trying to make us , shall I say , commercial , and us trying to remain somewhat grungy " . Production continued until December 12 , 1988 , with Norton and Haigler adding extra effects , including gated reverb to the mix . The master tapes were then sent for final post @-@ production later that month . 
 = = Music = = 
 Doolittle features an eclectic mix of musical styles . While tracks such as " Tame " and " Crackity Jones " are fast and aggressive , and incorporate the band 's trademark loud – quiet dynamic , other songs such as " Silver " , " I Bleed " , and " Here Comes Your Man " reveal a quieter , slower and more melodic temperament . With Doolittle , the band began to incorporate further instruments into their sound ; for instance , " Monkey Gone to Heaven " features two violins and two cellos . 
 " Tame " is based on a three chord formula ; including Joey Santiago 's playing a " Hendrix chord " over the main bass progression . " I Bleed " is melodically simple , and is formed around a single rhythmical repetition . Some songs are influenced by other genres of music ; while " Crackity Jones " has a distinctly Spanish sound , and incorporates G ♯ and A triads over a C ♯ pedal , the song 's rhythm guitar , played by Francis , starts with an eighth @-@ note downstroke typical of punk rock music . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 The lyrical themes explored on Doolittle range from the surrealism of " Debaser " , to the environmental catastrophe of " Monkey Gone to Heaven " . The women and whores of " Mr. Grieves " , " Tame " , and " Hey " share space with the Biblical analogies of " Dead " and " Gouge Away " . Black Francis often claimed that Doolittle 's lyrics were words which just " fit together nicely " , and that " the point [ of the album ] is to experience it , to enjoy it , to be entertained by it " . Francis wrote all the material for the album with the exception of " Silver " , which he co @-@ wrote with Kim Deal . 
 The album 's opening track " Debaser " references surrealism , a theme that runs throughout the album . " Debaser " alludes to Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí 's 1929 surrealist film Un Chien Andalou , and the lyric " slicing up eyeballs " refers to an early scene in the film . Surrealism heavily influenced Francis in his college years and throughout his career with the Pixies . In 1989 , Francis expressed his interest in surrealism and its influence on his songwriting method to the New York Times by stating " I got into avant @-@ garde movies and Surrealism as an escape from reality . ... To me , Surrealism is totally artificial . I recently read an interview with the director David Lynch who said he had ideas and images but that he didn 't know exactly what they meant . That 's how I write . " 
 Another of the album 's main themes is environmental catastrophe . " Monkey Gone to Heaven " deals with man 's destruction of the ocean and " confusion of man 's place in the universe " . As Francis put it : " On one hand , it 's this big organic toilet . Things get flushed and <unk> or decomposed and it 's this big , dark , mysterious place . It 's also a very mythological place where there are octopus 's gardens , the Bermuda Triangle , Atlantis , and mermaids . " " Monkey Gone to Heaven " is concerned with man 's relationship to the divine , a theme shared with " Mr. Grieves " . 
 Two songs on Doolittle are fashioned after Biblical stories : the story of David and Bathsheba in " Dead " , and Samson and Delilah in " Gouge Away " . Francis ' fascination with Biblical themes can be traced back to his teenage years ; when he was twelve , he and his parents joined an evangelical church linked to the Assemblies of God . This background was to be an influence in Doolittle , where he referred to the Devil being " six " and God being " seven " in " Monkey Gone to Heaven " . 
 Other songs explored eccentric subjects , such as in " Wave of Mutilation " , which Francis described as being about " Japanese businessmen doing murder @-@ suicides with their families because they 'd failed in business , and they 're driving off a pier into the ocean . " 
 " Wave of Mutilation " ' s sea and underwater themes , which also feature in " Mr. Grieves " and " Monkey Gone to Heaven " , are explorations of one arena for man 's death and destruction . Ben Sisario points out that the album begins ( " Debaser " ) and ends ( " Gouge Away " ) with songs about violence being done to eyes . " Crackity Jones " covers another offbeat subject ; Francis ' roommate in his student exchange trip to San Juan , Puerto Rico , who he described as a " weird psycho gay roommate " . 
 Doolittle also references more ostensibly conventional subjects . " La La Love You " , sung by the band 's drummer David Lovering , is a love song — though with its " first base , second base , third base , home run " break , it 's been referred to as " a dig at the very idea of a love song " . Francis gave it to Lovering as a song to sing , " like a Ringo thing " ; Lovering at first refused to sing , but Norton said that soon he was unable to " get him away from the microphone " . As well as lead vocals on " La La Love You " , Lovering played bass guitar on " Silver " , with Deal playing slide guitar ; this arrangement did not occur again . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 Doolittle was the first album where Simon Larbalestier , the Pixies ' cover photographer , and Vaughan Oliver , the band 's cover artist , had access to the lyrics . According to Larbalestier , this " made a fundamental difference " . 
 The surrealist and abstract images throughout the album booklet are linked to the album 's content . " Gouge Away " is represented by a picture of a spoon containing hair , laid across a woman 's torso ; a direct pictorial representation of heroin , with the spoon and the hair being horses . " I Bleed " is referenced with the image " As Loud As Hell " ; the image shows " a ringing bell " , with a set of teeth ; this references the line " it shakes my teeth " . " Walking with the Crustaceans " is a visual representation of " Wave of Mutilation " ' s lyrics . Larbalestier later commented that he was interested in " early Surrealist stuff " at this time . 
 During the recording sessions , Whore was discarded as a potential album title , after Oliver changed the cover artwork idea to a monkey and halo cover . Francis later explained his rationale for the move : 
 Francis then named the album Doolittle , from the " Mr. Grieves " lyric " Pray for a man in the middle / One that talks like Doolittle " . 
 = = Release = = 
 In the months following Surfer Rosa , the Pixies ' management fielded calls from a number of labels . Elektra Records A & R scout Peter Lubin first saw the band in October 1988 , when they opened for The Jesus and Mary Chain . He immediately sought to convince the band to sign to his label . Pixies contracted to Elektra Records during a UK spring tour in 1989 . Elektra followed by releasing a live promotional album , which contained two songs from their forthcoming album , " Debaser " and " Gouge Away " , along with a selection of earlier material . 
 However Elektra had not yet attained distribution rights to the band 's forthcoming album . 4AD , then a small British independent record label , held worldwide distribution rights to the Pixies , but did not have access to distribution outside of the United Kingdom ; the band had had to import all its previous records from Europe . The Pixies ' management sought international distribution ; and while negotiations with Elektra and other record companies began in the third quarter of 1988 , they were only completed just two weeks before Doolittle 's release on April 2 , 1989 . PolyGram had already secured Canadian distribution rights by that time . 
 Doolittle was released in the United Kingdom on April 17 , 1989 , and in the United States the following day . Throughout the States , helped by Elektra Records ' major label status , retail displays were constructed for the record , and " Monkey Gone to Heaven " , the first single from the album , was released to radio stations for inclusion on playlists . Doolittle 's chart performance in the United States was unremarkable ; the album entered the Billboard 200 at number 171 . However , with the help of college radio @-@ play of " Monkey Gone to Heaven " , Doolittle eventually rose to number 98 and spent two weeks in the Top 100 . In Britain , the record reached number eight on the UK Album Chart . This chart placing was an unexpected success for the band , as their previous two records , Come On Pilgrim and Surfer Rosa , had failed to make such an impact on the British charts . 
 In June 1989 , 4AD released " Here Comes Your Man " as the album 's second single . It reached number three on the US Modern Rock Tracks chart and number 56 in the UK Singles Chart . It was not the last single from the album : in 1997 , " Debaser " was released as a single to promote the Death to the Pixies compilation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Following its release , Doolittle sold steadily in America , and broke sales of 100 @,@ 000 after six months . By early 1992 , while the band were supporting U2 on their Zoo TV Tour , the album was selling 1 @,@ 500 copies per week . The middle of 1993 , two years after the band 's last album , Trompe le Monde , saw sales average 1 @,@ 200 copies per week . Doolittle was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1995 . Ten years after the breakup , Doolittle was still selling between 500 and 1 @,@ 000 copies a week ; the reunion tour saw sales creep back up to 1 @,@ 200 copies per week . At the end of 2005 , best estimates put total sales in America at between 800 @,@ 000 and one million copies . 
 Reaction to Doolittle was positive in general , with the album garnering praise from several major music publications . NME commented that " the songs on Doolittle have the power to make you literally jump out of your skin with excitement " . Q , giving the album four stars out of five , said that Doolittle 's " carefully structured noise and straightforward rhythmic insistence makes perfect sense " . Tim Rolston , of the Daily Telegraph praised Doolittle as " a scintillating rock 'n'roll album " and the Pixies ' " finest half @-@ hour so far " . Other publications also awarded the album four out of five stars , including the British music weekly Record Mirror , The Philadelphia Inquirer , the Los Angeles Times , and the Chicago Tribune . The Village Voice 's Robert Christgau gave the album a B + rating , suggesting that " getting famous too fast could ruin them " . 
 However , Doolittle received mixed reviews from several music critics . Time Out said that " Gil Norton 's toy theatre production makes a drama out of what should have been a crisis " . Spin ran a hundred @-@ word review of the album , including critic Joe Levy 's comment " the insanity less surreal and more silly , and the songs themselves more like songs and less like adventures " . Rolling Stone , reviewing the album in July 1989 , gave the album three and a half stars . Doolittle appeared on several end @-@ of @-@ year " Best Album " lists ; both Rolling Stone and The Village Voice placed the album tenth , and independent music magazines Sounds and Melody Maker both ranked the album as the second @-@ best of the year . NME also ranked the album highly , placing it fourth in their end @-@ of @-@ year list . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The sudden loud to quiet dynamic present on Doolittle , most notably in " Tame " , has been very influential on alternative rock . After writing " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , both Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic of Nirvana thought : " this really sounds like the Pixies . People are really going to nail us for this . " Producer Gil Norton usually receives much credit for the album 's dynamic , and is sought by bands seeking a similar sound . Former The Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha described Doolittle as less raw than Surfer Rosa but " more listenable " and " Here Comes Your Man " as a " classic pop record " . Fellow alternative musician PJ Harvey was " in awe " of " I Bleed " and " Tame " , and described Francis ' writing as " amazing " . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = = Band relationships = = = 
 During the recording of Doolittle , tensions between Francis and Deal became visible to band members and the production team . <unk> and standoffs between the two marred the recording sessions and led to increased stress among the band members . John Murphy , Deal 's husband at the time , later recalled that with Doolittle it " went from just all fun to work " . Exhaustion from touring and from releasing three records in two years contributed to the friction . This culminated at the end of the US post @-@ Doolittle " Fuck or Fight " tour , where they were too tired to attend the end @-@ of @-@ tour party . Soon afterwards the band announced that they were taking a break . 
 After they reconvened in 1990 , Francis began to limit Deal 's contributions to the band . He wrote and sang all the original material on the Pixies ' two subsequent albums ; 1990 's Bossanova and 1991 's Trompe le Monde ( both produced by Norton and mixed by Haigler ) . This breakdown in the relationship between Deal and Francis , first apparent during the recording of Doolittle , ultimately led to the band 's breakup in late 1992 and early 1993 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 A range of music magazines have since acclaimed Doolittle as one of the quintessential alternative rock albums of the 1980s . Rolling Stone , reviewing Doolittle again in 2002 , gave the album a maximum score of five stars , remarking that it laid the " groundwork for Nineties rock " . Doolittle has received a number of international accolades and is consistently noted as one of the best albums of the 1980s in any genre . 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Doolittle is taken from AcclaimedMusic.net. 
 ( * ) designates unordered lists . 
