 = = = Doolittle 25 reissue = = = 
 The band announced that the album will be reissued January 12 , 2015 , with two additional discs of material . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were written by Black Francis , except where noted . 
 " Debaser " – 2 : 52 
 " Tame " – 1 : 55 
 " Wave of Mutilation " – 2 : 04 
 " I Bleed " – 2 : 34 
 " Here Comes Your Man " – 3 : 21 
 " Dead " – 2 : 21 
 " Monkey Gone to Heaven " – 2 : 56 
 " Mr. Grieves " – 2 : 05 
 " Crackity Jones " – 1 : 24 
 " La La Love You " – 2 : 43 
 " No. 13 Baby " – 3 : 51 
 " There Goes My Gun " – 1 : 49 
 " Hey " – 3 : 31 
 " Silver " ( Francis / Deal ) – 2 : 25 
 " Gouge Away " – 2 : 45 
 = = = Doolittle 25 bonus discs = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Pixies 
 Black Francis – vocals , rhythm guitar , acoustic guitar 
 Kim Deal – bass guitar , vocals , slide guitar on " Silver " 
 Joey Santiago – lead guitar , backing vocals 
 David Lovering – Drums , lead vocals on " La La Love You " , bass guitar on " Silver " 
 Additional musicians 
 Arthur Fiacco – cello on " Monkey Gone to Heaven " 
 Karen Karlsrud – violin on " Monkey Gone to Heaven " 
 <unk> Metter – violin on " Monkey Gone to Heaven " 
 Ann Rorich – cello on " Monkey Gone to Heaven " 
 Production 
 Steve Haigler – mixing engineer 
 Matt Lane – assistant engineer 
 Simon Larbalestier – cover image , album booklet imagery 
 Gil Norton – production , engineering 
 Vaughan Oliver – album booklet imagery 
 Dave Snider – assistant engineer 
 Burt Price – second assistant 
 Rob Sylvain – second assistant 
 Published by Rice ' n ' Beans Music BMI 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = New York State Route 361 = 
 New York State Route 361 ( NY 361 ) was a state highway located in Dutchess County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route was at the Connecticut state line , where it continued to Sharon , Connecticut , as Route 361 . The northern terminus was at U.S. Route 44 ( US 44 ) in Millerton . NY 361 was designated in the mid @-@ 1930s and removed from the state highway system and replaced with County Route 62 ( CR 62 ) in 1980 as part of a large @-@ scale highway maintenance swap between the New York State Department of Transportation and the Dutchess County highway department . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 361 began as a continuation of Connecticut 's Route 361 adjacent to the bi @-@ state water body of Indian Lake in the town of North East . The route traveled northward on Sharon Road , paralleling the Webatuck Creek to Millerton , where it became South Maple Avenue and terminated at an intersection with US 44 ( Main Street ) . The road itself , however , continued northward to NY 22 in the hamlet of Mount Riga as North Maple Avenue and , outside the village , Rudd Pond Road , connecting Millerton to the Rudd Pond area of Taconic State Park . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 361 was assigned c . 1936 to a short north – south highway connecting US 44 in Millerton to Route 4 ( later Route 361 ) at the Connecticut state line . The route remained unchanged until April 1 , 1980 , when ownership and maintenance of the route was transferred to Dutchess County as part of a large scale highway maintenance swap . As part of the swap , NY 361 , the routing of NY 82A from Amenia to Pine Plains , NY 402 , and three reference routes near the hamlets of <unk> ( near Red Hook ) , Pine Plains , and East Park ( near Hyde Park ) were given to the county by the New York State Department of Transportation in exchange for maintenance of the segment of NY 82 between NY 199 and the Columbia County line . Also exchanged was a county route bypassing Millbrook to the northwest ( which became NY 44A and later US 44 ) , the portion of the Salt Point Turnpike north of Smith Street in Poughkeepsie ( NY 115 ) , and <unk> Road between US 9 and NY 376 in Poughkeepsie ( NY 113 ) . The former routing of NY 361 is now part of CR 62 , which continues north of US 44 to NY 22 in Mount Riga . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Dutchess County . 
 = United States v. Jackalow = 
 United States v. Jackalow , 66 U.S. ( 1 Black ) 484 ( 1862 ) , is a U.S. Supreme Court case interpreting the Venue and Vicinage clauses of the United States Constitution . It was an " unusual criminal case " , and one of the few constitutional criminal cases from the Taney Court . Jackalow , a mariner from the Ryukyu Islands , was suspected of the robbery and murder of the captain of the sloop Spray , Jonathan Leete , and Jonathan 's brother Elijah , while the ship was at sea . He was convicted of robbery in the Long Island Sound , but as there was disagreement over the question of jurisdiction between the two judges who heard the post @-@ trial motion – Judge Mahlon Dickerson and Supreme Court Justice Robert Cooper Grier – the case was referred to the Supreme Court by certificate of division . 
 The Supreme Court directed the circuit court for the District of New Jersey to grant Jackalow a new trial . The Court held that , while the trial court should determine the description of the boundaries of New York and Connecticut , the ascertainment of their actual boundaries , and the application of those boundaries to the crime in question , should have been a question of fact for the jury . Jackalow was not retried and was released . 
 The trial attracted significant media interest . According to The New York Times , " every part in and near the Court room was crowded during the trial " . The case is viewed as historically significant , because even though it occurred during the American Civil War , the federal courts focused on proper legal procedure and jurisprudence in a case unrelated to the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jonathan T. Leete had captained the schooner Reaper , owned by James Frisbie , and crewed by a man of East Asian origin , John Canoe , commonly known as Jackalow , short for John Low or John Lord . After Jonathan gave up command of the Reaper , he and Jackalow worked on Jonathan 's father 's farm on Sachem 's Head in Guilford , Connecticut , where Jackalow was regarded as family . At some point , while in New York , Jackalow had stolen $ 100 from Jonathan and fled to New Haven . He was returned to New York by the police , but Jonathan refused to testify against him and rehired him . Jonathan and his brother Elijah J. Leete subsequently bought the 30 @-@ ton sloop Spray , funded in part by a mortgage their father took out on his farm . Jonathan ( the captain ) , Elijah , and Jackalow sailed the Spray together for two or three years . By March 1860 , Jackalow had sailed with Jonathan for four years . 
 = = Spray 's final voyage = = 
 On March 15 , 1860 , the Spray departed its home port of Guilford on a voyage to New York City , in the company of other vessels . As well as its normal crew of Jonathan , Elijah and Jackalow , there was a passenger on board : Andrew Foote , of Nut Plains . The Spray also carried hay and potatoes on consignment from David Benton of Sachem 's Head . 
 The Spray reached New York City safely and sold its cargo for $ 500 in gold and bills . Foote returned to Guilford by other means . The Spray set course for Guilford and was seen at various points along the route . One night , she anchored near Norwalk , where cries of " Murder ! " and " Open the Cabin Door ! " were allegedly heard . Supposedly , Jackalow had locked the cabin door before dispatching Elijah on the deck . Elijah had yelled " Murder ! " ; and Jonathan , " Open the Cabin Door ! " Then , Jackalow was supposed to have shot Jonathan through the cabin skylight , thrown the bodies overboard , and searched the cabin for the money . Alone , Jackalow was further supposed to have sailed the Spray to South Brooklyn , purchased supplies , and then sailed south . 
 At 2 pm on Wednesday , March 21 , the Spray collided with the Lucinda four miles north of Barnegat , New Jersey , knocking a hole in the Spray 's bow that resulted in her filling with water ; the Lucinda also sustained damage . Capt. Willis of the Lucinda saw no one other than Jackalow ( whom he blamed for the collision ) on board the Spray , and Jackalow refused to be rescued and taken aboard the Lucinda . Willis observed that the deck of the Spray was strewn with bedding and other articles from the cabin . 
 That same day , Jackalow , anchored on a nearby yawl boat and was taken aboard the schooner Thomas F. French ( of Suffolk , Virginia ) , captained by James Webb , who believed Jackalow to be a kanaka . ( Other accounts call him a lascar . ) Jackalow gave contradictory accounts of the fate of the Leetes . He told Webb that Jonathan was sick in the cabin and that Elijah had been knocked overboard by the boom , but he subsequently changed his story , claiming that one brother had fallen overboard from the bowsprit , and the other had been knocked overboard by the <unk> . Webb sailed to Little Egg Harbor , finding the Lucinda and its captain and hearing Willis 's account of the collision . Webb made no attempt to detain Jackalow , who accompanied him ashore in a small row boat before immediately disappearing into a crowd . 
 The Spray , already stripped of her sails and rigging , and lying on her beam ends , was towed to the New York Harbor . There , the harbor police took charge of the Spray and began retrieving items from the partially submerged cabin , including the captain 's bed , which was stained and splattered with blood . A " heavy three @-@ cornered scraper " also recovered was suspected to be the " instrument with which the bloody deed was committed . " A pair of unloaded pistols , one with signs of recent discharge , were also recovered . Other items included a small pine box , suspected to be the captain 's money box , that had been broken open , but no bodies or money were found . 
 Jackalow became a wanted man , and his description was widely disseminated . On March 25 , news of the fate of the Spray reached Guilford . That same day , the pilot boat George Steers reached the Spray and towed her to Jersey City . 
 = = Jackalow 's arrest = = 
 At 11 : 30 am , March 27 , recognizing his description from a newspaper story , the engineer and brakeman of a train , from Philadelphia to Jersey City , crossing the Hackensack Bridge , spotted Jackalow running towards the woods . First two , then eight , New Jersey police officers went into the woods after him . Around noon , Jackalow was turned away from crossing a railroad bridge , then under construction in Newark , New Jersey , by workman William Jacobus , who recognized Jackalow . His colleague Henry Wilson mentioned a $ 1000 reward for Jackalow 's arrest , and the pair — joined by John Sanford and John Douglass , and aided by a spy glass — spotted Jackalow heading for the Newark Plank Road . Jacobus and Douglass pursued Jackalow , while Wilson and Sanford took the car to Newark , hired a horse , and set out to intercept him on the road . 
 The four arrested Jackalow at the toll gate of the Plank Road ; he did not respond to " Jackalow " and claimed to be Indian . He was taken to Jersey City by train , arriving at about 4 : 00 pm . Jackalow was taken to the Jersey City police station , where in search conducted by Assistant Superintendent Woodruff bags of gold and silver worth about $ 400 , were found tied to his person . Jackalow was also wearing Jonathan 's coat , which contained Jonathan 's memorandum book . Jackalow was taken to the city prison . " As the news spread , people came flocking from all directions , completely filling the <unk> and blocking the streets around it . " 
 Soon after 5 pm , Jackalow was taken before Recorder Bedford , where Sanford lodged a formal complaint accusing Jackalow of the murders of the Leetes . Jackalow gave his name to the Recorder as " Sam Patch " and his occupation as a crewman on the Spray . Later , Jackalow told a reporter from the New York Herald that the $ 400 represented his savings , and that his wages had been $ 30 / month for four years . 
 On Saturday , April 2 , the Spray was salvaged , and the stains believed to have been blood were discovered to be vermilion . An examination by Dr. John F. Quidor found " no evidence of a murder having been committed in the cabin . " In Quidor 's opinion , the blood discovered on a cotton chord belonged to an animal . 
 = = = Preliminary hearings = = = 
 Also on April 2 , U.S. Commissioner J.P. Vroom , in Jersey City , presided over Jackalow 's preliminary hearing . Elizabeth Schenck , an African @-@ American , her sister Ann Louisa Talmadge , and brother @-@ in @-@ law James Talmadge testified that Jackalow had sought board with them , claiming to be an Indian . The court recessed until 2 pm , when Mrs. Electa <unk> and Elizabeth Leete , the mother and sister of Jonathan Leete respectively , appeared . The women identified the Leetes ' effects , testified to their relationship with Jackalow , and stated that they had never known him to carry so much money . Upon seeing the women , Jackalow burst into tears and requested to speak with them . Jackalow 's lawyer , William Voorhees , refused to allow Jackalow to speak to anyone without his consent . 
 Chas . H. Ross and Mr. <unk> then testified to the articles he recovered from the Spray . The prosecutor , William H. Jelliffe , asked for another adjournment to await the arrival of Willis to testify to the collision . Voorhees opposed the adjournment and moved for Jackalow 's immediate release on the ground that there was no jurisdiction because no crime had been proved to have been committed . <unk> replied that he intended to charge murder , piracy , and running away with a vessel with intent to steal it . Vroom granted an adjournment until Tuesday at 11 am . Jackalow was remanded to the city prison . 
 On Monday , April 4 , U.S. Attorney Garret S. Cannon took over the prosecution and moved that Jackalow be transferred to the U.S. Marshall in the Essex County Jail . Voorhies again objected to jurisdiction , arguing that if the alleged murder was committed in the Long Island Sound it could only be tried in New York . Vroom on the other hand held that a showing of probable cause had been made . Further , he argued that he had jurisdiction on the grounds that the murder was committed between the state of New York and the Norwalk Islands , and Jackalow 's robbery had in any case continued until his arrival in Barnegat . Jackalow was remanded to Newark to await the decision of the grand jury . 
 Jackalow was still incarcerated in the Essex County Jail on July 21 . A reporter from the Newark Daily Advertiser visited Jackalow and found him to be intelligent , noting that he spent most of his time reading but was not proficient in spoken English . Jackalow protested his innocence to the reporter and explained that he was Japanese , from the Ryukyu Islands . 
 = = = Indictment = = = 
 Jackalow 's indictment , in the United States Circuit Court for the District of New Jersey , was scheduled for Tuesday , September 25 . Justice Robert Cooper Grier , riding circuit , and Judge Mahlon Dickerson , of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey , presided in Newark . Jackalow , having been moved to the Mercer jail , attended . U.S. Attorney Cannon stated that he needed three or four days to bring in witnesses from Connecticut and elsewhere . The grand jurors were sworn , and Justice Grier instructed them on the law , specifically the Act of 1820 , which provided : 
 If any person shall , upon the high seas , or in any open roadstead , or in any haven , basin or bay , or in any river where the sea ebbs and flows , commit the crime of robbery in or upon any of the ship 's company of any ship or vessel , or the lading thereof , such person shall be adjudged to be a pirate , and , being thereof convicted before any Circuit Court of the United States for the district into which he shall be brought , or in which he shall be found , shall suffer death . 
 Justice Grier further instructed the grand jury that it was unnecessary for the government to produce the corpse to prosecute a murder . But , on September 27 , while the grand jury was still sitting , Jonathan Leete 's clothed body was recovered in Goose Creek , Jamaica , Queens . The body was shown to the Leetes ' sister for identification , and a portion of the clothing was sent to his mother in Guilford for further identification , which was inconclusive . The forehead of the corpse bore " two distinct wounds , as if the result of blows from a hatchet or hammer . " The coroner cited the wounds as the cause of death . The Leete family offered their opinion that Elijah had been at the wheel , Jackalow at the lookout , and Jonathan asleep in the berth prior to the murders . ( It was the habit of the Leete brothers to sleep fully clothed . ) 
 On Saturday , October 6 , the grand jury heard testimony from Joseph Langdon , the crew of the Lucinda , and a carman from Brooklyn . At 9 am , the grand jury presented five bills of indictment against Jackalow : the murder of Jonathan Leete ; the murder of Elijah Leete ; the robbery of Jonathan Leete ; the robbery of Elijah Leete ; and running away with the Spray . Voorhees was joined by lawyer Isaac R. Wilson , of New York City , for Jackalow 's defense . Jackalow pleaded not guilty to each count . On the motion of U.S. Attorney Cannon , a special term of the circuit court was appointed to meet in Trenton , on the third Tuesday in January , to try the case . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The remaining , un @-@ <unk> petit jurors were discharged from the Trenton federal court on September 28 . Thus , Jackalow could have been tried no earlier than January 1861 . Jackalow 's trial was scheduled for January 15 , 1861 . 
 The trial was postponed until January 17 because Jackalow 's counsel was not served with the list of names of the jurors until the morning of January 15 , and federal law required that the panel be served two full days before trial . The government planned to call 34 witnesses , and to pay each $ 500 for their time . Jackalow moved to compel the attendance of Dr. Theodore R. <unk> , Robert J. Dalton , and Professor George Hammell Cook of Rutgers College . Voorhees and Wilson represented Jackalow , and the prosecution was conducted by U.S. Attorney Cannon and Andrew Dutcher . 
 The jury was <unk> on January 18 . The indictment was read and Cannon delivered his opening statement . Most of the evidence pertained to the robbery counts , resulting in speculation that the other counts would not even be tried if a robbery conviction could be obtained . 
 = = = Prosecution 's case = = = 
 On January 21 , four government witnesses testified . The testimony tended to prove that : the Spray was seen on March 15 with Jackalow and the Leetes aboard ; Jackalow was seen on the vessel alone on March 17 and 18 , heading to New York City ; Jackalow purchased supplies from a grocer in Brooklyn on March 19 with a roll of banknotes , including one $ 50 bill from the Mechanics Bank , and asked for change in coins . E. H. Grandin was added to the defense team , and J. W. Wiley acted as interpreter . 
 On January 22 , eleven government witnesses testified . The testimony tended to prove that : the Spray and Lucinda had collided ; Jackalow , brandishing a hatchet , had refused to allow anyone else aboard ; Capt. Webb had taken Jackalow aboard his ship to Newark ; Jackalow had applied for lodging in a cellar in Newark ; Jackalow had given two different names for himself in Egg Harbor when relating the fate of the Leetes ; he had bought supplies in New York City and Brooklyn . At the close of evidence , the government had examined 17 witnesses , half the number for which it had issued subpoenas . 
 On January 23 , six government witnesses testified . The testimony tended to prove that : Jackalow had offered $ 60 for a boat , intending to catch bluefish ; two witnesses had pursued Jackalow after the account of the Leetes ' death was published ; Jackalow was found on the Newark Plank Road ; Jackalow had then claimed to be an East Indiaman named Sam Patch ; the bags of coins had been found on Jackalow . 
 On January 24 , 13 government witnesses testified . The testimony tended to prove that : Jackalow was found with $ 393 ; someone heard a " cry of murder on the Sound " on March 15 ; blood was found on the Spray in Jersey City . Jackalow also sought to compel the attendance of Bayard Taylor . Wiley , the interpreter , could barely understand Jackalow because his language was " not pure Chinese . " 
 On January 25 , five government witnesses testified , including Dr. Quidor and the Leetes ' mother and sister . Quidor testified that he had discovered blood on a ball of twine , although it had been painted over with vermilion . 
 On Monday , January 28 , the government examined one last witness and rested its case . The witness testified to what transpired before U.S. Commissioner Vroom after Jackalow 's arrest . 
 = = = Jackalow 's case = = = 
 Still on January 28 , Jackalow 's defense opened with Taylor 's evidence . He testified to having seen a person on the Perry Expedition in Japan who " resembled [ Jackalow ] very much , and he thought it was the same man . " Supposedly , Jackalow had been brought to the United States by Commodore Perry aboard the USS Mississippi . 
 At this point , Grandin moved for a judgment of acquittal for lack of jurisdiction . Because the incident took place between Norwalk and Hell Gate , Grandin argued that venue was improper in the District of New Jersey , as opposed to the Southern District of New York or District of Connecticut . Grandin also argued that the Long Island Sound was not on the " high seas " and thus that the indictment was defective . In rebuttal , Dutcher cited authorities that the Sound was " an arm of the sea . " The following day , Dutcher , followed by U.S. Attorney Cannon , argued that the Sound was " <unk> waters of the ocean outside the jaws of land . " In particular , Cannon cited the Amistad case ( 1841 ) and noted that the words " out of the jurisdiction of any particular State " had been removed in 1820 . Voorhees was given rebuttal . 
 Judge Dickerson stated that he was of the opinion that the Long Island Sound was not on the high seas . Rather than halt the trial , Dickerson proposed to have the jury return a special verdict , and , if Jackalow was convicted , to argue a motion for arrest of judgment before a " full bench " ( i.e. Dickerson plus Justice Grier riding circuit ) at the next term in March , and , if the panel was divided , to certify the question to the Supreme Court by certificate of division . 
 " [ W ] ithout a formal opening , " Voorhees called two more witnesses that day , " but nothing was elicited from them . " 
 = = = Closing arguments and instructions = = = 
 The defense rested on January 30 . Dutcher delivered the closing argument for the prosecution on the robbery charges , Grandin for the defense . On January 31 , Grandin concluded his argument , and Voorhees followed ; the murder charge had not been tried . Cannon delivered the prosecution 's rebuttal . Cannon concluded his " most able argument " the next day , February 1 . 
 Judge Dickerson instructed the jury to consider the two robbery charges only : " If the robbery was an after thought after the murder , it would be nothing more than larceny . If the murder was committed with the intention of taking the goods , then it was robbery . " And , Dickerson instructed , " [ i ] f they found the prisoner guilty , then they must also fix the locality of the robbery . " The jury left the courtroom at 4 pm . 
 = = = Verdict = = = 
 At 12 pm on February 2 , the jury found Jackalow guilty on the first robbery count and not guilty on the other counts in the indictment . As for the location , the jury found that the Spray " at that time was lying on the waters adjoining the State of Connecticut , between Norwalk Harbor and Westchester county , in the State of New @-@ York , and at a point five miles eastward from Lyon 's Point , one and a half miles from the Connecticut shore at low water mark . " The special verdict did not determine whether the place of the murder was Connecticut , New York , or the high seas . 
 One juror explained that he considered only the taking of Leete 's coat , and not their money , to have been proven . The value of the coat had been proven to be approximately $ 1 . 
 Grandin moved to set aside the verdict . The question of jurisdiction was set for argument before the full bench at the upcoming March term . 
 = = = Certificate of division = = = 
 Jackalow 's post @-@ trial motion was argued on April 4 before Judge Dickerson and Justice Grier . Anthony Q. Keasbey , Cannon 's successor as U.S. Attorney , appeared for the United States ; Grandin for Jackalow . Grandin put forward various reasons to arrest the judgment : 
 because the Judge refused to charge the jury as to the evidence of the ownership of the gold and silver ; because the Judge refused to charge the jury that the coat was taken from [ Jonathan Leete ] by violence ... because the first count of the indictment is uncertain and insufficient . To bring the case in this District , it should have appeared that the crime was committed out of the jurisdiction of any particular State ; because it does not appear in the count that the prisoner was found and brought within the district of the State of New @-@ Jersey ; because it was not shown in the verdict that the schooner Spray was an American vessel , and was owned by citizens of the United States ; because the indictment charges piracy , but in the verdict only robbery is specified , and it does not specify that it was done on the high seas ; because the indictment charges that the crime was done on the water adjoining the State of Connecticut ; because it does not appear that it was done within the jurisdiction of this Court . 
 The argument concluded on April 6 . Dickerson persisted in his view that there was no jurisdiction , but Grier disagreed . The court certified the question to the Supreme Court by a certificate of division . 
 While the certificate was pending , a body believed to be that of Elijah Leete was discovered off the Norwalk Islands on August 21 . " It had evidently been a long time in the water , and the body had on thick clothing and oil cloth pants . " 
 = = Oral argument = = 
 The case was called before the Supreme Court on March 17 , 1862 . Attorney General Edward Bates announced that he was delegating the argument to U.S. Attorney Keasbey . Jackalow 's attorney was not present , and , by letter , requested a postponement . No postponement was forthcoming , and Reverdy Johnson volunteered to argue for Jackalow . 
 The case was argued on March 18 . Keasbey made an " able and exhaustive argument " for the United States . According to The New York Times , Johnson argued for Jackalow , although the United States Reports state that " no counsel appeared for Jackalow . " The opinion was to be delivered the following Monday , as the Court was to adjourn for the term on Tuesday . 
 = = Opinion = = 
 Article Three provides that " the Trial of all Crimes , except in Cases of Impeachment , shall be by Jury ; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed ; but when not committed within any State , the Trial shall be at such Place or Places as the Congress may by Law have directed . " Pursuant to the latter clause , the 1820 piracy statute provided that offenders of that statute could be tried in the " Circuit Court of the United States for the district into which he shall be brought , or in which he shall be found . " Further , more generally , § 14 of the Crimes Act of 1825 provided that " the trial of all offences which shall be committed upon the high seas or elsewhere , out of the limits of any state or district , shall be in the district where the offender is apprehended , or into which he may first be brought . " 
 Justice Samuel Nelson , for the unanimous Court , noted that , under Article Three , the New Jersey circuit court 's jurisdiction depended on two <unk> propositions : first , that Jackalow 's crime was not committed within any State ; and second , that Jackalow was first apprehended in New Jersey . Citing United States v. Dawson ( 1854 ) , the Court also noted that the Vicinage Clause required that crimes be tried in the district where committed , if and only if the crime was committed within a U.S. state . Further , the Court noted that , with the " high seas " crimes created by the Crimes Act of 1790 and Crimes Act of 1825 , " the question presented in this case could not arise , as the offence could not be committed within the limits of the State . " But , because offenses committed in " any open roadstead , or in any haven , basin , or bay , or in any river where the sea ebbs and flows " are not committed on the " high seas , " the Court held , these offenses must be prosecuted in conformity with the restrictions of the venue and vicinage clauses . 
 The Court noted that the jury was not asked to return a special verdict that decided whether Jackalow 's crime was committed within a state ; instead , Judge Dickerson had himself decided that the crime was committed within New York . Although the Court expressed no opinion on the boundary of New York , it noted that " two of the eminent judges of the highest court of the State of New York entertained different opinions on this question . " Instead , the Court prescribed the following procedure : 
 The boundary of a State , when a material fact in the determination of the extent of the jurisdiction of a court , is not a simple question of law . The description of a boundary may be a matter of construction , which belongs to the court ; but the application of the evidence in the ascertainment of it as thus described and interpreted , with a view to its location and settlement , belongs to the jury . All the testimony bearing upon this question , whether of maps , surveys , practical location , and the like , should be submitted to them under proper instructions to find the fact . 
 Thus , the Court directed the circuit court to set aside the special verdict and grant a new trial . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Jackalow 's fate = = = 
 At the time the Court 's opinion was announced , Jackalow was in the Mount Holly Jail in Burlington County , New Jersey . The New York Times misinterpreted the Court 's opinion as having " decided that the State of New @-@ York has no jurisdiction over the waters of Long Island Sound , where the murders were committed , and has advised the United States Circuit Court for New @-@ Jersey to proceed with the case . " Thus , the Times predicted that Jackalow would be sentenced and that his counsel would attempt a motion for a new trial " upon the ground of the illegality of the verdict . " Next , the Times falsely reported that Jackalow had been sentenced to death , and then that Judge Dickerson had " decided not to pass the sentence of death . " 
 On March 24 , 1863 , at the Court 's suggestion , the government filed a nolle prosequi motion and Jackalow was discharged . Jackalow was admonished to leave the country and never return , and he complied . Three years after Jackalow 's first trial , the government was unable to locate witnesses for a retrial and persisted in " [ d ] <unk> about the jurisdiction . " Justice Grier , again riding circuit , reportedly stated : " If the Supreme Court of the United States can 't make up its mind whether the place where the murder was committed was within the jurisdiction of the states or on the high seas , I am not going to come so near committing judicial murder as to set twelve men guessing at it . " 
 That April , Voorhees filed a writ of attachment against Jackalow for unpaid attorney 's fees , and the Leetes ' executors were said to be contemplating similar action . The $ 389 that Jackalow was carrying at the time of his arrest eventually went to his lawyers . 
 = = = As a precedent = = = 
 The rule of Jackalow generally remains good law , but to obtain reversal of a criminal conviction for failure to submit the issue of venue to the jury , venue must have been " in issue " and the defendant must have timely objected . Lower courts differ over the precise contours of when venue is " in issue . " Because the government need only prove venue by a preponderance of the evidence , and because the jury often implicitly finds facts establishing venue by convicting the defendant , such errors are often harmless . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Mark Lender cites Jackalow , decided during the American Civil War , as evidence that , " even amid the emotion of war , " Judge Dickerson and Justice Grier " still preferred jurisprudence grounded in established procedures . " Lender also argues that " Jackalow ... provided something of a perspective on the nature of federal jurisprudence in a time of extraordinary national crisis " by providing " generally fair and efficient proceedings " to " controversial defendants . " 
 In part , Jackalow " attracted considerable attention " because " [ w ] ith the nation at war , the federal government properly was concerned with its authority at sea and the safety of American shipping , even though the case was not directly related to the rebellion . " 
 = An Unforgettable Summer = 
 An Unforgettable Summer ( French : Un été <unk> ; Romanian : O <unk> de <unk> ) is a 1994 drama film directed and produced by Lucian Pintilie . A Romanian @-@ French co @-@ production based on a chapter from a novel by Petru Dumitriu , it stars British actress Kristin Scott Thomas as the Hungarian @-@ born aristocrat Marie @-@ Thérèse Von Debretsy . Her marriage with Romanian Land Forces captain Petre Dumitriu brings her to Southern Dobruja ( present @-@ day northeastern Bulgaria ) , where they settle in 1925 . There , she witnesses first @-@ hand the violent clashes between , on one hand , the Greater Romanian administration , and , on the other , <unk> brigands of Macedonian origin and ethnic Bulgarian locals . The film shows her failed attempt to rescue Bulgarians held hostage by the Romanian soldiers , and who are destined for execution . An Unforgettable Summer also stars Claudiu Bleonţ as Captain Dumitriu and Marcel <unk> as Ipsilanti , a general whose unsuccessful attempt to seduce Von Debretsy and the resulting grudge he holds against the couple account for Dumitriu 's reassignment . 
 Completed in the context of the Yugoslav wars , the film constitutes an investigation into the consequences of xenophobia and state @-@ sanctioned repression , as well as an indictment of a failure in reaching out . It is thus often described as a verdict on the history of Romania , as well as on problems facing the Balkans at large , and occasionally described as a warning that violence could also erupt in a purely Romanian context . 
 Released by MK2 Productions , An Unforgettable Summer was financed by the Council of Europe 's Eurimages fund for continental cinema . In the United States and elsewhere , it was made available on limited release . Other actors credited in secondary roles include George Constantin as General <unk> , Răzvan <unk> as Colonel <unk> , Olga <unk> as Madame <unk> , Cornel <unk> , Carmen <unk> , Dorina Lazăr , Mihai Constantin and Ioan Gyuri Pascu . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film 's plot , which develops as a flashback narrated by Dumitriu 's young son , opens with what American film magazine Variety called " a mad gallop , with the camera in the saddle , giving viewers a crash course in regional rivalries circa 1925 . " In the opening scenes , Romanian authorities are shown to be frantically engaged in shutting down a brothel , whose presence they believe would embarrass local high society at a time when a grand ball is set to take place . This scandalized prostitutes include the Hungarian Erzsi , who is also a communist sympathizer , and who irritates the officials by shouting out insults and mooning them through a window . During the latter scene , John Simon notes , Land Forces officers are shown staring up " in mixed horror and admiration at the familiar globe whose owner they promptly identify . " As she is beaten up by the soldiers , Erzsi continues to defy her aggressors by shouting up revolutionary slogans coined under the Hungarian Soviet Republic . 
 The film then centers on the gala , which is attended by the Dumitrius and offers the setting for Von Debretsy 's rejection of General Ipsilanti 's advances . The characters ' backgrounds are explained through the gossip of Madame <unk> , a distant relative of Von Debretsy , who is attending the event . The spectators are thus told that Von Debretsy is the daughter of a Romanian boyaress and a member of the Hungarian aristocracy , and that she is held in contempt by the local <unk> . In parallel , Ipsilanti himself is shown to be not just a military commander , but also as a prince . 
 Film historian Anne Jäckel describes the story as dealing with " the slow descent into Hell of two honest , liberal people . " The two persons are the short and <unk> Captain Dumitriu and his sophisticated wife . Confronted with the general 's spiteful decision , they find themselves isolated to a garrison in a land frequently raided by Macedonian <unk> , in rebellion against Romanian rule . Initially shocked by the cultural clash , Von Debretsy , a mother of three , attempts to adapt her aristocratic lifestyle to the new requirements , but manages to make herself stand out when she continues to seek a life of luxury . French critic Sylvie <unk> argues that this attempt to " tame the world " by erecting " frontiers " is a central aspect of An Unforgettable Summer . 
 While Petre Dumitriu is motivated by his pursuit of discipline , his wife preserves her sophistication , reading the works of Marcel Proust , playing the harpsichord , employing a nanny to educate her children , and comparing the surrounding landscape with Japan 's Mount Fuji . Variety calls her " sensitive @-@ yet @-@ flamboyant in the mold of Zelda Fitzgerald " . To her husband 's assurance that they were not going to spend long in Southern Dobruja , she replies : " I like it here . " In pursuing this path , she only manages to widen the gap between her and most other characters . This rift is made apparent by a number of omens : unknown attackers through rocks into the Dumitrius ' house , while the vegetables she planted in the garden prove unpalatable . Confronted with these signs , Von Debretsy still attempts to make the best of the situation ; online film critic James Berardinelli notes : " [ She ] does her best to make a happy home for her family , despite stray bullets that shatter mirrors . " Bulgarian locals , taken as hostages by the military , are made to work on the garden . Their labor brings immediate improvement to the crop , and , upset by their condition , Marie @-@ Thérèse decides to pay them out of her own pocket , serves them tea and eventually befriends them . In a scene that provided the original title for Petru Dumitriu 's book chapter ( " The Salad " ) , she invites Ipsilanti and other officers to dinner , and they are all shown to be enjoying the salad provided by Bulgarian labor . However , the episode also renews tensions between Ipsilanti and his Hungarian host , when she expresses her appreciation of her servants ' work and attempts to intervene on their behalf . 
 As a result of one Macedonian incursion , during which border guards are killed , Dumitriu is ordered to round up and execute a number of his Bulgarian prisoners . Horrified by this random reprisal , Marie @-@ Thérèse strives to have them pardoned and released , but her plea only serves to irritate her husband 's superiors . Her husband alienates his superiors further when he asks for the execution order to be ratified through official channels , whereas they would prefer an extrajudicial killing . The resulting toll on Dumitriu 's career means that they are forced to leave Southern Dobruja , shortly before which the captain 's colleagues make public their resentment of the couple . The captain feels dishonored when an angry General <unk> draws a comparison between Von Debretsy and the prostitute Erzsi and stresses that , as Hungarians , both women are natural suspects in Romania . It is a result of this that Dumitriu decides to commit suicide , unable to decide whether to shoot himself in the mouth or in the temple , and ultimately falling of the stool ( which his mare had chewed on ) and weeping uncontrollably . This episode , Simon points out , was not present in the original text , and was invented by Pintilie to underline the degradation his character undergoes in order to survive . In what is one of the closing scenes , Marie @-@ Thérèse is stoned by those Bulgarian women whose husbands had been executed . 
 = = Production = = 
 Together with its predecessor Balanţa , which is sometimes seen as Pintilie 's greatest success , An Unforgettable Summer is one of the director 's main films of the 1990s . During the previous decade , his work had been censored by the communist regime , which came to an end during the Romanian Revolution of 1989 . The two films are thus among the first in which Pintilie was allowed to express himself freely . The New York Times chronicler Caryn James writes : " His return [ with An Unforgettable Summer ] has added a significant name to the list of world film makers . " 
 The two films were both produced with assistance from Eurimages , and were donated production funds from French private ventures , as well as from the French state . The credited producers of the film also include the television stations La Sept and Canal Plus , the Romanian Ministry of Culture 's Studio of Film Production and the French Ministry of Culture 's Centre national de la <unk> , the Romanian firm Filmex , as well as filmmakers Marin <unk> and Constantin Popescu . 
 The screenplay , written by Pintilie , was based on the Petru Dumitriu 's novel <unk> de <unk> ( " Family Chronicle " ) , and in particular on its chapter <unk> ( " The Salad " ) , which is often described as a stand @-@ alone novella . Reportedly , the director wished to use <unk> as the film 's title , but the name was imposed on him during production . An Unforgettable Summer differs from the original story by adding an English education to Marie @-@ Thérèse Von Debretsy 's background , in what American film critic John Simon indicates is intended to explain the Oxford accent Scott Thomas uses in her Romanian @-@ language lines , and to allow the actress to express herself in English during several scenes . 
 = = Political themes = = 
 = = = An Unforgettable Summer and Yugoslavia = = = 
 Berardinelli describes the film as " simple and stark " , while Romanian journalist and film critic <unk> <unk> places stress on its " classical " feel . Variety contrasted its technique with that used in <unk> , concluding that the latter was characterized by " rambunctious razzle @-@ dazzle " . James defines the former as a " complicated black comedy " , arguing that the 1994 film is " simpler , often lyrical and far more accessible . " 
 An Unforgettable Summer was especially noted for its depiction of oppression , nationalism and xenophobia , and for its investigation of violence in both interwar Romania and the Balkans . It is also connected with the end of Communist Yugoslavia and the onset of the Yugoslav wars : Lucian Pintilie once stated that he had been inspired by this outcome when filming on location , and continued to refer to it in later interviews . 
 According to Jäckel , An Unforgettable Summer has a prophetic role to play within the Balkan context , one she equates with that of Jean @-@ Luc Godard 's La <unk> , which is credited by others with having offered a glimpse into the French revolutionary environment that was to be responsible for the May 1968 events . Writing shortly after the film 's release , John Simon specifically linked the plot with the 1992 – 95 civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina , proposing that " it may even explain " what had sparked this conflict ; likewise , American critic J. Hoberman places the film 's production in the context of the " <unk> Balkans " . 
 In 1999 , Jäckel noted : " [ Marie @-@ Thérèse Von Debretsy 's ] despair at the absurdity of destiny , and her powerlessness to change the situation , seem more relevant today than in 1993 , when the film was made . " Concluding that Pintilie 's message also displays criticism of " liberal incomprehension " for Balkan realities , she argues that the Western world 's intervention during situations of crisis , " after first denying and then ignoring the existence of evil " , bears resemblance to what Von Debretsy is attempting . In James Berardinelli 's view : " The basic impotence of the characters only emphasizes the real @-@ world difficulties faced by peacemakers . " 
 = = = Romanian historical setting = = = 
 Like Balanţa , An Unforgettable Summer is also seen as a comment on Romanian history : while the former deals with Communist Romania and post @-@ 1989 events , the latter is an investigation into the legacy of nationalism and anti @-@ liberalism in Romanian society . Jäckel writes : " Pintilie is convinced that nothing can change until fundamental questions are asked , and that it is only when a nation starts facing its past , that it can move into adulthood . " She believes this focus on revisiting past events is also evident in other Romanian cinema productions of the 1990s , in particular films by Radu <unk> . Caryn James argues that , through its references to the Hungarian Soviet Republic and its impact in Romania , the film can serve as a guide to the start of communism , just as Balanţa is a depiction of its outcome . Through the means of dialogues in the film , the viewer is informed that communism has had an actual impact on Marie @-@ Thérèse : her father allowed the Hungarian revolutionaries to split up his estate , but , for all his generosity , was killed by them . 
 Tronaru also points out that An Unforgettable Summer stays true to Pintilie 's condemnation of Romanian administrative tradition , with officials displaying " an inveterate stupidity " , while J. Hoberman , who emphasizes the Romanian administrators ' brutality and describes them as " operetta soldiers " , praises the film for undermining nostalgia for " the Good All Days " . In parallel , the remoteness of the Southern Dobrujan location and the clash of values have prompted Hoberman to compare the film with Fort Apache , a 1948 western by John Ford . 
 Lucian Pintilie himself notes that Dumitriu 's book , authored during the internationalist stage of communism , and before nationalism made a comeback with the rule of Nicolae Ceauşescu , is valid as a critique of interwar realities . According to <unk> Tronaru , the book chapter on which the film was based was itself controversial , and seen by many as " indigestible " . Tronaru writes : " the film was made during the bloody Yugoslav conflict , but Pintilie is telling us [ Romanians ] not to tune out believing we are somehow better , that , if need be , we could be just as bloodthirsty as our shunned neighbors . " 
 Pintilie indicates that his interest was in showing the violent intrusion of an " oppressive mass " of Romanians into a world peopled by Bulgarian peasants , describing the latter as " natural cultivators of that land , with a special genius for vegetables — innocent ones , without any political or national consciousness . " A second area of interest was the Bulgarian government 's manipulation of Macedonians living in the region , resulting in " a lucrative bloody tension on the border " and " a political and historical crime that the Romanian and Bulgarian governments are building together . " Elsewhere , he had indicated : " In An Unforgettable Summer the Bulgarian peasants have no consciousness of ethnic difference : they are executed simply because examples must be set . " The Macedonian brigands are a mysterious presence throughout the film , and their actual ethnicity , unlike their loyalty to the Bulgarian state , is never specified . According to Simon , they are themselves multi @-@ ethnic , while Pintilie states that they include resettled Aromanians . This blurring of ethnic division lines is also present among Captain Dumitriu 's hostages : one of them is shown to be a Turk , and is unable to speak Bulgarian . 
 Although the film develops on these themes of oppression , both the narrator and Pintilie look back on the age of Greater Romania with a dose of nostalgia . Simon writes : " What was the most horrible summer in the life of a young mother , driving her to drink and wasting away , was for her small son the most <unk> lovely season of his life . " Variety argues : " The frantic crescendo of the final sequence has an eerie resonance , as the narrator 's final remarks reframe all that has gone before in a different , deeply ironic light . " Discussing this aspect , Pintilie stated : " Maybe I 'm even a bit perverse to begin the film in a light and playful way : people fall into the trap of thinking it 's not a serious film . " 
 In a 1994 interview , Lucian Pintilie expanded on the issues central to the film by drawing a parallel with his own childhood in a multi @-@ ethnic part of Bessarabia . He noted that , before World War II 's Operation Barbarossa , when Nazi German troops began rounding up and executing members of various communities , the region did not experience " racial tension " . Despite his fondness for the interwar period , the director added : " I believe that an artist should not be a hostage to his own political convictions . If the Romanians are shown as intolerant , at least once , it has to be discussed . Each person , in this ethnic madness , must clean his own doorstep . " 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Although available only on limited release in many parts of the Western world , Lucian Pintilie 's production has attracted significant interest abroad , and was granted a special reception at the Telluride Film Festival . John Simon describes the film as " witty , harrowing , wonderful " , and , in one of his comparative essays on cinema traditions , lists it among the most notable European works of 1994 ( alongside Yves Angelo 's Colonel Chabert and Nanni Moretti 's Caro <unk> ) . His colleague Hoberman added the film to a " 10 Best " list for 1994 . Berardinelli draws a parallel between An Unforgettable Summer and Before the Rain , by Macedonian director <unk> <unk> , noting that , for all the difference in setting and approach , they deal with similar subjects . He writes : " If nothing else , these two pictures taken together underline the unhappy truth that , in the Balkans , little has changed over the past seventy years . " 
 An Unforgettable Summer was the first major production to star Scott Thomas , and the last film to star George Constantin ( who died soon after ) . It also featured the critically acclaimed presence of comedian Ioan Gyuri Pascu . Tronaru praises both Bleonţ and Scott Thomas for their performance , while Berardinelli objects to their seeming aloofness , arguing that a connection between the audience and the actors in the main roles could prove " tenuous " . In contrast with the latter commentator , Variety notes : " The actress gives a properly flighty dimension to the loving wife and mom whose flair for putting a joyous spin on things is forever impaired by the looming atrocity she feels powerless to halt . " Caryn James writes : " An Unforgettable Summer would have been more trenchant if Petre 's character had been more fully developed . But Marie @-@ Therese is , deliberately , the apolitical soul of the film , shifting the focus from politics to the humanity that transcends border disputes and ethnic loyalties . Ms. Scott @-@ Thomas makes the film work because she shows Marie @-@ Therese to be something other than a shallow woman playing Lady Bountiful . She is sincere , rather helpless and , finally , shaken with disillusionment . Neither pure heroine nor villain , by the end she is unable to escape the murderous impact of politics . " Variety also commends Răzvan <unk> for his performance in the role of Colonel <unk> , " an opportunistic soldier who has no <unk> about anything the military life may require " , and comments favorably on the soundtrack composed by Anton <unk> and on Paul <unk> 's production design . 
 Discussing Captain Dumitriu 's suicide attempt , John Simon writes : " It is visually stunning and emotionally shattering , but it may be a bit too theatrical . Still , with such writing , directing , and acting — most prominently from Kristin Scott @-@ Thomas and Claudiu Bleonţ as the Dumitrius , but also from the rest — what is a small faux pas ? This film resonates in the memory , insistently and <unk> . " Simon also discusses the cinematography , arguing that Călin Ghibu 's use of lighting manages to convey the " almost unearthly beauty at sunset " , which helps viewers understand why Scott Thompson 's character uses Mount Fuji as her preferred metaphor for the place . Of this aspect , James notes : " Like its heroine , the film 's serene and beautiful appearance masks a powerful conscience . " 
 The overall positive reception offered by the critics did not materialize in significant box @-@ office success or international awards : An Unforgettable Summer unsuccessfully completed for the Palme d 'Or during the 1994 Cannes Film Festival . Of the film 's implications and its reduced impact in Romania , Tronaru concludes : " The ravages of nationalism are the same regardless of the communities involved [ ... ] . Of course Pintilie 's uncomfortable message was not accepted in its essence , the film registering only the success of reverence [ towards the director ] . " Tronaru also notes that the film 's high standard of quality was a peak in Pintilie 's career , and that it was no longer reached by the director until 2001 , when he released <unk> @-@ <unk> unui <unk> . 
 Speaking in 1994 , Pintilie indicated that he was considering a sequel to the film , also based on Dumitriu 's writings . Planned for 1996 , it was to depict an aging and jealous Marie @-@ Thérèse , who intervenes in her son 's love life and chases away women who fancy him . 
 = On Growth and Form = 
 On Growth and Form is a book by the Scottish mathematical biologist D 'Arcy Wentworth Thompson ( 1860 – 1948 ) . The book is long – 793 pages in the first edition of 1917 , 1116 pages in the second edition of 1942 . 
 The book covers many topics including the effects of scale on the shape of animals and plants , large ones necessarily being relatively thick in shape ; the effects of surface tension in shaping soap films and similar structures such as cells ; the logarithmic spiral as seen in mollusc shells and ruminant horns ; the arrangement of leaves and other plant parts ( phyllotaxis ) ; and Thompson 's own method of transformations , showing the changes in shape of animal skulls and other structures on a Cartesian grid . 
 The work is widely admired by biologists , anthropologists and architects among others , but less often read than cited . Peter Medawar explains this as being because it clearly pioneered the use of mathematics in biology , and helped to defeat mystical ideas of vitalism ; but that the book is weakened by Thompson 's failure to understand the role of evolution and evolutionary history in shaping living structures . Philip Ball on the other hand suspects that while Thompson argued for physical mechanisms , his rejection of natural selection bordered on vitalism . 
 = = Overview = = 
 D 'Arcy Wentworth Thompson 's most famous work , On Growth and Form was written in Dundee , mostly in 1915 , but publication was put off until 1917 because of the delays of wartime and Thompson 's many late alterations to the text . The central theme of the book is that biologists of its author 's day overemphasized evolution as the fundamental determinant of the form and structure of living organisms , and <unk> the roles of physical laws and mechanics . At a time when vitalism was still being considered as a biological theory , he advocated structuralism as an alternative to natural selection in governing the form of species , with the smallest hint of vitalism as the unseen driving force . 
 Thompson had previously criticized Darwinism in his paper Some Difficulties of Darwinism . On Growth and Form explained in detail why he believed Darwinism to be an inadequate explanation for the origin of new species . He did not reject natural selection , but regarded it as secondary to physical influences on biological form . 
 Using a mass of examples , Thompson pointed out correlations between biological forms and mechanical phenomena . He showed the similarity in the forms of jellyfish and the forms of drops of liquid falling into viscous fluid , and between the internal supporting structures in the hollow bones of birds and well @-@ known engineering truss designs . He described phyllotaxis ( numerical relationships between spiral structures in plants ) and its relationship to the Fibonacci sequence . 
 Perhaps the most famous part of the book is Chapter 17 , " The Comparison of Related Forms , " where Thompson explored the degree to which differences in the forms of related animals could be described , in work inspired by the German engraver Albrecht Dürer ( 1471 – 1528 ) , by mathematical transformations . 
 The book is descriptive rather than experimental science : Thompson did not articulate his insights in the form of hypotheses that can be tested . He was aware of this , saying that " This book of mine has little need of preface , for indeed it is ' all preface ' from beginning to end . " 
 = = Editions = = 
 The first edition appeared in 1917 with 793 pages , published by Cambridge University Press . The second , enlarged edition appeared in 1942 , with 1116 pages ; it extended many of the chapters somewhat but did not significantly change Thompson 's thesis . Since then it has been reprinted and abridged many times , including in 1943 , 1944 , 1945 , 1948 , 1951 , 1952 , 1959 , 1961 , 1963 , 1966 , 1967 , 1968 , 1969 , 1971 , 1972 , 1973 , 1977 , 1979 , 1980 , 1981 , 1983 , 1984 , 1986 , 1987 , 1988 , 1990 , 1992 , 1994 , 1995 , 1997 , 1999 , 2000 , 2003 , 2004 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 and 2014 . It has thus been in print continuously since the Second World War . The book has been translated into German , Spanish , French , and Greek . The 1961 edition , skilfully abridged down to 346 pages by John Tyler Bonner , presents the essence of Thompson 's argument . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The contents of the chapters in the first edition are summarized below . All but Chapter 11 have the same titles in the second edition , but many are longer , as indicated by the page numbering of the start of each chapter . Bonner 's abridgment shortened all the chapters , and removed some completely , again as indicated at the start of each chapter 's entry below . 
 = = = 1 . Introductory = = = 
 ( 1st edition p1 - 2nd edition p1 - Bonner p1 ) 
 Thompson names the progress of chemistry towards Kant 's goal of a mathematical science able to explain reactions by molecular mechanics , and points out that zoology has been slow to look to mathematics . He agrees that zoologists rightly seek for reasons in animals ' adaptations , and reminds readers of the related but far older philosophical search for teleology , explanation by some Aristotelian final cause . His analysis of " growth and form " will try to show how these can be explained with ordinary physical laws . 
 = = = 2 . On Magnitude = = = 
 ( 1st p16 - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Thompson begins by showing that an animal 's surface and volume ( or weight ) increase with the square and cube of its length , respectively , and deducing simple rules for how bodies will change with size . He shows in a few short equations that the speed of a fish or ship rises with the square root of its length . He then derives the slightly more complex scaling laws for birds or aircraft in flight . He shows that an organism thousands of times smaller than a bacterium is essentially impossible . 
 = = = 3 . The Rate of Growth = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner removed ) 
 Thompson points out that all changes of form are phenomena of growth . He analyses growth curves for man , noting rapid growth before birth and again in the teens ; and then curves for other animals . In plants , growth is often in pulses , as in <unk> , peaks at a specific temperature , and below that value roughly doubles every 10 degrees Celsius . Tree growth varies cyclically with season ( less strongly in evergreens ) , preserving a record of historic climates . Tadpole tails regenerate rapidly at first , slowing exponentially . 
 = = = 4 . On the Internal Form and Structure of the Cell = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner removed ) 
 Thompson argues for the need to study cells with physical methods , as morphology alone had little explanatory value . He notes that in mitosis the dividing cells look like iron filings between the poles of a magnet , in other words like a force field . 
 = = = 5 . The Forms of Cells = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 He considers the forces such as surface tension acting on cells , and Plateau 's experiments on soap films . He illustrates the way a splash breaks into droplets and compares this to the shapes of <unk> zoophytes ( Hydrozoa ) . He looks at the flask @-@ like shapes of single @-@ celled organisms such as species of <unk> , considering teleological and physical explanations of their having minimal areas ; and at the hanging drop shapes of some Foraminifera such as <unk> . He argues that the cells of trypanosomes are similarly shaped by surface tension . 
 = = = 6 . A Note on Adsorption = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner removed ) 
 Thompson notes that surface tension in living cells is reduced by substances resembling oils and soaps ; where the concentrations of these vary locally , the shapes of cells are affected . In the green alga <unk> ( <unk> ) , potassium is concentrated near growing points in the cell . 
 = = = 7 . The Forms of Tissues , or Cell @-@ aggregates = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Thompson observes that in multicellular organisms , cells influence each other 's shapes with triangles of forces . He analyses parenchyma and the cells in a frog 's egg as soap films , and considers the symmetries bubbles meeting at points and edges . He compares the shapes of living and fossil corals such as <unk> and <unk> , and the hexagonal structure of honeycomb , to such soap bubble structures . 
 = = = 8 . The same ( continued ) = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner merged with previous chapter ) 
 Thompson considers the laws governing the shapes of cells , at least in simple cases such as the fine hairs ( a cell thick ) in the rhizoids of mosses . He analyses the geometry of cells in a frog 's egg when it has divided into 4 , 8 and even 64 cells . He shows that uniform growth can lead to unequal cell sizes , and argues that the way cells divide is driven by the shape of the dividing structure ( and not vice versa ) . 
 = = = 9 . On <unk> , Spicules , and <unk> Skeletons = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Thompson considers the skeletal structures of diatoms , <unk> , foraminifera and sponges , many of which contain hard spicules with geometric shapes . He notes that these structures form outside living cells , so that physical forces must be involved . 
 = = = 10 . A <unk> Note on <unk> = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner removed ) 
 Thompson applies the use of the geodetic line , " the shortest distance between two points on the surface of a solid of revolution " , to the spiral thickening of plant cell walls and other cases . 
 = = = 11 . The Logarithmic Spiral [ ' The <unk> Spiral ' in 2nd Ed . ] = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Thompson observes that there are many spirals in nature , from the horns of ruminants to the shells of molluscs ; other spirals are found among the florets of the sunflower . He notes that the mathematics of these are similar but the biology differs . He describes the spiral of Archimedes before moving on to the logarithmic spiral , which has the property of never changing its shape : it is <unk> and is continually self @-@ similar . Shells as diverse as <unk> , Triton , <unk> and Nautilus ( illustrated with a halved shell and a radiograph ) have this property ; different shapes are generated by sweeping out curves ( or arbitrary shapes ) by rotation , and if desired also by moving downwards . Thompson analyses both living molluscs and fossils such as ammonites . 
 = = = 12 . The Spiral Shells of the Foraminifera = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner merged with previous chapter ) 
 Thompson analyses diverse forms of minute spiral shells of the foraminifera , many of which are logarithmic , others irregular , in a manner similar to the previous chapter . 
 = = = 13 . The Shapes of Horns , and of Teeth or Tusks : with A Note on <unk> = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Thompson considers the three types of horn that occur in quadrupeds : the keratin horn of the rhinoceros ; the paired horns of sheep or goats ; and the bony antlers of deer . 
 In a note on torsion , Thompson mentions Charles Darwin 's treatment of climbing plants which often spiral around a support , noting that Darwin also observed that the spiralling stems were themselves twisted . Thompson disagrees with Darwin 's teleological explanation , that the twisting makes the stems stiffer in the same way as the twisting of a rope ; Thompson 's view is that the mechanical adhesion of the climbing stem to the support sets up a system of forces which act as a ' couple ' offset from the centre of the stem , making it twist . 
 = = = 14 . On Leaf @-@ arrangement , or Phyllotaxis = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner removed ) 
 Thompson analyses phyllotaxis , the arrangement of plant parts around an axis . He notes that such parts include leaves around a stem ; fir cones made of scales ; sunflower florets forming an elaborate crisscrossing pattern of different spirals ( <unk> ) . He recognises their beauty but dismisses any mystical notions ; instead he remarks that 
 When the bricklayer builds a factory chimney , he lays his bricks in a certain steady , orderly way , with no thought of the spiral patterns to which this orderly sequence inevitably leads , and which spiral patterns are by no means " subjective " . 
 The numbers that result from such spiral arrangements are the Fibonacci sequence of ratios 1 / 2 , 2 / 3 , 3 @.@ 5 ... converging on 0 @.@ <unk> ... , the golden ratio which is 
 beloved of the circle @-@ squarer , and of all those who seek to find , and then to penetrate , the secrets of the Great Pyramid . It is deep @-@ set in Pythagorean as well as in Euclidean geometry . 
 = = = 15 . On the Shapes of Eggs , and of certain other Hollow Structures = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner removed ) 
 Eggs are what Thompson calls simple solids of revolution , varying from the nearly spherical eggs of owls through more typical ovoid eggs like chickens , to the markedly pointed eggs of cliff @-@ nesting birds like the guillemot . He shows that the shape of the egg favours its movement along the oviduct , a gentle pressure on the trailing end sufficing to push it forwards . Similarly , sea urchin shells have teardrop shapes , such as would be taken up by a flexible bag of liquid . 
 = = = 16 . On Form and Mechanical Efficiency = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Thompson criticizes talk of adaptation by coloration in animals for presumed purposes of crypsis , warning and mimicry ( referring readers to E. B. Poulton 's The Colours of Animals , and more sceptically to Abbott Thayer 's Concealing @-@ coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) . He considers the mechanical engineering of bone to be a far more definite case . He compares the strength of bone and wood to materials such as steel and cast iron ; illustrates the " cancellous " structure of the bone of the human femur with thin trabeculae which formed " nothing more nor less than a diagram of the lines of stress ... in the loaded structure " , and compares the femur to the head of a building crane . He similarly compares the cantilevered backbone of a quadruped or dinosaur to the girder structure of the Forth Railway Bridge . 
 = = = 17 . On the Theory of Transformations , or the Comparison of Related Forms = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 Inspired by the work of Albrecht Dürer , Thompson explores how the forms of organisms and their parts , whether leaves , the bones of the foot , human faces or the body shapes of copepods , crabs or fish , can be explained by geometrical transformations . For example : 
 Among the fishes we discover a great variety of deformations , some of them of a very simple kind , while others are more striking and more unexpected . A comparatively simple case , involving a simple shear , is illustrated by Figs . 373 and 374 . Fig . 373 represents , within Cartesian co @-@ ordinates , a certain little oceanic fish known as <unk> <unk> . Fig . 374 represents precisely the same outline , transferred to a system of oblique co @-@ ordinates whose axes are inclined at an angle of 70 ° ; but this is now ( as far as can be seen on the scale of the drawing ) a very good figure of an allied fish , assigned to a different genus , under the name of <unk> <unk> . Thompson 1917 , pages 748 – 749 
 In similar style he transforms the shape of the carapace of the crab <unk> variously to that of <unk> by a simple shear mapping , and to <unk> , <unk> , Lupa , and <unk> ( <unk> ) by stretching the top or bottom of the grid sideways . The same process changes Crocodilus porosus to Crocodilus americanus and <unk> terrestris ; relates the hip @-@ bones of fossil reptiles and birds such as Archaeopteryx and Apatornis ; the skulls of various fossil horses , and even the skulls of a horse and a rabbit . A human skull is stretched into those of the chimpanzee and baboon , and with " the mode of deformation .. on different lines " ( page 773 ) , of a dog . 
 = = = Epilogue = = = 
 ( 1st <unk> - 2nd <unk> - Bonner <unk> ) 
 In the brief epilogue , Thompson writes that he will have succeeded " if I have been able to shew [ the morphologist ] that a certain mathematical aspect of morphology ... is ... complementary to his descriptive task , and helpful , nay essential , to his proper study and comprehension of Form . " More lyrically , he writes that " For the harmony of the world is made manifest in Form and Number , and the heart and soul and all the poetry of Natural Philosophy are embodied in the concept of mathematical beauty " and quotes Isaiah 40 : 12 on measuring out the waters and heavens and the dust of the earth . He ends with a paragraph praising the French entomologist Jean @-@ Henri Fabre who " being of the same blood and marrow with Plato and Pythagoras , saw in Number ' la clef de <unk> ' [ the key to the vault ( of the universe ) ] and found in it ' le comment et le pourquoi des choses ' [ the how and the why of things ] " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 " <unk> " , reviewing the book in Science in 1917 , wrote that " the book is one of the strongest documents in support of the mechanistic view of life that has yet been put forth " , contrasting this with " vitalism " . The reviewer was interested in the " discussion of the physical factors determining the size of organisms , especially interesting being the consideration of the conditions which may determine the minimum size " . 
 J. W. Buchanan , reviewing the second edition in Physiological Zoology in 1943 , described it as " an imposing extension of his earlier attempt to formulate a geometry of Growth and Form " and " beautifully written " , but warned that " the reading will not be easy " and that " A vast store of literature has here been assembled and assimilated " . Buchanan summarizes the book , and notes that Chapter 17 " seems to the reviewer to contain the essence of the long and more or less leisurely thesis ... The chapter is devoted to comparison of related forms , largely by the method of co @-@ ordinates . Fundamental differences in these forms are thus revealed " , and Buchanan concludes that the large " gaps " indicate that Darwin 's endless series of continuous variations is not substantiated . But he does have some criticisms : Thompson should have referenced the effects of hormones on growth ; and the relation of molecular configuration and form ; genetics is barely mentioned , and experimental embryology and regeneration [ despite Thompson 's analysis of the latter ] are overlooked . The mathematics used consists of statistics and geometry , while thermodynamics is " largely absent " . 
 Edmund Mayer , reviewing the second edition in The Anatomical Record in 1943 , noted that the " scope of the book and the general approach to the problems dealt with have remained unchanged , but considerable additions have been made and large parts have been recast " . He was impressed at the extent to which Thompson had kept up with developments in many sciences , though he thought the mentions of quantum theory and Heisenberg uncertainly unwise . 
 George C. Williams , reviewing the 1942 edition and Bonner 's abridged edition for the Quarterly Review of Biology ( of which he was the editor ) , writes that the book is " a work widely praised , but seldom used . It contains neither original insights that have formed a basis for later advances nor instructive fallacies that have stimulated fruitful attack . This seeming paradox is brilliantly discussed by P. B. Medawar [ in ] Pluto 's Republic . " Williams then attempts a " gross simplification " of Medawar 's evaluation : 
 It was a compelling demonstration of how readily one can use physical and geometric principles in trying to understand biology . This was a major contribution in 1917 when vitalism was still being defended by prominent biologists . The battle was as won as it is ever likely to be by the time of the 1942 edition . The book was deficient because of Thompson 's lack of understanding of evolution and antipathy for any concepts of historical causation . " 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 The architects Philip Beesley and Sarah <unk> write that Thompson 's book at once became a classic " for its exploration of natural geometries in the dynamics of growth and physical processes . " They note the " extraordinary optimism " in the book , its vision of the world as " a symphony of harmonious forces " , and its huge range , including : 
 the laws governing the dimension of organisms and their growth , the statics and dynamics at work in cells and tissues including the phenomena of geometrical packing , membranes under tension , symmetries , and cell division ; as well as the engineering and geodesics of skeletons in simple organisms . 
 Beesley and <unk> observe that Thompson saw form " as a product of dynamic forces .. shaped by flows of energy and stages of growth . " They praise his " eloquent writing and exquisite illustrations " which have provided inspiration for artists and architects as well as scientists . 
 The statistician Cosma Shalizi writes that the book " has haunted all discussion of these matters ever since . " 
 Shalizi states that Thompson 's goal is to show that biology follows inevitably from physics , and to a degree also from chemistry . He argues that when Thompson says " the form of an object is a ' diagram of forces , ' " , Thompson means that we can infer from an object the physical forces that act ( or once acted ) upon it . Shalizi calls Thompson 's account of the physics of morphogenesis 
 ingenious , extremely elegant , very convincing and , significantly , aimed at very large features of the organism : the architecture of the skeleton , the curve of horns or shells , the outline of the organism as a whole . 
 Shalizi notes Thompson 's simplicity , explaining the processes of life " using little that a second @-@ year physics undergrad wouldn 't know . ( Thompson 's anti @-@ reductionist admirers seldom put it this way . ) " . He notes that Thompson deliberately avoided invoking natural selection as an explanation , and left history , whether of species or of an individual 's life , out of his account . He quotes Thompson 's " A snow @-@ crystal is the same today as when the first snows fell " : adding " so , too , the basic forces acting upon organisms " , and comments that we have forgotten other early twentieth century scientists who scorned evolution . In contrast , he argues , 
 Thompson owes his continuing influence to the fact that his alternative doesn 't beg questions at every turn . ( Also , of course , he wrote beautifully , better than the poets of his day . ) 
 The anthropologist Barry <unk> writes that Thompson 's book 
 is a tour de force combining the classical approaches of natural philosophy and geometry with modern biology and mathematics to understand the growth , form , and evolution of plants and animals . 
 <unk> observes that Thompson originated the use of transformational grids to measure growth in two dimensions , but that without modern computers the method was tedious to apply and was not often used . Even so , the book stimulated and lent intellectual validity to the new field of growth and development research . 
 Peter Coates recalls that 
 Peter Medawar famously called On Growth and Form " beyond comparison the finest work of literature in all the annals of science that have been recorded in the English tongue . " 
 Coates argues however that the book goes far beyond expressing knowledge elegantly and influentially , in a form " that can be read for pleasure by scientists and <unk> " ; it is in his view 
 one of the most peculiar and original works of modern science , advancing an idiosyncratic view of how organisms develop , a view that was deeply at odds with the intellectual climate of Thompson 's time ... and a textbook on how to think in any field . 
 The science writer Philip Ball observes that 
 Like Newton 's Principia , D ’ Arcy Thompson 's On Growth and Form is a book more often cited than read . " 
 Ball quotes the 2nd Edition 's epigraph by the statistician Karl Pearson : " I believe the day must come when the biologist will — without being a mathematician — not hesitate to use mathematical analysis when he requires it . " Ball argues that Thompson " presents mathematical principles as a shaping agency that may supersede natural selection , showing how the structures of the living world often echo those in inorganic nature " , and notes his " frustration at the ' Just So ' explanations of morphology offered by <unk> . " Instead , Ball argues , Thompson elaborates on how not heredity but physical forces govern biological form . Ball suggests that " The book 's central motif is the logarithmic spiral " , evidence in Thompson 's eyes of the universality of form and the reduction of many phenomena to a few principles of mathematics . 
 The philosopher of biology Michael Ruse wrote that Thompson " had little time for natural selection . " Instead , Thompson emphasised " the formal aspects of organisms " , trying to make a case for self @-@ organization through normal physical and chemical processes . Ruse notes that , following Aristotle , Thompson used as an example the morphology of jellyfish , which he explained entirely mechanically with the physics of a heavy liquid falling through a lighter liquid , avoiding natural selection as an explanation . Ruse is not sure whether Thompson believed he was actually breaking with " mechanism " , in other words adopting a vitalist ( ghost in the machine ) view of the world . In Ruse 's opinion , Thompson can be interpreted as arguing that " we can have completely mechanical explanations of the living world " – with the important proviso that Thompson apparently felt there was no need for natural selection . Ruse at once adds that " people like Darwin and Dawkins undoubtedly would disagree " ; they would insist that 
 the adaptive complexity that we see in the living world simply cannot be explained by physics and chemistry . If D 'Arcy Thompson thought otherwise , it can only be because in some way he was putting special direction into his physical models . He may not have been an explicit vitalist , but there is certainly the odor of spirit forces about what he claims . 
 = = Influence = = 
 For his revised On Growth and Form , Thompson was awarded the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal from the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1942 . 
 On Growth and Form has inspired thinkers including biologists Julian Huxley and Conrad Hal Waddington , mathematician Alan Turing and anthropologist Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss . The book has powerfully influenced architecture and has long been a set text on architecture courses . 
 On Growth and Form has inspired artists including Henry Moore , Richard Hamilton and Jackson Pollock . In 2011 the University of Dundee was awarded a £ 100 @,@ 000 grant by The Art Fund to build a collection of art inspired by his ideas and collections , much of which is displayed in the D 'Arcy Thompson Zoology Museum in Dundee . 
 = Harold B. Lee Library = 
 The Harold B. Lee Library ( HBLL ) , located in Provo , Utah , is the main academic library of Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , the largest religious and third @-@ largest private university in the United States . The library has approximately 98 miles ( 158 km ) of shelving for the more than 6 million items in its various collections , as well as a seating capacity for 4 @,@ 600 people . With over 10 @,@ 000 patrons entering the building each day , The Princeton Review consistently ranks the HBLL in the nation 's Top Ten University Libraries – # 1 in 2004 and # 3 in 2012 . Named for Harold B. Lee , former president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , the library 's motto is " ... Learning by study and also by faith . " 
 = = History = = 
 The HBLL began as a small collection of books kept in the office of Karl G. Maeser during his time as principal of then @-@ Brigham Young Academy . The small library relied almost exclusively on gifts , donations , and free material from the U.S. Government . When Maeser 's office was destroyed by a fire in 1884 , his library collection went with it . By the time the Education Building was completed in 1892 , a new library had been formed and a room was provided on the second floor of the new building . 
 The academy later became a university , which spurred the library 's growth until it filled the third floor and much of the second floor of the Education building . In July 1924 , the alumni association reported that $ 125 @,@ 000 had been appropriated to construct a new library building to be erected on University Hill . The new Heber J. Grant Library was subsequently dedicated on October 15 , 1925 with 40 @,@ 000 books and 35 @,@ 000 pamphlets were moved into their new home . 
 By 1950 , the collection had long since outgrown the Grant Library , and books were stored in almost all campus buildings . The lack of adequate space in the Grant Library lead to the location of libraries in other buildings on campus during the 1950s . The Physical Science Library was housed in the Eyring Science Center from the opening of that building in 1950 . In 1957 when the Joseph F. Smith Family Living Center was opened , it contained the life science library on the first floor and the music library on the third floor . The pre @-@ 1940 bound periodicals were being stored in the basement of BYU 's Joseph Smith Memorial Building . The reserve library was located in the David O. McKay Building , while the attics of the Maeser Building and the women 's gymnasium used for storage as well as a warehouse in downtown Provo . 
 Ernest L. Wilkinson appointed a faculty committee to survey library needs in January 1953 . As a result of the study , the J. Reuben Clark Library was constructed to help accommodate the growing collections of the Grant Library . In 1961 , 300 @,@ 000 volumes were moved into the Clark Library , although the building was not dedicated until October 10 , 1962 . 
 The new library was designed by Lorenzo Snow Young with Keyes D. Metcalf , Librarian @-@ emeritus of Harvard serving as a <unk> . It was built by the Garff , <unk> , and Garff Construction Company . Another key figure in the planning and building of the library was S. Lyman Tyler , who at the time was the director of the BYU Library . With the expansion of the library building came the expansion of the library collection . In 1971 the library celebrated the acquisition of their millionth volume with a conference on library acquisition and a luncheon for donors . 
 In 1973 , the name of the J. Reuben Clark Library was changed to the Harold B. Lee Library , in honor of the former president of the LDS Church . In order to keep up with the needs of the academic community and the church , construction began in 1974 on a library addition of 215 @,@ 000 square feet ( 20 @,@ 000 m2 ) . This addition was occupied in the summer of 1976 and dedicated March 15 , 1977 . 
 As the university continued to grow , so did the library collections and need for additional space . To help fill this need , ground was broken on September 20 , 1996 for another addition to the library . In the four years of construction , roughly 235 @,@ 000 square feet ( 21 @,@ 800 m2 ) were added to the library , most of it underground . When the new addition was dedicated on November 15 , 2000 , the library was 665 @,@ 000 square feet ( 61 @,@ 800 m2 ) . Since then , the library has focused more on digital expansion , adding access to several electronic books and scholarly databases from on- and off @-@ campus . Today , the library is supported by 351 full @-@ time equivalent employees . 
 = = Collections = = 
 The HBLL includes a family history library , the Primrose International Viola Archive , the International Harp Archives , and serves as a designated depository of government documents . In January 2010 the juvenile literature department opened its Lloyd Alexander Collection , featuring items from the author 's home office for students and researchers to access . 
 = = = Special Collections = = = 
 The L. Tom Perry Special Collections Library , named for an LDS Church apostle , preserves and makes available rare unique library materials in original and digital forms . Originally established in 1957 under the direction of Chad J. Flake , the library holds 350 @,@ 000 rare books and print matter , over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 photographs , and 10 @,@ 000 manuscript and archival collections . The library also offers numerous exhibits , lectures , tours , and conferences related to its holdings . The collection includes a 1967 Biblia Sacra illustrated by Salvador Dalí , a 1555 Biblia translated by Martin Luther , a 13th @-@ century hand @-@ copied Latin Vulgate Bible , a Turkish New Testament from 1905 , a page from the Bible produced by Johannes Gutenberg in about 1450 , and four first @-@ edition copies of the Book of Mormon . Other artifacts include four 4 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old cuneiform tablets , six Oscars , and ten Ansel Adams photographs . 
 In 1983 , after the commercial flop of The Magic of Lassie , Jimmy Stewart went into semi @-@ retirement and donated his papers , films , and other records to the HBLL . The library 's collections also include the Cecil B. DeMille papers . 
 = = = Foreign Language Collections = = = 
 The HBLL houses collections in many foreign languages . It houses a Welsh library originally sponsored in 1951 by the National <unk> Association of the United States and Canada . The Icelandic Library Association of Spanish Fork also donated their collection of Icelandic books in 1951 . 
 = = = Map Collection = = = 
 The map collection at the HBLL is located on the second floor and is considered " one of the best collections of printed maps in the area . " It contains approximately 240 @,@ 000 maps , 5 @,@ 500 atlases and gazetteers , and various online geographic resources . The map collection also contains a geospatial services and training lab which assists students and faculty with maps , data management , spatial analysis , and geographic information systems ( GIS ) . 
 = = Media attention = = 
 In July 2010 , the HBLL received nationwide attention for a parody on an Old Spice commercial that was filmed inside the library . In April 2011 , a cappella group Vocal Point recorded the music video for their rendition of " Jump , Jive , an ' Wail " in the HBLL . 
 = Action of 18 September 1810 = 
 The Action of 18 September 1810 was a naval battle fought between British Royal Navy and French Navy frigates in the Indian Ocean during the Napoleonic Wars . The engagement was one of several between rival frigate squadrons contesting control of the French island base of Île de France , from which French frigates had raided British trade routes during the war . The action came in the immediate aftermath of the Battle of Grand Port , in which four British frigates had been lost , and just four days after a fifth British frigate had been captured and subsequently recaptured in the Action of 13 September 1810 . In consequence of the heavy losses the British force had suffered , reinforcements were hastily rushed to the area and became individual targets for the larger French squadron blockading the British base at Île Bourbon . 
 HMS Ceylon had been despatched by the British authorities at Madras after the Battle of Grand Port to reinforce the remains of the squadron under Commodore Josias Rowley on Île Bourbon . Searching for Rowley off Île de France , Ceylon was spotted by French Commodore Jacques Hamelin who gave chase in his flagship Vénus , supported by a corvette . Vénus was faster than Ceylon , and although Captain Charles Gordon almost reached the safety of Île Bourbon , he was run down and forced to engage the French ship during the night , both frigates inflicting severe damage on one another before the wounded Gordon surrendered to the approaching corvette . As dawn broke , Rowley 's flagship HMS Boadicea arrived , recaptured Ceylon , drove off the corvette and forced the battered French flagship to surrender , capturing Hamelin . This was the last ship @-@ to @-@ ship action in the region before the successful invasion of Île de France in December 1810 : without Hamelin the French squadron , short on supplies and low on morale , did not contest British control of the region and failed to even attempt to disrupt the invasion fleet . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French Indian Ocean island bases of Île de France and Île Bonaparte had been ideal positions from which French cruisers could raid the valuable trade routes from Britain to India since the start of the war in 1803 . However , it was not until 1808 that the French authorities spared a significant force to operate from the region , providing a squadron of four frigates under Commodore Jacques Hamelin . In 1809 and early 1810 , these frigates operated with impunity along British trade routes , capturing seven valuable East Indiamen , a number of smaller merchant ships and several small warships . In response , the British admiral at the Cape of Good Hope , Albemarle Bertie , provided a small force of British warships to blockade the islands under Commodore Josias Rowley . Rowley knew that it would be almost impossible find and defeat the French ships out in the wider ocean with his limited resources , but he was able to limit French effectiveness by attacking their bases , raiding Saint Paul harbour in 1809 and capturing Île Bonaparte in 1810 , renaming it Île Bourbon . 
 In August 1810 , a squadron of four of Rowley 's frigates , making up the majority of the forces under his command and led by Captain Samuel Pym , were despatched to Île de France to blockade Grand Port on the south @-@ eastern coast . The arrival of a French squadron under Captain Guy @-@ Victor Duperré on 20 August prompted Pym into ordering an inadequately planned attack on the harbour on 23 August and two of his vessels were wrecked on the reefs that protected the harbour entrance . Pym was unable to withdraw his remaining ships and the entire squadron was lost , leaving Rowley with only his flagship HMS Boadicea and two small brigs to conduct his campaign against six large French frigates . Urgent reinforcements were requested , as French ships under Captain Pierre Bouvet blockaded Île Bourbon . 
 The first ship to arrive was HMS Africaine under the Captain Robert Corbet . In the Action of 13 September 1810 , Corbet engaged Bouvet 's two frigates alone and was defeated , dying of his wounds shortly after the battle . Rowley in Boadicea was able to recapture Africaine later in the day , but the frigate was severely damaged and unable to provide any reinforcement to the British squadron . Bouvet retired to Grand Port several days later for repairs , and thus was not on blockade duty on 17 September when HMS Ceylon arrived . Ceylon was an unusual ship , constructed by the Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) in Bombay as an East Indiaman merchant ship designed to operate as a 32 – gun frigate during wartime . In 1805 she was purchased by the British government and commissioned into the Royal Navy for service in the Indian Ocean . In 1810 , her commander was Captain Charles Gordon , who had been ordered to sail to Rowley 's aid when word of the losses suffered at Grand Port reached Madras . In his haste to depart , Gordon had been unable to obtain any Royal Marines , whose place was taken by 100 men of the 69th Regiment and the 86th Regiment from the Madras garrison . Also embarked was General John Abercromby and his staff , who were to lead a planned assault on Île de France . 
 = = Pursuit = = 
 Gordon arrived off Port Napoleon on 17 September , hoping to find Rowley maintaining the blockade off the port in Boadicea . Rowley was however off Île Bourbon , sparring with Bouvet 's frigates , and therefore Gordon only found Hamelin 's squadron in the harbour . This force consisted of the frigates Vénus and Manche with the corvette Victor . Recognising that he was heavily outnumbered , Gordon sailed westwards towards Île Bourbon to meet with Rowley and pass on the location of Hamelin 's squadron . French lookouts on shore spotted Ceylon but mistook her for a troopship due to her unusual construction . The sighting was rapidly passed on to Hamelin , who immediately gave chase with Vénus and Victor . 
 At 14 : 00 , Ceylon spotted Hamelin 's ships in pursuit and her crew increased their efforts to escape , mistaking Victor , which carried three masts , for a larger ship and therefore considering themselves significantly outnumbered . As night fell , Gordon slowed Ceylon by shortening sail in the hope of meeting Vénus ( which had outdistanced Victor ) alone . However , the French flagship also slowed to allow the corvette to catch up and so Gordon increased sail once more , leading Hamelin southwest towards Île Bourbon . At 00 : 15 on the morning of 18 September , Vénus caught up with Ceylon , which began firing on the larger French frigate as she passed . Hamelin , recognising that his vessel had the advantage in size and weight of shot , did not wait for Victor but attacked immediately , passing Ceylon and tuning across her bows to open a raking fire . 
 = = Battle = = 
 For an hour the frigates exchanged broadsides , until 01 : 15 when Hamelin , who had realised that he was fighting a warship not a troopship or East Indiaman , dropped back to effect repairs after suffering damage to his rigging . Ceylon was more severely damaged than the French ship and when Hamelin returned at 02 : 15 , her repairs were not complete , preventing her escape . The battle began again , both frigates suffering serious damage in the second encounter . By 03 : 00 , Vénus had lost her mizzenmast and two topmasts , while Ceylon had lost all of her topmasts , which had destroyed much of the ship 's rigging as they fell . With both ships now unable to manoeuvre , the action continued at close range until 04 : 00 , when Vénus was able to haul herself away to await the arrival of Victor . 
 The French corvette had been struggling to catch up during the night and did not arrive until dawn approached , revealing the flagship in a damaged state and the British vessel even more stricken . Sailing directly at Ceylon , the corvette was able to manoeuvre around the frigate and place herself in a raking position , from which her cannon could cause heavy damage and casualties to Ceylon without reply . Rather than have his ship destroyed , the wounded Gordon surrendered ( although it is not clear whether Victor opened fire or not before the British surrender ) . Victor 's men boarded Ceylon and Gordon and his officers , including Abercromby , were taken to Vénus as prisoners of war . 
 As dawn broke and visibility cleared , the sailors on Ceylon , Vénus and Victor realised that they were within sight of Saint Denis on Île Bourbon , and thus vulnerable to counterattack from Rowley 's flagship Boadicea . Despite hasty repairs , neither Ceylon nor Vénus were seaworthy by 07 : 30 , when British lookouts on the island spotted the three ships and sent word to Rowley . Within ten minutes , Rowley was at sea , taking 50 volunteers from Africaine to augment his crew . Hamelin made desperate efforts to limp back to Île de France , ordering Victor to tow Ceylon , but progress was slow and strong winds , which did not help the dismasted Ceylon and Vénus , repeatedly broke the tow rope . 
 During the day , Boadicea continued to close until Victor was forced to abandon Ceylon and sail in support of Vénus at 15 : 30 . As soon as the French prize crew was removed , Lieutenant Philip Fitz Gibbon , the remaining officer on Ceylon , rehoisted British colours and assumed control of the ship . This allowed Boadicea to sail past the recaptured frigate and engage the French ships directly , reaching Vénus at 16 : 40 . Hamelin recognised that the battered state of his flagship meant that he would not be able to adequately defend against Rowley 's attack and ordered Victor to take news of his defeat back to Port Napoleon . <unk> his ship for a token action , Hamelin fired at Boadicea as she came up but was forced to surrender within ten minutes . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the assistance of HMS Otter , which had followed Boadicea from Saint Denis , Rowley was able to return his prize and the battered Ceylon to Île Bourbon without significant difficulty . British casualties had been relatively minor for such a difficult engagement , Ceylon suffering 10 men killed and 31 wounded and Boadicea just 2 wounded . French losses were also comparatively light , with only 9 dead and 15 wounded on Vénus and none at all on Victor . Rowley repaired Ceylon and restored Gordon in command . Vénus was also repaired , and entered British service as HMS Nereide to replace the Nereide lost at Grand Port . Nearly four decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by the clasps " <unk> 18 SEPT . 1810 " , " <unk> 18 SEPT . 1810 " and " <unk> 18 SEPT . 1810 " attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 With the British squadron bolstered and the French commander and best frigate in British hands , the campaign stalemated . The French were no longer able to repair or maintain their ships due a lack of naval stores on Île de France , and so remained in port and prepared for the inevitable invasion . Rowley meanwhile was busy preparing troops , stores and his squadron for the coming attack , which was led by Admiral Bertie in November 1810 . The French squadron made no attempt to disrupt the invasion forces and were captured intact in their harbours . Bertie was credited with the final defeat of Île de France and was made a baronet as reward for the successful campaign , sending Rowley back to Britain with despatches . A court martial , held on HMS Illustrious in the aftermath of the invasion cleared Gordon of any blame in the defeat of his ship , although historian William James criticised Gordon 's assumption during the battle that Victor was a French frigate rather than a much smaller corvette , and identified discrepancies between Gordon 's published account and the ship 's log . 
 = 2001 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2001 Atlantic hurricane season was a fairly active Atlantic hurricane season that produced 17 tropical cyclones , 15 named storms , nine hurricanes , and four major hurricanes . The season officially lasted from June 1 , 2001 , to November 30 , 2001 , dates which by convention limit the period of each year when tropical cyclones tend to form in the Atlantic Ocean basin . The season began with Tropical Storm Allison on June 4 , and ended with Hurricane Olga , which dissipated on December 6 . The most intense storm was Hurricane Michelle , which attained Category 4 strength on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 The most damaging storms of the season were Tropical Storm Allison , which caused extensive flooding in Texas , Hurricane Iris , which struck Belize , and Hurricane Michelle , which affected several countries . Three tropical cyclones made landfall on the United States , three directly affected Canada , and three directly affected Mexico and Central America . Overall , the season caused 105 fatalities , and $ 7 @.@ 1 billion ( 2001 USD ; $ 9 @.@ 49 billion 2014 USD ) in damage . Due to their severe damage , the names Allison , Iris , and Michelle were retired by the World Meteorological Organization . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray , and their associates at Colorado State University ; and separately by NOAA forecasters . 
 Klotzbach 's team ( formerly led by Gray ) defined the average number of storms per season ( 1950 to 2000 ) as 9 @.@ 6 tropical storms , 5 @.@ 9 hurricanes , 2 @.@ 3 major hurricanes ( storms reaching at least Category 3 strength in the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) and ACE Index 96 @.@ 1 . NOAA defines a season as above @-@ normal , near @-@ normal or below @-@ normal by a combination of the number of named storms , the number reaching hurricane strength , the number reaching major hurricane strength and ACE Index . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On December 7 , 2000 , Gray 's team issued its first extended @-@ range forecast for the 2001 season , predicting above @-@ average activity ( 13 named storms , 8 hurricanes , and about 4 of Category 3 or higher ) . It listed an 63 percent chance of at least one major hurricane striking the U.S. mainland . This included a 43 percent chance of at least one major hurricane strike on the East Coast , including the Florida peninsula , and a 36 percent chance of at least one such strike on the Gulf Coast from the Florida Panhandle westward . The potential for major hurricane activity in the Caribbean was forecast to near average . 
 On April 5 , 2001 , a new forecast was issued , calling for 12 named storms , 7 hurricanes , and 3 major hurricanes . The increase in the forecast was attributed to the warm sea surface temperatures , although the agency noted that the season would likely not be as active as previous ones due to the effect of a weak to moderate El Nino . The estimated potential for at least one major hurricane to affect the U.S. was upped slightly to 65 percent ; the East Coast potential also went up slightly , and from the Florida Panhandle westward to Brownsville , Texas , the probability remained nearly the same . 
 = = = Mid @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On August 7 , 2001 , Gray 's team issued their first mid @-@ season forecast for the 2001 season , keeping the forecast number at 12 named storms , with 7 becoming hurricanes and 3 becoming a major hurricane , noting that sea surface temperatures and sea level pressures continued to be favorable for above @-@ average hurricane activity . The estimated potential for at least one major hurricane to affect the U.S. was upped slightly once again to 69 percent ; the East Coast potential also went up slightly to 50 % , and from the Florida Panhandle westward to Brownsville , Texas , the probability was also upped slightly . 
 On August 8 , 2001 , NOAA revised its season estimate slightly upwards to nine to twelve named storms , of which 6 to 8 were to be hurricanes , and 2 to 4 major hurricanes . The agency noted that sea surface temperatures continued to be favorable for above @-@ average hurricane activity , and due to the likelihood that El Nino would not develop during the peak of the season , there was a reduced likelihood of a below @-@ average year . 
 = = Season activity = = 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 110 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones , including the latter portion of Allison and the initial portions of Karen , Noel , and Olga , are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Allison = = = 
 Tropical Storm Allison developed from a tropical wave in the northern Gulf of Mexico on June 4 , 2001 , and struck the northern Texas coast shortly thereafter . It drifted northward through the state , turned to the south , and re @-@ entered the Gulf of Mexico . The storm continued towards the east @-@ northeast , made landfall on Louisiana and then moved across the southeast United States and Mid @-@ Atlantic . Allison was the first storm since Tropical Storm Frances in 1998 to affect the northern Texas coastline . 
 The storm was a major flood disaster throughout its path from Texas to the Mid @-@ Atlantic . The worst of the flooding occurred in Houston , Texas , where over 35 in ( 890 mm ) of rain fell . The storm killed 41 people , of which 27 drowned . The storm also caused over $ 5 billion in damage ( 2001 USD ; $ 6 @.@ 68 billion 2014 USD ) , making it the costliest and second @-@ deadliest tropical storm on record in the United States . Allison destroyed 2 @,@ 744 homes , leaving 30 @,@ 000 homeless with residential damages totaling to $ 1 @.@ 76 billion ( 2001 USD ; $ 2 @.@ 35 billion 2014 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two = = = 
 A tropical depression formed from a low level circulation on July 11 , well to the east of the Windward Islands . It attained a maximum strength of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) , with a pressure of 1 @,@ 010 mbar ( 30 inHg ) , though vertical wind shear from a subtropical ridge to the north caused it to dissipate on July 12 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Barry = = = 
 On July 24 , a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa and tracked westward . The wave entered the Caribbean on July 29 and gained in organization and convection , and organized into Tropical Storm Barry on August 3 . After fluctuations in intensity , the system attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) in the Gulf of Mexico , and headed northward before moving ashore along the Gulf Coast . 
 The storm affected Florida ; rainfall peaked at 8 @.@ 9 in ( 230 mm ) at Tallahassee , and winds gusts topped out at 79 mph ( 127 km / h ) . Three people in Florida were killed by the storm , and total damage is estimated at around $ 30 million ( 2001 USD ; $ 40 @.@ 1 million 2014 USD ) . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Chantal = = = 
 Tropical Storm Chantal developed from a tropical wave on August 14 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It tracked rapidly westward for much of its duration , and after degenerating into a tropical wave it passed through the Windward Islands . Chantal reformed and reached a peak intensity of 75 mph ( 110 km / h ) twice in the Caribbean Sea , and each time , wind shear and later land interaction prevented strengthening to hurricane status . On August 21 Chantal moved ashore near the border of Mexico and Belize , and it dissipated the next day . 
 The storm produced a wind gust of 71 mph ( 115 km / h ) in Caye Caulker , although stronger winds were possible in a convective band to the north . On the Yucatan Peninsula , heavy rainfall led to mudslides across Quintana Roo , leaving some areas isolated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dean = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned Tropical Storm Dean on August 22 over the Lesser Antilles . Strong wind shear quickly weakened Dean to cause it to dissipate on August 23 . The remnants turned northward , and redeveloped on August 26 to the north of Bermuda . Located over warm waters and in an area of favorable conditions , Dean steadily strengthened while moving to the northeast , and peaked just below hurricane status on August 27 southwest of Newfoundland . The storm subsequently weakened over cooler waters , and became extratropical on August 28 . Tropical Storm Dean lightly affected Newfoundland , though no damages were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Erin = = = 
 Hurricane Erin developed from a tropical wave on September 1 , and strengthened to a 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) tropical storm as it moved to the west @-@ northwest . After weakening due to wind shear , the remnants re @-@ organized into a tropical depression the next day , and Erin strengthened into a hurricane on September 9 while moving northwestward . The hurricane quickly intensified and reached peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) later on September 9 . A trough turned Erin to the northeast , and after passing just east of Cape Race , Newfoundland it became extratropical on September 15 . The extratropical remnant continued northeastward and lost its identity near Greenland on September 17 . Hurricane Erin brushed Newfoundland , producing a sustained wind of 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) with a gust of 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) at Cape Race . Along the coast , the passage of the storm led to wave heights of up to 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 3 m ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Felix = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned a tropical depression on September 7 near the Cape Verde islands , which degenerated back into a tropical wave the next day due to strong shear . It redeveloped back into a tropical depression on September 10 , and intensified into Tropical Storm Felix the next day while tracking generally northward . By September 13 , it intensified into a hurricane , and subsequently it underwent rapid deepening , becoming a major hurricane on September 14 with peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . By that time , Felix had turned to the northeast , and subsequently entered an area of unfavorable conditions . The hurricane gradually weakened , deteriorating to a tropical storm on September 17 . Cool waters and higher wind shear caused additional weakening while Felix nearly stalled to the southwest of the Azores . Late on September 18 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression , and early the next day Felix dissipated . 
 = = = Hurricane Gabrielle = = = 
 Hurricane Gabrielle originated in a weak low- to mid @-@ level trough that was nearly stationary a short distance off the southeastern coastline of the United States . A cut off low formed over Florida on September 9 , and an associated surface low pressure system formed , that was soon designated Tropical Depression Eight . The storm gradually intensified , and made landfall on Florida before emerging into the Atlantic Ocean and accelerating northeastward , as it reached peak intensity as a minimal hurricane . 
 Hurricane Gabrielle produced moderate winds along coastal areas of western Florida , reaching 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) at Venice . The tide flooded the northern shoreline of Charlotte Harbor and at the entrance to the Peace River , while further to the south a surge of greater than 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) inundated the barrier island at Fort Myers Beach and flooded some cars . Gabrielle brushed the eastern coast of Newfoundland ; the rainfall set the all time six @-@ hour precipitation record at St. John 's , with a total of 3 @.@ 54 in ( 90 mm ) . Hundreds of homes and buildings were damaged by the passage of Gabrielle , totaling several million dollars in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Nine = = = 
 A tropical depression formed from a tropical wave in the Caribbean on September 19 , north @-@ northwest of San Andres Island . It attained a maximum strength of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) , and made landfall near Puerto Cabezas on September 20 . After losing its closed circulation over land , it reformed into Hurricane Juliette in the East Pacific . 
 = = = Hurricane Humberto = = = 
 Hurricane Humberto formed from an area of low pressure generated by Hurricane Gabrielle . The low formed into a tropical depression on September 21 while south of Bermuda , tracking northwest , and was named Tropical Storm Humberto the next day . It began moving north , and then northeast as it passed Bermuda and strengthened into a hurricane . Humberto headed over the colder waters of the far north Atlantic Ocean , and dissipated quickly on September 27 . 
 = = = Hurricane Iris = = = 
 Tropical Depression Eleven formed just southeast of Barbados on October 4 . It traveled across the Windward Islands , and was named Tropical Storm Iris while south of Puerto Rico on October 5 . Iris continued to the west and intensified . After passing just south of Jamaica , Iris reached Category 4 hurricane strength , and made landfall near Monkey River Town , Belize on October 9 at Category 4 strength , but weakened rapidly . It dissipated later that day . 
 The storm produced an 8 to 15 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) storm surge . Numerous homes were destroyed , and the banana crop suffered extensive damage . An exact death toll is unknown , but 31 are confirmed dead , three in the Dominican Republic , eight in Guatemala , and 20 from the M / V Wave Dancer , a ship that capsized off the Belize coast . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Jerry = = = 
 Tropical Storm Jerry formed as a tropical depression from a tropical wave on October 6 near Barbados . The storm intensified into a tropical storm early the following day on October 7 while initially located under an environment of weak vertical wind shear . After reaching its peak of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , Jerry passed just south of Barbados late on October 7 and through the Windward Islands on October 8 . Deterioration in organization occurred , and Jerry dissipated while moving rapidly westward well south of Puerto Rico . 
 = = = Hurricane Karen = = = 
 A cold front and an upper level trough interacted on October 10 to the south of Bermuda , and formed an extratropical storm . The storm passed near Bermuda on October 12 , producing hurricane @-@ force winds on the island . It then organized , becoming a subtropical cyclone on October 12 and a tropical cyclone on October 13 . Karen strengthened to reach 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) winds as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , and after weakening over cooler waters , it made landfall on Nova Scotia as a tropical storm . It quickly became extratropical . 
 Tropical Storm Karen produced light to moderate winds across Atlantic Canada , peaking at 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) with a gust of 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) in Cape George in Antigonish County , Nova Scotia , along with a 26 mph ( 42 km / h ) report in Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island . Later , in Newfoundland and Nova Scotia , the storm system that absorbed Hurricane Noel produced strong winds that downed several trees and power lines which resulted in power outages . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Lorenzo = = = 
 An upper @-@ level tropospheric trough persisted in the eastern Atlantic Ocean , developing a circulation by October 26 which quickly organized . On October 27 , it developed into Tropical Depression Fourteen about 860 miles ( 1380 kilometers ) south @-@ southwest of the western Azores . Moving westward , the depression was forecast to attain winds of at least 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , although it failed to reach that intensity . Banding features developed over the storm , and on October 30 it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Lorenzo . By early on October 31 , convection had begun to separate from the circulation , and later in the day Lorenzo became extratropical ; shortly thereafter , its remnants merged with a frontal system about 690 mi ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) west of the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Michelle = = = 
 Hurricane Michelle developed from a tropical wave that moved across the Atlantic , and formed into a tropical depression on October 29 . Convection increased , and the system formed into Tropical Storm Michelle on November 1 . It strengthened further , reaching its peak strength as a Category 4 . One of only four November Category 4 hurricanes , Michelle made landfall on south @-@ central Cuba with winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) , the strongest Cuban landfall since Hurricane Fox in the 1952 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 The system that eventually became Hurricane Michelle dropped torrential rains in several countries , causing six deaths in Honduras and four deaths in Nicaragua , with an extensive yet unknown amount of damage . An additional 26 people were reported missing in Central America . Michelle went on to affect Cuba , where the storm produced 4 to 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ) waves , along with a heavy storm surge . Rainfall amounts up to 29 @.@ 69 in ( 754 mm ) were recorded across the island . 
 = = = Hurricane Noel = = = 
 A non @-@ tropical frontal low developed from a cold front on November 1 to the west of the Azores . It intensified while moving west @-@ northwestward and gradually dissipated its frontal structure . It became a subtropical storm on November 4 about 775 nautical miles ( 1435 km ) south of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Operationally , the storm was considered a non @-@ tropical low , and the National Hurricane Center did not begin issuing advisories until it became a tropical cyclone . It moved slowly northward as convection organized into a ring around the center . As a result of a ship reporting hurricane @-@ force winds near the center , and due to the development of a weak mid @-@ level warm core , the subtropical cyclone was reclassified as Hurricane Noel on November 5 . Increasing westerly wind shear limited convection near the center , and Noel weakened to a tropical storm early on November 6 . Progressively cooler water temperatures contributed to weakening , and Noel became extratropical later on November 6 about 330 mi ( 530 km ) southeast of Newfoundland . The extratropical remnant continued to the northeast and was absorbed by a larger extratropical storm later that day . 
 = = = Hurricane Olga = = = 
 Hurricane Olga formed as a subtropical cyclone on November 24 and meandered westward where it reached hurricane status on November 26 . The storm attained peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) before turning southeastward and weakening back into a tropical storm . Olga dissipated as a tropical cyclone on December 6 east of the Bahamas . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 2001 . The names not retired from this list will be used again in the 2007 season . This is the same list used for the 1995 season except for Lorenzo , Michelle , Olga , and Rebekah , which replaced Luis , Marilyn , Opal , and Roxanne . Storms were named Lorenzo , Michelle , and Olga for the first time in 2001 . Names that were allocated for the 2001 season but were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired three names in the spring of 2002 : Allison , Iris , and Michelle . They were replaced in the 2007 season by Andrea , Ingrid , and Melissa . Allison became the first Atlantic tropical storm to have its name retired . 
 = Great white shark = 
 The great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) , also known as the great white , white pointer , white shark , or white death , is a species of large <unk> shark which can be found in the coastal surface waters of all the major oceans . The great white shark is mainly known for its size , with mature female individuals growing up to 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) in length and 1 @,@ 950 kg ( 4 @,@ 300 lb ) in weight . However most are smaller , males measuring 3 @.@ 35 to 3 @.@ 96 m ( 11 ft 0 in to 13 ft 0 in ) and females 4 @.@ 57 to 4 @.@ 88 m ( 15 ft 0 in to 16 ft 0 in ) on average . According to a 2014 study the lifespan of great white sharks is estimated to be as long as 70 years or more , well above older estimates , making it one of the longest lived cartilaginous fish currently known . According to the same study , male great white sharks take 26 years to reach sexual maturity , while the females take 33 years to be ready to produce offspring . Great white sharks can accelerate to over 56 km / h ( 35 mph ) for short bursts . 
 The great white shark has no known natural predators other than the killer whale . The great white shark is arguably the world 's largest known extant macropredatory fish , and is one of the primary predators of marine mammals . It is also known to prey upon a variety of other marine animals , including fish and seabirds . It is the only known surviving species of its genus Carcharodon , and is ranked first in having the most recorded attacks on humans . The IUCN list the great white shark as a vulnerable species , while it is included in Appendix II of CITES . 
 The bestselling novel Jaws by Peter Benchley and the subsequent blockbuster film by Steven Spielberg depicted the great white shark as a " ferocious man eater " . Humans are not the preferred prey of the great white shark , but , nevertheless , the great white is responsible for the largest number of reported and identified fatal unprovoked shark attacks on humans . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1758 , Carl Linnaeus gave the great white shark its first scientific name , Squalus carcharias . Later , Sir Andrew Smith gave it Carcharodon as its generic name in 1833 , and also in 1873 . The generic name was identified with Linnaeus ' specific name and the current scientific name , Carcharodon carcharias , was finalized . Carcharodon comes from the Greek words <unk> , which means sharp or jagged , and odous , which means tooth . 
 = = = Ancestry and fossil record = = = 
 The great white shark came into existence during the mid @-@ Miocene epoch . The earliest known fossils of the great white shark are about 16 million years old . However , the phylogeny of the great white is still in dispute . The original hypothesis for the great white 's origins is that it shares a common ancestor with a prehistoric shark , such as the C. megalodon . C. megalodon had teeth that were superficially not too dissimilar with those of great white sharks , but its teeth were far larger . Although cartilaginous skeletons do not fossilize , C. megalodon is estimated to have been considerably larger than the great white shark , estimated at up to 17 m ( 56 ft ) and 59 @,@ 413 kg ( 130 @,@ 983 lb ) . Similarities among the physical remains and the extreme size of both the great white and C. megalodon led many scientists to believe these sharks were closely related , and the name Carcharodon megalodon was applied to the latter . However , a new hypothesis proposes that the C. megalodon and the great white are distant relatives ( albeit sharing the family Lamnidae ) . The great white is also more closely related to an ancient mako shark , Isurus hastalis , than to the C. megalodon , a theory that seems to be supported with the discovery of a complete set of jaws with 222 teeth and 45 vertebrae of the extinct transitional species Carcharodon <unk> in 1988 and published on 14 November 2012 . In addition , the new hypothesis assigns C. megalodon to the genus Carcharocles , which also comprises the other <unk> sharks ; Otodus obliquus is the ancient representative of the extinct Carcharocles lineage . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Great white sharks live in almost all coastal and offshore waters which have water temperature between 12 and 24 ° C ( 54 and 75 ° F ) , with greater concentrations in the United States ( Northeast and California ) , South Africa , Japan , Oceania , Chile , and the Mediterranean . One of the densest known populations is found around Dyer Island , South Africa , where almost all of the shark research is done . 
 The great white is an epipelagic fish , observed mostly in the presence of rich game , such as fur seals ( Arctocephalus ssp . ) , sea lions , cetaceans , other sharks , and large bony fish species . In the open ocean , it has been recorded at depths as great as 1 @,@ 200 m ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) . These findings challenge the traditional notion that the great white is a coastal species . 
 According to a recent study , California great whites have migrated to an area between Baja California Peninsula and Hawaii known as the White Shark Café to spend at least 100 days before migrating back to Baja . On the journey out , they swim slowly and dive down to around 900 m ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) . After they arrive , they change behavior and do short dives to about 300 m ( 1 @,@ 000 ft ) for up to ten minutes . Another white shark that was tagged off of the South African coast swam to the southern coast of Australia and back within the year . A similar study tracked a different great white shark from South Africa swimming to Australia 's northwestern coast and back , a journey of 20 @,@ 000 km ( 12 @,@ 000 mi ; 11 @,@ 000 nmi ) in under nine months . These observations argue against traditional theories that white sharks are coastal territorial predators , and open up the possibility of interaction between shark populations that were previously thought to have been discrete . The reasons for their migration and what they do at their destination is still unknown . Possibilities include seasonal feeding or mating . 
 = = Anatomy and appearance = = 
 The great white shark has a robust , large , conical snout . The upper and lower lobes on the tail fin are approximately the same size which is similar to some mackerel sharks . A great white displays countershading , by having a white underside and a grey dorsal area ( sometimes in a brown or blue shade ) that gives an overall mottled appearance . The coloration makes it difficult for prey to spot the shark because it breaks up the shark 's outline when seen from the side . From above , the darker shade blends with the sea and from below it exposes a minimal silhouette against the sunlight . Great white sharks , like many other sharks , have rows of serrated teeth behind the main ones , ready to replace any that break off . When the shark bites , it shakes its head side @-@ to @-@ side , helping the teeth saw off large chunks of flesh . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 In great white sharks , sexual dimorphism is present , females are generally larger than males . Male great whites on average measure 3 @.@ 35 – 3 @.@ 96 m ( 11 @.@ 0 – 13 @.@ 0 ft ) long , while females at 4 @.@ 57 – 4 @.@ 88 m ( 15 @.@ 0 – 16 @.@ 0 ft ) . Adults of this species weigh 522 – 771 kg ( 1 @,@ 151 – 1 @,@ 700 lb ) on average , however mature females can have an average a mass of 680 – 1 @,@ 110 kg ( 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 450 lb ) . The largest females have been verified up to 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) in length and an estimated 1 @,@ 950 kg ( 4 @,@ 300 lb ) in weight , perhaps up to 2 @,@ 268 kg ( 5 @,@ 000 lb ) . The maximum size is subject to debate because some reports are rough estimations or speculations performed under questionable circumstances . Among living cartilaginous fish , only the whale shark ( Rhincodon typus ) , the basking shark ( Cetorhinus maximus ) and the giant manta ray ( Manta birostris ) , in that order , average larger and heavier . These three species are generally quite docile in disposition and given to passively filter @-@ feeding on very small organisms . This makes the great white shark the largest extant macropredatory fish . Great whites sharks are at around 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) when born , and grow about 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) each year . 
 According to J. E. Randall , the largest white shark reliably measured was a 6 @.@ 0 m ( 19 @.@ 7 ft ) individual reported from Ledge Point , Western Australia in 1987 . Another great white specimen of similar size has been verified by the Canadian Shark Research Center : A female caught by David McKendrick of Alberton , Prince Edward Island , in August 1988 in the Gulf of St. Lawrence off Prince Edward Island . This female great white was 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) long . However , there was a report considered reliable by some experts in the past , of a larger great white shark specimen from Cuba in 1945 . This specimen was 6 @.@ 4 m ( 21 ft ) long and had a body mass estimated at 3 @,@ 324 kg ( 7 @,@ 328 lb ) . However , later studies also revealed that this particular specimen was actually around 4 @.@ 9 m ( 16 ft ) in length , a specimen in the average maximum size range . 
 The largest great white recognized by the International Game Fish Association ( IGFA ) is one caught by Alf Dean in the south Australian waters in 1959 , weighing 1 @,@ 208 kg ( 2 @,@ 663 lb ) . Several larger great whites caught by anglers have since been verified , but were later disallowed from formal recognition by IGFA monitors for rules violations . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 Great white sharks , like all other sharks , have an extra sense given by the ampullae of Lorenzini which enables them to detect the electromagnetic field emitted by the movement of living animals . Great whites are so sensitive they can detect variations of half a billionth of a volt . At close range , this allows the shark to locate even immobile animals by detecting their heartbeat . Most fish have a less @-@ developed but similar sense using their body 's lateral line . 
 To more successfully hunt fast and agile prey such as sea lions , the great white has adapted to maintain a body temperature warmer than the surrounding water . One of these adaptations is a " rete mirabile " ( Latin for " wonderful net " ) . This close web @-@ like structure of veins and arteries , located along each lateral side of the shark , conserves heat by warming the cooler arterial blood with the venous blood that has been warmed by the working muscles . This keeps certain parts of the body ( particularly the stomach ) at temperatures up to 14 ° C ( 25 ° F ) above that of the surrounding water , while the heart and gills remain at sea temperature . When conserving energy the core body temperature can drop to match the surroundings . A great white shark 's success in raising its core temperature is an example of gigantothermy . Therefore , the great white shark can be considered an endothermic <unk> because its body temperature is not constant but is internally regulated . Great whites also rely on the fat and oils stored within their livers for long @-@ distance migrations across nutrient @-@ poor areas of the oceans . Studies by Stanford University and the Monterey Bay Aquarium published on 17 July 2013 revealed that In addition to controlling the sharks ' buoyancy , the liver of great whites is essential in migration patterns . Sharks that sink faster during drift dives were revealed to use up their internal stores of energy quicker than those which sink in a dive at more leisurely rates . 
 = = = Bite force = = = 
 A 2007 study from the University of New South Wales in Sydney , Australia , used CT scans of a shark 's skull and computer models to measure the shark 's maximum bite force . The study reveals the forces and behaviors its skull is adapted to handle and resolves competing theories about its feeding behavior . In 2008 , a team of scientists led by Stephen Wroe conducted an experiment to determine the great white shark 's jaw power and findings indicated that a specimen weighing 3 @,@ 324 kg ( 7 @,@ 328 lb ) could exert a bite force of 18 @,@ 216 newtons ( 4 @,@ 095 lbf ) . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 This shark 's behavior and social structure is not well understood . In South Africa , white sharks have a dominance hierarchy depending on the size , sex and squatter 's rights : Females dominate males , larger sharks dominate smaller sharks , and residents dominate newcomers . When hunting , great whites tend to separate and resolve conflicts with rituals and displays . White sharks rarely resort to combat although some individuals have been found with bite marks that match those of other white sharks . This suggests that when a great white approaches too closely to another , they react with a warning bite . Another possibility is that white sharks bite to show their dominance . 
 The great white shark is one of only a few sharks known to regularly lift its head above the sea surface to gaze at other objects such as prey . This is known as spy @-@ hopping . This behavior has also been seen in at least one group of blacktip reef sharks , but this might be learned from interaction with humans ( it is theorized that the shark may also be able to smell better this way because smell travels through air faster than through water ) . White sharks are generally very curious animals , display intelligence and may also turn to socializing if the situation demands it . At Seal Island , white sharks have been observed arriving and departing in stable " clans " of two to six individuals on a yearly basis . Whether clan members are related is unknown but they get along peacefully enough . In fact , the social structure of a clan is probably most aptly compared to that of a wolf pack ; in that each member has a clearly established rank and each clan has an alpha leader . When members of different clans meet , they establish social rank <unk> through any of a variety of interactions . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Great white sharks are carnivorous and prey upon fish ( e.g. tuna , rays , other sharks ) , cetaceans ( i.e. , dolphins , porpoises , whales ) , pinnipeds ( e.g. seals , fur seals , and sea lions ) , sea turtles , sea otters ( Enhydra lutris ) and seabirds . Great whites have also been known to eat objects that they are unable to digest . Juvenile white sharks predominantly prey on fish including other elasmobranchs , as their jaws are not strong enough to withstand the forces required to attack larger prey such as pinnipeds and cetaceans until they reach a length of 3 meters ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) or more , at which point their jaw cartilage <unk> enough to withstand the impact of biting into larger prey species . Upon approaching a length of nearly 4 meters ( 13 ft ) , great white sharks begin to target predominately marine mammals for food , though individual sharks seem to specialize in different types of prey depending on their preferences . They seem to be highly opportunistic . These sharks prefer prey with a high content of energy @-@ rich fat . Shark expert Peter Klimley used a rod @-@ and @-@ reel rig and <unk> carcasses of a seal , a pig , and a sheep from his boat in the South <unk> . The sharks attacked all three baits but rejected the sheep carcass . 
 Off California , sharks immobilize northern elephant seals ( Mirounga angustirostris ) with a large bite to the hindquarters ( which is the main source of the seal 's mobility ) and wait for the seal to bleed to death . This technique is especially used on adult male elephant seals , which are typically larger than the shark , ranging between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 3 @,@ 300 and 4 @,@ 400 lb ) , and are potentially dangerous adversaries . Most commonly though , juvenile elephant seals are the most frequently eaten at elephant seal colonies . Prey is normally attacked sub @-@ surface . Harbor seals ( Phoca <unk> ) are taken from the surface and dragged down until they stop struggling . They are then eaten near the bottom . California sea lions ( Zalophus californianus ) are ambushed from below and struck mid @-@ body before being dragged and eaten . 
 White sharks also attack dolphins and porpoises from above , behind or below to avoid being detected by their echolocation . Targeted species include dusky dolphins ( Lagenorhynchus obscurus ) , Risso 's dolphins ( Grampus griseus ) , bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops ssp . ) , Humpback dolphins ( Sousa ssp . ) , harbour porpoises ( <unk> <unk> ) , and Dall 's porpoises ( <unk> dalli ) . Groups of dolphins have occasionally been observed defending themselves from sharks with mobbing behaviour . White shark predation on other species of small cetacean has also been observed . In August 1989 , a 1 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) juvenile male pygmy sperm whale ( Kogia breviceps ) was found stranded in central California with a bite mark on its caudal peduncle from a great white shark . In addition , white sharks attack and prey upon beaked whales . Cases where an adult Stejneger 's beaked whale ( <unk> <unk> ) , with a mean mass of around 1 @,@ 100 kg ( 2 @,@ 400 lb ) , and a juvenile Cuvier 's beaked whale ( <unk> <unk> ) , an individual estimated at 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , were hunted and killed by great white sharks have also been observed . When hunting sea turtles , they appear to simply bite through the carapace around a flipper , immobilizing the turtle . The heaviest species of bony fish , the oceanic sunfish ( Mola mola ) , has been found in great white shark stomachs . 
 Off Seal Island , False Bay in South Africa , the sharks ambush brown fur seals ( Arctocephalus pusillus ) from below at high speeds , hitting the seal mid @-@ body . They go so fast that they can completely leave the water . The peak burst speed is estimated to be above 40 kilometers per hour ( 25 mph ) . They have also been observed chasing prey after a missed attack . Prey is usually attacked at the surface . Shark attacks most often occur in the morning , within 2 hours of sunrise , when visibility is poor . Their success rate is 55 % in the first 2 hours , falling to 40 % in late morning after which hunting stops . 
 Whale carcasses comprise an important part of the diet of white sharks . However , this has rarely been observed due to whales dying in remote areas . It has been estimated that 30 kg of whale blubber could feed a 4 @.@ 5 m white shark for 1 @.@ 5 months . Detailed observations were made of four whale carcasses in False Bay between 2000 and 2010 . Sharks were drawn to the carcass by chemical and odour detection , spread by strong winds . After initially feeding on the whale caudal peduncle and fluke , the sharks would investigate the carcass by slowly swimming around it and mouthing several parts before selecting a blubber @-@ rich area . During feeding bouts of 15 – 20 seconds the sharks removed flesh with lateral <unk> , without the protective ocular rotation they employ when attacking live prey . The sharks were frequently observed regurgitating chunks of blubber and immediately returning to feed , possibly in order to replace low energy yield pieces with high energy yield pieces , using their teeth as mechanoreceptors to distinguish them . After feeding for several hours , the sharks appeared to become lethargic , no longer swimming to the surface ; they were observed mouthing the carcass but apparently unable to bite hard enough to remove flesh , they would instead bounce off and slowly sink . Up to eight sharks were observed feeding simultaneously , bumping into each other without showing any signs of aggression ; on one occasion a shark accidentally bit the head of a neighbouring shark , leaving two teeth embedded , but both continued to feed unperturbed . Smaller individuals hovered around the carcass eating chunks that drifted away . Unusually for the area , large numbers of sharks over five metres long were observed , suggesting that the largest sharks change their behaviour to search for whales as they lose the maneuverability required to hunt seals . It is possible that whale carcasses are an important location for sexually mature sharks to meet for mating . The investigating team concluded that the importance of whale carcasses , particularly for the largest white sharks , has been underestimated . In another documented incident , white sharks were observed scavenging on a whale carcass alongside tiger sharks . 
 Stomach contents of great whites also indicates that whale sharks both juvenile and adult may also be included on the animal 's menu , though whether this is active hunting or scavenging is not known at present . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Almost nothing is known about the reproduction of great whites . Some evidence points to the near @-@ soporific effect of a large feast ( such as a whale carcass ) possibly inducing mating . Great white sharks were previously thought to reach sexual maturity at around 15 years of age , but actually take far longer ; male great white sharks reach sexual maturity at age 26 , while females take 33 years to reach sexual maturity . Maximum life span was originally believed to be more than 30 years , but a study by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution placed it at upwards of 70 years . Examinations of vertebral growth ring count gave a maximum male age of 73 years and a maximum female age of 40 years for the specimens studied . The shark 's late sexual maturity , low reproductive rate and slow growth make it vulnerable to pressures such as overfishing and environmental change . 
 Little is known about the great white shark 's mating habits . Birth has never been observed , but pregnant females have been examined . Great white sharks are ovoviviparous , which means eggs develop and hatch in the uterus and continue to develop until birth . The great white has an 11 @-@ month gestation period . The shark pup 's powerful jaws begin to develop in the first month . The unborn sharks participate in oophagy , in which they feed on ova produced by the mother . Delivery is in spring and summer . The Northern Pacific population of great whites is suspected to breed off of the Sea of Cortez , as evidenced by local fisherman who have said to have caught them and evidenced by teeth found at dump sites for discarded parts from their catches . 
 = = = Breaching behavior = = = 
 A breach is the result of a high speed approach to the surface with the resulting momentum taking the shark partially or completely clear of the water . This is a hunting technique employed by great white sharks whilst hunting seals . This technique is often used on cape fur seals at Seal Island in False Bay , South Africa . Because the behavior is unpredictable , it is very hard to document . It was first photographed by Chris Fallows and Rob Lawrence who developed the technique of towing a slow @-@ moving seal decoy to trick the sharks to breach . Between April and September , scientists may observe around 600 breaches . The seals swim on the surface and the great white sharks launch their predatory attack from the deeper water below . They can reach speeds of up to 40 kilometers per hour ( 25 mph ) and can at times launch themselves more than 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) into the air . Just under half of observed breach attacks are successful . In 2011 , a 3 @-@ meter ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) long shark jumped onto a seven @-@ person research vessel off Seal Island in Mossel Bay . The crew were undertaking a population study using sardines as bait , and the incident was judged not to be an attack on the boat but an accident . 
 = = = Natural threats = = = 
 Interspecific competition between the great white shark and the orca is probable in regions where dietary preferences of both species may overlap . An incident was documented on 4 October 1997 , in the Farallon Islands off California in the United States . An estimated 4 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 15 – 17 ft ) female orca immobilized an estimated 3 – 4 @-@ meter ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) great white shark . The orca held the shark upside down to induce tonic immobility and kept the shark still for fifteen minutes , causing it to suffocate . The orca then proceeded to eat the dead shark 's liver . It is believed that the scent of the slain shark 's carcass caused all the great whites in the region to flee , forfeiting an opportunity for a great seasonal feed . Another similar attack apparently occurred there in 2000 , but its outcome is not clear . After both attacks , the local population of about 100 great whites vanished . Following the 2000 incident , a great white with a satellite tag was found to have immediately submerged to a depth of 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) and swum to Hawaii . In 2015 , a pod of orcas was recorded to have killed a great white shark off South Australia . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 It is unclear how much of a concurrent increase in fishing for great white sharks has caused the decline of great white shark populations from the 1970s to the present . No accurate global population numbers are available , but the great white shark is now considered vulnerable . Sharks taken during the long interval between birth and sexual maturity never reproduce , making population recovery and growth difficult . 
 The IUCN notes that very little is known about the actual status of the great white shark , but as it appears uncommon compared to other widely distributed species , it is considered vulnerable . It is included in Appendix II of CITES , meaning that international trade in the species requires a permit . As of March 2010 , it has also been included in Annex I of the CMS Migratory Sharks MoU , which strives for increased international understanding and coordination for the protection of certain migratory sharks . A February 2010 study by Barbara Block of Stanford University estimated the world population of great white sharks to be lower than 3 @,@ 500 individuals , making the species more vulnerable to extinction than the tiger , whose population is in the same range . According to another study from 2014 by George H. Burgess , Florida Museum of Natural History , University of Florida , there are about 2000 great white sharks near the California coast , which is 10 times higher than the previous estimate of 219 by Barbara Block . 
 Fishermen target many sharks for their jaws , teeth , and fins , and as game fish in general . The great white shark , however , is rarely an object of commercial fishing , although its flesh is considered valuable . If casually captured ( it happens for example in some <unk> in the Mediterranean ) , it is misleadingly sold as smooth @-@ hound shark . 
 = = = In Australia = = = 
 The great white shark was declared Vulnerable by the Australian Government in 1999 because of significant population decline and is currently protected under the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation ( EPBC ) Act . The causes of decline prior to protection included mortality from sport fishing harvests as well as being caught in beach protection netting . 
 The national conservation status of the great white shark is reflected by all Australian states under their respective laws , granting the species full protection throughout Australia regardless of jurisdiction . Many states had prohibited the killing or possession of great white sharks prior to national legislation coming into effect . The great white shark is further listed as Threatened in Victoria under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act , and as rare or likely to become extinct under Schedule 5 of the Wildlife Conservation Act in Western Australia . 
 In 2002 , the Australian government created the White Shark Recovery Plan , implementing government @-@ mandated conservation research and monitoring for conservation in addition to federal protection and stronger regulation of shark @-@ related trade and tourism activities . An updated recovery plan was published in 2013 to review progress , research findings , and to implement further conservation actions . A study in 2012 revealed that Australia 's White Shark population was separated by Bass Strait into genetically distinct eastern and western populations , indicating a need for the development of regional conservation strategies . 
 Presently , human @-@ caused shark mortality is continuing , primarily from accidental and illegal catching in commercial and recreational fishing as well as from being caught in beach protection netting , and the populations of great white shark in Australia are yet to recover . 
 = = = In New Zealand = = = 
 As of April 2007 , great white sharks were fully protected within 370 kilometers ( 230 mi ) of New Zealand and additionally from fishing by New Zealand @-@ flagged boats outside this range . The maximum penalty is a $ 250 @,@ 000 fine and up to six months in prison . 
 = = = In North America = = = 
 In 2013 , great white sharks were added to California 's Endangered Species Act . From data collected , the population of great whites in the North Pacific was estimated to be fewer than 340 individuals . Research also reveals these sharks are genetically distinct from other members of their species elsewhere in Africa , Australia , and the east coast of North America , having been isolated from other populations . 
 A 2014 study estimated the population of great white sharks along the California coastline to be approximately 2 @,@ 400 . 
 In 2015 Massachusetts banned catching , cage diving , feeding , towing decoys , or baiting and chumming for its significant and highly predictable migratory great white population without an appropriate research permit . The goal of these restrictions is to both protect the sharks and public health . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Shark attacks = = = 
 Of all shark species , the great white shark is responsible for by far the largest number of recorded shark attacks on humans , with 272 documented unprovoked attacks on humans as of 2012 . 
 More than any documented attack , Peter Benchley 's best @-@ selling novel Jaws and the subsequent 1975 film adaptation directed by Steven Spielberg provided the great white shark with the image of being a " man eater " in the public mind . While great white sharks have killed humans in at least 74 documented unprovoked attacks , they typically do not target them : for example , in the Mediterranean Sea there have been 31 confirmed attacks against humans in the last two centuries , most of which were non @-@ fatal . Many of the incidents seemed to be " test @-@ bites " . Great white sharks also test @-@ bite buoys , flotsam , and other unfamiliar objects , and they might grab a human or a surfboard to identify what it is . 
 Contrary to popular belief , great white sharks do not mistake humans for seals . Many attacks occur in waters with low visibility or other situations which impair the shark 's senses . The species appears to not like the taste of humans , or at least finds the taste unfamiliar . Further research shows that they can tell in one bite whether or not the object is worth attacking . Humans , for the most part , are too bony for their liking . They much prefer a fat , protein @-@ rich seal . 
 Humans are not appropriate prey because the shark 's digestion is too slow to cope with a human 's high ratio of bone to muscle and fat . Accordingly , in most recorded attacks , great whites broke off contact after the first bite . Fatalities are usually caused by blood loss from the initial bite rather than from critical organ loss or from whole consumption . From 1990 to 2011 there have been a total of 139 unprovoked great white shark attacks , 29 fatal . 
 However , some researchers have hypothesized that the reason the proportion of fatalities is low is not because sharks do not like human flesh , but because humans are often able to escape after the first bite . In the 1980s , John McCosker , Chair of Aquatic Biology at the California Academy of Sciences , noted that divers who dove solo and were attacked by great whites were generally at least partially consumed , while divers who followed the buddy system were generally rescued by their buddy . McCosker and Timothy C. <unk> , an author and professor at the University of Hawaii , suggest that a standard pattern for great whites is to make an initial devastating attack and then wait for the prey to weaken before consuming the wounded animal . Humans ' ability to move out of reach with the help of others , thus foiling the attack , is unusual for a great white 's prey . 
 In 2014 the state government of Western Australia led by Premier Colin Barnett implemented a policy of killing large sharks . The policy is intended to protect users of the marine environment from shark attack following the deaths of seven people on the Western Australian coastline in the years 2010 – 2013 . <unk> drum lines are deployed near popular beaches using hooks designed to catch great white sharks , as well as bull and tiger sharks . Large sharks found hooked but still alive are shot and their bodies discarded at sea . The government claims they are not culling the sharks , but are using a " targeted , localised , hazard mitigation strategy " . Barnett has described opposition as " ludicrous " and " extreme " , and said that nothing can change his mind . 
 = = = Attacks on boats = = = 
 Great white sharks infrequently attack and sometimes even sink boats . Only five of the 108 authenticated unprovoked shark attacks reported from the Pacific Coast during the 20th century involved kayakers . In a few cases they have attacked boats up to 10 meters ( 33 ft ) in length . They have bumped or knocked people overboard , usually attacking the boat from the stern . In one case in 1936 , a large shark leapt completely into the South African fishing boat Lucky Jim , knocking a crewman into the sea . <unk> and McCosker 's underwater observations suggest that sharks are attracted to boats by the electrical fields they generate . 
 = = = Great white sharks in captivity = = = 
 Prior to August 1981 , no great white shark in captivity lived longer than 11 days . In August 1981 , a white shark survived for 16 days at SeaWorld San Diego before being released . The idea of containing a live great white at SeaWorld Orlando was used in the 1983 film Jaws 3 @-@ D. 
 In 1984 , shortly before its opening day , the Monterey Bay Aquarium in Monterey , California , housed its first great white shark which had died after 10 days . In July 2003 , Monterey researchers captured a small female and kept it in a large netted pen near Malibu for five days . They had the rare success of getting the shark to feed in captivity before its release . Not until September 2004 was the aquarium able to place a great white on long @-@ term exhibit . A young female , which was caught off the coast of Ventura , was kept in the aquarium 's 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 @-@ liter ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) Outer Bay exhibit for 198 days before she was released in March 2005 . She was tracked for 30 days after release . On the evening of 31 August 2006 , the aquarium introduced a juvenile male caught outside Santa Monica Bay . His first meal as a captive was a large salmon steak on 8 September 2006 , and as of that date , he was estimated to be 1 @.@ 72 meters ( 68 in ) in length and to weigh approximately 47 kilograms ( 104 lb ) . He was released on 16 January 2007 , after 137 days in captivity . 
 Monterey Bay Aquarium housed a third great white , a juvenile male , for 162 days between 27 August 2007 , and 5 February 2008 . On arrival , he was 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) long and weighed 30 @.@ 6 kg ( 67 lb ) . He grew to 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and 64 kg ( 141 lb ) before release . A juvenile female came to the Outer Bay Exhibit on 27 August 2008 . While she did swim well , the shark fed only one time during her stay and was tagged and released on 7 September 2008 . Another juvenile female was captured near Malibu on 12 August 2009 , introduced to the Outer Bay exhibit on 26 August 2009 , and was successfully released into the wild on 4 November 2009 . The Monterey Bay Aquarium added a 1 @.@ 4 @-@ meter ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) long male into their redesigned " Open Sea " exhibit on 31 August 2011 . The animal was captured in the waters off of Malibu . 
 One of the largest adult great whites ever exhibited was at Japan 's Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium in 2016 , where a 3 @.@ 5 meters ( 11 ft ) male was exhibited for three days before dying . Probably the most famous captive was a 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) female named Sandy , which in August 1980 became the only great white to be housed at the California Academy of Sciences ' <unk> Aquarium in San Francisco , California . She was released because she would not eat and constantly bumped against the walls . 
 = = = Shark tourism = = = 
 Cage diving is most common at sites where great whites are frequent including the coast of South Africa , the Neptune Islands in South Australia , and Guadalupe Island in Baja California . The popularity of cage diving and swimming with sharks is at the focus of a booming tourist industry . A common practice is to chum the water with pieces of fish to attract the sharks . These practices may make sharks more accustomed to people in their environment and to associate human activity with food ; a potentially dangerous situation . By drawing bait on a wire towards the cage , tour operators lure the shark to the cage , possibly striking it , exacerbating this problem . Other operators draw the bait away from the cage , causing the shark to swim past the divers . 
 At present , hang baits are illegal off Isla Guadalupe and reputable dive operators do not use them . Operators in South Africa and Australia continue to use hang baits and pinniped decoys . In South Australia , playing rock music recordings underwater , including the AC / DC album Back in Black has also been used experimentally to attract sharks . 
 Companies object to being blamed for shark attacks , pointing out that lightning tends to strike humans more often than sharks bite humans . Their position is that further research needs to be done before banning practices such as chumming , which may alter natural behavior . One compromise is to only use chum in areas where whites actively patrol anyway , well away from human leisure areas . Also , responsible dive operators do not feed sharks . Only sharks that are willing to scavenge follow the chum trail and if they find no food at the end then the shark soon swims off and does not associate chum with a meal . It has been suggested that government licensing strategies may help enforce these responsible tourism . 
 The shark tourist industry has some financial leverage in conserving this animal . A single set of great white jaws can fetch up to £ 20 @,@ 000 . That is a fraction of the tourism value of a live shark ; tourism is a more sustainable economic activity than shark fishing . For example , the dive industry in Gansbaai , South Africa consists of six boat operators with each boat guiding 30 people each day . With fees between £ 50 and £ 150 per person , a single live shark that visits each boat can create anywhere between £ 9 @,@ 000 and £ 27 @,@ 000 of revenue daily . 
 = = = Examples of large unconfirmed great whites = = = 
 A number of very large unconfirmed great white shark specimens have been recorded . For decades , many <unk> works , as well as the Guinness Book of World Records , listed two great white sharks as the largest individuals : In the 1870s , a 10 @.@ 9 m ( 36 ft ) great white captured in southern Australian waters , near Port Fairy , and an 11 @.@ 3 m ( 37 ft ) shark trapped in a herring weir in New Brunswick , Canada , in the 1930s . However these measurements are not scientific and researchers have questioned the reliability of these measurements for a long time , noting they were much larger than any other accurately reported sighting . Later studies proved these theories correct . This New Brunswick shark may have been a misidentified basking shark , as the two have similar body shapes . The question of the Port Fairy shark was settled in the 1970s when J. E. Randall examined the shark 's jaws and " found that the Port Fairy shark was of the order of 5 m ( 17 ft ) in length and suggested that a mistake had been made in the original record , in 1870 , of the shark 's length " . These wrong measurements would make the alleged shark more than five times heavier than it really was . 
 Several unconfirmed reports of great white sharks caught in modern times with have been estimated to be more than 7 m ( 23 ft ) long , but these claims have received some criticism . However , J. E. Randall believed that great white shark may have exceeded 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) in length . A great white shark was captured near Kangaroo Island in Australia on 1 April 1987 . This shark was estimated to be more than 7 m ( 23 ft ) long by Peter <unk> , and has been designated as KANGA . Another great white shark was caught in Malta by Alfredo <unk> on 16 April 1987 . This shark was also estimated to be around 7 @.@ 13 m ( 23 @.@ 4 ft ) long by John Abela and has been designated as MALTA . However , <unk> drew criticism because he used shark size estimation methods proposed by J. E. Randall to suggest that the KANGA specimen was 5 @.@ 8 – 6 @.@ 4 m ( 19 – 21 ft ) long . In a similar fashion , I. K. Fergusson also used shark size estimation methods proposed by J. E. Randall to suggest that the MALTA specimen was 5 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 7 m ( 17 – 19 ft ) long . However , photographic evidence suggested that these specimens were larger than the size estimations yielded through Randall 's methods . Thus , a team of scientists — H. F. Mollet , G. M. <unk> , A. P. Klimley , D. A. Ebert , A. D. <unk> , and L. J. V. Compagno — reviewed the cases of the KANGA and MALTA specimens in 1996 to resolve the dispute by conducting a comprehensive morphometric analysis of the remains of these sharks and re @-@ examination of photographic evidence in an attempt to validate the original size estimations and their findings were consistent with them . The findings indicated that estimations by P. <unk> and J. Abela are reasonable and could not be ruled out . A particularly large female great white nicknamed " Deep Blue " , estimated measuring at 6 @.@ 09 metres ( 20 @.@ 0 ft ) was filmed off Guadalupe during shooting for the 2014 episode of Shark Week " Jaws Strikes Back " . Deep Blue would also later gain significant attention when she was filmed interacting with researcher Mauricio Hoyas <unk> in a viral video that Mauricio posted on Facebook on June 11 , 2015 . A particularly infamous great white shark , supposedly of record proportions , once patrolled the area that comprises False Bay , South Africa , was said to be well over 7 metres ( 23 ft ) during the early 1980s . This shark , known locally as the " Submarine " , had a legendary reputation that was supposedly well founded . Though rumors have stated this shark was exaggerated in size or non @-@ existent altogether , witness accounts by the then young Craig Anthony Ferreira , a notable shark expert in South Africa , and his father indicate an unusually large animal of considerable size and power ( though it remains uncertain just how massive the shark was as it escaped capture each time it was hooked ) . Ferreira describes the four encounters with the giant shark he participated in with great detail in his book " Great White Sharks On Their Best Behavior " . 
 One contender in maximum size among the predatory sharks is the tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) . While tiger sharks which are typically both a few feet smaller and have a leaner , less heavy body structure than white sharks , have been confirmed to reach at least 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft ) in the length , an unverified specimen was reported to have measured 7 @.@ 4 metres ( 24 ft ) in length and weighed 3 @,@ 110 kilograms ( 6 @,@ 860 lb ) , more than two times heavier than the largest confirmed specimen at 1 @,@ 524 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 360 lb ) . Some other macropredatory sharks such as the Greenland shark ( Somniosus microcephalus ) and the Pacific sleeper shark ( S. pacificus ) are also reported to rival these sharks in length ( but probably weigh a bit less since they are more slender in build than a great white ) in exceptional cases . The question of maximum weight is complicated by the unresolved question of whether or not to include the shark 's stomach contents when weighing the shark . With a single bite a great white can take in up to 14 kg ( 31 lb ) of flesh , and can also consume several hundred kilograms of food . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 The Devil 's Teeth by Susan Casey . 
 Close to Shore by Michael Capuzzo about the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916 . 
 Twelve Days of Terror by Richard Fernicola about the same events . 
 = = = News and articles = = = 
 Ocean Portal : Great White Shark , " Cool Stuff " , Life and Natural History , Science , Human Connections , and Educator Resources by The Smithsonian Institution , 2010 
 Great White Shark : Fact File from National Geographic 
 Most Complete Great White Fossil Yet by National Geographic 
 Great White Shark Filmed Breaching at Night by National Geographic 
 In @-@ depth article : Shark 's Super Senses from the PBS Ocean Adventures site 
 Are great whites descended from mega @-@ sharks ? from <unk> 
 " Great White Sharks – The Truth " by documentary maker Carly Maple – Australian focus 
 White Shark Biological Profile from Florida Museum of Natural History 
 Great White Shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) – Legal Status 
 Leviathans may battle in remote depths from Los Angeles Times 
 Article on largest Great Whites Recorded 
 Huge great white cruises off busy beach 
 = = = Photographic depictions and tagging activities = = = 
 <unk> – Images and movies of the great white shark , Carcharodon carcharias 
 Photo Gallery : Great White Sharks from National Geographic 
 Pictures of great white sharks 
 <unk> , Tagging of Pacific Predators , a research group that tags and studies the habits and migration of the white shark . 
 = = = Videos = = = 
 Nature 's Perfect Predator – Great White Shark from Discovery Channel 
 White Shark Cage Dive in Gansbaai , South Africa on YouTube 
 Riding a Great White from Discovery Channel 
 Wild – The Whale That Ate Jaws on YouTube ( This video is about a documented interaction of an Orca with an inexperienced white shark ) 
 Attacking a Seal above water 
 = Live at Benaroya Hall with the Seattle Symphony = 
 Live at Benaroya Hall with the Seattle Symphony is a live album and fourth album overall by the American singer @-@ songwriter Brandi Carlile , released on May 3 , 2011 through Columbia Records . Recorded during two sold @-@ out shows in November 2010 at Benaroya Hall in Seattle , Washington , the album features Washington @-@ native Carlile and her long @-@ time band ( including brothers Phil and Tim Hanseroth ) performing alongside the Seattle Symphony . Seattle @-@ based producer and audio engineer Martin Feveyear recorded the concerts , which contained orchestral arrangements by Paul Buckmaster and Sean O 'Loughlin . Carlile had previously performed with the Seattle Symphony in 2008 at the same venue . 
 The album contains three songs from Carlile 's second studio album The Story ( 2007 ) , five from Give Up the Ghost ( 2009 ) , and three covers , including Elton John 's " Sixty Years On " , Simon & Garfunkel 's " The Sound of Silence " , and Leonard Cohen 's " Hallelujah " ( which also features Alphaville 's " Forever Young " ) . Critical reception of Live at Benaroya Hall was positive overall . In the United States , the album reached peak positions of number sixty @-@ three on the Billboard 200 , number five on the Top Folk Albums chart and number fourteen on the Top Rock Albums chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Live at Benaroya Hall with the Seattle Symphony was recorded at two sold @-@ out shows in November 2010 during Carlile 's tour in support of her previous studio album Give Up the Ghost ( 2009 ) . Carlile , who claimed that she and the band always wanted their fourth release to be a live album , had initially hoped to record at a famous venue but decided to return to Benaroya Hall since she had performed there alongside the symphony in 2008 . Prior to the single rehearsal Carlile had with the 30 @-@ member strong Seattle Symphony , string arrangers generated charts and sent computer @-@ generated demos to Carlile for approval . Carlile was reportedly " shock [ ed ] " to hear the orchestra " weaving in and out " of her music . While the recording process , according to Carlile , was not complicated , she later commented on rehearsing with the full symphony : 
 The rehearsal process is really understated . It 's funny because it 's not really needed . It 's not needed for us anyway . Because we know how to play the songs , and the [ symphony ] charts don 't change the songs structurally at all . But the symphony charts are something that you 're not used to hearing . And then the symphony doesn 't need the rehearsal because they sight @-@ read . They sight @-@ read better than we could even imagine . So when we get there , they already know how to play our songs better than we do ... The purpose of the rehearsal is really , honestly to prepare the band for exactly how powerful the concert is going to be . When the symphony jumps in during those moments where all of a sudden you 're singing a song you sing every night and then 30 more musicians start playing , it 's so powerful that it causes you to take pause , and you can 't take pause . And that 's what the rehearsal really is for . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Live at Benaroya Hall features arrangements by British arranger and composer Paul Buckmaster , who previously worked with Carlile on Give Up the Ghost , and Sean O 'Loughlin . Seattle @-@ based producer and audio engineer Martin Feveyear , who had previously mixed Carlile 's debut album in addition to other live EPs and demos , recorded , mixed and mastered the album . Carlile had not spoken to Feveyear prior to the first rehearsal , but was pleased with the result of his work . Carlile 's band included long @-@ time members ( and siblings ) Phil and Tim Hanseroth on guitar and bass , Josh Neumann on cello , and Allison Miller on drums . The Seattle Symphony was led by Assistant Conductor Eric Garcia . 
 The pop rock album opens with the curtain call , strengthening the impression of a live recording rather than a studio album . Three tracks , " Shadow on the Wall " , " Turpentine " , and " The Story " , appeared on Carlile 's second studio album The Story ( 2007 ) . " Looking Out " , " Before It Breaks " , " I Will " , " Dreams " , and " Pride and Joy " all appeared on Give Up the Ghost . Believing in the cultivation of standards , Carlile included six cover versions in the set list , three of which would appear on the album . " Sixty Years On " , originally written by Elton John and Bernie Taupin , was arranged by Paul Buckmaster . Carlile , a fan of the " dark " string arrangements that appear on John 's album Tumbleweed Connection ( 1970 ) , contacted Buckmaster following advice from her manager . Carlile first heard the Hanseroth brothers singing Paul Simon 's " The Sound of Silence " in 2009 and requested that they perform it during the set . She does not contribute vocals to the version that appears on the album . Carlile 's cover of Leonard Cohen 's song " Hallelujah " , also arranged by Buckmaster is followed by a hidden track : a cover of Alphaville 's " Forever Young " . Carlile said the following of Cohen 's song : " ' Hallelujah ' is going to be a standard that our grandkids , our great @-@ great grandkids will learn to sing in church . It 's one of those really , really special songs . The thing that 's going to make it that , besides that it 's so great , is that everyone knows about it because hundreds of songwriters have been moved by that song and have covered it . And that 's just something really important that we do in every generation . " 
 The number of cover songs , which play a prominent role in Carlile 's live act , represent the amount she typically includes in a concert . By her own admission , " Before It Breaks " and " I Will " were the most difficult to perform emotionally . Carlile felt as though she were a member of The Beatles when the audience stood and loudly sang the words to " Dreams " . Carlile " jokes " with the audience between songs , which she felt was well @-@ received , and requests their participation in a three @-@ part harmony during " Turpentine " . During the concert , the band experienced technical difficulties and a bra thrown from the audience , intended for the drummer , hit Carlile on stage . Carlile said the " rock ' n ' roll symphony album " was " the meeting of two worlds , two different kinds of artists who got together for completely different reasons " . She insists the album is the one she and her band are most proud of , believing it truly represents their live act . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Overall , critical reception of the album was positive . Nick <unk> of The Seattle Times wrote that " standout " tracks included " Dreams " and " Pride and Joy " , which highlighted Carlile 's " unique folk @-@ rock style " and " enthralling , emotional and fun " voice . The Hanseroth brothers ' cover of Paul Simon 's " The Sound of Silence " was deemed " spot @-@ on " by Allmusic 's Andrew Leahey and " breathtaking " by Gene Stout of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer . The Source Weekly contributor Mike <unk> complimented the album for capturing Carlile 's live act and recommended this album for first @-@ time listeners of her music . Glide magazine 's reviewer complimented Carlile 's " authentic and raw " vocals and appreciated that recorded flaws were not covered up . Stephen <unk> of the Oklahoma Gazette also noted the errors , but summarized his review by saying that " Things aren 't perfect ; they 're still beautiful . " <unk> also complimented the successful transition of Carlile 's acoustic @-@ based songs to orchestral arrangements . The Salt Lake Tribune 's David Burger gave the album an A – rating , asserting that Live at Benaroya Hall captures the " unbridled spirit " of Carlile 's live act more than any of her studio albums . Burger also wrote that Carlile 's " well @-@ crafted " songs were " gloriously illustrated " by Buckmaster 's and O 'Loughlin 's arrangements . Gregg Shapiro of the LGBT @-@ related Bay Area Reporter said listening to the album is a must even for people that do not often enjoy live albums . Paste magazine included the album on its list of " 12 May Albums Worth Checking Out " . The magazine 's contributor Jeff Leven wrote that the album was " anthemic " and " captivating " but " over @-@ stacked " with covers song , and that Carlile 's passion was contagious . Leahey 's review concluded : " This isn 't Brandi Carlile 's first concert album , but it 's certainly the best . " Similarly , Visser called the album Carlile 's " best work to date " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic and album liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel adapted from Allmusic and album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 In the United States , Live at Benaroya Hall with the Seattle Symphony reached peak positions of number sixty @-@ three on the Billboard 200 , number five on the Top Folk Albums chart and number fourteen on the Top Rock Albums chart . 
 = Jahlil Okafor = 
 Jahlil Okafor ( pronounced / <unk> <unk> / ; born December 15 , 1995 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Philadelphia 76ers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He played his freshman season of college for the 2014 – 15 Duke national championship team . 
 Okafor was heavily recruited since before high school and had been at the top of the recruiting rankings for several years . He played high school basketball in Chicago , Illinois for Whitney M. Young Magnet High School , where he earned high school national player of the year awards from McDonalds , USA Today and Parade . At the 2012 FIBA Under @-@ 17 World Championship , he earned the Tournament MVP for the gold @-@ medal winning USA team . In 2013 , Okafor led Whitney Young to the 2013 Chicago Public High School League ( CPL ) city championship . He was an All @-@ American as a junior in 2013 . The following summer , he was an All @-@ Tournament team selection at the 2013 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship for the gold @-@ medal Team USA . Following his senior season , he earned broad All @-@ American recognition and was named national player of the year by Parade , USA Today and McDonald 's among other players . He signed with Duke as a package with Tyus Jones , with widespread recognition as the preseason Collegiate National Player of the Year . 
 At Duke , he earned the USBWA National Freshman of the Year and ACC Player of the Year , and a unanimous 2015 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American first @-@ team selection . In the week following Duke 's victory in the championship game of the 2015 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament against Wisconsin , Okafor announced that he would enter the 2015 NBA draft . He was selected with the third overall pick by the Philadelphia 76ers . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Okafor 's father , Chukwudi , known as Chuck , is of Nigerian Igbo and African @-@ American descent , and his mother , <unk> Lanett Benton , is African @-@ American and White . As a youth , Okafor split time between his mother 's home in the 127 @-@ resident town of Moffett , Oklahoma and his father 's home in Chicago . When he was 9 years old , his mother contracted bronchitis and died two weeks later from a collapsed lung . Okafor permanently moved in with his father to the South Side of Chicago and then to Rosemont . Okafor attended Rosemont Elementary . The adjustment was difficult because he was shy and so tall that other students thought he was put in the class for having failed . In November 2008 , during seventh grade he matched his father 's height of 6 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) . Later the family moved to Chicago 's North Side so that Okafor could attend Whitney Young High School . 
 As a 6 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) eighth @-@ grader , Okafor was recruited by DePaul Blue Demons men 's basketball in violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) recruiting rules when DePaul Athletic Director Jean <unk> Ponsetto made public comments about an offer . Initially , interim coach Tracy Webster , made an oral offer on January 30 outside the DePaul locker room at Allstate Arena . The offer was noted online by <unk> and picked up by the press , leading to the problematic statements by Ponsetto . In February 2010 , Ponsetto confirmed a statement : 
 This is a young guy we 've been talking with for a long time , and who has been to games and we have a relationship with because his uncle works for the Rosemont Police Department ... I think it 's a prospect who has grown up around DePaul basketball . I think he 's probably a fan and someone who has been a fan for some time , since we have played in Rosemont for the last 30 years . 
 = = = High school = = = 
 = = = = Freshman and sophomore seasons = = = = 
 Okafor and teammate Paul White were regarded as the best incoming freshmen in the Chicago metropolitan area , according to the Chicago Sun @-@ Times 's Joe Henricksen . They joined a team with six returning seniors that had finished as state runners up the prior year . Along with 6 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 08 m ) sophomore Thomas Hamilton Jr. and White , Okafor was part of a trio of Whitney Young players ranked in the top 10 of their respective national classes by ESPNU . Entering the season , Whitney Young was considered to resemble a college team due to its size and athleticism . That year , Okafor feels he was not one of the " key players " on the team , but attending tournaments with elite players such as Austin Rivers and Michael Kidd @-@ Gilchrist inspired him to be one . 
 Following his freshman season , Okafor was regarded as the second best college basketball prospect in the Chicago area behind Jabari Parker . The scouting report on him was that he possessed an improved midrange jump shot , nimble feet , soft hands and physical skills at 6 @-@ foot @-@ 9 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 06 m ) that made him a mismatch against almost any high school competitor . Prior to his sophomore season Dave Spahn of SLAM Magazine described Okafor as a player with the footwork and ambidexterity to dominate his opponents , placing him in the conversation for the role of best player in the national class of 2014 . In August 2011 , ESPN ranked him as the third best player in the class of 2014 . 
 Okafor and White were featured in Ball So Hard , the first documentary short by Life + Times . 
 On December 22 , in front of an audience that included John Calipari , Rick Pitino , Derrick Rose and Anthony Davis at the UIC Pavilion , Okafor had 20 points ( 10 in the fourth quarter ) , 9 rebounds and 3 blocked shots against cross @-@ town rival Simeon and its star Parker in a 62 – 55 loss . 
 Following the season , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times named him to the Class 4A All @-@ State first team along with Parker , Keith Carter , Darius Paul and Fred VanVleet . The Chicago Tribune named him to its second team All @-@ State team . The Associated Press named him to its Class 4A second team . He was also selected by the Chicago Public League Basketball Coaches Association to its 25 @-@ man boy 's All @-@ City team . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times named him to its All @-@ Public League second team as well as its All @-@ area 20 @-@ man team . By the end of his sophomore season , he started appearing on ballots from ESPN HS 's 10 @-@ person panel for the Mr. Basketball USA award as the best high school basketball player in the country . He was one of twenty sophomores chosen as Underclass All @-@ Americans by ESPN HS . 
 = = = = Junior season = = = = 
 In June 2012 , Sports Illustrated named him one of their " Future Game Changers " , a group of fourteen young athletes who are considered to be the brightest talents of their respective sport ( such as Sarah Hendrickson , <unk> Peppers , and Taylor Townsend ) . On September 19 John Calipari made Okafor an offer to play for Kentucky , joining Ohio State , Michigan State , Louisville , Illinois , Duke , North Carolina , Florida and Arizona as programs that have offered Okafor . 
 Okafor was one of 10 USA Today preseason All @-@ USA selections ( along with Aaron Gordon , Andrew Harrison , Aaron Harrison , Kasey Hill , Jones , Parker , Julius Randle , Noah Vonleh , Andrew Wiggins ) . Okafor was named as one of the top 5 Illinois Mr. Basketball contenders ( along with Parker , Kendrick Nunn , Sterling Brown and Malcolm Hill ) prior to the season by the Chicago Tribune 's Mike Helfgot . Whitney Young was the number eight ranked team in the MaxPreps.com national preseason poll . Young entered the season ranked fourteenth in the nation according to ESPN . 
 On December 20 Okafor and Young lost in overtime to <unk> Johnson 's ESPN # 1 @-@ ranked Montverde Academy . Young was ranked # 9 at the time . On January 19 , Okafor led Young to an 85 – 52 victory over Long Beach Polytechnic High School at the Hoophall Classic with 26 points , 7 rebounds and 3 blocks . The victory gave Young a 7 – 1 record against nationally ranked teams for the year , moving Young to # 2 in the USA Today rankings as they prepared for the January 26 crosstown showdown against Simeon and Parker . 
 In the Chicago Public High School League playoffs February 15 finals contest against Morgan Park High School Okafor tallied 19 points , 14 rebounds and 7 blocked shots , including a game @-@ saving block against Billy Garrett , Jr . , in a 60 – 56 overtime Public League Championship game victory over Morgan Park . 
 Okafor was recognized as a 2013 All @-@ Public League first team selection by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times along with Nunn , Parker , Alexander and Billy Garrett , Jr . On February 28 , he was named the Chicago Sun @-@ Times Player of the Year . On March 25 , Okafor finished as runner @-@ up in the Illinois Mr. Basketball voting to Parker by a 315 – 277 @-@ point margin , including a 43 – 40 first place vote margin . On April 17 , he was a first team All @-@ USA selection by USA Today along with Wiggins , Aaron Harrison , Randle and Parker . Following the demise of ESPN HS , HighSchoolHardwood.com undertook several <unk> selections . Although MaxPreps.com did not select him as a first team All @-@ American , they did select him as a Junior All @-@ American along with Stanley Johnson , Joel Berry , Jones , and Emmanuel Mudiay . 
 = = = = Senior season = = = = 
 Following his time with Team USA , Okafor participated in the Nike Pro @-@ Am Chi @-@ League , the All @-@ Peach Jam , and the Adidas Nations event . He made his verbal commitment on ESPNU to Duke basketball on November 15 , jointly with Tyus Jones . Prior to his senior season , USA Today named him to its 10 @-@ man preseason All @-@ USA team along with Alexander , Stanley Johnson , Jones , Trey Lyles , Mudiay , Malik Newman , Kelly Oubre , D 'Angelo Russell , and Myles Turner . On November 21 , Winslow committed to Duke , giving them the number one recruiting class in the nation with Jones , Okafor , Winslow and Grayson Allen all committed . Okafor was joined on the Chicago Tribune 's preseason Illinois Mr. Basketball top 5 by Alexander , Jalen Brunson , Tyler Ulis and Keita Bates @-@ Diop . 
 Okafor dominated the December 27 – 30 , Les Schwab Invitational hosted by Liberty High School by leading the tournament in scoring ( 31 ) and rebounding ( 12 @.@ 5 ) and finished 2013 atop the three major recruiting databases ( ESPN , Rivals and Scout ) . Young went 2 – 2 in the tournament , losing to Rainier Beach High School as well as losing to Oregon 's defending Class 6A state champions West Linn High School . On January 4 at the Cancer Research Classic in Wheeling , West Virginia , Okafor earned the tournament MVP based on a 24 @-@ point 9 @-@ rebound performance against Mudiay 's Prime Prep Academy . 
 Okafor and Young reached an anticipated city championship matchup with Curie and Alexander at the Jones Convocation Center . Okafor had 16 points , 14 rebounds and 3 blocks . Curie won the city championship 69 – 66 in quadruple overtime as Okafor had 16 points before fouling out with 2 : 13 remaining in regulation . The CPL Championship game was attended by Mayor of Chicago Rahm Emanuel and was the lead story on the late edition of SportsCenter . 
 On March 14 , Okafor posted 35 points and 13 rebounds in a 75 – 66 victory over St. Rita of Cascia High School ( who featured Kentucky @-@ bound Charles Matthews ) , earning Young its first sectional title since 2009 and leaving them one victory away from the final four . On March 18 , Okafor led Young to a 58 – 32 victory over Loyola Academy with 12 points , 12 rebounds , 7 assists and 3 blocks . On March 21 Okafor 's 33 points and 14 rebounds enabled Young to overcome a record setting 56 @-@ point performance by Brunson with a 75 – 68 victory over Stevenson High School . On March 22 , Okafor and Young won the IHSA Class 4A state championship by defeating Benet Academy 46 – 44 . Okafor only produced 8 points , 6 rebounds and 3 assists as he battled Xavier @-@ bound Sean O 'Mara . 
 Okafor earned co @-@ MVP ( with Justin Jackson ) of the April 2 , 2014 , McDonald 's All @-@ American Game after posting 17 points and 7 rebounds , including the go ahead dunk with less than 40 seconds remaining , for the winning west team in a 105 – 102 victory . On April 12 , he posted a 14 @-@ point 10 @-@ rebound double @-@ double in an 84 – 73 Team USA Nike Hoops Summit victory over the world team . On April 18 in the Jordan Brand Classic , he earned co @-@ MVP with ( Alexander ) by posting 29 points and 9 rebounds . 
 Okafor was selected to the 10 @-@ man Team USA for the 17th annual Nike Hoop Summit on April 12 , 2014 at the Moda Center . He was also selected to the 24 @-@ player 37th annual April 2 , 2014 McDonald 's All @-@ American Boys Game at the United Center . He was recognized as first team All @-@ City along with teammate White , Alexander , Louis Adams , Jr. of Orr , and <unk> <unk> of Bogan High School by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . On February 18 , he became one of three finalists for the Naismith Prep Player of the Year Award along with Alexander and Stanley Johnson . 
 He was selected as the 2014 National Player of the Year from among the 20 Parade All @-@ Americans . He was also recognized by the McDonald 's All @-@ American Game organization as its 2014 Morgan Wootten National Player of the Year . USA Today recognized Okafor as its national player of the year when naming its All @-@ USA Boys Basketball Team along with Alexander , Oubre , Mudiay , and Stanley Johnson . Okafor beat Alexander in the Illinois Mr. Basketball voting by a 492 – 402 vote . He earned first team All @-@ American recognition from MaxPreps on April 13 . Okafor was named the 2013 – 14 Chicago Tribune / WGN Ch . 9 Athlete of the Year . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 In 2011 , center <unk> Johnson was named National Freshman of the Year by ESPN HS . In the following months , Okafor beat out Johnson for a spot on the 2011 FIBA Americas Under @-@ 16 Championship Team USA . Okafor spent his sophomore season ranked as the number one center and second best player in the national class of 2014 by SLAM Magazine behind Andrew Wiggins , according to SLAM 's Franklyn Calle . In January 2012 during his sophomore season , he was ranked third in the class by ESPNU . By April , he was ranked second . By the end of his second year , there was talk that with Jabari Parker Chicago might produce the number one high school player in the country in back to back years , something that they had come close to with Mark Aguirre and Isiah Thomas in the late 1970s . Also in the 1981 NBA draft Aguirre and Thomas were selected first and second . On October 25 , 2012 , Andrew Wiggins reclassified into the class of 2013 , which cleared the way for Okafor to assume the number one ranking in the Rivals.com ranking for the class of 2014 . As of November 2012 , he was listed number one in the national class of 2014 by Rivals.com and number two by ESPN . He remained number one according to Rivals with its March 14 , 2013 rankings update , following his junior season . 
 = = College career = = 
 Okafor was selected as Preseason Player of the Year by CBSSports.com , NBCSports.com , SB Nation , and ESPN analyst Fran <unk> . Okafor was a Preseason All @-@ American first team selection by USA Today , CBSSports.com , NBCSports.com , Athlon Sports , Bleacher Report , Sporting News , SB Nation , Sports Illustrated , and the Associated Press . In its preseason top 100 player ranking , Okafor was listed at number 3 by ESPN . For the 2014 – 15 Atlantic Coast Conference men 's basketball season , the conference media selected him as the ACC Preseason Rookie of the Year and as a Preseason All @-@ ACC Team selection . He finished second in the conference Preseason Player of the Year voting to Marcus Paige . He was also listed as a John R. Wooden Award Preseason Top 50 candidate . He was also named to the Oscar Robertson Trophy and Wayman Tisdale Award Watch Lists . 
 Okafor opened the season as ACC Freshman of the Week on November 17 . In his first three games he shot 25 @-@ for @-@ 30 on his field goal attempts . He was again named ACC Freshman of the Week on November 24 and December 1 . He had his first two 20 @-@ point performances in the Coaches vs. Cancer Classic with 24 points against Furman on November 26 and 21 against Army on November 30 . On December 15 with a 25 @-@ point and 20 @-@ rebound performance against Elon , Okafor became the first Duke freshman to record 20 rebounds in a game and the second ACC freshman to record 20 points and 20 rebounds in a game , joining Joe Smith . The performance earned Okafor his fourth ACC Rookie of the Week Award and first Wayman Tisdale National Freshman of the Week recognitions . He then scored a season @-@ high 28 points against Boston College on January 3 , earning his fifth ACC Rookie of the Week , first ACC Player of the Week , and second Wayman Tisdale National Freshman of the Week recognition the following day . He was again ACC Rookie of the Week on January 12 and 19 . He was named to the John R. Wooden Award Midseason Top 25 list on January 14 . After sitting out a game due to an ankle injury , Okafor posted a career @-@ high 30 points in an overtime win against Virginia Tech on February 25 . 
 Following the season , Okafor was named Atlantic Coast Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year by both the ACC coaches and media and ACC Freshman of the year . He was the first freshman to win ACC Player of the Year . He was also a first team All @-@ ACC selection and among the first trio to be selected to the All @-@ ACC Freshman first team ( along with Jones and Winslow ) . He was named USBWA National Freshman of the Year and the 2015 USBWA Freshman All @-@ America Team by the United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) . Okafor was a unanimous 2015 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American first @-@ team selection by The Sporting News , USBWA , National Association of Basketball Coaches , and Associated Press . He contributed to a national championship with 10 points , including 2 key baskets in the final minutes , in the championship game of the 2015 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , despite spending much of the game in foul trouble while defending Frank Kaminsky of Wisconsin . Okafor finished as runner @-@ up to Kaminsky in the John R. Wooden Award voting ( <unk> – <unk> ) . On April 9 , Okafor declared for the 2015 NBA draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia 76ers ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On June 25 , 2015 , Okafor was selected with the third overall pick in the 2015 NBA draft by the Philadelphia 76ers . After debuting with a 20 @-@ point NBA Summer League performance on July 6 , Okafor signed a two @-@ year contract with the 76ers on July 7 , with team options for two additional seasons . He debuted for the 76ers with a 26 @-@ point , 7 @-@ rebound , 2 @-@ block effort ( that also included 8 turnovers ) against the Boston Celtics on October 28 . The young 2015 – 16 76ers team played no players over the age of 24 or with more than three years of NBA experience on opening night . In early November , he was stopped on the Benjamin Franklin Bridge between Philadelphia and Camden , New Jersey for speeding at 108 miles per hour ( 174 km / h ) , almost two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half times the bridge 's posted speed limit of 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) . On November 9 , he posted his first career double @-@ double with 21 points and 15 rebounds against his hometown Chicago Bulls . In the subsequent game on November 11 , Okafor posted 4 blocked shots along with 21 points and 7 rebounds against the Toronto Raptors . 
 After the 76ers got off to an 0 – 16 start to the season , Okafor was involved in a street fight with taunting individuals on November 25 in Boston . On November 30 , with additional reports surfacing that Okafor had been involved in various controversial and dangerous off @-@ the @-@ court situations , the 76ers agreed to a request to assign a security guard to accompany Okafor in public . On December 1 , Okafor and the 76ers defeated the Los Angeles Lakers 103 – 91 . The win ended the longest losing streak in the history of major professional sports in the United States ( 28 games going back to the prior season ) and the worst start in NBA history ( tied with the 2009 – 10 New Jersey Nets at 0 – 18 ) . The next day , video surfaced on TMZ of a second fight in Boston from November . Okafor was subsequently suspended by the 76ers for two games . He returned from suspension against the San Antonio Spurs on December 7 , recording 10 points and 4 rebounds off the bench in a 119 – 68 defeat . On January 16 , 2016 , he recorded 25 points and 10 rebounds in a 114 – 89 win over the Portland Trail Blazers , helping the 76ers snap a four @-@ game losing streak and improving their record to 5 – 37 . On January 27 , 2016 , he was named to the 2016 NBA All @-@ Star Game weekend Rising Stars Challenge lineup . 
 In February , the 76ers had Okafor and Nerlens Noel swap positions as Okafor moved from center to power forward . On February 6 , he recorded 22 points and a season @-@ high 17 rebounds in a 103 – 98 win over the Brooklyn Nets . The position swap was considered an improvement over the two players splitting time or having Noel play out of his natural position . On February 21 against the Dallas Mavericks , Okafor posted a career @-@ high 31 points in a 129 – 103 loss , surpassing not only his NBA career high , but also his 30 @-@ point game at Duke . On February 28 , Okafor posted 26 points against the Orlando Magic , but he endured a shin contusion in a collision with teammate Isaiah Canaan that was only expected to sideline him for a game . As he missed his fifth consecutive game , 76ers head coach Brett Brown noted that Okafor had a CT scan on his knee . On March 11 , Okafor was ruled out for the rest of the season after tests revealed that he had sustained a small tear of the meniscus in his right knee . 
 Okafor finished fifth in the 2016 NBA Rookie of the Year Award voting and earned NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team honors . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = International career = = 
 In October 2010 , he successfully tried out for USA Basketball 's 2011 – 12 USA Developmental National Team . In June 2011 , he qualified for the 12 @-@ man United States team at the 2011 FIBA Americas Under @-@ 16 Championship along with Simeon rivals Parker and Nunn . In the gold medal game , Okafor made all of his field goal attempts posting 18 points and 14 rebounds . For the tournament , his 46 rebounds over 5 games ranked him second on the United States team ( to Aaron Gordon ) and third at the Championships in rebounding . 
 He was a member of USA Basketball 's 12 @-@ man Team USA at the 2012 FIBA Under @-@ 17 World Championship with Parker and Nunn again . His listed height was 6 feet 11 inches ( 2 @.@ 11 m ) . At a two @-@ game four @-@ team preliminary exhibition tournament in Las Palmas , Canary Islands the week before the championship began , he was named tournament MVP . He was also named MVP of the 2012 FIBA Under @-@ 17 World Championship for the gold medal @-@ winning United States team . Okafor posted 17 points and 8 rebounds in the gold medal game . Over the course of the tournament , he was the second @-@ leading scorer with 13 @.@ 6 points per game and second @-@ leading rebounder for the United States with 8 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . 
 On May 21 , 2013 , USA Basketball announced the roster of 24 players , including Okafor , who had accepted invitations to the June 14 – 19 , 2013 , USA Basketball Men 's U19 World Championship team training camp . The camp was used to select the 12 @-@ man team for the June 27 – July 7 , 2013 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship in Czech Republic . Okafor made the final roster that was announced on June 18 . The team won the gold medal and Okafor made the All @-@ Tournament team along with teammate and tournament MVP Gordon . He led the tournament with 77 % field goal percentage , and he was the only player on the all tournament team who would return to high school . However , coaches Billy Donovan and Shaka Smart told him his weak link was his conditioning . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 His mother , <unk> Lanett Benton , died when he was 9 years old , leaving him to be raised by his father Chukwudi and aunt Chinyere Okafor @-@ Conley , whom he refers to as his " auntie mom " . His father 's full name is Chukwudi <unk> Okafor . His parents met in Fort Smith , Arkansas when Chuck played basketball for a local junior college . " My deepest fear is losing someone else close to me , " Jahlil told Chicago magazine . " That 's something I think about way more than I should . " 
 Jahlil has an older sister , Jalen , and 2 younger brothers named <unk> and <unk> . His father has 5 Chicago @-@ area siblings . His uncle works for the police department in Rosemont , Illinois . His father , who is known as Chuck Okafor , is 6 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) and played power forward for <unk> Community College , West Texas A & M University and Carl Albert State College . His parents had basketball scholarships at Carl Albert State College at the same time . Chuck had been an All @-@ City High School basketball player for Bowen High School . His mother also played college basketball . Okafor plays chess and the saxophone as well as the tuba . In junior high , he participated in the stage crew for a musical . He is a distant cousin of Emeka Okafor . He is of Nigerian descent through his paternal grandfather who moved to the U.S. from Nigeria at the age of 20 . Jahlil traveled to Nigeria when he was in seventh grade . 
 = 1934 Muroto typhoon = 
 In September 1934 , a violent typhoon caused tremendous devastation in Japan , leaving more than 3 @,@ 000 people dead in its wake . Dubbed the Muroto typhoon ( <unk> , Muroto Taifū ) , the system was first identified on September 13 over the western Federated States of Micronesia . Moving generally northwest , it eventually brushed the Ryukyu Islands on September 20 . Turning northeast , the typhoon accelerated and struck Shikoku and southern Honshu the following morning . It made landfalls in Muroto , Kaifu , Awaji Island , and Kobe . A pressure of 911 @.@ 9 hPa ( 26 @.@ 93 inHg ) was observed in Muroto , making the typhoon the strongest ever recorded to impact Japan at the time . This value was also the lowest land @-@ based pressure reading in the world on record at the time ; however , it was surpassed the following year during the 1935 Labor Day hurricane . After clearing Japan , the now extratropical storm traveled east and weakened . Turning north by September 24 , the system deepened and impacted the Aleutian Islands ; it was last noted the following day over western Alaska . 
 Regarded as the " second @-@ greatest catastrophe of modern Japan " , the storm left parts of Osaka in ruins . Tens of thousands of structures were damaged or destroyed , leaving approximately 200 @,@ 000 people homeless . Among the 3 @,@ 066 people killed were 421 children and teachers who perished when their flimsy schools were destroyed . This ranked it , at the time , as the deadliest typhoon in Japanese history . In addition to the fatalities , 13 @,@ 184 people were injured . Total damage exceeded $ 300 million ( 1934 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 13 , 1934 , a tropical cyclone developed over the western Caroline Islands . The storm traveled generally northwest , executing a brief cyclonic loop on September 14 – 15 . After a brief stint traveling nearly due north on September 17 , the cyclone began recurving to the northeast . It brushed the Ryukyu Islands to the southeast on September 20 as it accelerated northeast . On the morning of September 21 , the typhoon struck Shikoku and southern Honshu . According to the Central Meteorological Observatory ( now called the Japan Meteorological Agency ) , maximum sustained winds reached 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , with gusts exceeding 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . 
 The typhoon first made landfall over Muroto , Kōchi Prefecture , resulting in it later being dubbed the " Muroto typhoon " . A then @-@ world record low barometric pressure for a land station of 911 @.@ 9 hPa ( 26 @.@ 93 inHg ) was observed in Muroto . Though surpassed less than a year later during the 1935 Labor Day hurricane in the Florida Keys , it remains the lowest value ever observed in mainland Japan and the third @-@ lowest throughout the country . It briefly emerged over the Kii Channel before striking the Kaifu District in Tokushima Prefecture . The system then crossed the Kii Channel again and traversed Awaji Island . After another brief stint over water , the storm made its next landfall directly over Kobe , Hyōgo Prefecture , just 30 km ( 19 mi ) west of Osaka City . A barometric pressure of 954 @.@ 3 hPa ( 28 @.@ 18 inHg ) was observed in Osaka . Crossing mainland Japan , the storm briefly emerged over the Sea of Japan before traversing northern Honshu . 
 Pronounced frontal features , a characteristic of extratropical cyclones , developed late on September 21 , with a cold front extending south toward the Philippines . The system continued on an easterly course and was last noted in the International Best Track Archive on September 22 moving away from Hokkaido . Surface weather analyses depict the system continuing east , crossing the International Date Line ( 180 ° ) by September 23 . During this time , its central pressure rose to roughly 985 – 990 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 – 29 @.@ 34 inHg ) . On September 24 , the storm turned north toward the Aleutian Islands of the then Territory of Alaska and deepened . Winds up to Force 10 — 89 to 102 km / h ( 55 to 63 mph ) — on the Beaufort scale affected parts of the Aleutians and a pressure of 964 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 47 inHg ) was observed near 48 ° N 160 @.@ 5 ° W ﻿ / 48 ; <unk> . Traversing the Bering Sea , the system was last identifiable on September 25 over western Alaska . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Called the " second @-@ greatest catastrophe of modern Japan " , and the " worst typhoon in a generation " , the storm wrought tremendous damage in Shikoku and southern Honshu , with areas in and around Osaka suffering the brunt of its impact . The effects , at the time , were second only to the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake . Throughout Japan , 3 @,@ 066 people were killed , of which at least 1 @,@ 665 deaths were in Osaka Prefecture , and 13 @,@ 184 others were injured . This ranked it as the deadliest typhoon in Japanese history , until Typhoon Vera in 1959 which killed approximately 5 @,@ 000 people . A total of 34 @,@ 262 buildings were destroyed , another 40 @,@ 274 were severely damaged , and 401 @,@ 157 were flooded or affected . Total damage far exceeded $ 300 million ( 1934 USD ) . Approximately 200 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless in Osaka , and at least 250 @,@ 000 required assistance . 
 In Kōchi Prefecture , where the storm first made landfall , powerful wind gusts — measured up to 234 km / h ( 145 mph ) — caused tremendous damage . Torrential rain accompanied the storm , amounting to 684 mm ( 26 @.@ 9 in ) in Muroto . Throughout Kōchi , 1 @,@ 815 homes were destroyed and 6 @,@ 064 were damaged or flooded ; 81 people died and 399 more sustained injuries . Sixty @-@ three people died in Muroto when the typhoon 's storm surge swept away 550 homes . 
 The greatest damage , however , took place across eastern Osaka Bay . A maximum tide of 3 @.@ 1 to 4 @.@ 2 m ( 10 to 14 ft ) was observed there , the highest ever for the region . Areas up to 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) inland were inundated by the typhoon 's storm surge , total of 49 @.@ 31 km2 ( 19 @.@ 04 mi2 ) of the city was flooded . The city of Osaka was crippled by the typhoon , electricity was completely lost , the water supply network sustained significant damage , and communications were disrupted . Powerful winds devastated the city 's poorly built schools , destroying 128 buildings . Within them , at least 421 children and teachers were killed , while 1 @,@ 100 others sustained injury . One teacher , <unk> Ashida , was hailed as a hero for sacrificing himself to save his students by propping up the exit of his collapsing classroom with his own body ; his students escaped before he was crushed under the weight of the building . An insane asylum along the city 's outskirts was swept away with 60 patients missing . A five @-@ story pagoda ( built in 1812 ) at the <unk> @-@ ji temple collapsed , killing 3 people and trapping 20 others . The <unk> hospital for leprosy was destroyed ; 260 patients are believed to have drowned after the building collapsed amid rising water and gale @-@ force winds . Near <unk> , a passenger train derailed , killing 10 people and injuring 165 . 
 The city 's industrial sector sustained severe losses , exceeding US $ 90 million . More than 3 @,@ 000 factories were destroyed and thousands more were damaged . The Japanese Army 's munitions program was significantly setback due to destroyed ammunition factories . At least 100 people drowned in the city 's harbor where more than 1 @,@ 600 seagoing craft were grounded , sunk , or otherwise damaged . 
 Thirty of the nation 's then forty @-@ six prefectures were impacted by the typhoon . Significant damage took place in Aichi , Gifu , Kyoto , Nagano , Nagasaki , Tokushima , Tottori , Wakayama , and Yamanashi prefectures . In Kyoto , at least 209 people were killed and 858 were injured . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately following the typhoon 's tremendous impact , the Japanese military was deployed to Osaka before nightfall on September 21 and water was being trucked in . Officials in Osaka Prefecture released an immediate ¥ 10 million in relief funds . Baron <unk> Sumitomo donated ¥ 1 million ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) to relief funds , the largest such private donation in the nation 's history at the time . The Cabinet of Japan held a special meeting to discuss emergency operations . Three destroyers from the Kure Naval District , loaded with medical equipment and other essentials , were deployed to assist in relief work . Outbreaks of typhoid fever , dysentery , and scarlet fever plagued survivors in the storm 's aftermath . 
 During an October 5 cabinet meeting , Minister of Education Genji Matsuda recommended schools to be built with steel in light of the large number of children killed . Reconstruction of the affected areas required an estimated 100 @,@ 000 tons of steel . The National Diet held a special meeting in November to address issues regarding the typhoon 's aftermath . 
 Following the disaster , a marked increase in actions and countermeasures to storm surge events and typhoons were enacted . Throughout Osaka , construction of breakwaters and embankments alleviated flood risks in coastal communities , reducing the risk of life from roughly 10 − 3 to 10 − 7 by the time of Typhoon Nancy in 1961 . Before the onset of World War II , total anti @-@ flood construction in Osaka spanned 36 @.@ 68 km ( 22 @.@ 79 mi ) ; this included 16 @.@ 52 km ( 10 @.@ 27 mi ) along rivers and canals , 11 @.@ 08 km ( 6 @.@ 88 mi ) of levees , and 11 @.@ 08 km ( 6 @.@ 88 mi ) of breakwaters . These protected the city from surges of 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) above Osaka Port . Several other projects to expand and rebuild the anti @-@ flood system took place in the decades following World War II . 
 According to a 2010 report by the Central Disaster Prevention Council , if a storm identical to the 1934 Muroto typhoon were to strike in the modern day , it would kill approximately 7 @,@ 600 people . 
 = Central dense overcast = 
 The central dense overcast , or CDO , of a tropical cyclone or strong subtropical cyclone is the large central area of thunderstorms surrounding its circulation center , caused by the formation of its eye wall . It can be round , angular , oval , or irregular in shape . This feature shows up in tropical cyclones of tropical storm or hurricane strength . How far the center is embedded within the CDO , and the temperature difference between the cloud tops within the CDO and the cyclone 's eye , can help determine a tropical cyclone 's intensity . Locating the center within the CDO can be a problem for strong tropical storms and with systems of minimal hurricane strength as its location can be obscured by the CDO 's high cloud canopy . This center location problem can be resolved through the use of microwave satellite imagery . 
 After a cyclone reaches hurricane intensity , an eye appears at the center of the CDO , defining its center of low pressure and its cyclonic wind field . Tropical cyclones with changing intensity have more lightning within their CDO than steady state storms . Tracking cloud features within the CDO , using frequently updated satellite imagery , can also be used to determine its intensity . The highest maximum sustained winds within a tropical cyclone , as well as its heaviest rainfall , are usually located under the coldest cloud tops in the CDO . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 It is a large region of thunderstorms surrounding the center of stronger tropical and subtropical cyclones which shows up brightly ( with cold cloud tops ) on satellite imagery . The CDO forms due to the development of an eyewall within a tropical cyclone . Its shape can be round , oval , angular , or irregular . Its development can be preceded by a narrow , dense , C @-@ shaped convective band . Early in its development , the CDO is often angular or oval in shape , which rounds out , increases in size , and appears more smooth as a tropical cyclone intensifies . Rounder CDO shapes occur in environments with low levels of vertical wind shear . 
 The strongest winds within tropical cyclones tend to be located under the deepest convection within the CDO , which is seen on satellite imagery as the coldest cloud tops . The radius of maximum wind is usually collocated with the coldest cloud tops within the CDO , which is also the area where a tropical cyclone 's rainfall reaches its maximum intensity . For mature tropical cyclones that are steady state , the CDO contains nearly no lightning activity , though lightning is more common within weaker tropical cyclones and for systems fluctuating in intensity . 
 = = Eye = = 
 The eye is a region of mostly calm weather at the center of the CDO of strong tropical cyclones . The eye of a storm is a roughly circular area , typically 30 – 65 km ( 20 – 40 miles ) in diameter . It is surrounded by the eyewall , a ring of towering thunderstorms surrounding its center of circulation . The cyclone 's lowest barometric pressure occurs in the eye , and can be as much as 15 % lower than the atmospheric pressure outside the storm . In weaker tropical cyclones , the eye is less well @-@ defined , and can be covered by high cloudiness caused by cirrus cloud outflow from the surrounding central dense overcast . 
 = = Use as a tropical cyclone strength indicator = = 
 Within the Dvorak satellite strength estimate for tropical cyclones , there are several visual patterns that a cyclone may take on which define the upper and lower bounds on its intensity . The central dense overcast ( CDO ) pattern is one of those patterns . The central dense overcast utilizes the size of the CDO . The CDO pattern intensities start at T2.5 , equivalent to minimal tropical storm intensity , 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The shape of the central dense overcast is also considered . The farther the center is tucked into the CDO , the stronger it is deemed . Banding features can be utilized to objectively determine the tropical cyclone 's center , using a ten degree logarithmic spiral . Using the 85 – 92 GHz channels of polar @-@ orbiting microwave satellite imagery can definitively locate the center within the CDO . 
 Tropical cyclones with maximum sustained winds between 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) can have their center of circulations obscured by cloudiness within visible and infrared satellite imagery , which makes diagnosis of their intensity a challenge . Winds within tropical cyclones can also be estimated by tracking features within the CDO using rapid scan geostationary satellite imagery , whose pictures are taken minutes apart rather than every half @-@ hour . 
 = Governor of Kentucky = 
 The Governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky is the head of the executive branch of government in the Commonwealth of Kentucky . Fifty @-@ seven men and one woman have served as Governor of Kentucky . The governor 's term is four years in length ; since 1992 , incumbents have been able to seek re @-@ election once before becoming ineligible for four years . Throughout the state 's history , four men have served two non @-@ consecutive terms as governor , and two others have served two consecutive terms . Kentucky is one of only five U.S. states that hold gubernatorial elections in odd @-@ numbered years immediately before the United States Presidential Election . The current governor is Matt Bevin , who was first elected in 2015 . 
 The governor 's powers are enumerated in the state constitution . There have been four constitutions of Kentucky — adopted in 1792 , 1799 , 1850 , and 1891 , respectively — and each has enlarged the governor 's authority . Among the powers appropriated to the governor in the constitution are the ability to grant pardons , veto legislation , and call the legislature into session . The governor serves as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the state 's military forces and is empowered to enforce all laws of the state . The officeholder is given broad statutory authority to make appointments to the various cabinets and departments of the executive branch , limited somewhat by the adoption of a merit system for state employees in 1960 . Because Kentucky 's governor controls so many appointments to commissions , the office has been historically considered one of the most powerful state executive positions in the United States . Additionally , the governor 's influence has been augmented by wide discretion in awarding state contracts and significant influence over the legislature , although the latter has been waning since the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 The history of the office of Governor is largely one of long periods of domination by a single party , though different parties were predominant in different eras . Federalists were rare among Kentuckians during the period of the First Party System , and Democratic Republicans won every gubernatorial election in the state until 1828 . The Second Party System began when the Democratic @-@ Republicans split into Jacksonian Democrats ( the predecessor of the modern Democratic Party ) and National Republicans ( later to become Whigs ) . Beginning with the election of Thomas Metcalfe in 1828 , the Whigs dominated the governorship until 1851 , with John Breathitt being the only Democrat elected during that period . 
 With the collapse of the Whig Party in the 1850s , Democrats took control of the governorship for the duration of the Third Party System , with Charles S. Morehead of the Know Nothing Party being the only exception . The election of Republican William O 'Connell Bradley in 1895 began the only period of true two @-@ party competition for the governorship ; from Bradley 's election through 1931 , five Republicans and six Democrats held the office of governor of Kentucky . Since 1931 , only four Republicans have served as governor of Kentucky ; current governor Matt Bevin , whose term began in 2015 , is the most recent . 
 = = Powers and responsibilities = = 
 In all four Kentucky constitutions , the first power enumerated to the governor is to serve as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the state 's militia and military forces . In 1799 , a stipulation was added that the governor would not personally lead troops on the battlefield unless advised to do so by a resolution of the General Assembly . Such a case occurred in 1813 when Governor Isaac Shelby , a veteran of the Revolutionary War , was asked to lead a band of Kentucky troops to aid William Henry Harrison at the Battle of the Thames . For his service , Shelby received the Thanks of Congress and the Congressional Gold Medal . 
 Among the other powers and responsibilities of the governor that appear in all four constitutions are the power to enforce all laws , the power to fill vacancies in elected offices until the next meeting of the General Assembly , and the power to remit fines and grant pardons . The power to pardon is not applicable to cases of impeachment , and in cases of treason , a gubernatorial pardon is only effective until the end of the next session of the General Assembly , which can grant a full pardon for treason . The 1891 constitution further required that , with each application for a pardon , the governor file " a statement of the reasons for his decision thereon , which ... shall always be open to public inspection . " This requirement was first proposed by a delegate to the 1850 constitutional convention , but it was rejected at that time . Historically , power in Kentucky 's executive has been split amongst a variety of elected positions — including Lieutenant Governor , Attorney General , Auditor of Public Accounts , Treasurer , and several commissioners — but in the late 20th century , political power has centralized in the office of Governor . 
 = = = <unk> and adjourning the legislature = = = 
 The power of the governor to adjourn the General Assembly for a period of up to four months if the two houses cannot agree on a time to adjourn appears in all four constitutions . The governor is also empowered to convene the General Assembly " on extraordinary occasions " . Since the 1799 constitution , the governor has been permitted to call the legislature into session somewhere other than the state capital if the capital had , since the last legislative session , " become dangerous from an enemy or from contagious diseases . " This was an important provision in the early days of the Commonwealth , when epidemics like smallpox posed a danger to the populace . One notable example of an attempt to employ this power was in 1900 when Republican Governor William S. Taylor attempted to adjourn the legislature and re @-@ convene it in heavily Republican London , Kentucky following the shooting of William Goebel . Taylor claimed a state of insurrection existed in the capital , but defiant Democrats refused to heed the call to adjourn or to convene in London . 
 The 1891 constitution added a provision that the governor must specify the reason for any specially @-@ called legislative session , and that no other business could be considered during the session . There is , however , no constitutional requirement that the legislature conduct any business during the called session . In 2007 , Republican governor Ernie Fletcher called the Assembly into session to consider a long list of items . The Democratically @-@ controlled House of Representatives maintained that none of the items were urgent enough that they could not wait until the regular session convened ; they claimed that Fletcher was calling the session only to boost his sagging poll numbers before the upcoming election in which he faced a challenge from Democrat Steve Beshear . The House convened on the day appointed and adjourned an hour later without transacting any business . 
 = = = Veto = = = 
 The 1799 constitution contained , for the first time , the power of the governor to veto legislation ; this power was substantially similar to , and probably based upon , that found in the 1792 New Hampshire Constitution and the 1798 Georgia Constitution . The governor 's veto can be overridden by a majority vote of both houses of the legislature . The 1891 constitution empowered the governor with a line @-@ item veto , but its use was forbidden on constitutional amendments and laws related to the classification of property for tax purposes . 
 Unlike the U.S. President , the governor does not have the option of a pocket veto . If the governor does not make a decision to sign or veto a bill , it automatically becomes law after ten days . In the event that the legislature adjourns to prevent the return of a bill by veto , the bill becomes law three days after the commencement of the next legislative session unless the governor explicitly vetoes it . ( With the federal pocket veto , the bill is considered vetoed after ten days if the legislature adjourns . ) 
 = = = Budget = = = 
 Although setting the state budget is a legislative function in many states , Kentucky governors are required by statute to present a proposed biennial budget to the General Assembly for approval shortly after the beginning of its even @-@ year sessions . The governor 's budget has often been approved with few changes , but since the Republicans took control of the state senate for the first time in 1999 , approval has become a much more contentious process . The General Assembly failed to pass a budget before the end of its session in both 2002 and 2004 . In both cases , the state operated under an executive spending plan drafted by the governor until the legislature could re @-@ convene and pass a budget . In 2005 the Kentucky Supreme Court ruled that the governor had no authority to expend funds without legislative approval , and that if legislators failed to pass a budget in the future , only expenditures explicitly authorized in the state constitution could be made . 
 = = = Administration and appointments = = = 
 Although the Kentucky constitution designates the governor as the head of the executive branch of state government , it does not specify the means of carrying out that role . Empowered to nominate all constitutional officers by the state 's first constitution , that power of the office of the governor has been reduced in subsequent constitutions , as more of those offices became elective . Because the governor is not explicitly authorized by the constitution to conduct many of the functions necessary to administer the state government , the officeholder has had to rely on empowering legislation enacted by the General Assembly . With this in mind , Kentucky historian Thomas D. Clark wrote in 2004 that extensive executive powers had been granted through the creation of a large number of commissions that reported to the governor : 
 During the past century and a half , and especially in the later 20th century , it would have been impossible for state government to operate efficiently without a broadening of executive powers . Through the years the General Assembly has created a myriad of commissions and turned them over to the governor to exercise administrative oversight . ... All of these commissions extended the influence of the governor into every phase of human life in the commonwealth , well beyond the limitations of executive power envisioned by delegates to the constitutional convention in 1891 . 
 By 1934 , the executive branch consisted of sixty @-@ nine boards , commissions , and agencies in addition to the constitutional officers , although the members of these commissions were often the constitutional officers themselves . Governor Ruby Laffoon proposed the Administrative Reorganization Act of 1934 to organize these boards and commissions into seventeen executive departments and seven independent agencies . The General Assembly passed this legislation , giving the executive branch some semblance of structure for the first time . 
 Laffoon 's successor , A. B. " Happy " Chandler , called a special legislative session in 1936 seeking passage of another reorganization act . This act abolished several commissions and organized those remaining into ten statutory departments : Finance , Revenue , Highways , Health , Welfare , Industrial Relations , Business Regulation , Conservation , Libraries and Archives , and Mines and Minerals . The Act also created the Executive Cabinet , consisting of the constitutional officers and the heads of each of the ten statutory departments . The efficiencies created by Chandler 's reorganization allowed him to pay off more than three @-@ quarters of the state 's $ 28 @.@ 5 million debt . Besides effecting the reorganization of the executive branch , the Reorganization Act of 1936 also explicitly empowered the governor to appoint executive department heads and establish , combine , or divide departments as necessary . Later statutes gave the governor the power to appoint advisory committees on reorganization , appoint deputy heads of divisions , transfer employees and change their responsibilities within the executive branch , and establish general rules of conduct for executive branch members . 
 In the 35 years between the time of Chandler 's reorganization and the election of Wendell H. Ford as governor in 1971 , the executive branch had again become unwieldy . 60 departments and 210 boards reported directly to the governor by 1972 , and duplication of services between departments had created inefficiencies . On January 1 , 1973 , a plan that Ford had issued in late 1972 took effect , consolidating the departments reporting to him into six program cabinets : Consumer Protection and Regulation , Development , Education and the Arts , Human Resources , Safety and Justice , and Transportation . Ford continued merging departments and reorganizing the executive branch throughout 1973 to the extent that , by the end of the year , there were only three program cabinets ( Development , Education and the Arts , and Consumer Protection and Regulation ) and four additional departments ( Human Resources , Justice , Natural Resources and Environmental Protection , and Transportation ) . 
 By 2002 , the executive branch had again grown to fourteen cabinets , but had no additional departments . Shortly after his election in 2003 , Governor Ernie Fletcher undertook the last major reorganization of the executive branch to date , reducing the number of cabinets to nine — Justice and Public Safety , Education and Workforce Development , Environmental and Public Protection , Transportation , Economic Development , Health and Family Services , Finance and Administration , Tourism , Arts and Heritage , and Personnel . 
 Because the governor controls so many appointments to commissions — approximately 2 @,@ 000 according to a 1992 estimate — the office has been historically considered one of the most powerful state executive positions in the United States . Additionally , the governor is given wide discretion in awarding state contracts , further augmenting his influence . In the second half of the 20th century , attempts were made to curb the use of the governor 's appointment power for political patronage . During his second term in office , Happy Chandler issued an executive order creating a merit system that forbade the hiring or firing of state employees for political reasons ; his successor , Bert T. Combs , pushed a new merit system through the legislature , protecting it from abolition by executive order . Despite the presence of the merit system , many governors have been criticized for abusing their appointment power . In 2005 , Ernie Fletcher and several members of his administration were indicted for violating the merit system in their hiring practices ; the charges were later dropped as part of an agreement with the prosecutor , Attorney General Greg Stumbo . 
 = = = Unofficial powers = = = 
 In The Kentucky Encyclopedia , Eastern Kentucky University professor Paul Blanchard writes that " Many observers consider the governor 's informal powers — those derived from tradition , custom , and precedent — as important as the formal powers . " Frequently the leaders of their political parties at the state level , Kentucky governors usually control the party 's delegations to state and national party conventions . Though given few powers with regard to the legislature , Kentucky governors can exercise a great deal of influence over the General Assembly , often hand @-@ selecting the leadership of both chambers . A move toward a more independent legislature began in the last quarter of the 20th century , particularly during the administration of Governor John Y. Brown , Jr. from 1979 to 1983 . Brown was much less engaged in legislative affairs than his predecessors ; he did not seek to influence the selection of the legislature 's leadership , and he left on vacation during one of the two legislative sessions of his term . The trend toward a coequal legislature continued under the administrations of Brown 's two immediate successors , Martha Layne Collins and Wallace Wilkinson , neither of whom was considered a strong executive . 
 The governor is also the most visible state officer and is the center of political attention in the Commonwealth . The official host of the state when dignitaries visit , the governor frequently delivers addresses at various dedications and ceremonies , and appears on national television with the winner of the annual Kentucky Derby . The state constitution requires the governor to address the legislature periodically regarding the state of the Commonwealth . This address , traditionally given annually , is often targeted directly at the state 's citizens as much as , or more so than , the legislature . The governor can use the address to extol the accomplishments of his or her term and lay out a specific plan for the upcoming legislative session ; the contents of the address often shape the agenda of the session . The state 's media outlets devote significant coverage to the governor 's actions , and many strong governors have used the media to win support for their agendas and criticize political enemies . 
 = = Qualifications and term = = 
 Candidates for the office of governor of Kentucky must be at least thirty years of age and have resided in the state for at least six years preceding the general election . The residency requirement was increased from two years to six years in the constitution of 1799 and all subsequent constitutions . The 1792 constitution — the state 's first — also included an exception for candidates who had been absent from the state " on the public business of the United States or of this State . " The age requirement was raised from thirty years to thirty @-@ five years in the 1799 constitution and was returned to thirty years in the 1891 constitution . 
 A prohibition against any person concurrently holding the office of governor and a federal office appears in the first three state constitutions , but is absent in the state 's current charter . Additionally , the 1799 constitution barred a " minister of any religious society " from holding the office . This language was possibly aimed at the sitting governor , James Garrard , who was an ordained Baptist minister and had frequently clashed with the legislature . The prohibition against ministers holding the office remained in the 1850 constitution , but was removed from the 1891 constitution . 
 In the 1891 constitution , a section was included that forbade anyone from holding any state office — including the office of governor — who had " either directly or indirectly , give [ n ] , accept [ ed ] or knowingly carr [ ied ] a challenge to any person or persons to fight in single combat , with a citizen of this State , with a deadly weapon , either in or out of the State " . This provision reflected the prevalence of duelling in the South at the time . Though anachronistic , the provision remains in the state constitution and the gubernatorial oath of office , which states : 
 The governor 's term has been for four years in all four state constitutions . The governor was not term @-@ limited in the 1792 constitution , but in the 1799 constitution , the governor was made ineligible for re @-@ election for seven years following the expiration of his term . The provision did not apply to then @-@ sitting governor James Garrard , who was re @-@ elected in 1799 . In the 1850 constitution , the period of ineligibility following the expiration of the governor 's term was shortened to four years , and it remained so in the 1891 constitution . In 1953 , Governor Lawrence Wetherby lamented the challenges presented by the term limit coupled with biennial legislative sessions : 
 A Kentucky governor is elected under our constitution for four years without legal opportunity , regardless of how acceptable his program has been , to put it before the public for approval or rejection . In practical application he must successfully run the legislative gauntlet during the first hurried ninety days he is in office if he is to adopt a program and have an administration worthy of history 's harsh pen . The remaining general assembly two years hence is invariably plagued with vicissitudes common to ' lame duck ' tenures . 
 The idea of removing the gubernatorial term limit was first proposed in the 1850 constitutional convention , but was vigorously opposed by some of the state 's best known statesmen of the day , including Archibald Dixon , Garrett Davis , Benjamin Hardin , and Charles A. Wickliffe . Not until 1992 was an amendment to the state constitution passed to help ameliorate the situation by making the governor eligible to succeed himself one time before becoming ineligible for four years . Succession amendments had been proposed and defeated during the administrations of John Y. Brown , Jr. and Wallace Wilkinson , but then @-@ Governor Brereton Jones was able to see it passed because , unlike Brown and Wilkinson , he was willing to exempt the present incumbents , including himself , from the succession provision . Paul E. Patton , with victories in the elections of 1995 and 1999 , was the first governor to be elected to consecutive terms since the 1992 amendment . Another constitutional amendment , passed in November 2000 , called for a 30 @-@ day legislative session to be held in odd @-@ numbered years between the longer 60 @-@ day sessions held in even @-@ numbered years . 
 = = Election = = 
 In the 1792 constitution , the governor and state senators were chosen by electors , in a manner similar to the operation of the United States Electoral College . In the 1795 gubernatorial election , Benjamin Logan received 21 electoral votes , James Garrard received 17 , Thomas Todd received 14 , and John Brown received 1 . The constitution did not specify whether election required a plurality or a majority of the electoral votes cast ; in the absence of any instruction , the electors held a runoff vote , wherein most of Todd 's electors voted for Garrard , giving him a majority . The secretary of state certified Garrard 's election , though Attorney General John Breckinridge questioned the legality of the second vote and Logan formally protested it . Ultimately , Breckinridge determined that he was not empowered by the state constitution to intervene , and Logan gave up the challenge . The 1799 constitution changed the method of selecting the governor to direct election by majority vote and prescribed that , in the event of a tie vote , the governor would be chosen by lot in the Kentucky General Assembly . This provision has remained since 1799 . 
 After the development of the party system , it became commonplace for political parties to choose their nominees for the office of governor via a nominating convention . Thomas Metcalfe was the first gubernatorial candidate chosen by a nominating convention ; he was nominated by the National Republican Party at their convention in December 1827 . Governor Ruby Laffoon , elected in 1931 , was the last governor of Kentucky nominated by a convention . Laffoon 's lieutenant governor , Happy Chandler , pushed the legislature to mandate party primaries , which they did in 1935 . Party primaries remain required by law today . In 1992 , the state constitution was amended to require candidates for governor and lieutenant governor to be nominated and elected as a ticket . 
 Kentucky is one of only five U.S. states to hold gubernatorial elections in odd @-@ numbered years — commonly called an off @-@ year election . Louisiana , Mississippi , Virginia , and New Jersey also hold off @-@ year gubernatorial elections . The general election for governor and lieutenant governor is held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November . The governor and lieutenant governor are inaugurated on the fifth Tuesday after their election . This was changed from the fourth Tuesday after the election by the 1850 constitution . 
 = = Succession = = 
 Under Kentucky 's first constitution ( 1792 ) , the Speaker of the Kentucky Senate became acting governor upon the death , resignation , or removal of the sitting governor from office , until a new election could be held . The 1799 constitution created the office of lieutenant governor , who acted as Speaker of the Senate , but was not otherwise considered a member of that body . The lieutenant governor was to become governor in the event of the sitting governor 's death , resignation , or removal from office and was to act in a gubernatorial capacity any time the governor was out of the state . Whenever the lieutenant governor became acting governor , the Senate was to elect one of its members to act as Speaker ; that individual then became next in the line of gubernatorial succession . A provision of the 1850 constitution added that , if the governor 's term had more than two years remaining at the time of his death , resignation , or removal from office , a special election would be called to fill the office ; the lieutenant governor would be acting governor in the interim . 
 In the 1891 constitution , the chain of succession was extended . It mandated that , if the Senate was not in session and therefore did not have an elected Speaker , the secretary of state , or in the event of his inability to qualify , the attorney general , would become acting governor in the event of the death , resignation , or removal from office of the sitting governor and lieutenant governor . The secretary of state or attorney general would then be required to call the Senate into session to elect a Speaker , who would subsequently become governor . A 1992 amendment to the state constitution removed the provision under which the lieutenant governor became acting governor when the sitting governor was out of the state . It also relieved the lieutenant governor of his duties in the Senate and created the office of President of the Kentucky Senate , chosen from among the state senators , who presides over the Senate . The amendment also modified the chain of succession again — it is now as follows : 
 Governor 
 Lieutenant Governor 
 President of the Senate ( if the Senate is in session ) 
 Attorney General ( if the Senate is not in session ) 
 State Auditor ( if the Senate is not in session and the Attorney General fails to qualify ) 
 If the office devolves upon the Attorney General or State Auditor , that individual is required to call the Senate into session to elect a president , who would subsequently become governor . 
 The first instance of gubernatorial succession in Kentucky 's history occurred upon the death of Governor George Madison in 1816 . Madison was extremely popular as a twice @-@ wounded war hero . He died of tuberculosis just three weeks into his term . His lieutenant governor , Gabriel Slaughter , ascended to the governorship and immediately made two very unpopular appointments . These moves engendered much animosity toward Slaughter , and a movement began in the House of Representatives to hold a new election for governor . Leaders of the movement , including a young John C. Breckinridge , claimed that Slaughter was only the " acting governor " until a new governor was elected . The call for a new election failed in the House in 1815 , but was approved by the House in 1817 only to fail in the Senate . Slaughter served out the rest of Madison 's term and in so doing , established the precedent that the lieutenant governor would be the permanent successor to the governor upon the latter 's death , resignation , or removal from office . 
 Besides Madison , four other governors have died while in office — John Breathitt , James Clark , John L. Helm , and William Goebel . All died of natural causes except Goebel , who is the only governor of any U.S. state to have been assassinated . Goebel lost the contentious 1899 gubernatorial election to William S. Taylor , but challenged the results . While the General Assembly was considering the challenge , Goebel was shot . Days later , the General Assembly decided in favor of Goebel , ousting Taylor from office and making Goebel governor . Goebel was sworn in on his sick bed and died two days later . His lieutenant governor , J. C. W. Beckham , succeeded him . 
 Seven men have resigned the office of governor before the end of their terms — John J. Crittenden , Beriah Magoffin , John W. Stevenson , Augustus O. Stanley , Happy Chandler , Earle C. Clements , and Wendell H. Ford . Six resigned to accept a higher office : Crittenden was appointed Attorney General of the United States and the other five were elected to the U.S. Senate . Only Beriah Magoffin resigned under duress . A Confederate sympathizer during the Civil War , Magoffin 's power was entirely checked by a hostile , pro @-@ Union legislature . With the state 's government in gridlock , Magoffin agreed to resign in exchange for being able to name his successor . Lieutenant Governor Linn Boyd had died in office , and the Speaker of the Senate , John F. Fisk , was not acceptable to Magoffin as a successor . Fisk resigned as Speaker , and the Senate elected Magoffin 's choice , James Fisher Robinson as Speaker . Magoffin then resigned , Robinson was elevated to governor , and Fisk was re @-@ elected as Speaker of the Senate . 
 All elected officials in Kentucky , including the governor , are subject to impeachment for " any misdemeanors in office " . The articles of impeachment must be issued by the House of Representatives and the trial is conducted by the Senate . If convicted , the governor is subject to removal from office and may be prohibited from holding elected office in the state thereafter . <unk> governors may also be subject to trial in the criminal or civil court system . No governor of Kentucky has been impeached . 
 = = Compensation and residence = = 
 Each iteration of the Kentucky Constitution has provided that the governor receive a salary . Under the first three constitutions , the governor 's salary could not be increased or reduced while he was in office ; this provision was extended to all public officials in the present constitution . The governor 's salary is set by law , and is equal to $ 60 @,@ 000 times the increase in the consumer price index between January 1 , 1984 , and the beginning of the current calendar year . In 2014 , the governor 's salary was $ 186 @,@ 730 . 
 The Kentucky Governor 's Mansion is the official residence of the governor of Kentucky . The present Governor 's Mansion , constructed in 1914 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1972 , is located at 704 Capitol Avenue in the state capital of Frankfort . It is the second building to serve as the official residence of the governor of Kentucky . The Kentucky Revised Statutes provide that " [ t ] he Governor shall have the use of the mansion and the furniture therein and premises , free of rent , but the purchase of furniture for the mansion shall be upon the recommendation of the secretary of the Finance and Administration Cabinet " . 
 The state 's first governor 's mansion was constructed during the gubernatorial tenure of James Garrard . According to tradition , future governors Thomas Metcalfe ( a stonemason ) and Robert P. Letcher ( who worked at his father 's brickyard ) participated in the construction of the first governor 's mansion . After the construction of the present governor 's mansion , the old governor 's mansion became the official residence of the lieutenant governor . Lieutenant governor Steve Henry vacated the mansion in 2002 so it could be renovated ; following the renovation , it became a state guest house and official entertainment space for the governor . For many years , the mansion was the oldest official residence still in use in the United States . Located at 420 High Street in Frankfort , it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1971 . 
 = = History of the office = = 
 Political parties had developed in the United States before Kentucky became a state . Because most early Kentuckians were Virginians , they naturally allied with the Democratic @-@ Republicans , the party of Thomas Jefferson and James Madison ; the latter was a cousin of George Madison , the state 's sixth governor . Political victories were few and far between for Federalists in Kentucky , and none of Kentucky 's governors were members of the Federalist Party . Military service was the most important consideration for voters in Kentucky 's early gubernatorial elections . John Breathitt , elected Kentucky 's eleventh governor in 1832 , was the first Kentucky governor not to have served in the military . 
 The Federalist Party had died out nationally by 1820 , but new party divisions were soon to form in Kentucky . The Panic of 1819 left many Kentuckians deeply in debt and without a means of repaying their creditors . Two factions grew up around the issue of debt relief . Those who favored laws favorable to debtors were dubbed the " Relief Party " and those who favored laws protecting creditors were called the " Anti @-@ Relief Party " . While not formal political parties — members of both factions still considered themselves Democratic @-@ Republicans — these factions defined the political dialogue of the 1820s in Kentucky . The debt relief issue began under Gabriel Slaughter , who identified with the Anti @-@ Relief Party , but Slaughter 's two immediate successors , John Adair and Joseph Desha , were members of the Relief Party . The struggle between the two parties culminated in the Old Court – New Court controversy , an attempt by the pro @-@ relief legislature to abolish the Court of Appeals because the court overturned some debt relief measures as unconstitutional . The controversy ended with the restoration of the Old Court over Desha 's veto in late 1826 . 
 Although many Old Court supporters — typically the state 's wealthy aristocracy — gravitated to the National Republican Party ( later to be called Whigs ) that formed in the 1820s , it is inaccurate to assume the Anti @-@ Relief Party as a whole became National Republicans and the Relief Party became Democrats . The primary factor in determining which party Kentuckians aligned with was their faith in Whig Party founder and native son , Henry Clay . From the election of Thomas Metcalfe in 1828 to the expiration of John L. Helm 's term in 1851 , only one Democrat held the office of governor : John Breathitt , who died a year and a half into his term and was succeeded in office by his lieutenant governor , James Turner Morehead , a National Republican . 
 Following the collapse of the Whig Party in the early 1850s , many former Whigs joined the Know Nothing , or American , Party , and Charles S. Morehead was elected governor from that party in 1855 . Sectarian tensions gripped the state in the lead @-@ up to the Civil War , and while the majority of Kentuckians favored the preservation of the Union above all else , a self @-@ constituted group of Confederate sympathizers met at Russellville and formed a Confederate government for the state . While this provisional government never displaced the elected government in Frankfort , two men served as Confederate governors of Kentucky . 
 From the close of the Civil War until 1895 , Kentuckians elected a series of Bourbon Democrats with Confederate sympathies as governor , including two men — James B. McCreary and Simon Bolivar Buckner — who had served in the Confederate States Army . The Democratic dominance was broken by William O 'Connell Bradley , who was elected the state 's first Republican governor in 1895 . Bradley 's election marked the beginning of thirty years of true , two @-@ party competition for the governorship in the state . Between 1895 and 1931 , five Republicans and six Democrats held the office of governor . Since 1931 , however , the Republicans have been unable to preserve this level of parity , and in that period only four of the twenty elected governors have been from the Republican party , including incumbent Matt Bevin . 
 = Julius Schaub = 
 Julius Schaub ( 20 August 1898 – 27 December 1967 ) was the chief aide and adjutant to German dictator Adolf Hitler until the dictator 's suicide on 30 April 1945 . 
 Born in 1898 in Munich , Bavaria , Schaub served as a field medic during World War I , during which he injured both of his feet . During the hard times which followed during the Great Depression , Schaub joined the Nazi Party . After losing his job because of his membership , Hitler hired him as his personal aide , a position he held for 25 years . 
 Schaub took care of Hitler 's personal belongings , papers and travel journeys , making him a notable figure in Hitler 's inner circle . In 1924 , he was imprisoned with Hitler for his involvement in the coup d 'état attempt of November 1923 in Munich . In time he closely befriended Hitler . Later in July 1944 , Schaub was present during the military briefing during which a bomb exploded , killing four people and injuring others ; Hitler escaped with minor injuries . 
 Schaub was ordered to leave the Führerbunker in late April 1945 and destroy all of Hitler 's personal belongings and papers . He was arrested by the Americans shortly after the war . He was actively involved with Nazi activities . Schaub died on 27 December 1967 in Munich . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Julius Schaub was born on 20 August 1898 in Munich , a largely Catholic city in southern Bavaria . On 28 June 1914 , Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife were assassinated by a group of Serbian and Bosnian rebels . This triggered the outbreak of World War I in Europe . On 17 January 1917 , Schaub was drafted to serve as a field medic in the German Army . According to Traudl Junge , one of Hitler 's private secretaries , both of Schaub 's feet had been injured in the war , making him semi @-@ handicapped . By the end of the war , Schaub found work as a contract worker at the Munich Central Supply Office . 
 = = Association with Hitler = = 
 After defeat in World War I , Germany was plunged into bankruptcy , social injustice , poverty , crime and mass unemployment . During these depressing years , Germany saw the creation of a number of extremist political and paramilitary associations , representing both the far @-@ left and the far @-@ right . Amidst this crisis , Schaub decided to join the National Socialist German Workers Party , later commonly known as the Nazi Party ; he became member # 81 . The political program of the party was essentially a rejection of the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , antisemitism , and anti @-@ Bolshevism , driven by Adolf Hitler and his world view . 
 After getting involved with the Nazi Party , Schaub lost his job at the Munich Central Supply Office . Upon hearing the news , Hitler hired him as his personal aide @-@ de @-@ camp . Thereafter , Schaub looked after his confidential papers , carried money for Hitler 's use and provided both secretary and security duties . A friendship developed , which was evident by Hitler later appearing as a witness at Schaub 's second wedding . Junge states that Schaub considered himself to be an " amazingly important , significant person " to the Nazi cause . The Luftwaffe chief Hermann Göring , who gave humorous nicknames to almost all in Hitler 's inner circle , dubbed Schaub the " Travel Marshal " as he typically took care of Hitler 's traveling arrangements and often accompanied him . As Hitler disliked change in personnel and liked to keep familiar faces around him , Schaub remained in Hitler 's staff for 25 years . He later became Hitler 's chief aide and adjutant in October 1940 . 
 = = = Munich Putsch = = = 
 In 1923 , the Nazis felt strong enough to try to seize power in Munich . They decided to march on the city , inspired by Benito Mussolini 's successful march on Rome . Known as the Beer Hall Putsch , Hitler and his paramilitary Sturmabteilung ( SA ) troops failed to take control of Munich . Schaub and other Nazis were arrested and imprisoned with Hitler at Landsberg Prison . After the 1925 reformation of Nazi Party , Schaub became a founding member of the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) , documented as member # 7 . 
 = = = 20 July plot = = = 
 Later during World War II , with Germany suffering major defeat on all fronts , Colonel Claus von Stauffenberg and his fellow conspirators decided to eliminate Hitler and the Nazi leadership , establish a new pro @-@ Western government and save Germany from total destruction . Stauffenberg had his opportunity on 20 July 1944 at a military briefing at Hitler 's East Prussian headquarters known as the " Wolf 's Lair " . He managed to get through security and plant a briefcase bomb under the conference table . The bomb exploded , fatally wounding three officers and a stenographer who died soon after . Hitler survived with only minor injuries , as did everyone else who was shielded from the bomb blast by the conference table leg . 
