 In the aftermath of the event , Hitler had a badge struck to honor all those injured or killed in the explosion ; the " 20 July Wound Badge " . Those present at the conference later said that Schaub , who was in another building at the time of the explosion , falsely tried to claim he was injured so as to qualify for the badge . 
 = = = 1945 = = = 
 In January 1945 , Hitler and his staff relocated to the Führerbunker in Berlin . After finally admitting everything was lost , he ordered much of his personal staff to leave Berlin in late April 1945 . Schaub was instructed to burn all of Hitler 's personal belongings and papers in the garden of the Reich Chancellery . Schaub then flew to Munich and did the same in Hitler 's private apartment at the <unk> and then at the Berghof on the Obersalzberg . His final act as aide and adjutant was to destroy Hitler 's personal train , the " Führer <unk> " . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After the war , while possessing false identification papers and introducing himself as " Josef Huber " , Schaub was arrested by American troops on 8 May 1945 in <unk> , and remained in custody until 17 February 1949 . Ultimately , Schaub was classified by denazification investigators as being only a " fellow traveler " and was not accused or associated with any war crimes . His final rank , promoted in 1944 , was SS @-@ Obergruppenführer . Schaub died on 27 December 1967 in his hometown Munich . Junge described Schaub in her memoirs as " extremely kind , but very curious too " . She further notes that " for historical purposes , it 's not worth saying much about him " . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " Unseen Photographs Reveal the Private Life of Adolf Hitler " . The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 30 March 2015 . 
 = Poor Jake 's Demise = 
 Poor Jake 's Demise is a 1913 American silent short slapstick comedy film directed by Allen Curtis and featuring Max Asher and Lon Chaney . The slapstick film focuses on Jake who finds his wife in a compromising position with another man and later takes his revenge with a seltzer bottle . It is one of several slapstick comedy films Chaney made for Universal at the start of his career and is also his first credited screen role . The film was presumed lost , but a fragment of the film was discovered in England in May 2006 and restored . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jake comes home and finds his wife and Willy <unk> in a compromising position . Enraged , Jake throws Willy out of the house and scolds his wife and threatens to kill himself . Fearful that Jake will commit suicide , the wife calls the police and three officers are sent out to find Jake . Stopping at a bar before he commits suicide , Jake finds Willy who is drowning his sorrows . Jake takes his revenge on Willy with a seltzer bottle . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Max Asher as Jake Schultz 
 Daisy Small as Mrs. Schultz 
 Lon Chaney as The Dude 
 Louise Fazenda as Servant 
 = = Production = = 
 Poor Jake 's Demise was directed by Allen Curtis and produced by Independent Moving Pictures Company ( IMP ) and distributed by Universal Film Manufacturing Company . The screenplay author was not credited . The film is notable for having been the first billed appearance of Lon Chaney and perhaps the debut of Louise Fazenda . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film was released on August 16 , 1913 and had viewings in Texas , North Carolina , Pennsylvania , Wisconsin , and Illinois . A contemporary review of the film in Moving Picture World described it as " simply horse play without any special appeal , though it is harmless and lacks vulgarity . " 
 The film was presumed lost , but a fragment of the film was discovered in England in May 2006 . It has since been restored by the <unk> Laboratory of Amsterdam and Lobster Films , Paris . The restored fragment is 7 minutes and 52 seconds long . In 2006 , the film was shown at the Pordenone Silent Film Festival . The film would also be shown at the 31st <unk> Sudbury International Film Festival on the evening of March 19 , 2011 . 
 In 1957 , an article by Jim Neal of the Denton Record @-@ Chronicle cited this as the first of Lon Chaney 's films . Don G. Smith 's book , Lon Chaney , Jr . : Horror Film Star , 1906 @-@ 1973 , also claims this film as Chaney 's first . Rosemary <unk> would also refer to this claim in The Encyclopedia of Vampires , Werewolves , and Other Monsters . Chronologically , this is the first released film with a confirmed credit for Chaney and also the first billed release . According to Blake , Chaney did not appear in The Honor of the Family or The Ways of Fate , two earlier films sometimes credited to him . 
 = Thoughts on the Education of Daughters = 
 Thoughts on the education of daughters : with reflections on female conduct , in the more important duties of life is the first published work of the British feminist Mary Wollstonecraft . Published in 1787 by her friend Joseph Johnson , Thoughts is a conduct book that offers advice on female education to the emerging British middle class . Although dominated by considerations of morality and etiquette , the text also contains basic child @-@ rearing instructions , such as how to care for an infant . 
 An early version of the modern self @-@ help book , the 18th @-@ century British conduct book drew on many literary traditions , such as advice manuals and religious narratives . There was an explosion in the number of conduct books published during the second half of the 18th century , and Wollstonecraft took advantage of this burgeoning market when she published Thoughts . However , the book was only moderately successful : it was favourably reviewed , but only by one journal and it was reprinted only once . Although it was excerpted in popular contemporary magazines , it was not republished until the rise of feminist literary criticism in the 1970s . 
 Like other conduct books of the time , Thoughts adapts older genres to the new middle @-@ class ethos . The book encourages mothers to teach their daughters analytical thinking , self @-@ discipline , honesty , contentment in their social position , and marketable skills ( in case they should ever need to support themselves ) . These goals reveal Wollstonecraft 's intellectual debt to John Locke ; however , the prominence she affords religious faith and innate feeling distinguishes her work from his . Her aim is to educate women to be useful wives and mothers , because , she argues , it is through these roles that they can most effectively contribute to society . The predominantly domestic role Wollstonecraft outlines for women — a role that she viewed as meaningful — was interpreted by 20th @-@ century feminist literary critics as paradoxically confining them to the private sphere . 
 Although much of Thoughts is devoted to platitudes and advice common to all conduct books for women , a few passages anticipate Wollstonecraft 's feminist arguments in A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) , such as her poignant description of the suffering single woman . However , several critics suggested that such passages only seem to have radical undertones in light of Wollstonecraft 's later works . 
 = = Biographical background = = 
 Like many impoverished women during the last quarter of the 18th century in Britain , Wollstonecraft attempted to support herself by establishing a school . She , her sister , and a close friend founded a boarding school in Newington Green , a village already known for its Dissenting academies , including that of political theorist and educational reformer James Burgh , whose widow acted as " fairy godmother " in helping Wollstonecraft to find a house and pupils . However , in the late 1780s the school closed because of financial difficulties , and , desperate to escape from debt , Wollstonecraft wrote her first book , Thoughts on the Education of Daughters . The title alludes to Burgh 's Thoughts on Education ( 1747 ) , which in turn alludes to John Locke 's 1693 work , Some Thoughts Concerning Education . She sold the copyright for only ten guineas to Joseph Johnson , a publisher recommended to her by a friend ; they became friends and he encouraged her writing throughout her life . 
 Wollstonecraft next tried her hand at being a governess , but she chafed at her lowly position and refused to accommodate herself to her employers . The modest success of Thoughts and Johnson 's encouragement emboldened Wollstonecraft to embark on a career as a professional writer , a precarious and somewhat disreputable profession for women during the 18th century . She wrote to her sister that she was going to become the " first of a new genus " and published Mary : A Fiction , an autobiographical novel , in 1788 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Addressed to mothers , young women , and teachers , Thoughts on the Education of Daughters explains how to educate a woman from infancy through marriage . Its twenty @-@ one chapters are not arranged in any particular order and cover a wide variety of topics . The first two chapters , " The Nursery " and " Moral Discipline " , offer advice on shaping the child 's " constitution " and " temperament " , arguing that the formation of the rational mind must begin early . These chapters also offer specific recommendations regarding the care of infants and endorse breastfeeding ( a hotly debated topic in the 18th century ) . Much of the book criticizes what Wollstonecraft considers the damaging education usually offered to women : " artificial manners " , card @-@ playing , theatre @-@ going , and an emphasis on fashion . She complains , for example , that women " squander " their money on clothing , " which if saved for charitable purposes , might alleviate the distress of many poor families , and soften the heart of the girl who entered into such scenes of woe " . She contrasts this common but ineffectual education with one based on early childhood reading , benevolence , and love . Wollstonecraft also delves into a description of social issues , addressing the " Unfortunate Situation of Females , Fashionably Educated , and Left without a Fortune " in addition to the " Treatment of Servants " . Religious faith plays a prominent role in Wollstonecraft 's educational plan ; she advocates Sabbath observance and describes the " Benefits which arise from Disappointments " , that is , the benefits which arise from suffering sent by God . 
 In her later works , such as A Vindication of the Rights of Men ( 1790 ) and A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) , Wollstonecraft repeatedly returns to the topics addressed in Thoughts , particularly the virtue of hard work and the imperative for women to learn useful skills . Wollstonecraft suggests that the social and political life of the nation would greatly improve if women were to acquire valuable skills instead of being mere social ornaments . 
 = = Genre : the conduct book = = 
 Between 1760 and 1820 , conduct books reached the height of their popularity in Britain ; one scholar refers to the period as " the age of courtesy books for women " . As Nancy Armstrong writes in her seminal work on this genre , Desire and Domestic Fiction ( 1987 ) : " so popular did these books become that by the second half of the eighteenth century virtually everyone knew the ideal of womanhood they proposed " . 
 Conduct books integrated the styles and rhetorics of earlier genres , such as devotional writings , marriage manuals , recipe books , and works on household economy . They offered their readers a description of ( most often ) the ideal woman while at the same time handing out practical advice . Thus , not only did they dictate morality , but they also guided readers ' choice of dress and outlined " proper " etiquette . Typical examples include Bluestocking Hester Chapone 's Letters on the Improvement of the Mind ( 1773 ) , which went through at least sixteen editions in the last quarter of the 18th century , and the classically educated historian Catharine Macaulay 's Letters on Education ( 1790 ) . Chapone 's work , in particular , appealed to Wollstonecraft at this time and influenced her composition of Thoughts because it argued " for a sustained programme of study for women " and was based on the idea that Christianity should be " the chief instructor of our rational faculties " . Moreover , it emphasized that women should be considered rational beings and not left to wallow in sensualism . When Wollstonecraft wrote A Vindication of the Rights of Woman in 1792 , she drew on both Chapone and Macaulay 's works . 
 Conduct books have traditionally been viewed by scholars as an integral factor in the creation of a bourgeois sense of self . The conduct book " helped to generate the belief that there was such a thing as a ' middle class ' and that the modest , submissive but morally and domestically competent woman it described was the first ' modern individual ' " . By developing a specifically bourgeois ethos through genres such as the conduct book , the emerging middle class challenged the primacy of the aristocratic code of manners . However , conduct books simultaneously constricted women 's roles , propagating what has been called " the angel in the house " image ( alluding to Coventry Patmore 's poem of that name ) . Women were encouraged to be chaste , pious , submissive , modest , selfless , graceful , pure , delicate , compliant , reticent , and polite . 
 More recently , a few scholars have argued that conduct books should be differentiated more carefully and that some of them — such as Wollstonecraft 's Thoughts — transformed traditional female advice manuals into " proto @-@ feminist tracts " . These scholars view Thoughts as part of a tradition that adapted older genres to a new message of female empowerment , genres such as advice manuals for women 's education , moral satires , and moral and spiritual works by religious Dissenters ( those not associated with the Church of England ) . Wollstonecraft 's text resembles conventional conduct books in promoting self @-@ control and submission , traits that were supposed to attract a husband . Yet at the same time , the text challenges this portrait of the " proper lady " by introducing strains of religious Dissent that promote equality of the soul . Thus , Thoughts appears to be torn between several sets of binaries , such as compliance and rebellion ; spiritual meekness and rational independence ; and domestic duty and political participation . This view of the conduct book , and of Thoughts in particular , questions the earlier interpretation of the genre as a mere tool of ideological indoctrination , an interpretation that grew out of criticism influenced by theorists such as Michel Foucault . 
 = = Pedagogical theory = = 
 By the end of her life , Wollstonecraft had been involved in almost every arena of education : she had been a governess , a teacher , a children 's writer , and a pedagogical theorist . Most of her works deal with education in some way . For example , her two novels are <unk> ( novels of education ) ; she translated educational works such as Christian Gotthilf Salzmann 's Elements of Morality ; she wrote a children 's book , Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) ; and her Vindication of the Rights of Woman is largely an argument for the value of female education . As is evidenced by this broad range of genres , " education " for Wollstonecraft and her contemporaries included much more than scholastic training ; it encompassed everything that went into forming a person 's character , from infant swaddling to childhood curricular choices to adolescent leisure activities . 
 Wollstonecraft and other political radicals during the last quarter of the 18th century focused their reform efforts on education because they believed that if people were educated correctly , Britain would experience a moral and political revolution . Religious Dissenters , especially , embraced this view ; Wollstonecraft 's philosophy in Thoughts and elsewhere closely resembles that of the Dissenters she met while teaching in Newington Green , such as the theologian , educator , and scientist Joseph Priestley and the minister Richard Price . Dissenters " were most concerned with molding children into people of good moral character and habits " . However , political conservatives , who also believed that childhood was the crucial time for the formation of a person 's character , used their own educational works to deflect rebellion by promoting theories of compliance . Liberals and conservatives alike subscribed to Lockean and <unk> associationist psychology : that is , they believed that a person 's sense of self was built up through a set of associations made between things in the external world and ideas in the mind . Both Locke and Hartley had argued that the associations formed in childhood were nearly irreversible and must thus be formed with care . Locke famously advised parents to keep their children away from servants , as they would only tell children frightening stories that would foster a fear of the dark . 
 Wollstonecraft was significantly influenced by Locke 's Some Thoughts Concerning Education ( 1693 ) ( her title alludes to it ) and Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's Emile ( 1762 ) , the two most important pedagogical treatises of the 18th century . Thoughts follows in the Lockean tradition with its emphasis on a parent @-@ directed domestic education , a distrust of servants , a banning of superstitious and irrational stories ( e.g. fairy tales ) , and an advocacy of clear rules . Wollstonecraft breaks from Locke , however , in her emphasis on piety and her insistence that the child has " innate " feelings that guide her towards virtue , ideas likely drawn from Rousseau . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Thoughts advocates several educational goals for women : independent thought , rationality , self @-@ discipline , truthfulness , acceptance of one 's social position , marketable skills , and faith in God . 
 = = = Education of women = = = 
 Wollstonecraft assumes that the " daughters " in her book will one day become mothers and teachers . She does not propose that women abandon these traditional roles , because she believes that women can most effectively improve society as pedagogues . Wollstonecraft and other writers as diverse as the evangelical moralist Hannah More , the historian Catharine Macaulay , and the feminist novelist Mary Hays , argue that since women are the primary caregivers of the family and educators of children , they should be given a sound education . Thoughts is insistent , following Locke and associationist psychology , that a poor education and an early marriage will ruin a woman . Wollstonecraft argues that if no attention is paid to girls as they are growing , they will turn out poorly and marry while still intellectual and emotional children . Such wives , she contends , perform no useful role in society and , indeed , contribute to its immorality . She expanded upon this argument five years later in A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . 
 Wollstonecraft and others criticized the traditional " accomplishment " -based education traditionally offered women ; they argued that this kind of education , which emphasized the acquisition of skills such as drawing and dancing , was useless and decadent . The ideal woman in Thoughts is , as Wollstonecraft scholar Gary Kelly writes , " rational , provident , realistic , self @-@ disciplined , self @-@ conscious and critical " , an image that resembles that of the professional man . Wollstonecraft argues that women should have all of the intellectual and moral training given to men , though she does not provide women with a place to use these new skills beyond the home . 
 Wollstonecraft 's feminist critics charged that the masculine role for women that she envisioned — one designed for the public sphere but which women could not perform in the public sphere — left women without a specific social position . They saw it as ultimately confining and limiting — as offering women more in the way of education without a real way to use it . 
 Wollstonecraft 's most passionate writing in Thoughts focuses on the lack of career opportunities for women , a theme that would dominate her later novel Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman ( 1798 ) . In the chapter entitled " Unfortunate Situation of Females , Fashionably Educated , and Left without a Fortune " she writes , perhaps describing her own experiences : 
 [ T ] o be an humble companion to some rich old cousin ... It is impossible to enumerate the many hours of anguish such a person must spend . Above the servants , yet considered by them as a spy , and ever reminded of her inferiority when in conversation with the superiors . … A teacher at a school is only a kind of upper servant , who has more work than the menial ones . A governess to young ladies is equally disagreeable . … life glides away , and the spirits with it ; ' and when youth and genial years are flown , ' they have nothing to subsist on ; or , perhaps , on some extraordinary occasion , some small allowance may be made for them , which is thought a great charity . … It is hard for a person who has a relish for polished society , to herd with the vulgar , or to condescend to mix with her formal equals when she is considered in a different light ... How cutting is the contempt she meets with ! — A young mind looks round for love and friendship ; but love and friendship fly from poverty : expect them not if you are poor ! 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Although Wollstonecraft 's comments on female education hint at some of her more radical arguments in A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , the religious tone of the text — also found in her first novel , Mary : A Fiction — is generally viewed by scholars as conservative . The religion presented in Thoughts is one that celebrates the " pleasures of resignation " , the belief that the afterlife is awaiting and that the world is ordered by God for the best . Wollstonecraft writes : 
 He who is training us up for immortal bliss , knows best what trials will contribute to make us [ virtuous ] ; and our resignation and improvement will render us respectable to ourselves , and to that Being , whose approbation is of more value than life itself . 
 Although she drifted away from these beliefs and later adopted a more permissive theology , Thoughts is " steeped in orthodox attitudes , advocating ' fixed principles of religion ' and warning of the dangers of rationalist speculation and deism " . Wollstonecraft even agrees with Rousseau that women should be taught religious dogma rather than theology ; clear rules , she maintains , will restrain their passions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Thoughts was only moderately successful : it was reprinted in Dublin a year after its initial publication in London , extracts were published in The Lady 's Magazine , and Wollstonecraft included excerpts from it in her own Female Reader ( 1789 ) , an anthology of writings designed " for the Improvement of Young Women " . The English Review noticed Thoughts favourably : 
 These thoughts are employed on various important situations and incidents in the ordinary life of females , and are , in general , dictated with great judgment . Mrs. Wollstonecraft appears to have reflected maturely on her subject ; … while her manner gives authority , her good sense adds irresistible weight to almost all her precepts and remarks . We should therefore recommend these Thoughts as worthy the attention of those who are more immediately concerned in the education of young ladies . 
 However , no other journal reviewed the book and Thoughts was not reprinted until the late 20th century , when there was a resurgence of interest in Wollstonecraft among feminist literary critics . 
 Alan Richardson , a scholar of 18th @-@ century education , points out that if Wollstonecraft had not written A Vindication of the Rights of Men ( 1790 ) and A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , it is unlikely that Thoughts would have been considered progressive or even worthy of notice . One critic has even said that the text reads as if it were simply trying to please the public . Although some scholars have argued that there are glimmers of Wollstonecraft 's radicalism in this text , they admit that the " potential for critique remains largely latent " . Thoughts is therefore usually interpreted either <unk> , as a first step towards the more radical Rights of Woman , or dismissed as a " politically naïve potboiler " written prior to Wollstonecraft 's conversion to radicalism while she was writing the Rights of Men . 
 = = Modern reprints = = 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Thoughts on the Education of Daughters . Clifton , NJ : A. M. Kelley , 1972 . ISBN 0 @-@ 678 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Thoughts on the Education of Daughters . Oxford : Woodstock Books , 1994 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 195 @-@ 7 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Thoughts on the Education of Daughters . London : Printed by J. Johnson , 1787 . Eighteenth Century Collections Online ( by subscription only ) . Retrieved on 18 July 2007 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . The Complete Works of Mary Wollstonecraft . Ed . Janet Todd and Marilyn Butler . 7 vols . London : William Pickering , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 9225 @-@ 1 . 
 = Frank Zappa = 
 Frank Vincent Zappa ( December 21 , 1940 – December 4 , 1993 ) was an American musician , songwriter , composer , record producer , actor and filmmaker . In a career spanning more than 30 years , Zappa composed rock , jazz , jazz fusion , orchestral and musique concrète works , and produced almost all of the 60 @-@ plus albums that he released with his band the Mothers of Invention and as a solo artist . He also directed feature @-@ length films and music videos , and designed album covers . 
 As a self @-@ taught composer and performer , Zappa 's diverse musical influences led him to create music that was often difficult to categorize . While in his teens , he acquired a taste for 20th @-@ century classical composers such as Edgard Varèse , Igor Stravinsky , and Anton Webern , along with 1950s rhythm and blues music . He began writing classical music in high school , while at the same time playing drums in rhythm and blues bands ; later switching to electric guitar . His 1966 debut album with the Mothers of Invention , Freak Out ! , combined songs in conventional rock and roll format with collective improvisations and studio @-@ generated sound collages . He continued this eclectic and experimental approach , irrespective of whether the fundamental format was rock , jazz or classical . 
 Zappa 's lyrics reflected his iconoclastic view of established social and political processes , structures and movements , often humorously so . He was a strident critic of mainstream education and organized religion , and a forthright and passionate advocate for freedom of speech , self @-@ education , political participation and the abolition of censorship . Unlike many other rock musicians of his era , he disapproved of and seldom used drugs , but supported their decriminalization and regulation . 
 During Zappa 's lifetime , he was a highly productive and prolific artist , earning widespread acclaim from critics and fellow musicians . He had some commercial success , particularly in Europe , and worked as an independent artist for most of his career . He remains a major influence on musicians and composers . Sterling Whitaker described Zappa as " one of the most innovative and versatile rock musicians of his generation . " His honors include an induction into the 1995 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the 1997 Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award . In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked him at number 71 on its list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " , and in 2011 at number 22 on its list of the " 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Zappa was born in Baltimore , Maryland . His mother , Rose Marie ( born <unk> ) , was of Italian ( more specifically , her family was from Naples and Sicily ) and French ancestry ; his father , Francis Vincent Zappa , was an immigrant from <unk> , Sicily , with Greek and Arab ancestry . Zappa , the eldest of four children , was raised in an Italian @-@ American household where Italian was often spoken by his grandparents . The family moved often because his father , a chemist and mathematician , worked in the defense industry . After a time in Florida in the 1940s , the family returned to Maryland , where Zappa 's father worked at the Edgewood Arsenal chemical warfare facility of the Aberdeen Proving Ground . Due to their home 's proximity to the arsenal , which stored mustard gas , gas masks were kept in the home in case of an accident . This had a profound effect on Zappa , and references to germs , germ warfare and the defense industry occur throughout his work . 
 Zappa was often sick as a child , suffering from asthma , <unk> and sinus problems . A doctor treated his sinusitis by inserting a pellet of radium into each of Zappa 's nostrils . At the time , little was known about the potential dangers of even small amounts of therapeutic radiation , and although it has since been claimed that nasal radium treatment has causal connections to cancer , no studies have provided significant enough evidence to confirm this . Nasal imagery and references appear in his music and lyrics , as well as in the collage album covers created by his long @-@ time collaborator Cal Schenkel . Zappa believed his childhood diseases might have been due to exposure to mustard gas , released by the nearby chemical warfare facility . His health worsened when he lived in Baltimore . In 1952 , his family relocated for reasons of health . They next moved to Monterey , California , where his father taught metallurgy at the Naval Postgraduate School . They soon moved to Claremont , California , then to El Cajon , before finally settling in San Diego . 
 Zappa recalled his parents being " pretty religious " and trying to make him go to Catholic school despite his resentment . Zappa showed disgust towards organized religion ( Christianity in particular ) because he believed that it promoted ignorance and anti @-@ intellectualism . 
 = = = Musical influences = = = 
 Zappa joined his first band at Mission Bay High School in San Diego . He was the drummer . About the same time his parents bought a phonograph , which allowed him to develop his interest in music , and to begin building his record collection . R & B singles were early purchases , starting a large collection he kept for the rest of his life . He was interested in sounds for their own sake , particularly the sounds of drums and other percussion instruments . By age 12 , he had obtained a snare drum and began learning the basics of orchestral percussion . Zappa 's deep interest in modern classical music began when he read a <unk> magazine article about the Sam Goody record store chain that lauded its ability to sell an LP as obscure as The Complete Works of Edgard Varèse , Volume One . The article described Varèse 's percussion composition Ionisation , produced by EMS Recordings , as " a weird jumble of drums and other unpleasant sounds " . Zappa decided to seek out Varèse 's music . After searching for over a year , Zappa found a copy ( he noticed the LP because of the " mad scientist " looking photo of Varèse on the cover ) . Not having enough money with him , he persuaded the salesman to sell him the record at a discount . Thus began his lifelong passion for Varèse 's music and that of other modern classical composers . 
 Zappa grew up influenced by avant @-@ garde composers such as Varèse , Igor Stravinsky , and Anton Webern ; 1950 's blues artists Guitar Slim , Johnny Watson , and B.B. King ; R & B and doo @-@ wop groups ( particularly local <unk> groups ) ; and modern jazz . His own heterogeneous ethnic background , and the diverse social and cultural mix in and around greater Los Angeles , were crucial in the formation of Zappa as a practitioner of underground music and of his later distrustful and openly critical attitude towards " mainstream " social , political and musical movements . He frequently lampooned musical fads like psychedelia , rock opera and disco . Television also exerted a strong influence , as demonstrated by quotations from show themes and advertising jingles found in his later works . 
 = = 1955 – 60 : Youth and early career = = 
 By 1956 , the Zappa family had moved to Lancaster , a small aerospace and farming town in the Antelope Valley of the Mojave Desert close to Edwards Air Force Base , in northern Los Angeles County . Zappa 's mother encouraged him in his musical interests . Although she disliked Varèse 's music , she was indulgent enough to give her son a long distance call to the composer as a 15th birthday present . Unfortunately , Varèse was in Europe at the time , so Zappa spoke to the composer 's wife and she suggested he call back later . In a letter Varèse thanked him for his interest , and told him about a composition he was working on called " <unk> " . Living in the desert town of Lancaster , Zappa found this very exciting . Varèse invited him to visit if he ever came to New York . The meeting never took place ( Varèse died in 1965 ) , but Zappa framed the letter and kept it on display for the rest of his life . 
 At Antelope Valley High School , Zappa met Don Vliet ( who later expanded his name to Don Van Vliet and adopted the stage name Captain Beefheart ) . Zappa and Vliet became close friends , sharing an interest in R & B records and influencing each other musically throughout their careers . Around the same time , Zappa started playing drums in a local band , the Blackouts . The band was racially diverse , and included Euclid James " Motorhead " Sherwood who later became a member of the Mothers of Invention . Zappa 's interest in the guitar grew , and in 1957 he was given his first instrument . Among his early influences were Johnny " Guitar " Watson , Howlin ' Wolf and Clarence " Gatemouth " Brown . ( In the 1970s and ' 80s , he invited Watson to perform on several albums . ) Zappa considered soloing as the equivalent of forming " air sculptures " , and developed an eclectic , innovative and highly personal style . 
 Zappa 's interest in composing and arranging flourished in his last high @-@ school years . By his final year , he was writing , arranging and conducting avant @-@ garde performance pieces for the school orchestra . He graduated from Antelope Valley High School in 1958 , and later acknowledged two of his music teachers on the sleeve of the 1966 album Freak Out ! Due to his family 's frequent moves , Zappa attended at least six different high schools , and as a student he was often bored and given to distracting the rest of the class with juvenile antics . In 1959 , he attended Chaffey College but left after one semester , and maintained thereafter a disdain for formal education , taking his children out of school at age 15 and refusing to pay for their college . 
 Zappa left home in 1959 , and moved into a small apartment in Echo Park , Los Angeles . After meeting Kathryn J. " Kay " Sherman during his short period of private composition study with Prof. Karl Kohn of Pomona College , they moved in together in Ontario , and were married December 28 , 1960 . Zappa worked for a short period in advertising . His sojourn in the commercial world was brief , but gave him valuable insights into its workings . Throughout his career , he took a keen interest in the visual presentation of his work , designing some of his album covers and directing his own films and videos . 
 = = Early 1960s : Studio Z = = 
 Zappa attempted to earn a living as a musician and composer , and played different nightclub gigs , some with a new version of the Blackouts . Financially more rewarding were Zappa 's earliest professional recordings , two soundtracks for the low @-@ budget films The World 's Greatest Sinner ( 1962 ) and Run Home Slow ( 1965 ) . The former score was commissioned by actor @-@ producer Timothy Carey and recorded in 1961 . It contains many themes that appeared on later Zappa records . The latter soundtrack was recorded in 1963 after the film was completed , but it was commissioned by one of Zappa 's former high school teachers in 1959 and Zappa may have worked on it before the film was shot . Excerpts from the soundtrack can be heard on the posthumous album The Lost Episodes ( 1996 ) . 
 During the early 1960s , Zappa wrote and produced songs for other local artists , often working with singer @-@ songwriter Ray Collins and producer Paul Buff . Their " Memories of El Monte " was recorded by the Penguins , although only Cleve Duncan of the original group was featured . Buff owned the small Pal Recording Studio in Cucamonga , which included a unique five @-@ track tape recorder he had built . At that time , only a handful of the most sophisticated commercial studios had multi @-@ track facilities ; the industry standard for smaller studios was still mono or two @-@ track . Although none of the recordings from the period achieved major commercial success , Zappa earned enough money to allow him to stage a concert of his orchestral music in 1963 and to broadcast and record it . He appeared on Steve Allen 's syndicated late night show the same year , in which he played a bicycle as a musical instrument . Using a bow borrowed from the band 's bass player , as well as drum sticks , he proceeded to pluck , bang , and bow the spokes of the bike , producing strange , comical sounds from his new found instrument . With Captain Beefheart , Zappa recorded some songs under the name of the <unk> . They were rejected by Dot Records for having " no commercial potential " , a verdict Zappa subsequently quoted on the sleeve of Freak Out ! 
 In 1964 , after his marriage started to break up , he moved into the Pal studio and began routinely working 12 hours or more per day recording and experimenting with overdubbing and audio tape manipulation . This established a work pattern that endured for most of his life . Aided by his income from film composing , Zappa took over the studio from Paul Buff , who was now working with Art Laboe at Original Sound . It was renamed Studio Z. Studio Z was rarely booked for recordings by other musicians . Instead , friends moved in , notably James " Motorhead " Sherwood . Zappa started performing in local bars as a guitarist with a power trio , the <unk> , to support himself . 
 An article in the local press describing Zappa as " the Movie King of Cucamonga " prompted the local police to suspect that he was making pornographic films . In March 1965 , Zappa was approached by a vice squad undercover officer , and accepted an offer of $ 100 to produce a suggestive audio tape for an alleged stag party . Zappa and a female friend recorded a faked erotic episode . When Zappa was about to hand over the tape , he was arrested , and the police stripped the studio of all recorded material . The press was tipped off beforehand , and next day 's The Daily Report wrote that " Vice Squad investigators stilled the tape recorders of a free @-@ swinging , a @-@ go @-@ go film and recording studio here Friday and arrested a self @-@ styled movie producer " . Zappa was charged with " conspiracy to commit pornography " . This felony charge was reduced and he was sentenced to six months in jail on a misdemeanor , with all but ten days suspended . His brief imprisonment left a permanent mark , and was central to the formation of his anti @-@ authoritarian stance . Zappa lost several recordings made at Studio Z in the process , as the police only returned 30 out of 80 hours of tape seized . Eventually , he could no longer afford to pay the rent on the studio and was evicted . Zappa managed to recover some of his possessions before the studio was torn down in 1966 . 
 = = Late 1960s : The Mothers of Invention = = 
 In 1965 , Ray Collins asked Zappa to take over as guitarist in local R & B band the Soul Giants , following a fight between Collins and the group 's original guitarist . Zappa accepted , and soon assumed leadership and the role as co @-@ lead singer ( even though he never considered himself a singer ) . He convinced the other members that they should play his music to increase the chances of getting a record contract . The band was renamed the Mothers , coincidentally on Mother 's Day . They increased their bookings after beginning an association with manager Herb Cohen , while they gradually gained attention on the burgeoning Los Angeles underground music scene . In early 1966 , they were spotted by leading record producer Tom Wilson when playing " Trouble Every Day " , a song about the Watts riots . Wilson had earned acclaim as the producer for Bob Dylan and Simon & Garfunkel , and was notable as one of the few African @-@ Americans working as a major label pop music producer at this time . Wilson signed the Mothers to the Verve division of MGM , which had built up a strong reputation for its releases of modern jazz recordings in the 1940s and 1950s , but was attempting to diversify into pop and rock audiences . Verve insisted that the band officially rename themselves the Mothers of Invention as Mother was short for motherfucker — a term that , apart from its profane meanings , can denote a skilled musician . 
 = = = 1966 : Debut album : Freak Out ! = = = 
 With Wilson credited as producer , the Mothers of Invention , augmented by a studio orchestra , recorded the groundbreaking Freak Out ! ( 1966 ) , which , after Bob Dylan 's Blonde on Blonde , was the second rock double album ever released . It mixed R & B , doo @-@ wop , musique concrète , and experimental sound collages that captured the " freak " subculture of Los Angeles at that time . Although he was dissatisfied with the final product , Freak Out immediately established Zappa as a radical new voice in rock music , providing an antidote to the " relentless consumer culture of America " . The sound was raw , but the arrangements were sophisticated . While recording in the studio , some of the additional session musicians were shocked that they were expected to read the notes on sheet music from charts with Zappa conducting them , since it was not standard when recording rock music . The lyrics praised non @-@ conformity , disparaged authorities , and had dadaist elements . Yet , there was a place for seemingly conventional love songs . Most compositions are Zappa 's , which set a precedent for the rest of his recording career . He had full control over the arrangements and musical decisions and did most overdubs . Wilson provided the industry clout and connections and was able to provide the group with the financial resources needed . Although Wilson was able to provide Zappa and the Mothers with an extraordinary degree of artistic freedom for the time , the recording did not go entirely as planned . In a surviving 1967 radio interview , Zappa explained that the album 's outlandish 11 @-@ minute closing track , " Return of the Son of Monster Magnet " was in fact an unfinished piece . The track ( as it appears on the album ) was created to act as the backing track for a much more complex work , but MGM refused to approve the additional recording time Zappa needed to complete it , so ( much to his chagrin ) it was issued in this unfinished form . 
 During the recording of Freak Out ! , Zappa moved into a house in Laurel Canyon with friend Pamela <unk> , who appeared on the album . The house became a meeting ( and living ) place for many LA musicians and groupies of the time , despite Zappa 's disapproval of their illicit drug use . After a short promotional tour following the release of Freak Out ! , Zappa met Adelaide Gail Sloatman . He fell in love within " a couple of minutes " , and she moved into the house over the summer . They married in 1967 , had four children and remained together until Zappa 's death . 
 Wilson nominally produced the Mothers ' second album Absolutely Free ( 1967 ) , which was recorded in November 1966 , and later mixed in New York , although by this time Zappa was in de facto control of most facets of the production . It featured extended playing by the Mothers of Invention and focused on songs that defined Zappa 's compositional style of introducing abrupt , rhythmical changes into songs that were built from diverse elements . Examples are " Plastic People " and " Brown Shoes Don 't Make It " , which contained lyrics critical of the hypocrisy and conformity of American society , but also of the counterculture of the 1960s . As Zappa put it , " [ W ] e 're satirists , and we are out to satirize everything . " At the same time , Zappa had recorded material for an album of orchestral works to be released under his own name , Lumpy Gravy , released by Capitol Records in 1967 . Due to contractual problems , the album was pulled . Zappa took the opportunity to radically restructure the contents , adding newly recorded , improvised dialogue . After the contractual problems were resolved , the album was reissued by Verve in 1968 . It is an " incredible ambitious musical project " , a " monument to John Cage " , which intertwines orchestral themes , spoken words and electronic noises through radical audio editing techniques . 
 = = = 1966 – 68 : New York period = = = 
 The Mothers of Invention played in New York in late 1966 and were offered a contract at the Garrick Theater during Easter 1967 . This proved successful and Herb Cohen extended the booking , which eventually lasted half a year . As a result , Zappa and his wife , along with the Mothers of Invention , moved to New York . Their shows became a combination of improvised acts showcasing individual talents of the band as well as tight performances of Zappa 's music . Everything was directed by Zappa using hand signals . Guest performers and audience participation became a regular part of the Garrick Theater shows . One evening , Zappa managed to entice some U.S. Marines from the audience onto the stage , where they proceeded to dismember a big baby doll , having been told by Zappa to pretend that it was a " gook baby " . 
 Zappa uniquely contributed to the avant @-@ garde , anti @-@ establishment music scene of the 60 's , sampling radio tape recordings and incorporating his own philosophical ideals to music and freedom of expression in his pieces . Bands such as AMM and Faust also contributed to the radio sampling techniques of the 60 's , yet Zappa was unique in his mixtures of rock , classical , jazz , and avant @-@ garde styles of composition . He is credited by musicologists as making a fundamental contribution to the studies of how sound determines music , and music sound . 
 Situated in New York , and only interrupted by the band 's first European tour , the Mothers of Invention recorded the album widely regarded as the peak of the group 's late 1960s work , We 're Only in It for the Money ( released 1968 ) . It was produced by Zappa , with Wilson credited as executive producer . From then on , Zappa produced all albums released by the Mothers of Invention and as a solo artist . We 're Only in It for the Money featured some of the most creative audio editing and production yet heard in pop music , and the songs ruthlessly satirized the hippie and flower power phenomena . He sampled plundered surf music in We 're only in It for the Money , as well as the Beatles ' tape work from their song Tomorrow Never Knows . The cover photo parodied that of the Beatles ' Sgt Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . The cover art was provided by Cal Schenkel whom Zappa met in New York . This initiated a lifelong collaboration in which Schenkel designed covers for numerous Zappa and Mothers albums . 
 Reflecting Zappa 's eclectic approach to music , the next album , Cruising with Ruben & the Jets ( 1968 ) , was very different . It represented a collection of doo @-@ wop songs ; listeners and critics were not sure whether the album was a satire or a tribute . Zappa later noted that the album was conceived in the way Stravinsky 's compositions were in his neo @-@ classical period : " If he could take the forms and clichés of the classical era and pervert them , why not do the same ... to doo @-@ wop in the fifties ? " A theme from Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring is heard during one song . 
 In New York , Zappa increasingly used tape editing as a compositional tool . A prime example is found on the double album Uncle Meat ( 1969 ) , where the track " King Kong " is edited from various studio and live performances . Zappa had begun regularly recording concerts , and because of his insistence on precise tuning and timing , he was able to augment his studio productions with excerpts from live shows , and vice versa . Later , he combined recordings of different compositions into new pieces , irrespective of the tempo or meter of the sources . He dubbed this process " xenochrony " ( strange <unk> ) — reflecting the Greek " <unk> " ( alien or strange ) and " <unk> " ( time ) . Zappa also evolved a compositional approach he called " conceptual continuity " , meaning that any project or album was part of a larger project . Everything was connected , and musical themes and lyrics reappeared in different form on later albums . Conceptual continuity clues are found throughout Zappa 's entire œuvre . 
 During the late 1960s , Zappa continued to develop the business sides of his career . He and Herb Cohen formed the Bizarre Records and Straight Records labels , distributed by Warner Bros. Records , as ventures to aid the funding of projects and to increase creative control . Zappa produced the double album Trout Mask Replica for Captain Beefheart , and releases by Alice Cooper , The Persuasions , Wild Man Fischer , and the <unk> , as well as Lenny Bruce 's last live performance . 
 In 1967 and 1968 , Zappa made two appearances with the Monkees . The first appearance was on an episode of their TV series , " The Monkees Blow Their Minds " , where Zappa , dressed up as Mike Nesmith , interviews Nesmith who is dressed up as Zappa . After the interview , Zappa destroys a car with a sledgehammer as the song " Mother People " plays . He later provided a cameo in the Monkees ' movie Head where , leading a cow , he tells Davy Jones " the youth of America depends on you to show them the way . " Zappa had respect for what the Monkees were doing , and offered Micky Dolenz a position in the Mothers . RCA / Columbia / <unk> would not allow Dolenz out of his contract . 
 = = = 1969 : Disbanding the original Mothers of Invention = = = 
 Zappa and the Mothers of Invention returned to Los Angeles in the summer of 1968 , and the Zappas moved into a house on Laurel Canyon Boulevard , only to move again to one on Woodrow Wilson Drive in the autumn . This was Zappa 's home for the rest of his life . Despite being a success with fans in Europe , the Mothers of Invention were not faring well financially . Their first records were vocally oriented , but Zappa wrote more instrumental jazz and classical oriented music for the band 's concerts , which confused audiences . Zappa felt that audiences failed to appreciate his " electrical chamber music " . 
 In 1969 there were nine band members and Zappa was supporting the group himself from his publishing royalties whether they played or not . 1969 was also the year Zappa , fed up with MGM Records ' interference , left them for Warner Bros. Records ' Reprise subsidiary where Zappa / Mothers recordings would bear the Bizarre Records imprint . 
 In late 1969 , Zappa broke up the band . He often cited the financial strain as the main reason , but also commented on the band members ' lack of sufficient effort . Many band members were bitter about Zappa 's decision , and some took it as a sign of Zappa 's concern for perfection at the expense of human feeling . Others were irritated by ' his autocratic ways ' , exemplified by Zappa 's never staying at the same hotel as the band members . Several members played for Zappa in years to come . Remaining recordings with the band from this period were collected on Weasels Ripped My Flesh and Burnt Weeny Sandwich ( both released in 1970 ) . 
 After he disbanded the Mothers of Invention , Zappa released the acclaimed solo album Hot Rats ( 1969 ) . It features , for the first time on record , Zappa playing extended guitar solos and contains one of his most enduring compositions , " Peaches en Regalia " , which reappeared several times on future recordings . He was backed by jazz , blues and R & B session players including violinist Don " Sugarcane " Harris , drummers John Guerin and Paul Humphrey , multi @-@ instrumentalist and previous member of the Mothers of Invention Ian Underwood , and multi @-@ instrumentalist Shuggie Otis on bass , along with a guest appearance by Captain Beefheart ( providing vocals to the only non @-@ instrumental track , " Willie the Pimp " ) . It became a popular album in England , and had a major influence on the development of the jazz @-@ rock fusion genre . 
 = = 1970s : From Mothers to Zappa = = 
 In 1970 Zappa met conductor Zubin Mehta . They arranged a May 1970 concert where Mehta conducted the Los Angeles Philharmonic augmented by a rock band . According to Zappa , the music was mostly written in motel rooms while on tour with the Mothers of Invention . Some of it was later featured in the movie 200 Motels . Although the concert was a success , Zappa 's experience working with a symphony orchestra was not a happy one . His dissatisfaction became a recurring theme throughout his career ; he often felt that the quality of performance of his material delivered by orchestras was not commensurate with the money he spent on orchestral concerts and recordings . 
 = = = 1970 : Rebirth of the Mothers and filmmaking = = = 
 Later in 1970 , Zappa formed a new version of the Mothers ( from then on , he mostly dropped the " of Invention " ) . It included British drummer Aynsley Dunbar , jazz keyboardist George Duke , Ian Underwood , Jeff Simmons ( bass , rhythm guitar ) , and three members of the Turtles : bass player Jim Pons , and singers Mark Volman and Howard Kaylan , who , due to persistent legal and contractual problems , adopted the stage name " The <unk> Leech and Eddie " , or " Flo & Eddie " . 
 This version of the Mothers debuted on Zappa 's next solo album <unk> 's Revenge ( 1970 ) , which was followed by the double @-@ album soundtrack to the movie 200 Motels ( 1971 ) , featuring the Mothers , the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra , Ringo Starr , Theodore Bikel , and Keith Moon . Co @-@ directed by Zappa and Tony Palmer , it was filmed in a week at Pinewood Studios outside London . Tensions between Zappa and several cast and crew members arose before and during shooting . The film deals loosely with life on the road as a rock musician . It was the first feature film photographed on videotape and transferred to 35 mm film , a process that allowed for novel visual effects . It was released to mixed reviews . The score relied extensively on orchestral music , and Zappa 's dissatisfaction with the classical music world intensified when a concert , scheduled at the Royal Albert Hall after filming , was canceled because a representative of the venue found some of the lyrics obscene . In 1975 , he lost a lawsuit against the Royal Albert Hall for breach of contract . 
 After 200 Motels , the band went on tour , which resulted in two live albums , Fillmore East – June 1971 and Just Another Band from L.A. ; the latter included the 20 @-@ minute track " Billy the Mountain " , Zappa 's satire on rock opera set in Southern California . This track was representative of the band 's theatrical performances — which used songs to build sketches based on 200 Motels scenes , as well as new situations that often portrayed the band members ' sexual encounters on the road . 
 = = = 1971 – 72 : Accident , attack and aftermath = = = 
 On December 4 , 1971 , Zappa suffered his first of two serious setbacks . While performing at Casino de Montreux in Switzerland , the Mothers ' equipment was destroyed when a flare set off by an audience member started a fire that burned down the casino . <unk> in Deep Purple 's song " Smoke on the Water " , the event and immediate aftermath can be heard on the bootleg album Swiss Cheese / Fire , released legally as part of Zappa 's Beat the Boots II compilation . After losing $ 50 @,@ 000 worth of equipment and a week 's break , the Mothers played at the Rainbow Theatre , London , with rented gear . During the encore , audience member Trevor Howell pushed Zappa off the stage and into the concrete @-@ floored orchestra pit . The band thought Zappa had been killed — he had suffered serious fractures , head trauma and injuries to his back , leg , and neck , as well as a crushed larynx , which ultimately caused his voice to drop a third after healing . 
 This attack resulted in an extended period of wheelchair confinement , making touring impossible for over half a year . Upon return to the stage in September 1972 , Zappa was still wearing a leg brace , had a noticeable limp and could not stand for very long while on stage . Zappa noted that one leg healed " shorter than the other " ( a reference later found in the lyrics of songs " <unk> Woof " and " Dancin ' Fool " ) , resulting in chronic back pain . Meanwhile , the Mothers were left in limbo and eventually formed the core of Flo and Eddie 's band as they set out on their own . 
 During 1971 – 72 Zappa released two strongly jazz @-@ oriented solo LPs , Waka / <unk> and The Grand Wazoo , which were recorded during the forced layoff from concert touring , using floating line @-@ ups of session players and Mothers alumni . Musically , the albums were akin to Hot Rats . Zappa began touring again in late 1972 . His first effort was a series of concerts in September 1972 with a 20 @-@ piece big band referred to as the Grand Wazoo . This was followed by a scaled @-@ down version known as the Petit Wazoo that toured the U.S. for five weeks from October to December 1972 . 
 = = = 1973 – 75 : Top 10 album = = = 
 Zappa then formed and toured with smaller groups that variously included Ian Underwood ( reeds , keyboards ) , Ruth Underwood ( vibes , marimba ) , Sal Marquez ( trumpet , vocals ) , Napoleon Murphy Brock ( sax , flute and vocals ) , Bruce Fowler ( trombone ) , Tom Fowler ( bass ) , Chester Thompson ( drums ) , Ralph Humphrey ( drums ) , George Duke ( keyboards , vocals ) , and Jean @-@ Luc Ponty ( violin ) . 
 By 1973 the Bizarre and Straight labels were discontinued . In their place , Zappa and Cohen created DiscReet Records , also distributed by Warner Bros. Zappa continued a high rate of production through the first half of the 1970s , including the solo album <unk> ( ' ) ( 1974 ) , which reached a career @-@ high No. 10 on the Billboard pop album charts helped by the chart single " Don 't Eat The Yellow Snow " . Other albums from the period are Over @-@ Nite Sensation ( 1973 ) , which contained several future concert favorites , such as " Dinah @-@ Moe <unk> " and " Montana " , and the albums Roxy & Elsewhere ( 1974 ) and One Size Fits All ( 1975 ) which feature ever @-@ changing versions of a band still called the Mothers , and are notable for the tight renditions of highly difficult jazz fusion songs in such pieces as " Inca Roads " , " Echidna 's Arf ( Of You ) " and " Be @-@ Bop Tango ( Of the Old <unk> 's Church ) " . A live recording from 1974 , You Can 't Do That on Stage Anymore , Vol . 2 ( 1988 ) , captures " the full spirit and excellence of the 1973 – 75 band " . Zappa released Bongo Fury ( 1975 ) , which featured live recordings from a tour the same year that reunited him with Captain Beefheart for a brief period . They later became estranged for a period of years , but were in contact at the end of Zappa 's life . 
 = = = 1976 – 79 : Business breakups and touring = = = 
 Zappa 's relationship with long @-@ time manager Herb Cohen ended in 1976 . Zappa sued Cohen for skimming more than he was allocated from DiscReet Records , as well as for signing acts of which Zappa did not approve . Cohen filed a lawsuit against Zappa in return , which froze the money Zappa and Cohen had gained from an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement with MGM over the rights of the early Mothers of Invention recordings . It also prevented Zappa having access to any of his previously recorded material during the trials . Zappa therefore took his personal master copies of the rock @-@ oriented Zoot <unk> ( 1976 ) directly to Warner Bros. , thereby bypassing DiscReet . 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s Zappa prepared material for Läther ( pronounced " leather " ) , a four @-@ LP project . Läther encapsulated all the aspects of Zappa 's musical styles — rock tunes , orchestral works , complex instrumentals , and Zappa 's own trademark distortion @-@ drenched guitar solos . Wary of a quadruple @-@ LP , Warner Bros. Records refused to release it . Zappa managed to get an agreement with Phonogram , and test pressings were made targeted at a Halloween 1977 release , but Warner Bros. prevented the release by claiming rights over the material . Zappa responded by appearing on the Pasadena , California radio station KROQ , allowing them to broadcast Läther and encouraging listeners to make their own tape recordings . A lawsuit between Zappa and Warner Bros. followed , during which no Zappa material was released for more than a year . Eventually , Warner Bros. issued different versions of much of the Läther material in 1978 and 1979 as four individual albums ( five full @-@ length LPs ) with limited promotion . When the music was first released on CD in 1991 , Zappa chose to rerelease the four existing albums . Läther was released posthumously in 1996 . 
 Although Zappa eventually gained the rights to all his material created under the MGM and Warner Bros. contracts , the various lawsuits meant that for a period Zappa 's only income came from touring , which he therefore did extensively in 1975 – 77 with relatively small , mainly rock @-@ oriented , bands . Drummer Terry Bozzio became a regular band member , Napoleon Murphy Brock stayed on for a while , and original Mothers of Invention bassist Roy Estrada joined . Among other musicians were bassist Patrick O 'Hearn , singer @-@ guitarist Ray White and keyboardist / violinist Eddie Jobson . In December 1976 , Zappa appeared as a featured musical guest on the NBC television show Saturday Night Live . Zappa 's song " I 'm the Slime " was performed with a voice @-@ over by SNL booth announcer Don Pardo , who also introduced " Peaches En Regalia " on the same airing . In 1978 , Zappa served both as host and musical act on the show , and as an actor in various sketches . The performances included an impromptu musical collaboration with cast member John Belushi during the instrumental piece " The Purple Lagoon " . Belushi appeared as his Samurai Futaba character playing the tenor sax with Zappa conducting . 
 Zappa 's band at the time , with the additions of Ruth Underwood and a horn section ( featuring Michael and Randy Brecker ) , performed during Christmas in New York , recordings of which appear on one of the albums Warner Bros. culled from the Läther project , Zappa in New York ( 1978 ) . It mixes intense instrumentals such as " The Black Page " and humorous songs like " Titties and Beer " . The former composition , written originally for drum kit but later developed for larger bands , is notorious for its complexity in rhythmic structure and short , densely arranged passages . 
 Zappa in New York featured a song about sex criminal Michael H. Kenyon , " The Illinois Enema Bandit " , which featured Don Pardo providing the opening narrative in the song . Like many songs on the album , it contained numerous sexual references , leading to many critics objecting and being offended by the content . Zappa dismissed the criticism by noting that he was a journalist reporting on life as he saw it . Predating his later fight against censorship , he remarked : " What do you make of a society that is so primitive that it clings to the belief that certain words in its language are so powerful that they could corrupt you the moment you hear them ? " The remaining albums released by Warner Bros. Records without Zappa 's consent were Studio Tan in 1978 and Sleep Dirt in 1979 , which contained complex suites of instrumentally @-@ based tunes recorded between 1973 and 1976 , and whose release was overlooked in the midst of the legal problems . Also released by the label without the artist 's consent was Orchestral Favorites in 1979 , which featured recordings of a concert with orchestral music from 1975 . 
 = = = 1979 : Zappa as an independent artist = = = 
 Resolving the lawsuits successfully , Zappa ended the 1970s " stronger than ever " , by releasing two of his most successful albums in 1979 : the best selling album of his career , Sheik Yerbouti , and in Kelley Lowe 's opinion the " bona fide masterpiece " , Joe 's Garage . The double album Sheik Yerbouti was the first release on Zappa Records , and contained the Grammy @-@ nominated single " Dancin ' Fool " , which reached No. 45 on the Billboard charts , and " Jewish Princess " , which received attention when a Jewish group , the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) , attempted to prevent the song from receiving radio airplay due to its alleged anti @-@ Semitic lyrics . Zappa vehemently denied any anti @-@ Semitic sentiments , and dismissed the ADL as a " noisemaking organization that tries to apply pressure on people in order to manufacture a stereotype image of Jews that suits their idea of a good time . " The album 's commercial success was attributable in part to " Bobby Brown " . Due to its explicit lyrics about a young man 's encounter with a " dyke by the name of Freddie " , the song did not get airplay in the U.S. , but it topped the charts in several European countries where English is not the primary language . The triple LP Joe 's Garage featured lead singer Ike Willis as the voice of the character " Joe " in a rock opera about the danger of political systems , the suppression of freedom of speech and music — inspired in part by the Islamic revolution that had made music illegal within its jurisdiction at the time — and about the " strange relationship Americans have with sex and sexual frankness " . The album contains rock songs like " Catholic Girls " ( a riposte to the controversies of " Jewish Princess " ) , " Lucille Has Messed My Mind Up " , and the title track , as well as extended live @-@ recorded guitar improvisations combined with a studio backup band dominated by drummer Vinnie Colaiuta ( with whom Zappa had a particularly good musical rapport ) adopting the xenochrony process . The album contains one of Zappa 's most famous guitar " signature pieces " , " Watermelon in Easter Hay " . 
 On December 21 , 1979 , Zappa 's movie Baby Snakes premiered in New York . The movie 's tagline was " A movie about people who do stuff that is not normal " . The 2 hour and 40 minutes movie was based on footage from concerts in New York around Halloween 1977 , with a band featuring keyboardist Tommy Mars and percussionist Ed Mann ( who would both return on later tours ) as well as guitarist Adrian Belew . It also contained several extraordinary sequences of clay animation by Bruce Bickford who had earlier provided animation sequences to Zappa for a 1974 TV special ( which became available on the 1982 video The Dub Room Special ) . The movie did not do well in theatrical distribution , but won the Premier Grand Prix at the First International Music Festival in Paris in 1981 . 
 Zappa later expanded on his television appearances in a non @-@ musical role . He was an actor or voice artist in episodes of Shelley Duvall 's Faerie Tale Theatre , Miami Vice and The Ren and Stimpy Show . A voice part in The Simpsons never materialized , to creator Matt Groening 's disappointment ( Groening was a neighbor of Zappa and a lifelong fan ) . 
 = = 1980s = = 
 In 1980 , Zappa cut his ties with Mercury Records after the label refused to release his song " I Don 't Wanna Get Drafted " . It was picked up by CBS Records and released on the Zappa label in North America and the CBS label internationally . After spending most of 1980 on the road , Zappa released <unk> Town Rebellion in 1981 . It was the first release on his own Barking Pumpkin Records , and it contains songs taken from a 1979 tour , one studio track and material from the 1980 tours . The album is a mixture of complicated instrumentals and Zappa 's use of <unk> ( speaking song or voice ) — a compositional technique utilized by such composers as Arnold Schoenberg and Alban Berg — showcasing some of the most accomplished bands Zappa ever had ( mostly featuring drummer Vinnie Colaiuta ) . While some lyrics still raised controversy among critics , in the sense that some found them sexist , the political and sociological satire in songs like the title track and " The Blue Light " have been described as a " hilarious critique of the willingness of the American people to believe anything " . The album is also notable for the presence of guitarist Steve Vai , who joined Zappa 's touring band in the fall of 1980 . 
 The same year the double album You Are What You Is was released . Most of it was recorded in Zappa 's brand new Utility Muffin Research Kitchen ( <unk> ) studios , which were located at his house , thereby giving him complete freedom in his work . The album included one complex instrumental , " Theme from the 3rd Movement of Sinister Footwear " , but focused mainly on rock songs with Zappa 's sardonic social commentary — satirical lyrics targeted at teenagers , the media , and religious and political hypocrisy . " Dumb All Over " is a tirade on religion , as is " Heavenly Bank Account " , wherein Zappa rails against TV evangelists such as Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson for their purported influence on the U.S. administration as well as their use of religion as a means of raising money . Songs like " Society Pages " and " I 'm a Beautiful Guy " show Zappa 's dismay with the Reagan era and its " obscene pursuit of wealth and happiness " . 
 In 1981 , Zappa also released three instrumental albums , Shut Up ' n Play Yer Guitar , Shut Up ' N Play Yer Guitar Some More , and The Return of the Son of Shut Up ' N Play Yer Guitar , which were initially sold via mail order , but later released through the CBS label due to popular demand . The albums focus exclusively on Frank Zappa as a guitar soloist , and the tracks are predominantly live recordings from 1979 to 1980 ; they highlight Zappa 's improvisational skills with " beautiful performances from the backing group as well " . Another guitar @-@ only album , Guitar , was released in 1988 , and a third , Trance @-@ Fusion , which Zappa completed shortly before his death , was released in 2006 . 
 = = = " Valley Girl " and classical performances = = = 
 In May 1982 , Zappa released Ship Arriving Too Late to Save a Drowning Witch , which featured his biggest selling single ever , the Grammy Award @-@ nominated song " Valley Girl " ( topping out at No. 32 on the Billboard charts ) . In her improvised lyrics to the song , Zappa 's daughter Moon Unit satirized the vapid speech of teenage girls from the San Fernando Valley , which popularized many " <unk> " expressions such as " gag me with a spoon " , " fer sure , fer sure " , " <unk> " ( gross ) , and " barf out " . Most Americans who only knew Zappa from his few singles successes now thought of him as a person writing novelty songs , even though the rest of the album contained highly challenging music . Zappa was irritated by this and never played the song live . 
 In 1983 , two different projects were released , beginning with The Man from Utopia , a rock @-@ oriented work . The album is eclectic , featuring the vocal @-@ led " Dangerous Kitchen " and " The Jazz Discharge Party Hats " , both continuations of the <unk> excursions on Tinseltown Rebellion . The second album , London Symphony Orchestra , Vol . I , contained orchestral Zappa compositions conducted by Kent Nagano and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) . A second record of these sessions , London Symphony Orchestra , Vol . II was released in 1987 . The material was recorded under a tight schedule with Zappa providing all funding , helped by the commercial success of " Valley Girl " . Zappa was not satisfied with the LSO recordings . One reason is " Strictly <unk> " , which was recorded after the trumpet section had been out for drinks on a break : the track took 40 edits to hide out @-@ of @-@ tune notes . Conductor Nagano , who was pleased with the experience , noted that " in fairness to the orchestra , the music is humanly very , very difficult " . Some reviews noted that the recordings were the best representation of Zappa 's orchestral work so far . In 1984 Zappa teamed again with Nagano and the Berkeley Symphony Orchestra for a live performance of A Zappa Affair with augmented orchestra , life @-@ size puppets , and moving stage sets . Although critically acclaimed the work was a financial failure , and only performed twice . Zappa was invited by conference organizer Thomas Wells to be the keynote speaker at the American Society of University Composers at the Ohio State University . It was there Zappa delivered his famous " Bingo ! There Goes Your Tenure " address , and had two of his orchestra pieces , " Dupree 's Paradise " and " Naval Aviation in Art ? " performed by the Columbus Symphony and <unk> Chamber Orchestra of Columbus . 
 = = = Synclavier = = = 
 For the remainder of his career , much of Zappa 's work was influenced by his use of the Synclavier as a compositional and performance tool . Even considering the complexity of the music he wrote , the Synclavier could realize anything he could dream up . The Synclavier could be programmed to play almost anything conceivable , to perfection : " With the Synclavier , any group of imaginary instruments can be invited to play the most difficult passages ... with one @-@ millisecond accuracy — every time " . Even though it essentially did away with the need for musicians , Zappa viewed the Synclavier and real @-@ life musicians as separate . 
 In 1984 , he released four albums . Boulez Conducts Zappa : The Perfect Stranger contains orchestral works commissioned and conducted by celebrated conductor , composer and pianist Pierre Boulez ( who was listed as an influence on Freak Out ! ) , and performed by his Ensemble <unk> . These were juxtaposed with premiere Synclavier pieces . Again , Zappa was not satisfied with the performances of his orchestral works , regarding them as under @-@ rehearsed , but in the album liner notes he respectfully thanks Boulez 's demands for precision . The Synclavier pieces stood in contrast to the orchestral works , as the sounds were electronically generated and not , as became possible shortly thereafter , sampled . 
 The album Thing @-@ Fish was an ambitious three @-@ record set in the style of a Broadway play dealing with a dystopian " what @-@ if " scenario involving feminism , homosexuality , manufacturing and distribution of the AIDS virus , and a eugenics program conducted by the United States government . New vocals were combined with previously released tracks and new Synclavier music ; " the work is an extraordinary example of bricolage " . 
 Francesco Zappa , a Synclavier rendition of works by 18th @-@ century composer Francesco Zappa ( no known relation ) , and Them or Us , a two @-@ record set of heavily edited live and session pieces , were also released in 1984 . 
 = = = Digital medium and last tour = = = 
 Around 1986 , Zappa undertook a comprehensive re @-@ release program of his earlier vinyl recordings . He personally oversaw the remastering of all his 1960s , 1970s and early 1980s albums for the new digital compact disc medium . Certain aspects of these re @-@ issues were criticized by some fans as being unfaithful to the original recordings . Nearly twenty years before the advent of online music stores , Zappa had proposed to replace " phonographic record merchandising " of music by " direct digital @-@ to @-@ digital transfer " through phone or cable TV ( with royalty payments and consumer billing automatically built into the accompanying software ) . In 1989 , Zappa considered his idea a " miserable flop " . 
 The album Jazz from Hell , released in 1986 , earned Zappa his first Grammy Award in 1988 for Best Rock Instrumental Performance . Except for one live guitar solo ( " St. Etienne " ) , the album exclusively featured compositions brought to life by the Synclavier . Although an instrumental album , containing no lyrics , Meyer Music Markets sold Jazz from Hell featuring an " explicit lyrics " sticker — a warning label introduced by the Recording Industry Association of America in an agreement with the Parents Music Resource Center ( PMRC ) . 
 Zappa 's last tour in a rock and jazz band format took place in 1988 with a 12 @-@ piece group which had a repertoire of over 100 ( mostly Zappa ) compositions , but which split under acrimonious circumstances before the tour was completed . The tour was documented on the albums Broadway the Hard Way ( new material featuring songs with strong political emphasis ) ; The Best Band You Never Heard in Your Life ( Zappa " standards " and an eclectic collection of cover tunes , ranging from Maurice Ravel 's Boléro to Led Zeppelin 's Stairway to Heaven ) ; and Make a Jazz Noise Here . Parts are also found on You Can 't Do That on Stage Anymore , volumes 4 and 6 . Recordings from this tour also appear on the 2006 album Trance @-@ Fusion . 
 = = 1990s : Classical music and death = = 
 In 1990 , Zappa was diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer . The disease had been developing unnoticed for ten years and was considered inoperable . After his diagnosis , Zappa devoted most of his energy to modern orchestral and Synclavier works . Shortly before his death in 1993 he completed Civilization <unk> III , a major Synclavier work which he had begun in the 1980s . 
 In 1991 , Zappa was chosen to be one of four featured composers at the Frankfurt Festival in 1992 ( the others were John Cage , Karlheinz Stockhausen , and Alexander <unk> ) . Zappa was approached by the German chamber ensemble , Ensemble Modern , which was interested in playing his music for the event . Although ill , Zappa invited them to Los Angeles for rehearsals of new compositions and new arrangements of older material . In addition to being satisfied with the ensemble 's performances of his music , Zappa also got along with the musicians , and the concerts in Germany and Austria were set up for the fall . In September 1992 , the concerts went ahead as scheduled , but Zappa could only appear at two in Frankfurt due to illness . At the first concert , he conducted the opening " Overture " , and the final " G @-@ Spot Tornado " as well as the theatrical " Food Gathering in Post @-@ Industrial America , 1992 " and " Welcome to the United States " ( the remainder of the program was conducted by the ensemble 's regular conductor Peter <unk> ) . Zappa received a 20 @-@ minute ovation . It would become his last professional public appearance , as the cancer was spreading to such an extent that he was in too much pain to enjoy an event that he otherwise found " exhilarating " ( though he did do an audio interview in the final months of his life ) . Recordings from the concerts appeared on The Yellow Shark ( 1993 ) , Zappa 's last release during his lifetime , and some material from studio rehearsals appeared on the posthumous Everything Is Healing <unk> ( 1999 ) . 
 Zappa died on December 4 , 1993 , in his home with his wife and children by his side . At a private ceremony the following day , Zappa was interred in an unmarked grave at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles . On December 6 , his family publicly announced that " Composer Frank Zappa left for his final tour just before 6 : 00 pm on Saturday " . 
 = = Politics and religion = = 
 Zappa was often characterized as an atheist . On Dweezil 's birth certificate , for father 's religion Zappa put " musician " . 
 Describing his political views , Frank Zappa jokingly categorized himself as a " practical conservative " , or " independent " . He favored limited government and low taxes ; he also stated that he approved of national defense , social security , and other federal programs , but only if recipients of such programs are willing and able to pay for them . He favored capitalism , entrepreneurship , and independent business , stating that musicians could make more from owning their own businesses than from collecting royalties . He opposed communism , stating , " A system that doesn 't allow ownership ... has — to put it mildly — a fatal design flaw . " Some of his songs , concert performances , interviews and public debates in the 1980s criticized and derided Republicans and their policies , President Ronald Reagan , the Strategic Defense Initiative ( SDI ) , televangelism , and the Christian Right , and warned that the United States government was in danger of becoming a " fascist theocracy " . Zappa expressed opinions on censorship when he appeared on CNN 's Crossfire TV series and debated issues with Washington Times commentator John Lofton in 1986 . He had always encouraged his fans to register to vote on album covers , and throughout 1988 he had registration booths at his concerts . He even considered running for president of the United States . 
 Frank Zappa tried cannabis ten times , but without any pleasure , and " never used LSD , never used cocaine , never used heroin or any of that other stuff . " Zappa stated , " Drugs do not become a problem until the person who uses the drugs does something to you , or does something that would affect your life that you don 't want to have happen to you , like an airline pilot who crashes because he was full of drugs . " He was a regular tobacco smoker for most of his life , and strongly critical of anti @-@ tobacco campaigns . While he disapproved of drug use , he criticized the War on Drugs , comparing it to alcohol prohibition , and stated that the United States Treasury would benefit from the decriminalization and regulation of drugs . Describing his philosophical views , Zappa stated , " I believe that people have a right to decide their own destinies ; people own themselves . I also believe that , in a democracy , government exists because ( and only so long as ) individual citizens give it a ' temporary license to exist ' — in exchange for a promise that it will behave itself . In a democracy , you own the government — it doesn 't own you . " 
 In early 1990 , Zappa visited Czechoslovakia at the request of President Václav Havel . Havel designated him as Czechoslovakia 's " Special Ambassador to the West on Trade , Culture and Tourism " . Havel was a lifelong fan of Zappa , who had great influence in the avant @-@ garde and underground scene in Central Europe in the 1970s and 1980s ( a Czech rock group that was imprisoned in 1976 took its name from Zappa 's 1968 song " Plastic People " ) . Under pressure from US Secretary of State James Baker , Zappa 's posting was withdrawn . Havel made Zappa an unofficial cultural attaché instead . Zappa also planned to develop an international consulting enterprise to facilitate trade between the former Eastern Bloc and Western businesses . 
 = = = Senate testimony = = = 
 On September 19 , 1985 , Zappa testified before the United States Senate Commerce , Technology , and Transportation committee , attacking the Parents Music Resource Center or PMRC , a music organization co @-@ founded by Tipper Gore , wife of then @-@ senator Al Gore . The PMRC consisted of many wives of politicians , including the wives of five members of the committee , and was founded to address the issue of song lyrics with sexual or satanic content . Zappa saw their activities as on a path towards censorship , and called their proposal for voluntary labelling of records with explicit content " extortion " of the music industry . In his prepared statement , he said : 
 The PMRC proposal is an ill @-@ conceived piece of nonsense which fails to deliver any real benefits to children , infringes the civil liberties of people who are not children , and promises to keep the courts busy for years dealing with the interpretational and <unk> problems inherent in the proposal 's design . It is my understanding that , in law , First Amendment issues are decided with a preference for the least restrictive alternative . In this context , the PMRC 's demands are the equivalent of treating dandruff by decapitation . ... The establishment of a rating system , voluntary or otherwise , opens the door to an endless parade of moral quality control programs based on things certain Christians do not like . What if the next bunch of Washington wives demands a large yellow " J " on all material written or performed by Jews , in order to save helpless children from exposure to concealed Zionist doctrine ? 
 Zappa set excerpts from the PMRC hearings to Synclavier music in his composition " Porn Wars " on the 1985 album Frank Zappa Meets the Mothers of Prevention , and the full recording was released in 2010 as Congress Shall Make No Law .... Zappa is heard interacting with Senators Fritz Hollings , Slade Gorton , Al Gore ( who claimed , at the hearing , to be a Zappa fan ) , and in an exchange with Florida Senator Paula Hawkins over what toys Zappa 's children played with . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Acclaim and honors = = = 
 Zappa earned widespread critical acclaim in his lifetime and after his death . The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) writes : " Frank Zappa dabbled in virtually all kinds of music — and , whether <unk> as a satirical rocker , jazz @-@ rock fusionist , guitar virtuoso , electronics wizard , or orchestral innovator , his eccentric genius was undeniable . " Even though his work drew inspiration from many different genres , Zappa was seen establishing a coherent and personal expression . In 1971 , biographer David Walley noted that " The whole structure of his music is unified , not neatly divided by dates or time sequences and it is all building into a composite " . On commenting on Zappa 's music , politics and philosophy , Barry Miles noted in 2004 that they cannot be separated : " It was all one ; all part of his ' conceptual continuity ' . " 
 Guitar Player devoted a special issue to Zappa in 1992 , and asked on the cover " Is FZ America 's Best Kept Musical Secret ? " Editor Don <unk> remarked that the issue was about " The most important composer to come out of modern popular music " . Among those contributing to the issue was composer and musicologist Nicolas Slonimsky , who conducted premiere performances of works of Ives and Varèse in the 1930s . He became friends with Zappa in the 1980s , and said , " I admire everything Frank does , because he practically created the new musical millennium . He does beautiful , beautiful work ... It has been my luck to have lived to see the emergence of this totally new type of music . " Conductor Kent Nagano remarked in the same issue that " Frank is a genius . That 's a word I don 't use often ... In Frank 's case it is not too strong ... He is extremely literate musically . I 'm not sure if the general public knows that . " Pierre Boulez stated in Musician magazine 's posthumous Zappa tribute article that Zappa " was an exceptional figure because he was part of the worlds of rock and classical music and that both types of his work would survive . " 
 In 1994 , jazz magazine Down Beat 's critics poll placed Zappa in its Hall of Fame . Zappa was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995 . There , it was written that " Frank Zappa was rock and roll 's sharpest musical mind and most astute social critic . He was the most prolific composer of his age , and he bridged genres — rock , jazz , classical , avant @-@ garde and even novelty music — with masterful ease " . He received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997 . In 2005 , the U.S. National Recording Preservation Board included We 're Only in It for the Money in the National Recording Registry as " Frank Zappa 's inventive and iconoclastic album presents a unique political stance , both anti @-@ conservative and anti @-@ counterculture , and features a scathing satire on <unk> and America 's reactions to it " . The same year , Rolling Stone magazine ranked him at No. 71 on its list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . In 2011 , he was ranked at No. 22 on the list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time by the same magazine . 
 = = = Artists influenced by Zappa = = = 
 Many musicians , bands and orchestras from diverse genres have been influenced by Frank Zappa 's music . Rock artists like Alice Cooper , Larry <unk> of Primus , Fee Waybill of the Tubes all cite Zappa 's influence , as do progressive , alternative and experimental rock artists like Can , Pere Ubu , Henry Cow , Trey Anastasio of Phish , Jeff Buckley , Faust , John Frusciante , and Steven Wilson . Paul McCartney regarded Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band as the Beatles ' Freak Out ! , Jimi Hendrix , and heavy rock and metal acts like Black Sabbath , Simon Phillips , Mike Portnoy , Warren <unk> , Steve Vai , Strapping Young Lad , System of a Down , Clawfinger , and Devin Townsend acknowledge Zappa 's inspiration . On the classical music scene , Tomas Ulrich , Meridian Arts Ensemble , Ensemble Ambrosius and the Fireworks Ensemble regularly perform Zappa 's compositions and quote his influence . Contemporary jazz musicians and composers Bill Frisell and John Zorn are inspired by Zappa , as is funk legend George Clinton . Other artists whose work is affected by Zappa include ambient composer Brian Eno , new age pianist George Winston , electronic composer Bob Gluck , parodist and novelty composer " Weird Al " Yankovic , industrial music pioneer Genesis P @-@ Orridge , and noise music artist Masami Akita of Merzbow . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Zappa was married to Kathryn J. " Kay " Sherman from 1960 to 1964 . In 1967 , he married Adelaide Gail Sloatman , with whom he remained until his death from prostate cancer in 1993 . They had four children : Moon , Dweezil , Ahmet and Diva . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Tiruvannamalai = 
 Tiruvannamalai ( Tamil : <unk> IPA : [ <unk> ̯ ] , also Thiruvannamalai or <unk> and <unk> during British times ) is a town in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu . The town is administered by a special grade municipality that covers an area of 16 @.@ 33 km2 ( 6 @.@ 31 sq mi ) and had a population of 144 @,@ 278 in 2011 . It is the administrative headquarters of Tiruvannamalai District . Roadways are the major mode of transport in Tiruvannamalai , while the town also has rail connectivity . Chennai International Airport is the nearest domestic and international airport to the town . Tiruvannamalai is named after the central deity of the Annamalaiyar Temple , Annamalaiyar . The <unk> Deepam festival is celebrated during the day of the full moon between November and December , and a huge beacon is lit atop the Annamalai hill . The event is witnessed by three million pilgrims . On the day preceding each full moon , pilgrims circumnavigate the temple base and the Annamalai hills in a worship called Girivalam , a practice carried out by one million pilgrims yearly . 
 Located on the foothills of Annamalai hills , Tiruvannamalai has been ruled by the Pallavas , the Medieval Cholas , the Later Cholas , Hoysalas , the Vijayanagar Empire , the Carnatic kingdom , Tipu Sultan , and the British . It served as the capital city of the Hoysalas . The town is built around the Annamalaiyar Temple like other Nayak capitals . Tiruvannamalai is administered by a special @-@ grade a municipality constituted in 1886 . Tiruvannamalai has an average elevation of 200 metres ( 660 ft ) and experiences a hot and humid climate . Being a pilgrimage town , most of the people are employed in the tertiary sector . There are 25 elementary schools , nine high schools , 18 higher secondary schools , four arts & science colleges , one government medical college and four engineering colleges in the town . 
 = = Etymology and legend = = 
 In Hindu mythology , Parvati , wife of Shiva , once closed the eyes of her husband playfully in a flower garden at their abode atop Mount Kailash . Although only a moment for the gods , all light was taken from the universe , and the earth , in turn , was submerged in darkness for years . Parvati performed penance with other devotees of Shiva , and her husband appeared as a column of fire at the top of Annamalai hills , returning light to the world . He then merged with Parvati to form Ardhanarishvara , the half @-@ female , half @-@ male form of Shiva . The Annamalai , or red mountain , lies behind the Annamalaiyar temple , and is associated with the temple of its namesake . The hill is sacred and considered a lingam , or iconic representation of Shiva , in itself . Another legend is that once , while Vishnu and Brahma contested for superiority , Shiva appeared as a flame , and challenged them to find his source . Brahma took the form of a swan , and flew to the sky to see the top of the flame , while Vishnu became the boar Varaha , and sought its base . The scene is called <unk> , and is represented in the western wall at the sanctum of most Shiva temples . Neither Brahma nor Vishnu could find the source , and while Vishnu conceded his defeat , Brahma lied and said he had found the pinnacle . In punishment , Shiva ordained that Brahma would never have temples on earth in his worship . In Tamil , the word <unk> means red or fire and <unk> means hill . Since Shiva manifested himself in the form of fire in this place , this name Arunachalam came to be associated with Annamalai hill and the town . The first mention of Annamalai is found in Tevaram , the seventh century Tamil Saiva canonical work by Appar and Tirugnanasambandar . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of Tiruvannamalai revolves around the Annamalaiyar Temple . The recorded history of the town dates back to the ninth century , as seen from a Chola inscriptions in the temple . Further inscriptions made before ninth century indicate the rule of Pallava kings , whose capital was Kanchipuram . The seventh century Nayanar saints Sambandar and Appar wrote of the temple in their poetic work , Tevaram . Sekkizhar , the author of the Periyapuranam records both Appar and Sambandar worshiped Annamalaiyar in the temple . The Chola Kings ruled over the region for more than four centuries , from 850 to 1280 , and were temple patrons . The inscriptions from the Chola king record various gifts like land , sheep , cow and oil to the temple commemorating various victories of the dynasty . 
 The Hoysala kings used Tiruvannamalai as their capital beginning in 1328 . There are 48 inscriptions from the Sangama Dynasty ( 1336 – 1485 ) , two inscriptions from Saluva Dynasty , and 55 inscriptions from Tuluva Dynasty ( 1491 – 1570 ) of the Vijayanagara Empire , reflecting gifts to the temple from their rulers . There are also inscriptions from the rule of Krishnadeva Raya ( 1509 – 1529 ) , the most powerful Vijayanagara king , indicating further patronage . Most of the Vijayanagara inscriptions were written in Tamil , with some in Kannada and Sanskrit . The inscriptions in the temple from the Vijayanagara kings indicate emphasis on administrative matters and local concerns , which contrasts the inscriptions of the same rulers in other temples like Tirupathi . The majority of the gift related inscriptions are for land endowments , followed by goods , cash endowments , cows and oil for lighting lamps . The town of Tiruvannamalai was at a strategic crossroads during the Vijayanagara Empire , connecting sacred centers of pilgrimage and military routes . There are inscriptions that show the area as an urban center before the precolonial period , with the city developing around the temple , similar to the Nayak ruled cities like Madurai . 
 During the 17th century , Tiruvannamalai came under the dominion of the Nawab of the Carnatic . As the Mughal empire came to an end , the Nawab lost control of the town , with confusion and chaos ensuing after 1753 . Subsequently , there were periods of both Hindu and Muslim stewardship of the temple , with <unk> Raya , Krishna Raya , <unk> Ali Khan , and <unk> <unk> besieging the temple in succession . As European incursions progressed , Tiruvannamalai was attacked by French <unk> , <unk> , and the English Captain Stephen Smith . While some were repelled , others were victorious . The French occupied the town in 1757 and it came under the control of the British in 1760 . In 1790 , Tiruvannamalai town was captured by Tippu Sultan , who ruled from 1750 – 99 . During the first half of the 19th century , the town came under British rule . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Tiruvannamalai is situated 185 km ( 115 mi ) from the state capital Chennai and 210 km ( 130 mi ) from Bangalore . The height of the Annamalai hill is approximately 2 @,@ 669 ft ( 814 m ) . Tiruvannamalai is located at 12 ° N 79 @.@ 05 ° E ﻿ / 12 ; 79 @.@ 05 . It has an average elevation of 200 metres ( 660 ft ) . The town is located to the east of Eastern Ghats . The topography of Tiruvannamalai is almost plain sloping from west to east . Tiruvannamalai experiences hot and dry weather throughout the year . The temperature ranges from a maximum of 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) to a minimum of 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . Like the rest of the state , April to June are the hottest months and December to January are the coldest . Tiruvannamalai receives scanty rainfall with an average of 815 mm ( 32 @.@ 1 in ) annually , which is lesser than the state average of 1 @,@ 008 mm ( 39 @.@ 7 in ) . The southwest monsoon with an onset in June and lasting up to August brings scanty rainfall . Bulk of the rainfall is received during the northeast monsoon in the months of October , November and December . The average humidity of the town is 77 % and varies between 67 % to 86 % . During the summer months of April to June , the humidity ranges from 47 – 63 % . The municipality covers an area of 16 @.@ 3 km2 ( 1 @,@ 630 ha ) 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the provisional population totals of the 2011 census , b Tiruvannamalai UA had a population of 144 @,@ 683 , with 72 @,@ 351 males and 72 @,@ 332 females . The sex ratio of the town was 1 @,@ 000 and the child sex ratio stood at 960 . Tiruvannamalai had an average literacy rate of 81 @.@ 64 % with male literacy being 85 @.@ 6 % , and female literacy being 77 @.@ 7 % . A total of 14 @,@ 530 of the population of the town was under 6 years of age . 
 According to 2011 census , Tiruvannamalai had a population of 145 @,@ 278 with a sex @-@ ratio of 1 @,@ 006 females for every 1 @,@ 000 males , much above the national average of 929 . A total of 15 @,@ 524 were under the age of six , constituting 7 @,@ 930 males and 7 @,@ 594 females . Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes accounted for 12 @.@ 37 % and 1 @.@ 22 % of the population respectively . The average literacy of the city was 78 @.@ 38 % , compared to the national average of 72 @.@ 99 % . The city had a total of 33 @,@ 514 households . There were a total of 50 @,@ 722 workers , comprising 583 cultivators , 580 main agricultural labourers , 994 in house hold industries , 44 @,@ 535 other workers , 4 @,@ 030 marginal workers , 84 marginal cultivators , 105 marginal agricultural labourers , 421 marginal workers in household industries and 3 @,@ 420 other marginal workers . As per the religious census of 2011 , Tiruvannamalai had 82 @.@ 57 % Hindus , 14 @.@ 07 % Muslims , 2 @.@ 79 % Christians , 0 @.@ 01 % Sikhs , 0 @.@ 01 % Buddhists , 0 @.@ 4 % Jains , 0 @.@ 13 % following other religions and 0 @.@ 01 % following no religion or did not indicate any religious preference . 
 The maximum decadal growth of population in Tiruvannamalai was observed during 1971 – 81 and had reduced growth rate from 1981 due to the increased amount of industrial activity that took place outside the town . The density of the town was 45 per hectare during 1971 and increased to 90 during 1999 . A total 446 @.@ 2 ha ( 1 @,@ 103 acres ) ( 32 @.@ 75 % ) of the land is used for residential , 48 @.@ 77 ha ( 120 @.@ 5 acres ) ( 3 @.@ 58 % ) for commercial , 22 @.@ 34 ha ( 55 @.@ 2 acres ) ( 1 @.@ 63 % ) for industrial , 39 @.@ 35 ha ( 97 @.@ 2 acres ) ( 2 @.@ 88 % ) for public & semi public , 30 @.@ 38 ha ( 75 @.@ 1 acres ) ( 2 @.@ 22 % ) for educational and 678 @.@ 77 ha ( 1 @,@ 677 @.@ 3 acres ) ( 56 @.@ 94 % ) for non @-@ urban purposes . 
 = = Economy = = 
 <unk> is a temple town and a major pilgrimage centre in Tamil Nadu . The town is the marketing and service town for the surrounding places . Being the administrative headquarters of the Tiruvannamalai district , Tiruvannamalai has a lot of tertiary sector activities . Trade and commerce and service activities are the major contributors to the economy of the town . In 1991 , 7 @.@ 93 % of the population was involved in primary sector , 21 @.@ 34 % in secondary sector and 70 @.@ 73 % in tertiary sector activities . The town had a female work participation of 11 % . Due to the urbanisation from 1971 , there has been dip in primary sector activities and a proportional increase in the tertiary sector activities . There is limited agricultural activity within the town limits . The secondary sector involves manufacturing and construction , whose growth has remained stable over the decades . There are a number of oil mills , rice mills and agro based industries within the Tiruvannamalai town limits . The tertiary sector activities of trade , commerce , transport , storage , communication and other services has been increasing due to the increasing number of tourists to the town . The patronage to Girivalam has increased informal economic activities around the town . The major commercial activities are concentrated around Car Street , <unk> Street , <unk> Street , <unk> Koil Street , <unk> Street and <unk> Road . 
 All major nationalised banks such as State Bank of India , Indian Bank , Central Bank of India , Punjab National Bank , Indian Overseas Bank , Bank of India and private banks like ICICI Bank , Karur Vysya Bank have their branches in Tiruvannamalai . All these banks have their automated teller machines located in various parts of the town . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Annamalaiyar Temple is the most prominent landmark of Tiruvannamalai . The temple complex covers an area of 10 ha ( 25 acres ) , and is one of the largest temples in India . It houses four gateway towers known as gopurams . The tallest is the eastern tower , with 11 stories and a height of 66 m ( 217 ft ) , making it one of the tallest temple towers in India . The temple has numerous shrines , with those of Annamalaiyar and Unnamulai Amman being the most prominent . The temple complex houses many halls ; the most notable is the thousand @-@ pillared hall built during the Vijayanagar period . 
 The Annamalaiyar temple is one of the Pancha Bhoota <unk> , or five Shiva temples , with each a manifestation of a natural element : land , water , air , sky or fire . In Annamalaiyar temple , Shiva is said to have manifested himself as a massive column of fire , whose crown and feet could not be found by the Hindu gods , Brahma and Vishnu . <unk> <unk> are Shiva temples which are considered to be personifications of the Tantric chakras of human anatomy . The Annamalaiyar temple is called the Manipooraga stalam , and is associated with the Manipooraga chakra . The temple is revered in Tevaram , the Tamil Saiva canon and classified as Paadal Petra Sthalam , one of the 276 temples that find mention in the Saiva canon . 
 The most important festival of the Annamalaiyar temple is celebrated during the Tamil month of Karthikai , between November and December , concluding with the celebration of Karthikai Deepam . A huge lamp is lit in a cauldron , containing three tons of ghee , at the top of the Annamalai hills during the Deepam . To mark the occasion , the festival deity of Annamalaiyar <unk> the mountain . Inscriptions indicate that the festival was celebrated as early as the Chola period ( 850 – 1280 ) and was expanded to ten days in the twentieth century . 
 Every full moon , tens of thousands of pilgrims worship Annamalaiyar by circumambulating the Annamalai hill barefoot . The circumambulation covers a distance of 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) , and is referred as Girivalam . According to Hindu legend , the walk removes sins , fulfils desires and helps achieve freedom from the cycle of birth and rebirth . Offerings are made in a string of tanks , shrines , pillared meditation halls , springs and caves around the hill . 
 Tirumalai is an ancient Jain temple complex in the outskirts of <unk> that houses three Jain caves , four Jain temples and a 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high sculpture of Neminatha dated from the 12th century and the tallest Jain image in Tamil Nadu . 
 The Ramana Ashram and ashram of Yogi <unk> , located around the Annamalai hill are popular visitor attractions of Tiruvannamalai . The <unk> Dam over the <unk> river located 20 km ( 12 mi ) southwest of the town is a prominent picnic spot . This 786 @.@ 37 m Dam is <unk> high and can store 7 @,@ 321 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft or 207 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 cubic meters of water . A scenic park is also present adjacent to this dam . Ulagalantha Perumal Temple in <unk> and <unk> , situated 20 km ( 12 mi ) south of Tiruvannamalai are prominent Vishnu temples that are located around Tiruvannamalai . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Puducherry – <unk> national highway , NH 66 and the Villupuram – Mangalore National highway NH 234 pass through Tiruvannamalai . The town has eight arterial roads that connects it to other towns . The Tiruvannamalai municipality maintains a total length of 75 @.@ 26 km ( 46 @.@ 76 mi ) . The town has 9 @.@ 068 km ( 5 @.@ 635 mi ) concrete roads , 50 @.@ 056 km ( 31 @.@ 103 mi ) BT roads , 7 @.@ 339 km ( 4 @.@ 560 mi ) of WBM roads and 8 @.@ 797 km ( 5 @.@ 466 mi ) earthern roads . A total of 452 roads is maintained by the State Highways Department . 
 Tiruvannamalai is served by the town bus service operated by the TNSTC , which provides connectivity within the town and the suburbs . There are private operated mini @-@ bus services that cater to the local transport needs of the town . The main bus stand covers an area of 2 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) and is located in the heart of the town . There are regular inter @-@ city bus services to Tiruvannamalai . The TNSTC operates daily services connecting various cities to Tiruvannamalai . The Corporation operates a computerised reservation centre in the bus stand of the town . The <unk> operates long distance buses connecting the town to important cities like Chennai , Puducherry and Bengaluru . The major inter city bus routes from the town are to cities and towns like Chennai , Bengaluru , Villupuram , Puducherry , <unk> , <unk> , Kanji , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Tiruvannamalai railway station is located in the rail head from <unk> to Villupuram and falls under the <unk> division of the Southern Railway . The Madurai @-@ Tirupati bi @-@ weekly expresses connects Tiruvannamalai to the cities of Madurai and Tirupati in either directions . There are also passenger trains running either side from <unk> to Villupuram . 
 The nearest airport is at Chennai , which is located 172 km ( 107 mi ) from the town . 
 = = Municipal administration and politics = = 
 The Tiruvannamalai municipality was established in 1896 during British times . It was promoted to a second @-@ grade municipal municipality in 1959 , first grade in 1974 , selection grade in 1998 and special grade in 2008 . The municipality has 39 wards and there is an elected councillor for each of those wards . The functions of the municipality are devolved into six departments : general administration / personnel , Engineering , Revenue , Public Health , city planning and Information Technology ( IT ) . All these departments are under the control of a Municipal Commissioner who is the executive head . The legislative powers are vested in a body of 39 members , one each from the 39 wards . The legislative body is headed by an elected Chairperson assisted by a Deputy Chairperson . 
 Tiruvannamalai comes under the Tiruvannamalai assembly constituency and it elects a member to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly once every five years . From the 1977 elections , the assembly seat was won by Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) five times during the 1977 , 1989 , 1996 , 2001 and 2006 elections , the Indian National Congress party three times during the 1980 , 1984 and 1991 elections . The current MLA of the constituency is E.V. Velu from DMK . 
 During the 1957 elections , Tiruvannamalai was a part of Tiruvannamalai parliamentary constituency and was held by an independent . From the 1962 to 2004 elections , the town was part of <unk> constituency . The Dravida <unk> Kazhagam ( DMK ) won the seat nine times during the 1962 , 1967 , 1971 , 1977 , 1980 , 1996 , 1998 , 1999 and 2004 elections and the Indian National Congress won it three times during the 1984 , 1989 and 1991 elections and AIADMK once during the 2014 elections . From the 2009 elections , Tiruvannamalai is a part of the Tiruvannamalai ( Lok Sabha constituency ) – it has the following six assembly constituencies – <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( SC ) , Tiruvannamalai , <unk> and <unk> . The current Member of Parliament from the constituency is R. <unk> from the AIADMK party . 
 Law and order in the town is maintained by the Tiruvannamalai sub division of the Tamil Nadu Police headed by a Deputy Superintendent ( DSP ) . There are three police stations in the town , one of them being an all @-@ women police station . There are special units like prohibition enforcement , district crime , social justice and human rights , district crime records and special branch that operate at the district level police division headed by a Superintendent of Police ( SP ) . 
 = = Education and utility services = = 
 There are 25 elementary schools , nine high schools and 18 higher secondary schools in Tiruvannamalai . There are four arts & science colleges and four engineering colleges in the town . Electricity supply to Tiruvannamalai is regulated and distributed by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board ( TNEB ) . The town along with its suburbs forms the Tiruvannamalai Electricity Distribution Circle . Water supply is provided by the municipality of Tiruvannamalai from the <unk> river and <unk> through feeders located in various parts of the town . In the period 2000 – 2001 , a total of 12 @.@ 5 million litres of water was supplied every day for households in the town . About 52 metric tonnes of solid waste are collected from Tiruvannamalai every day by door @-@ to @-@ door collection and subsequently the source segregation and dumping is carried out by the sanitary department of the municipality . The coverage of solid waste management had an efficiency of 75 % in 2001 . There is no underground drainage system in the town and the sewerage system for disposal of sullage is through septic tanks , open drains and public conveniences . The municipality maintains a total of 192 @.@ 24 km ( 119 @.@ 45 mi ) of storm water drains in Tiruvannamalai . There is one government hospital , one southern railway hospital , one municipal maternity hospital , two Siddha hospitals , two health centres and 16 private hospitals and clinics that take care of the health care needs of the citizens . There are a total of 3 @,@ 570 street lamps in Tiruvannamalai : 496 sodium lamps , 61 mercury vapour lamps , 3 @,@ 010 tube lights and three high mast beam lamp . The municipality operates three markets , namely the <unk> flower market , vegetable market and <unk> <unk> that cater to the needs of the town and the rural areas around it . 
 = Lancia LC2 = 
 The Lancia LC2 ( sometimes referred to as a Lancia @-@ Ferrari ) was a series of racing cars built by Italian automobile manufacturer Lancia and powered by engines built by their sister company Ferrari . They were part of Lancia 's official factory @-@ backed effort in the World Sportscar Championship from 1983 to 1986 , although they continued to be used by privateer teams until 1991 . They were also the company 's first car meeting the FIA 's new Group C regulations for sports prototypes . 
 More powerful than its primary competitor , the Porsche 956 , the LC2s were able to secure multiple pole positions during their three and a half seasons with the factory Martini Racing squad . However , deficiencies in reliability and fuel consumption hampered the LC2 's efforts for race wins against Porsche . LC2s earned three race victories over their lifetime in the hands of Italian drivers Teo Fabi , Riccardo Patrese , Alessandro Nannini , and Mauro Baldi , as well as German Hans Heyer and Frenchman Bob Wollek . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1982 , the new Group C regulations were introduced to the World Championship . This rule set required teams to use coupé @-@ style cars that had to be able to meet a fuel economy standard mandated at 100 kilometres ( 62 @.@ 1 mi ) for every 60 litres ( 16 US gal ) of fuel . The Lancia LC1 , which had been built to the older Group 6 regulations , initially competed in 1982 , but had to be replaced in order for Lancia to earn constructors ' points in the World Championship , now open to Group C cars only in 1983 . Besides the fact that the LC1 had an open @-@ cockpit , the turbocharged straight @-@ 4 Lancia engine it had used was not capable of achieving the fuel economy necessary in the new Group C regulations , requiring Lancia to also seek a new powerplant . Under the direction of Cesare Fiorio , Lancia began to work on the LC1 's replacement . 
 Lancia lacked a production engine large enough to base a racing engine on , leaving the company to turn to outside sources . Since Lancia were owned by the Fiat Group , they were able to seek the assistance of fellow Fiat company Ferrari . Ferrari allowed Lancia to adapt the new naturally aspirated 3 @.@ 0 litres ( 183 cu in ) four valve V8 which had been introduced in the Ferrari 308 <unk> QV in 1982 . The engine was reduced in capacity to 2 @.@ 6 litres ( 159 cu in ) and two KKK turbochargers were added to help the engine provide the fuel economy and power necessary . The specific engine displacement was chosen because of the possibility of using the same engine in the North American CART series . The engine was initially connected to a Hewland five @-@ speed manual gearbox , which was replaced by an Abarth @-@ cased unit in 1984 . 
 Design work on the chassis was split between Italian specialist racing car manufacturers Abarth and Dallara , the latter of which built the aluminium monocoque and the kevlar and carbon fibre bodywork in their factory . The LC2 featured a large intake for the radiators in the center of the nose of the car just as the LC1 had , unlike the contemporary Porsche 956s which drew all their air from behind and to the sides of the cockpit . This air was also directed through the side bodywork to feed the <unk> for the turbochargers . Inlets for the rear brake cooling ducts were also integrated onto the side bodywork of the car , immediately behind the doors . At the rear , a pontoon @-@ style design was adapted to the fenders with the large wing bridging across the pontoons . The rear diffusers exited between the pontoons and underneath the wing . 
 The LC2s were modified over their lifetime , with a multitude of modifications being made each season to the cars ' aerodynamics , including adapting brake duct inlets beneath the headlights . The Ferrari V8 was modified in 1984 , bringing the displacement back up to 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litres in an attempt to increase reliability and horsepower while improved engine electronics from Magneti Marelli allowed the larger engine to use the same amount of fuel as the previous version . In total , seven LC2s were built under the direction of Lancia , while a further two were built for Gianni Mussato without official backing after the program had ended . 
 After the program had ended , Abarth acquired an LC2 and fitted it with the 3 @.@ 5 @-@ litre Alfa Romeo Tipo 1035 V10 engine from the Alfa Romeo 164 Procar , and developed it under the project name SE047 . The SE047 was an early development of the Alfa Romeo SE <unk> project in 1988 . The SE047 's engine was ultimately not utilized in the later stages of the SE <unk> development . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 = = = 1983 = = = 
 The LC2s made their debut at the beginning of the 1983 season , being run under the Martini Racing name and painted in the Martini & Rossi colours , as well as initially using Italian Pirelli radial tyres . The first race of the season was also Lancia 's home event , the 1000 km of Monza . The LC2 proved more powerful than the 956s , taking the pole position by nearly a second over Joest Racing 's 956 . However tyre problems took the leading Lancia out of the lead of the race , and the second team car finished twelve laps behind the winning 956 . 
 Tyre problems and engine reliability hampered the LC2s all season ; the Pirelli tyres were eventually replaced with British Dunlop <unk> tyres , although the car 's suspension had been optimised for the Italian product . Neither car managed to finish a race again until the fifth round , the 1000 km of Spa . There the two Martini Racing LC2s as well as the privateer Mirabella LC2 all finished , but only after suffering various difficulties that dropped them from contention earlier in the race . The LC2s finally ran reliably at the European Endurance Championship round at Brands Hatch , where Michele Alboreto and Riccardo Patrese finished fourth . Lancia chose not to participate in the World Sportscar event in Japan , instead running the European Endurance event at Imola . The choice paid off as Teo Fabi and Hans Heyer earned the LC2 its first victory , although the factory Porsche team had not participated in this event . Lancia finished off the season with back @-@ to @-@ back second @-@ place finishes at Mugello and Kyalami . Even with their difficulties Lancia took second place in the World Constructors Championship , although they earned only 32 points to Porsche 's 100 . 
 = = = 1984 = = = 
 The revised LC2s appeared once again at the 1000 km of Monza to start the 1984 season , with suspension redesigned to work with the Dunlop tyres . Lancia opened the season with a podium finish , followed by another pole position on the fast Silverstone Circuit for the 1000 km of Silverstone led to a fourth @-@ place finish . For the 24 Hours of Le Mans , both cars qualified on the front row in the absence of the Rothmans Porsche team , with Bob Wollek 's pole time of 3 : 17 @.@ 11 being some 11 seconds faster than the fastest Porsche 956 's from Joest Racing who occupied the second row . Wollek and Nannini led at mid @-@ race after battles with the Kremer Porsche of Vern Schuppan ( the defending race winner ) and Alan Jones , only for problems with the gearboxes on both cars to lose the team their lead . Wollek and Nannini at least proved the potential reliability of the LC2 by completing the full race distance and finishing in eighth position , with Nannini setting the races fastest lap of 3 : 28 @.@ 90 . The team also ran a private entry LC2 in the race for drivers Pierluigi Martini , Xavier <unk> and Beppe Gabbiani . This car crashed heavily in qualifying , with most observers believing it would require a new chassis to be repaired . As changing a chassis was prohibited by the Automobile Club de l 'Ouest , the car was repaired in time to qualify and race , though rumours persisted that Lancia had broken the rules and used a new chassis to replace the original . 
 The team took a brief hiatus after Brands Hatch , returning for Imola once again but they were unable to repeat their previous performance , both cars crashing out . Lancia once again skipped Fuji in Japan , returning for the South African round at Kyalami where Patrese and Nannini led home a 1 @-@ 2 finish . Although the LC2 earned its second win , none of the leading Porsche teams attended the event in protest of the countries Apartheid laws . Unable to challenge further for the Constructors or Drivers Championships , the team did not attend the final round of the year at Sandown Park in Melbourne , Australia . Although the cars were fast , over the year Autocourse concluded that the team had had so many different problems that poor preparation must be the cause . 
 = = = 1985 = = = 
 1985 was a year in which Martini Racing needed to show the potential winning capabilities of the LC2 in order for Lancia to continue to fund a project that had seen limited success thus far . The cars were further revised and were running on Michelin radial tyres . The season opened with an LC2 taking pole position at Mugello by 1 @.@ 7 seconds ahead of the factory Porsche . Although the pole position car 's engine did not last , the other team car finished fourth . For the 1000 km of Monza , the LC2s were nearly four seconds ahead of the closest Porsche in qualifying , and led the race early on . However , while Patrese and Nannini were in third place and on the same lap as the leaders , a tree fell across the track and caused the race to be stopped early . On pole once again at Silverstone , one of the LC2s was in the lead of the race until a wheel bearing failure in the closing laps forced Nannini to pit , forfeiting the lead . Although the LC2s did not take pole at Le Mans , they lead the race early . Reliability issues again forced the team to drop out of the lead . They eventually finished the race in sixth and seventh places . A fuel pump failure also dropped the team out of contention at the Hockenheimring . 
 The team was competitive throughout the race at Spa , with the LC2 of Wollek , Patrese , and Mauro Baldi leading the factory Porsche towards the end of the event . The Lancia were leading when the race organisers chose to end the race out of respect for driver Stefan Bellof who had been killed in an accident earlier in the event . Even with the shortened race , Lancia were able to celebrate their first victory over the factory Rothmans Porsche team . The following event , the 1000 km of Brands Hatch , saw the LC2s leading en route to a potential win , only to hit one another and finish third and fourth . Once again unable to challenge Porsche in the championships , Lancia chose not to participate in the final two rounds . However they still earned second in the Teams Championship , just ahead of the privateer Joest Racing Porsche . 
 = = = 1986 = = = 
 Seeing some remaining potential in the LC2 , Lancia allowed the project to continue into 1986 , but only as a one @-@ car effort . The year opened with a sprint event at Monza , with the speed of the LC2 allowing it to take second place , less than a minute behind the winning Rothmans Porsche . The first endurance event at Silverstone however saw a return of the LC2 's reliability problems , as the fuel pump failed and the car was unable to finish . Feeling the cars were still not reliable enough nor fuel efficient enough to compete with the evolved Porsche 962C , Lancia determined that the project was no longer worth supporting , and Martini Racing pulled out of the championship . Lancia turned their full attention instead to their efforts in the World Rally Championship . 
 = = = Privateers = = = 
 Privateer teams initially attempted to carry on with older LC2 chassis . Gianni Mussato unsuccessfully entered two races in 1986 before leaving the championship , returning for one @-@ off appearances in 1987 and 1988 . The Mussato car moved to <unk> Racing later in 1988 , where it was again unsuccessful and failed to finish any of the races that season . Mussato returned in 1989 with a newly built LC2 , but once again the car struggled to finish any races during the season . His team made a final attempt in 1990 , running just the 24 Hours of Le Mans , but the outcome was the same . Even into 1991 , the Veneto Equipe team turned to the LC2 to contend the World Sportscar Championship . As with all previous privateer efforts the car was unable to compete , failing to even qualify for some of the races , let alone finish them . 
 = Being There ( Wilco album ) = 
 Being There is the second album by Chicago @-@ based rock band Wilco . Despite its release as a nineteen @-@ song double album , Being There was sold at a single album price due to a deal between lead singer Jeff Tweedy and Reprise Records . Released on October 29 , 1996 , the album was an improvement for the band in both sales and critical reception as compared with their first album , A.M .. 
 Taking its name from the 1979 film Being There , the self @-@ produced effort featured more surrealistic and introspective writing than their previous album . This was due in part to several significant changes in Tweedy 's life , including the birth of his first child . Musically , it juxtaposed the alternative country styles songs reminiscent of Uncle Tupelo with psychedelic , surreal songs . It was the only Wilco album with steel guitarist Bob Egan and the last with multi @-@ instrumentalist Max Johnston . 
 = = Context = = 
 Jeff Tweedy formed Wilco in 1994 after creative differences between Jay Farrar and Tweedy caused the breakup of Uncle Tupelo . The band entered the recording studio almost immediately afterwards to record and release A.M. in 1995 , which saw disappointing sales . Jay Farrar 's new band Son Volt released Trace in late 1995 to critical praise and good sales numbers . Trace also provided a college rock hit song in " Drown " , which entered the top ten of the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart , further increasing competition between the two bands . 
 Tweedy felt that Wilco was incomplete without a second guitarist due to the departure of Brian Henneman after the A.M. recording sessions . Wilco 's road manager Bob Andrews helped Tweedy get in contact with Jay Bennett , a multi @-@ instrumentalist who had been looking for a new band to join since his power pop band Titanic Love Affair had been dismissed from its record label . Bennett joined Wilco after Tweedy sent him a few Uncle Tupelo songs and a copy of A.M .. Tweedy was intrigued by the fact that Bennett could play keyboards , an instrument no other Wilco member played . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first conceptions of material for the album came during a particularly stressful time in Tweedy 's life . Tweedy had recently quit smoking marijuana , attendance at Wilco concerts was dwindling , and Tweedy was trying to manage his marriage , a mortgage , and the birth of his first child . He responded to these pressures : 
 For Being There , Tweedy wanted to blend the experiences he had making music with the ones he had listening to music . One of the first songs that Tweedy wrote was " Misunderstood " , a song about a tortured musical artist from the point of view of a fan . The song contains several overt references to the breakup of Uncle Tupelo , including the addition of insults that Farrar used against Tweedy — specifically one calling him a " mama 's boy " . The song concludes with the artist lashing out against the listener with satirical self @-@ pity , a rebellion against the way that fans saw Uncle Tupelo as only an archetype of Gram Parsons inspired country rock . To induce a feeling of chaos on the track , the members of Wilco recorded a track where the members switched to novel instruments and placed sections of it into the song . The theme of a " tortured artist " is found in other songs as well ; the end of " Sunken Treasure " features Tweedy calling for the renewal of his youth as a punk rocker . 
 A dichotomy of musical styling was featured in the album 's songs . " Hotel Arizona " , " Sunken Treasure " , and " Misunderstood " featured personal language and more surrealism compared to alternative country songs such as " The Lonely 1 " and " Far , Far Away " . To enhance this dichotomy between simple and surreal , each song was practiced , recorded , and mixed in only one day . The album 's name was taken from the 1979 comedy Being There , because the band believed that Peter Sellers ' character Chance had an analogous mentality to the mindset of the album . Wilco sought to incorporate influences from other bands , but not to an overbearing degree ; however , they were unable to accomplish this with songs like the Rolling Stones @-@ influenced " Monday " . Unlike radio @-@ friendly A.M. , the band had no preference about whether Being There could yield radio hits . 
 When the recording sessions were done , Wilco had originally recorded thirty songs , but were able to cut it down to nineteen songs covering a span of seventy @-@ seven minutes . Tweedy decided that he wanted to release all of the material as a double CD , but was concerned that consumers would be reluctant to purchase it . The purchasing price of a double album was at least $ 30 , but single albums cost ( at most ) $ 17 @.@ 98 . Tweedy approached record executive Joe McEwen , who had originally signed Uncle Tupelo to a Warner Brothers label , about selling Being There at a single album price . McEwen was reluctant at first , but was able to convince Reprise Records president Howie Klein to adhere to Tweedy 's request . To compensate for the financial loss that the label would take , Tweedy agreed to cut most of his royalties for the album . By 2003 , it was estimated that he lost nearly $ 600 @,@ 000 because of this , but Tweedy remained satisfied by the deal . 
 Being There was the only Wilco album with Freakwater 's Bob Egan . Egan was invited to come to the studio after Freakwater opened for Wilco for a few shows . He only played on two tracks ( " Far , Far Away " and " Dreamer in My Dreams " ) , but accompanied the band on the support tour . It was the last album for multi @-@ instrumentalist Max Johnston , who left because he was undergoing marital problems and believed that Bennett was taking over his place in the band . Jeff Tweedy performed as the lead singer and secondary guitarist . Jay Bennett was the lead guitarist , and also played a variety of other instruments . John Stirratt played bass guitar and Ken Coomer played drums . All members of the band played a different instrument on " Misunderstood " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Being There was received positively by critics . AllMusic editor Jason Ankeny gave the album a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars and referred to it as " the group 's great leap forward . " He praised the band 's ability to juxtapose psychedelia and power pop with tracks that " wouldn 't sound at all out of place on Exile on Main Street " . Greg Kot , writing for Rolling Stone , gave the album four stars and lauded how it " venture [ d ] out into an anxiety @-@ ridden world sure thing ... the solace they continue to find in rock and roll . " Robert Christgau was more modest , writing " there 's no point in denying Jeff Tweedy 's achievement as long as you recognize its insularity . " Ryan Schreiber of Pitchfork Media called the album " massively improved as both a band and as songwriters " but also noted that " the two @-@ disc set seems a little more than a marketing scheme . " In 2003 , Pitchfork Media named it the 88th best album of the 1990s . Critics at The Village Voice named Being There the 14th best of the year on its Pazz & Jop critics poll for 1996 . In 2004 , Stylus Magazine placed 178th on their " Top 101 @-@ 200 Favorite Albums of All @-@ Time " list . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 The album was a marked improvement over A.M. on the Billboard charts . It peaked at number 73 on the Billboard 200 , whereas A.M. failed to hit the chart at all . " Outtasite ( Outta Mind ) " was released as a single , and received moderate airplay on some college rock radio stations . As of 2003 , the album had sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Valve Corporation used " Someone Else 's Song " as a basis for the opening theme for The Engineer in their first @-@ person shooter game Team Fortress 2 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Jeff Tweedy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Wilco : 
 Jeff Tweedy – lead and backing vocals , guitars , bass , radio 
 John Stirratt – bass , piano , violin , backing vocals 
 Jay Bennett – guitars , piano , organ , harmonica , lap steel , drums , accordion , backing vocals 
 Ken Coomer – drums , percussion , guitars , backing vocals 
 Max Johnston – dobro , fiddle , mandolin , banjo , backing vocals 
 Additional musicians : 
 Bob Egan – pedal steel ( D1 : T2 ) , national steel guitar ( D2 : T9 ) 
 Greg Leisz – pedal steel ( D2 : T8 ) 
 Larry Williams – tenor sax ( D1 : T3 ) 
 Gary Grant , Jerry Hey – trumpet ( D1 : T3 ) 
 Jesse Green – violin ( D2 : T8 ) 
 Dan Higgins – baritone sax , tenor sax ( D1 : T3 ) 
 Jim Rondinelli , Chris Shepard – engineering , mastering 
 Ron Lowe , Mike <unk> , Lou Whitney , Chris Shepard – engineers 
 Bob Ludwig , Skip Saylor , Jim Scott – mastering 
 <unk> Davis – graphic design 
 Brad Miller – photography 
 = Akeelah and the Bee = 
 Akeelah and the Bee is a 2006 American drama film written and directed by Doug Atchison . It tells the story of Akeelah Anderson ( Keke Palmer ) , an 11 @-@ year @-@ old girl who participates in the Scripps National Spelling Bee , her mother ( Angela Bassett ) , her schoolmates , and her coach , Dr. Joshua Larabee ( Laurence Fishburne ) . The cast also features Curtis Armstrong , J.R. Villarreal , Sean Michael Afable , Erica Hubbard , Lee Thompson Young , Julito McCullum , Sahara Garey , Eddie Steeples , and Tzi Ma . 
 The film was developed over a period of 10 years by Atchison , who came up with the initial concept after seeing the 1994 Scripps National Spelling Bee and noting that a majority of the competitors came from good socioeconomic backgrounds . After completing the script in 1999 , Atchison won one of the Nicholl Fellowships in Screenwriting in 2000 , which attracted producers Sid Ganis and Nancy Hult Ganis . After an initial inability to secure funding , the project got a second wind as a result of the success of the 2002 documentary film Spellbound . Lionsgate Films undertook the production in 2004 and in the following year it was filmed in South Los Angeles on a budget of over $ 6 million . 
 Deemed an inspirational film , Atchison remarked that his theme for the film was about overcoming obstacles despite difficult challenges along the way . He also said that he wanted to portray African Americans in a manner that was not stereotypical and tried to show how African American children incorporate some stereotypes . The film alludes to the importance of community as well as to problems black communities face . It also deals with esteem and stigma in school while criticizes the public school system . Cast members said that although the film was aimed at children , they considered it had important lessons for the parents as well . 
 Released in the United States on April 28 , 2006 , Akeelah and the Bee was positively received by critics and audiences . Reviewers praised its storyline and cast , lauding Palmer 's performance , although a few critics panned the story as familiar and formulaic , and were critical of the portrayal of Asian @-@ American characters . The film grossed almost $ 18 million , and received a number of awards and nominations , including the Black Reel Awards and the NAACP Image Awards . Film critics highly praised it for avoiding African @-@ American stereotypes common in Hollywood films , while scholars were less favorable , even saying it reinforces some clichés . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Akeelah Anderson , an 11 @-@ year @-@ old spelling enthusiast , attends Crenshaw Middle School , a predominantly black school in South Los Angeles . She lives with her widowed mother Tanya , her older sister Kiana , her older brothers Devon and Terrence , and her infant niece . Her principal Mr. Welch suggests that she sign up for the Crenshaw <unk> Spelling Bee . She follows his advice and ends up winning . Soon after , Dr. Joshua Larabee ( Laurence Fishburne ) , a visiting English professor and Mr. Welch 's friend from college , tests Akeelah and decides that she is good enough to compete in the National Spelling Bee . Nevertheless , Dr. Larabee declines to coach her because she is rude to him . As a result , Akeelah studies on her own to prepare for the district spelling bee . Although Akeelah misspells her word during the final round of the bee , she qualifies for the regional bee when Kiana catches the other finalist cheating . Akeelah also meets and befriends Javier Mendez , a 12 @-@ year @-@ old Mexican American boy and fellow speller . Javier invites her to join the spelling club at his Woodland Hills middle school . 
 At Woodland Hills , Akeelah meets Dylan Chiu , a Chinese American boy who had won second place at the past two national spelling bees . <unk> , he asks her to spell " <unk> " . When she starts with a " z " , he tells her she needs a coach . At the conclusion of the spelling club meeting , Javier invites Akeelah to his birthday party . At the party , Akeelah nearly beats Dylan in Scrabble . The boy is reprimanded by his father for nearly losing to " a little black girl " . After the party , Tanya is depressed over her husband 's death and concerned about her daughter 's grades and frequent truancy . She subsequently forbids Akeelah from participating in the upcoming state bee . To circumvent this prohibition , Akeelah forges her deceased father 's signature on the consent form and secretly studies with Dr. Larabee . During the state bee , Tanya comes inside and interrupts her daughter before she can spell her word . Tanya relents after a side discussion with Dr. Larabee and Mr. Welch . Javier protects Akeelah from disqualification by stalling until she can return . Dylan , Javier and Akeelah advance to the Scripps National Spelling Bee . 
 As Christmas approaches , Akeelah goes out to buy Dr. Larabee a present , but when she meets him , he reveals that he is quitting being her coach because she reminds him of his deceased daughter Denise . Instead , he gives Akeelah 5 @,@ 000 flashcards to study . Without her coach , rejected by her best friend Georgia , and feeling the pressure from her neighborhood residents to make them proud , Akeelah loses her motivation . However , Tanya tells her that if she looked around her , she would realize that she has " 50 @,@ 000 coaches " . Akeelah recruits her family members , classmates , teachers , friends , and neighbor Derrick T to prepare in earnest . After reuniting with Dr. Larabee , Akeelah goes to Washington , D.C. with him , along with Tanya , Georgia , Mr. Welch , and Devon , unaware that her coach has paid for four of their tickets . Georgia rekindles her friendship with Akeelah after she invites her . During the competition , Akeelah becomes a crowd favorite . After all the other competitors are eliminated , only Dylan and Akeelah remain . The two finalists are allowed a break , during which Akeelah overhears Dylan 's father harshly pressuring him to win . Akeelah attempts to intentionally lose by deliberately misspelling " <unk> " . Dylan , knowing that Akeelah knows this word , intentionally misspells it as well . Dylan tells Akeelah that he wants a fair competition , rejecting his father 's obsession to win . The two then proceed to spell every word listed by the judges in the hopes of winning the championship together , with Dylan earning a share of it by correctly spelling " logorrhea " , much to his father 's delight . Akeelah spells the last word on the list , " <unk> " , and the two are declared co @-@ champions amidst a cheering crowd . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Keke Palmer as Akeelah Anderson : 
 Three hundred girls auditioned for the role of Akeelah in Los Angeles , New York and Atlanta , with Palmer having auditioned five times to get the part . Atchison liked Palmer 's acting , but the major factor in choosing her was the fact that at only age ten Palmer already had a profound interpretation of the script . He chose her as he did not want a kid whom he would command but instead someone with whom he could have a collaboration : someone who would understand the role and " would make this character her own . " He just assisted her to fully ensure that she would understand the character 's feelings and would make " the right emotional choices . " 
 Laurence Fishburne as Dr. Joshua Larabee : 
 Fishburne was pleased by the concept of the film , stating he was " really moved by it " , so that he accepted to take his part " at an affordable rate " , according to producer Michael Romersa . He first read the script in 2002 and moved by the fact that " there were very few people with the courage " to " make this kind of movie " he also accepted to be a producer for the film . About the character , Atchison said that Larabee is " vulnerable " and " a very sensitive guy " that has " a quiet moral authority " . He also asserted that Fishburne made Larabee " a fairly buttoned @-@ up , stoic type " and " subtly more animated " than how he envisioned the character . Larabee is based upon a teacher , Robert <unk> , Atchison had in Phoenix , Arizona . 
 Angela Bassett as Tanya Anderson : 
 Bassett 's agent send her the script which she " just loved . " Atchison praised Bassett 's portrayal of the character , asserting she " made Tanya a real person " after understanding " the thought process of the character " . The director said Tanya wants the best for Akeelah but is reticent because she thinks " the dream will fail and make things worse . " Bassett stressed that her character has to handle the pain of her husband 's death in addition to having bills paid but that Tanya " gain [ s ] some measure of courage herself " inspired by Akeelah . 
 Curtis Armstrong as Bob Welch : 
 Atchison pointed Armstrong " was the perfect choice for the school principal . " About his character role in the film , he said , " Welch is very excitable and provides a lot of the comic relief in our story . " 
 J.R. Villarreal as Javier Mendez : 
 Villarreal was chosen by scouts at the Sheraton Hotel in south McAllen to go to the next phase in Dallas . After doing well in Dallas , he was sent to auditions in California and finally got the part . He commented that " Javier is a very good friend to Akeelah ... And also like his charisma , his character , he can always put a smile on your face . He really doesn 't care what people think of him that much and he helps Akeelah out with that little matter because she cares very much of what people think about her . " 
 Sean Michael Afable as Dylan Chiu : 
 Afable argued that his character can be " sometimes harsh and seemingly cutthroat " , but this is because of the pressure his father puts on him , noting Dylan 's " true character " is seen at the end of the film . 
 Sahara Garey as Georgia 
 Garey did " about six auditions " to take the role . She commented that about her character : " she encourages Akeelah , because she sees so many qualities in her that she doesn 't think she herself has . Georgia aims lower , but she encourages Akeelah to aim higher . " 
 Erica Hubbard , Lee Thompson Young , and Julito McCullum portray Akeelah 's sister and brothers Kiana , Devon , and Terrence , respectively . Dalia Phillips appears as Akeelah 's teacher , Ms. Cross , and Eddie Steeples as Derrick T. Tzi Ma takes the role of Mr. Chiu , Dylan 's father , while Wolfgang <unk> plays the deceased Akeelah 's unnamed father . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Doug Atchison first had the idea of making a film about spelling bees after watching the Scripps National Spelling Bee of 1994 and noticing that most of the contestants had " privileged backgrounds " . Atchison also considered spelling bees to contain " all the drama and tension and entertainment value of a sporting event " , and felt that this could be made into a film . From this , he got the idea to write a script following the story of a child who had talent for spelling bee but was from a low @-@ income neighborhood so did not " have access to the resources or coaching to pursue it as these other kids had . " He had the desire of making a " Rocky @-@ like story " and although made it a " dramatic " plot , he declared it is " essentially a sports movie " . 
 Atchison started his screenplay in 1999 , when he wrote a five @-@ page treatment in about a month . In addition to the fact he was working on other projects , Atchison said he waited years before starting to write because he " thought someone else would do it first . " This did not happen , so he began to write by himself . Few changes were made in the process of transitioning from the original draft to the final product . One change was that at first , Akeelah 's mother had a smaller role and Akeelah 's father was alive . Also , Larabee had been an older man ( 72 years old ) , and a few characters were cut . However , Atchison has summarized that " the steps she goes through , the friends she 's got , those were always the same . " 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 2000 , Atchison submitted his script to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences along with about 4 @,@ 500 others , in hopes of winning the Nicholl Fellowships in Screenwriting . Atchison 's script ended up being one of five scripts selected , and he won the grant . Editor Glenn Farr , then a member of the committee , offered to edit Atchison 's film as soon as it was finished . Producer Sid Ganis was also attracted to the story during the award presentation ceremony . Nancy Hult Ganis , Sid 's wife who was interested in public education , encouraged him to follow through with the film . 
 The film was produced by Lionsgate Films , 2929 Entertainment , Starbucks Entertainment , Out of the Blue Entertainment , Reactor Films and Cinema Gypsy Productions , with a budget around $ 6 – 8 million . However , the Ganis couple found it difficult to secure funding for the film . In August 2001 , Danny Llewelyn 's Panoptic Pictures acquired the rights of Atchison 's script . In 2002 , documentary Spellbound was released and attracted attention to spelling bees , which , according to Hult Ganis , " helped us in some way " . In November 2004 , Lionsgate Films announced they would fund and distribute the film ; and in collaboration with 2929 Entertainment they would co @-@ finance the production . In January 2006 , Starbucks announced a partnership with Lionsgate to market it . 
 Another factor in not having a studio attached before was Atchison 's desire to direct it as he wanted to ensure his story would remain the one he envisioned . Several studios wanted to turn Larabee 's character into a white character but Atchison felt " it was important that Akeelah 's mentor be someone that comes from her neighborhood , that looks like her . " Lionsgate 's President of Production Michael <unk> agreed that Atchison should direct the script , claiming that he was the only person who could do it because the story " was in his heart and in his mind " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in February 2005 ; the crew filmed for ten hours a day for thirty @-@ one days . The eleven @-@ year @-@ old Palmer had to follow the United States ' child labor laws , which necessitated spending at least three hours a day at school , one on recreation , and one at lunch . Nevertheless , Palmer appeared in almost every scene , about which Ganis commented , " I honestly don 't know how we figured it out , but we did " . To get the filming done on time , Atchison storyboarded the scenes ahead of time and chatted with cinematographer David Mullen , the production designer Warren Young , and Glenn Farr to compile a list of scenes . This way , the filming team began each day knowing what shots they would take , their order , and the performances scheduled for each day . Most of the filming took place in South Los Angeles , which Atchison picked as the filming location due to their low budget . Scenes were also filmed at the University of Southern California , Hollywood Palladium — which stood in for the Grand Ballroom of the Washington , D.C. Hyatt Hotel — and Venice High School . 
 = = = Authenticity = = = 
 To bring authenticity to the film 's portrayal of spelling bees , George Hornedo , who competed in spelling bees in real life , was hired to play contestant Roman and be " an unofficial technical consultant . " Hornedo helped the actors to recreate " certain habits and idiosyncrasies they do on stage to help them spell . " Thus , Akeelah skipping rope to memorize the words was added as " something that was normal for the spelling bee " but Atchison tried to create it in a " subtle " way as he thought the audience could consider this unrealistic . Hornedo and other children who had never acted before were cast because of their authentic portrayals of nervous contestants ; other kids , in Atchison 's eyes , were " too old in how they acted " . 
 To further help the staff , Atchison asked Paige Kimball , director of the Scripps National Spelling Bee , to be a consultant . Kimball " was amazed at not only at how precise it was in its recreation , but also how authentic the individuals and the casting for the event was . " However , she and the organization did have some disagreements . Atchison has admitted that he originally created a more dramatic story than she wanted . However , he believed most of the disagreements were about technical procedures , " things you wouldn 't even notice " . For example , the children were originally sponsored by newspapers to compete , but Atchison felt this detail did not improve the story , so he removed it . There were some concerns about the screenplay , and Atchison changed some of them " because [ he ] thought it didn 't matter one way or another so [ he ] just made them happy . " 
 Dr. Jacques Bailly , who won the Scripps National Spelling Bee in 1980 and is currently the contest 's official <unk> , since 2003 , played himself in the movie . He stated that the film had a great message in that contestants should study the history of words and foreign languages and the meaning of those words more than just memorizing them . Bailly studied Ancient Greek and Latin , receiving his bachelor 's degree from Brown University and his PhD from Cornell University . He learned German in Switzerland with the help of a Fulbright scholarship . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film features a musical score by Aaron Zigman , who wrote 45 minutes of compositions in two and a half weeks . He had planned to score Akeelah and the Bee over the holidays , but Lionsgate pushed its release date up , so Zigman was pressed for time to write the score . He drew inspiration from Fishburne 's performance to write it . A soundtrack album consisting of 16 tracks was released by Lionsgate Records in a deal with BMG 's RED Distribution on April 4 , 2006 . It peaked at number 193 on the Billboard 200 , and reached the 19th and sixth spot on the Billboard Top Independent Albums and Top Soundtracks respectively . The original score , consisting of 37 tracks , was also released on April 4 as an iTunes exclusive . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Commentators on Akeelah and the Bee opined it dealt with multiple themes , including race and racism , poverty , educational system , competition and sportsmanship , self @-@ esteem , self @-@ image , stigma , community , friendship , gender and sexism , age , class and classism , and empowerment . Atchison affirmed that its focus is not the spelling but " a kid who learns what she 's good at , becomes proud of that and doesn 't want to hide it anymore . It 's overcoming the fear of being great , before you can be great . " Sid Ganis described it as a film " about hope and doing great things against all the odds , " while a New York Press reviewer declared it " addresses the human condition " . 
 After attending USC School of Cinematic Arts and working at a youth center in South Los Angeles , Atchison incorporated his experiences from the neighborhood into the film ; among them , he heard that children who do well in school are said to be " acting white " . As a result , Atchison tried to use the film to show what causes these children to doubt their own abilities . This doubts are shown through the preconceptions Akeelah and other community members have that " Spelling Bee is for someone else " . She " must first overcome her feelings of inadequacy , " and when she discovers Larabee comes from her neighborhood and is a successful man , it " empowers her to ... accomplish this task . " Fishburne stated the film 's treatment of race extends beyond the dichotomy of struggle and success , and goes into the prejudice that many people hold against black people competing in mainstream society . Atchison elaborated , " it 's about this girl 's insecurity about doing a thing that she hasn 't seen people who look like her doing " . The director affirmed that African American children in film usually aspire to nothing other than being successful in sports , music or dance . He argued that the film industry has disseminated " lies about black inferiority " , so he was interested in focusing in their intellect rather than let them succumb to the stereotypes . Atchison noted he had created the project for all publics " but particularly for kids of color to see a little black girl who does something powerful . " 
 The director also attributed Akeelah 's low @-@ esteem and doubt on her own capacities to the public school system , where she is bullied and " her intellectual curiosity is kind of crushed " . As such , Akeelah is portrayed as " <unk> student " , who " [ u ] <unk> to be stigmatized as a freak or a brainiac , " avoids showing her abilities . According to Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe , the film shows " the contradiction gifted students feel in an inhospitable environment . " Ann Hornaday from The Washington Post opined that Akeelah 's sentence " Why would I want to represent a school that doesn 't even have doors on the toilets ? " is " one of the film 's many subtle critiques of the country 's education policies . " Writing in the English Journal , Amanda L. Hodges said it suggests a new approach on teaching with the " 50 @,@ 000 coaches " part ; she declared it deconstructs the image of teachers " as those who keep order and disseminate knowledge " and shows that " [ t ] <unk> is not an isolated activity that begins and ends at the classroom door . " 
 Villarreal commented that the film " teaches you not to let your friends down " , while Fishburne believed that the theme of community was important . <unk> Ingman of The Austin Chronicle said the film indicates " a community @-@ based , cooperative model of group success , " while Justin Chang of Variety said it " focuses ... on the bee 's community @-@ uniting impact . " Hodges said Akeelah goes to the spelling bee because she recognizes it " proves that someone from their neighborhood can achieve success , and her <unk> , in a real sense , their own " . In contrast , Bernard Beck wrote for Multicultural Perspectives that it depicts " the success of individual perseverance " , while Red Feather <unk> 's Kathryn Linder expressed a similar opinion about individual success . Nevertheless , Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times commented " it raises important points about the ... obstacles to success that kids from poor neighborhoods face . " The New York Press 's reviewer went further and said social class was its " real subject " as it " depicts the basics of class mobility that are routinely taken for granted " . However , Chang asserted it shows the spelling bee contest as " a democratizing force " , while Rob Asghar , for The Seattle Times , wrote it treats English as " the quintessential American tool for success . " 
 Both Fishburne and Bassett also remarked that an important message of Akeelah and the Bee is to " speak properly " rather than strictly in vernacular , although Bassett emphasized the importance of the film 's themes beyond spelling and spelling bees . Atchison added that beyond learning how to spell words , Akeelah must learn the importance of the words . He said that Larabee " looks at Akeelah as a potential leader . He wants her to understand her history . She needs to know the importance of language – and competition . " In spite of knowing its importance , it " deconstruct [ s ] the ' competition ' paradigm of learning " , according to Ingman . Fishburne noted not only children but parents can learn from the film ; in his opinion , the most important is that they should pay attention to their children 's abilities . Villarreal also felt that , through Dylan 's father , parents would be able to ponder if they are " push [ ing ] their kids to follow their own dreams and not the children 's dreams . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Marketing and release = = = 
 The film was promoted by coffee shop chain Starbucks as a result of a partnership between Lions Gate Entertainment and Starbucks Entertainment . In January 2006 , approximately 8 @,@ 300 Starbucks locations in the United States and Canada began a promotional campaign for the film involving spelling @-@ related trivia games and promotions on cardboard cup sleeves . Variety stated that Lionsgate spent around $ 20 million with its market only , while Los Angeles Times reported a $ 25 million cost to both produce and market the film . Ford Motor Company also sponsored the film by providing a Lincoln Zephyr to chauffeur the cast and creators to and from a screening . 
 Akeelah and the Bee was first shown at the 2006 ShoWest on March 14 , and later premiered as the opening film at the 30th Cleveland International Film Festival on March 16 . On April 20 , the film was screened at the The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills , and it had a sneak preview in 900 theaters on April 22 . With predictions of strong box office returns by film critics , it was released nationwide in theaters on April 28 , grossing $ 6 @,@ 011 @,@ 585 in its opening weekend from around 2 @,@ 195 American theaters and ranking eighth at the box office . The film closed its run on July 14 and 20 domestically and internationally respectively , with $ 18 @,@ 848 @,@ 430 domestically and $ 110 @,@ 994 internationally . While the film received positive reviews , critics noted that it was not doing as well financially as they had predicted , and Lionsgate 's Michael Burns characterized the film 's gross with the word " only " . 
 Outside the United States , the film debuted at the <unk> Toronto International Film Festival for Children on April 23 , 2006 , where it was elected the best film by the kids in the ages of 10 and 11 . In the United Kingdom , Akeelah and the Bee was first shown at the Cambridge Film Festival on July 7 , and it premiered in the British theaters on August 18 . The film was also screened in October 2006 at the Rome Film Festival , in which it competed at the <unk> in the City section . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD by Lionsgate Home Entertainment on August 29 , becoming the first DVD offered for sale at Starbucks . Its bonus features on the single @-@ disc DVD include seven deleted scenes and a 25 @-@ minute making @-@ of video featuring <unk> and the cast . DVD sales in the United States reached $ 5 @,@ 391 @,@ 947 as 317 @,@ 942 copies were sold after one week on sale . By December 2006 , American consumers had spent a total of $ 25 @,@ 855 @,@ 396 to purchase 1 @,@ 512 @,@ 498 copies , making it one of the three most profitable home video releases of Lionsgate in 2006 . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The film received generally positive reviews from film critics . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports an 84 % " fresh " with an average rating of 7 / 10 based on 136 reviews . Its critical consensus states , " Although predictable in every way , a winning performance from its young star Keke Palmer and the rest of the cast makes it difficult not to cheer for the little heroine of Akeelah and the Bee . Sort of like Rocky for the middle school nerd set , Akeelah [ and the Bee ] is a warm , family @-@ friendly underdog story , featuring terrific supporting performances from Laurence Fishburne and Angela Bassett . " On Metacritic , the film achieved an average score of 72 out 100 , based on 30 reviews , signifying " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a rare average grade of A + . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote it is " an uncommonly good movie , entertaining and actually inspirational " . Writing for Film Journal International , Doris Toumarkine praised its pace and how " Atchison takes spelling competitions and conveys the excitement of the ' sport , ' the appeal of the ' game , ' the thrill of the win , [ and ] the crushing blow of the loss . " Hornaday from The Washington Post called the film " a triumph on many levels " and proclaimed , " It 's that nod to the collective ... that makes Akeelah and the Bee so special . " She especially appreciated that South Los Angeles was presented without stereotypes . Jane Clifford of U @-@ T San Diego felt the film would appeal to both children and adults , and stated that every time she tried to predict its plot " it took a sharp turn . A turn that leaves you facing your stereotypes and feeling a little sheepish . " Dana Stevens , writing for The New York Times , asserted , " The innate suspense and charm of the spelling bee , " and " a trio of crack performances " can turn " a formulaic sports picture " into a " tale that manages to inspire without being sappy . " <unk> Grant of The Jamaica Observer wrote that " acting is spectacular , the emotions are real and this story of black triumph is simply phenomenal . " New York Press critic affirmed that Akeelah and the Bee " resurrects a nearly lost idea of what an art @-@ movie really is " because it has " dramatic attention to character and place , psychology and existence . " 
 Chang of Variety commented that it " plays like The Karate Kid with a pro @-@ literacy agenda , pushing all the right emotional buttons yet hitting quite a few wrong ones in the process . " The Evening Chronicle 's review said it " conceals few narrative surprises " but contended that " when [ Atchison ] does finally defy our expectations , it 's to ensure his spellers learn a valuable lesson about integrity . " Turan of the Los Angeles Times criticized that the film " telegraphs its plot " ; however , he praised it as " genuinely sweet and determinedly inspirational . " PopMatters 's Cynthia Fuchs stated it is formulaic as it has some " conventions that make so many other genre films feel stale , " but that it " torques them slightly " , emphasizing the " intellectual activities " Akeelah gets involved with . Furthermore , the film was described as " <unk> entertaining in a feel @-@ good sort of way " by Rick Groen in an article for The Globe and Mail . Ingman of The Austin Chronicle described it as a typical sports film and felt it was heavy @-@ handed at times . However , she praised it for its <unk> and called the film a " [ t ] <unk> , engaging , " one and said it has " cross @-@ gender appeal " . Morris of The Boston Globe argued , " If Akeelah and the Bee is a generic , well @-@ oiled commercial contraption , it is the first to credibly dramatize the plight of a truly gifted , poor black child . " Morris added , " Obviously , it 's emotional propaganda . But it 's just the kind of propaganda our children need . " 
 Despite being a " critically @-@ acclaimed " film , according to Rotten Tomatoes , not all of its reviews were this positive . Anna Smith of Empire called it " formulaic and all @-@ American " , commenting that many scenes " appear functional rather than inspirational " , and that the film focused on the racial issue " a little too heavily " . Smith stated , " clunky plotting and characterisation mean it has ' telemovie ' written all over it . " Marc Mohan from The Oregonian stressed it can be compared to after @-@ school specials due to its " lack of originality in plot and character . " Time Out 's Jessica Winter also drew a <unk> to after @-@ school specials , saying " on the big screen ... its clichés seem bigger and its characterisations broader than they would on the more forgiving telly . " Nick Schager 's of Slant Magazine lamented that the " clichés are too numerous to mention " , while Neil Smith from BBC asserted it has " as much ... fantasy as Lord of the Rings . " Jan Stuart of Newsday deemed it " virtually suspense @-@ free , while Robert Hanks of The Independent stated it has an important message but that is a " shame it couldn 't be encased in a less faked @-@ up story " . Commenting on the The Times , Chris Ayres stressed that although it has good " visual flair " it " is ruined by its Oprah @-@ style emotional manipulation . " New York Post 's Kyle Smith deemed it as " uplifting but unimaginative " , suggesting that " Akeelah and the Bee is so warm and well @-@ meaning that you may find yourself wanting to like it more than you really do . " 
 In spite of criticism , cast members ' performances were usually well @-@ received – in particular , Palmer 's portrayal of Akeelah . Ebert said , " The movie depends on her , and she deserves its trust . " Hornaday opined that " Palmer 's Akeelah is that cinematic <unk> avis , the kid who is cute without being too cute , sympathetic without being cloying , and believable without being tiresome . " Evening Chronicle stated Palmer does it " with effortless grace " and that she " carries the film and doesn 't strike a single wrong emotional note . " Fuchs felt that most of the film 's strengths " have to do with Palmer 's winning performance . " Ingman declared Atchison 's " ensemble is wonderful , and his star , Palmer , is a fantastically assured young actress who conveys Akeelah 's maelstrom of 11 @-@ year @-@ old feelings with no apparent effort . " Turan complimented how Fishburne and Bassett 's " presence and ability give this film a welcome integrity . " Mohan stated , " Although Fishburne and Bassett can do these roles in their sleep , the kids are actually quite engaging . " <unk> felt there were " fine performances all around " and that Fishburne and Bassett " lend fine support in utterly believable roles " . 
 = = = = Racial issues = = = = 
 Chang called Dylan 's father " a stiff Asian stereotype " , while Mohan of The Oregonian found it contradictory for an anti @-@ racist film to contain such depiction . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian even claimed that the line " If you can barely beat a little black girl " ( spoken by Dylan 's father ) signifies that Atchison " thinks it 's all right to bring in racism by making the Asians the racists . " Metro Silicon Valley 's Richard von <unk> commented that " [ s ] <unk> around black stereotypes , the film squishes its two left feet right in the mire of Asian stereotyping . " Beth <unk> of KPBS also criticized Dylan and his father 's portrayal as " painful cliches " , while Schager of Slant Magazine found it not authentic , even likening Dylan 's father to Mao Zedong . 
 Scholars Charise Pimentel and Cathleen Sawyer from the Texas State University published an article titled " Akeelah and the Bee : Inspirational Story of African @-@ American Intellect and Triumph or Racist Rhetoric Served Up On Another Platter ? " on the May 2011 issue of journal Multicultural Perspectives . On a critical discourse analysis , the authors argue that despite appearing to be an " <unk> enough " film , it has major approaches that make it racist . First , it implies that African @-@ Americans needs to be rescued by others ; second , depicts African @-@ Americans community as " marked by homelessness , poverty , criminality , unemployment , and remnants of gang activity " ; third , indicates that black people usually only achieve success through sports by " linking the very essence of Akeelah 's phenomenal ability to spell to her rhythmic abilities " ; and shows that African @-@ Americans only can succeed outside their communities , " far from the oppressive clutches of their own . " 
 Linder , on her September 2011 paper " Spelling Out Racial Difference : Moving Beyond the Inspirational Discourses in Akeelah and the Bee " , also criticizes it saying it " acts as a platform for a racial melodrama through which ideals of whiteness are reinforced and strengthened . " Using Linda Williams ' categories of what constitutes a racial melodrama , Linder argues that it is described as an " inspirational " film because of " [ its ] portrayal of Akeelah 's victimization by the black community that surrounds her " and of redemption only achieved " through the idealized discourse of young people 's educational success as defined by dominant ( white ) culture . " Linder said characters " are mostly represented as having ' no interest in escape ' from societal oppressions and limitations " and that " there is no sign throughout the film of any kind of lasting change for Akeelah 's school or her young peers . " 
 Linder affirms that it creates a dichotomy between " success ( whiteness ) versus failure ( blackness ) . " Pimentel and Sawyer , as well as Linder , identify Larabee as the one who makes this separation clear when he manifests his disregard of African American Vernacular English . The co @-@ authors wrote that Larabee implies that " legitimate forms of intelligence can only be achieved through a Eurocentric perspective , thus advancing the message that Akeelah must be rescued from her African @-@ American ways of knowing , in order to be considered intellectual . " Another <unk> commented by scholars was " between the supportive Dr. Larabee and Akeelah 's skeptical mother . " <unk> and Sawyer said she is portrayed as " an African @-@ American obstructionist " , while scholar Gloria <unk> ‐ Billings asserted she represents the stereotype of " ignorant Black woman " . Although Fuchs said the film was able to avoid the " white authority figure saves the underclass child " plotline by introducing Larabee , <unk> ‐ Billings , Linder , and Pimentel and Sawyer opined that it did not . After all , Larabee , as Linder described , is " a non @-@ threatening black man who has assimilated to white culture and who can be depended on to help assimilate others " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film was nominated for six Black Reel Awards , winning only Best Actress for Palmer . Out of five NAACP Image Awards nominations , Akeelah and the Bee won Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture and Outstanding Writing in a Feature Film / Television Movie - Comedy or Drama . At the Black Movie Awards , it won the five awards it was nominated for . The same happened during the Young Artist Awards where it was nominated for two categories and won two awards , and at the <unk> Awards where it was nominated for and won an award . The film was also nominated for but did not win any award from the BET Awards , Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards , Chicago Film Critics , and Satellite Awards . National Board of Review elected it among the best ten independent films produced in 2006 . Additionally , two film critics , Chris Kaltenbach of The Baltimore Sun and Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer , added the film on their list of the ten best films of the year . St. Petersburg Times 's Steve Persall elected it the best family film of 2006 . 
 = Waldorf Astoria New York = 
 The Waldorf Astoria New York is a luxury hotel in Manhattan , New York City . The hotel has been housed in two historic landmark buildings in New York . The first , bearing the same name , was built in two stages , which accounts for its dual name . The original hotel , situated on Astor properties along Fifth Avenue , was completed in 1893 and designed by Henry J. Hardenbergh . It was demolished in 1929 to make way for the construction of the Empire State Building . The present building , at 301 Park Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets in Midtown Manhattan , is a 47 @-@ story 190 @.@ 5 m ( 625 ft ) Art Deco landmark designed by architects Schultze and Weaver , which was completed in 1931 . The current hotel was the world 's tallest hotel from 1931 until 1963 , when it was surpassed by Moscow 's Hotel Ukraina by 7 metres ( 23 ft ) . An icon of glamour and luxury , the current Waldorf Astoria is one of the world 's most prestigious and best known hotels . 
 From its inception , the Waldorf Astoria gained international renown for its lavish dinner parties and galas , often at the center of political and business conferences and fundraising schemes involving the rich and famous . Particularly after World War II it played a significant role in world politics and the Cold War , culminating in the controversial World Peace Conference of March 1949 at the hotel , in which Stalinism was widely denounced . Conrad Hilton acquired management rights to the hotel on October 12 , 1949 , and the Hilton Hotels Corporation finally bought the hotel outright in 1972 . It underwent a $ 150 million renovation by Lee Jablin in the 1980s and early 1990s , and in October 2014 it was announced that the Anbang Insurance Group of China had purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York for US $ 1 @.@ 95 billion , making it the most expensive hotel ever sold . 
 The Waldorf Astoria and Towers has a total of 1 @,@ 413 hotel rooms as of 2014 . In 2009 , when it had 1 @,@ 416 rooms , the main hotel had 1 @,@ 235 single and double rooms and 208 mini suites , while the Waldorf Towers , from the 28th floor up to the 42nd , had 181 rooms , of which 115 were suites , with one to four bedrooms . Several of the luxury suites are named after celebrities who lived or stayed in them such as The Cole Porter Suite , The Royal Suite , named after the Duke and Duchess of Windsor , the MacArthur Suite and the Churchill Suite . The most expensive room , the Presidential Suite , is designed with Georgian @-@ style furniture to emulate that of the White House . It was the residence of Herbert Hoover from his retirement for over 30 years , and Frank Sinatra kept a suite at the Waldorf from 1979 until 1988 . The hotel has three main restaurants , Peacock Alley , The Bull and Bear Steak House , and La Chine , a new Chinese restaurant that replaced Oscar 's Brasserie in late 2015 . Sir Harry 's Bar , named after British explorer Sir Harry Johnston , is the home of the Rob Roy and the Bobbie Burns cocktails . 
 On July 1 , 2016 , Anbang Insurance Group , the owner of the hotel , announced that it would convert most of the Waldorf 's hotel rooms into <unk> . Beginning in the spring of 2017 , the hotel will be closed for three years while renovations are performed on the structure . During this time , the restaurants of the Waldorf Astoria will also be closed during the remodeling and will reopen in three years along with the hotel . 
 = = Name = = 
 The name of the hotel is ultimately derived from the town of Walldorf in Germany , the ancestral home of the prominent German @-@ American Astor family that originated there . The hotel was originally known as The Waldorf @-@ Astoria with a single hyphen , as recalled by a popular expression and song , " Meet Me at the Hyphen . " The sign was changed to a double hyphen , looking similar to an equals sign , by Conrad Hilton when he purchased the hotel in 1949 . The double hyphen visually represents " Peacock Alley " , the hallway between the two hotels that once stood where the Empire State building now stands today . The use of the double hyphen was discontinued by parent company Hilton in 2009 , shortly after the introduction of the Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts chain . The hotel has since been known as the Waldorf Astoria New York , without any hyphen , though this is sometimes shortened to the Waldorf Astoria . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original buildings = = = 
 The original hotel started as two hotels on Fifth Avenue built by feuding relatives . The first hotel , the 13 @-@ story , 450 @-@ room Waldorf Hotel , designed by Henry Janeway Hardenbergh in the German Renaissance style , was opened on March 13 , 1893 at the corner of Fifth Avenue and 33rd Street , on the site where millionaire developer William Waldorf Astor had his mansion . The original hotel stood 225 feet ( 69 m ) high , with a frontage of about 100 feet ( 30 m ) on Fifth Avenue , with an area of 69 @,@ 475 square feet ( 6 @,@ 454 @.@ 4 m2 ) . The original hotel was described as having a " lofty stone and brick exterior " , which was " animated by an effusion of balconies , alcoves , arcades , and loggias beneath a tile roof bedecked with gables and turrets " . William Astor , motivated in part by a dispute with his aunt Caroline Webster Schermerhorn Astor , had built the Waldorf Hotel next door to her house , on the site of his father 's mansion . The hotel was built to the specifications of founding proprietor George Boldt , who owned and operated the Bellevue @-@ Stratford Hotel , a fashionable hotel on Broad Street in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , with his wife Louise . Boldt was described as " Mild mannered , undignified , unassuming " , resembling " a typical German professor with his close @-@ cropped beard which he kept fastidiously trimmed ... and his pince @-@ nez glasses on a black silk cord " . Boldt continued to own the Bellevue even after his relationship with the Astors blossomed . 
 At first , the Waldorf appeared destined for failure . It was originally a laughing stock with its high number of bathrooms and was known briefly as " Boldt 's Folly " or " Astor 's Folly " , with the general perception of the palatial hotel being that it had no place in New York City . Wealthy New Yorkers were angry because they viewed the construction of the hotel as the ruination of a good neighborhood . Business travelers found it too expensive and too far uptown for their needs . In the face of all of this , George Boldt decided that the hotel would host a benefit concert for St. Mary 's Hospital for Children on its opening day . The hospital was the favorite charity of those on the Social Register . The ballroom filled with many of New York 's First Families , who had paid five dollars for the concert and dinner at the Waldorf . It soon became a major success , earning $ 4 @.@ 5 million in its first year , exorbitant for that period . 
 William Astor 's construction of a hotel next to his aunt 's house worsened his feud with her , but , with Boldt 's assistance , Waldorf 's cousin , John Jacob Astor IV persuaded his mother to move uptown . On November 1 , 1897 , John Jacob Astor IV opened the 17 @-@ story Astoria Hotel on an adjacent site , and leased it to Boldt . The hotels were initially built as two separate structures , but Boldt planned the Astoria so it could be connected to the Waldorf by an alley . Peacock Alley was constructed to connect the two buildings , and the hotel subsequently became known as the " Waldorf @-@ Astoria " , the largest hotel in the world at the time . 
 With a telephone in every room and first @-@ class room service , the hotel was designed specifically to cater to the needs of socially prominent " wealthy upper crust " of New York and distinguished foreign visitors to the city . The hotel became , according to author Sean Dennis Cashman , " a successful symbol of the opulence and achievement of the Astor family " . It was the first hotel to offer complete electricity and private bathrooms . Founding proprietor Boldt , whose motto was " the guest is always right " , became wealthy and prominent internationally , if not so much a popular celebrity as his famous employee , Oscar Tschirky , known as " Oscar of the Waldorf " , maître d 'hôtel from the hotel 's inauguration in 1893 until his retirement in 1943 . Tschirky had arrived in the United States from Switzerland ten years prior to applying for the position at the new Waldorf and over the years grew to possess a great knowledge of cuisine . He authored The Cookbook by Oscar of The Waldorf ( 1896 ) , a 900 @-@ page book featuring all of the popular recipes of the day , including his own , for which he garnered great acclaim , such as Waldorf salad , Eggs Benedict and Thousand Island dressing , which remain popular worldwide today . James Remington McCarthy wrote in his book Peacock Alley that Oscar gained renown among the general public as an artist who " composed sonatas in soups , symphonies in salads , minuets in sauces , lyrics in entrees " . In 1902 Tschirky published Serving a Course Dinner by Oscar of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria , a booklet that explains the intricacies of being a cater to the American and international elite . Tschirky had an excellent memory and an encyclopedic memory of the culinary preferences of many of the guests , which further added to his popularity . In 1937 , for instance , he recalled the opening night and notable people present at the old Waldorf , a guest at the old building known to the public as Buffalo Bill , and spoke at length about the planning for the Panama Canal that took place at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria . 
 The Waldorf gained significant renown internationally for its fundraising dinners and balls , regularly attracting notables of the day such as Andrew Carnegie , who became a fixture . Banquets were often held in the ballroom for esteemed figures and international royalty . The Waldorf Astoria was influential in advancing the status of women , who were admitted singly without escorts . George Boldt 's wife , Louise <unk> Boldt , was influential in evolving the idea of the grand urban hotel as a social center , particularly in making it appealing to women as a venue for social events . On February 11 , 1899 , Oscar hosted a lavish dinner reception that the New York Herald Tribune cited as the city 's costliest dinner at the time . Some $ 250 was spent per guest , with <unk> oysters , green turtle soup , lobster , ruddy duck and blue raspberries . One article that year claimed that at any one time the hotel had $ 7 million worth of valuables locked in the safe , testament to the wealth of its guests . In 1902 a lavish dinner was organized for Prince Henry of Prussia , and in 1909 banquets , attended by hundreds , were organized for Arctic explorer Frederick Cook in September and Elbert Henry Gary , a founder of US Steel , the following month . 
 The United States Senate inquiry into the sinking of the RMS Titanic was opened at the hotel on April 19 , 1912 and continued there for some time in the Myrtle Room , before moving on to Washington , D.C .. John Jacob Astor IV was one of the people who perished on its ill @-@ fated journey . Seven senators were present on the subcommittee , including William Alden Smith ( Republican , Michigan ) as chair , Jonathan Bourne ( Republican , Oregon ) , Theodore E. Burton ( Republican , Ohio ) , Duncan U. Fletcher ( Democrat , Florida ) , Francis G. Newlands ( Democrat , Nevada ) , George Clement Perkins ( Republican , California ) , and <unk> <unk> Simmons ( Democrat , North Carolina ) . The composition of the subcommittee was carefully chosen to represent the conservative , moderate and liberal wings of the two parties . 
 In 1919 , restaurateur Louis Sherry announced an " alliance " with the Waldorf @-@ Astoria that involved both his candies and catering services . Although it was not disclosed at that time , at some point ownership of Louis Sherry Inc. was significantly vested in " Boomer @-@ duPont interests " , a reference to Lucius M. Boomer , then chairman of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria , and T. Coleman du Pont . Upon his death that year , William Waldorf Astor was reputed to have been worth £ 200 million , which he left in trust for his two sons Waldorf and John Jacob . His half share of the Waldorf Astoria and the Astor Hotel at the time were reported to have been worth £ 10 million . On the evening of November 15 , 1926 , the National Broadcasting Company broadcast its inaugural program from the grand ballroom of the old Waldorf @-@ Astoria . Among the entertainers heard by radio listeners was Will Rogers . The network became the Red Network on January 1 , 1927 when NBC launched its second network , designated the Blue Network . An antitrust suit forced the sale of the Blue Network in 1942 ; it became the American Broadcasting Company . 
 The hotel faced stiff competition from the early 20th century , with a range of new hotels springing up in New York City such the Hotel Astor ( 1904 ) , The St. Regis ( 1904 ) , The Knickerbocker ( 1906 ) , and the Savoy @-@ Plaza Hotel ( 1927 ) . By the 1920s , the hotel was becoming dated , and the elegant social life of New York had moved much farther north than 34th Street . The Astor family finally sold the hotel to the developers of the Empire State Building and closed the hotel on May 3 , 1929 . It was demolished soon after . 
 = = = Current building = = = 
 = = = = Early years and international politics = = = = 
 The idea of a new Waldorf @-@ Astoria hotel was based on the concept that there should be a large opulent hotel in New York for distinguished visitors . Financial backing was not difficult to get in the summer of 1929 as times were prosperous ; the stock market had not yet crashed nor had the Depression arrived . However , before ground was broken for the new building , some of the investors became dubious about whether this was the right time to be investing in a luxury hotel . The land for the new hotel was formerly owned by the New York Central Railroad , who had promised $ 10 million toward the building of the new Waldorf @-@ Astoria . The railroad and all the other investors decided to honor their commitments and take their chances with the uncertain financial climate . 
 The new building opened on Park Avenue , between East 49th and East 50th streets , on October 1 , 1931 . It was the tallest and largest hotel in the world at the time , covering the entire block . The slender central tower became known as the Waldorf Towers , with its own private entrance on 50th Street , and consisted of 100 suites , about one third of which were leased as private residences . President Herbert Hoover said on the radio , broadcast from the White House : " The opening of the new Waldorf Astoria is an event in the advancement of hotels , even in New York City . It carries great tradition in national hospitality ... marks the measure of nation 's growth in power , in comfort and in artistry ... an exhibition of courage and confidence to the whole nation " . There were 2 @,@ 000 people in the ballroom listening to this speech , but by the end of the business day , the 2 @,@ 200 @-@ room hotel had only 500 occupancies . It was not until 1939 that the Waldorf @-@ Astoria began operating at a profit . Lucius Boomer continued to manage the hotel in the 1930s and 1940s , a commanding figure who Tony Rey referred to as " the greatest <unk> of his era " . Boomer was elected chairman of the board of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Corporation on February 20 , 1945 , a position he held until his death in July 1947 . 
 Like the original hotel , from its inception , the Waldorf Astoria gained worldwide renown for its glamorous dinner parties and galas , often at the center of political and business conferences and fundraising schemes . Author Ward Morehouse III has referred to the Waldorf Astoria as " comparable to great national institutions " and a " living symbol deep within our collective consciousness " . It had the " greatest banquet department in the world " at the time according to restaurateur Tom Margittai , with the centre of activity being the Grand Ballroom . On August 3 , 1932 , some 200 people representing the " cream of New York 's literary world " attended the Waldorf Astoria to honor Pearl S. Buck , the author of The Good Earth , which was the best @-@ selling novel in the United States in 1931 and 1932 . One dinner alone , a relatively " small dinner " attended by some 50 people in June 1946 , raised over $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 The hotel played a considerable role in the emerging Cold War and international relations during the post @-@ war years , staging numerous events and conferences . On March 15 , 1946 , Winston Churchill attended a welcoming dinner at the hotel given by Governor Thomas E. Dewey , ten days after making his famous Iron Curtain speech , and from November 4 to December 12 , 1946 , the Big Four Conference was held in <unk> Boomer 's apartment on the 37th floor of the Towers between the United States , Britain , France and the Soviet Union to discuss the future of Eastern Europe . On November 24 , 1947 , 48 prominent figures of the Hollywood film industry , including various film executives such as Louis B. Mayer of Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , Harry Cohn of Columbia Pictures , Spyros Skouras of 20th Century Fox and Albert Warner of Warner Bros. and Eric Johnston , the head of the Association of Motion Picture Producers , met at the Waldorf Astoria and discussed what would become the Waldorf Statement , banning people with Communist beliefs or tendencies from the Hollywood film industry . The Statement was a response to the contempt of Congress charges against the so @-@ called " Hollywood Ten " . 
 On June 21 , 1948 a press conference at the hotel introduced the LP record . From March 27 to 29 , 1949 , the Cultural and Scientific Conference for World Peace , also known as the Waldorf World Peace Conference , was held at the hotel to discuss the emerging Cold War and the growing divide between the US and the Soviet Union . The conference came at time when there was deep anti @-@ Communist sentiment and suspicion of the Soviet Union in the United States , following the Berlin Blockade and the Czechoslovak coup d 'état the previous year . The event was organized by the struggling American Communist Party , but was sponsored by many individuals who were not Stalinists such as Leonard Bernstein , Marlon Brando , Albert Einstein and Aaron Copland , with the intention of promoting peace . The conference was attended by the likes of Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Vyshinsky , composer and pianist Dmitri Shostakovich and writer <unk> <unk> . Tension mounted during the controversial event , and culminated when Shostakovich , in front of a crowd of some 800 people , launched a scathing attack on western civilization , remarking that " a small clique of hatemongers was preparing world public opinion for the transition from cold war to outright aggression " . The event was picketed in a counter @-@ attack by anti @-@ Stalinists running under the banner of " America for Intellectual Freedom " ( AIF ) , and prominent individuals such as Irving Howe , Dwight Macdonald , Mary McCarthy , Robert Lowell and Norman Mailer publicly denounced Stalinism at the hotel . In 1954 , Israeli statesman and archaeologist Yigael Yadin met secretly with the Syriac Orthodox Archbishop Mar Samuel in the basement of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel to negotiate the purchase of four Dead Sea Scrolls for Israel . The scrolls were kept in a vault at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria branch of New York 's Chemical Bank . At the request of the Israeli government , respected biblical scholar Dr. Harry <unk> examined the scrolls and verified their authenticity ; Yadin paid $ 250 @,@ 000 for all four . Restaurateur George Lang began working at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in 1955 , and on December 13 , 1955 he helped organize the American Theatre Wing 's First Night Ball to celebrate Helen Hayes 's 50th year in show business . He did much to organize dinners at the Waldorf to assist Hungarian issues and relief . On one occasion an event was attended by the likes of Edward G. Robinson and pianist <unk> and some $ 60 @,@ 000 was raised . 
 = = = = April in Paris Ball = = = = 
 The April in Paris Ball was an annual gala event whose mission was to improve Franco – American relations , to share cultures , and to help provide assistance to US and French charities , aside from commemorating the 2000th anniversary of the founding of Paris . It was established by Claude Philippe , the hotel banquet manager , in 1952 . While the hotel 's management handled invitations and publicity , other details were coordinated by socialites . Elsa Maxwell was given the primary responsibility in organizing it . It was initially held annually in April , but according to Ann Vaccaro , former executive director of the ball , it was changed to October because " Mr. Philippe decided that because there are so many balls in the spring he would make it in October " . After being changed to October , it often marked the start of the US fall social season . It was staged in the Grand Ballroom at the Waldorf for eight years before moving to the Hotel Astor in 1960 , the Seventh Regiment Armory in 1961 , and other venues . 
 The ball was designed to cater for " very , very high @-@ class people " according to Vaccaro . <unk> tickets cost US $ 100 per person and offered opulent prizes such as a US $ 5000 bracelet and other jewels , expensive furs , perfumes and even cars . In the 1960 event , prizes given included a Ford Thunderbird car , a Chinchilla coat , a Renault Dauphine , a TV Hi @-@ Fi system , an electric typewriter , 25 cases of expensive French wines , original paintings and porcelains , jewels , clocks , evening bags and a pedigree poodle ; guests were given gift boxes containing gold key rings and jewelry , champagne and brandy , Maxim ashtrays , pipes , silver bottle openers , hats and scarves , and flowers . Every guest was said to have gone home with at least one gift in return . In the 1979 event , some US $ 106 @,@ 000 worth of prizes were given out . Over its history , the ball , which was exempt from tax , earned millions of dollars , which went primarily to over 20 American charities such as the American Cancer Society , with 15 to 20 % going towards French charities . A staff of three people were paid full @-@ time throughout the year to organize it . Of the expenses of the ball , founder Philippe stated " We charge the most , give the most , and make the most – it 's a success formula " . Bernard F. Gimbel served as chief treasurer . 
 The Paris Ball became a notable event in the annual calendar during the 1950s , with one early show featuring a " three @-@ hour spectacular of five tableaux , directed by Stuart Chaney " , [ depicting ] a twelfth century scene of troubadours at the court of Eleanor of <unk> , Henry VIII 's meeting at the Field of the Cloth of Gold , Louis XIV at Versailles , and a fashion show of forty creations by Dior , Fath , Balmain , <unk> and Givenchy " . French stars Juliette Greco , Jean <unk> , Beatrice Lillie , John Loder and many others were flown over for the ball . The 1957 event was attended by some 1300 guests , including the Duke and Duchess of Windsor , Senator John F. Kennedy , his wife , Jackie , and Marilyn Monroe , who paid $ 100 each and donated $ 130 @,@ 000 to charities . The following year , the ballroom was decorated with 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high chestnut trees , earning US $ 170 @,@ 000 for charities . The final ball to be hosted in the hotel was held on April 10 , 1959 , with the main theme being the Parisian circus of the 18th century . Genuine circus costumes from the period were flown over from France , and the ball was attended by Marlene Dietrich , who performed two Maurice Chevalier songs , wearing a top hat , trousers , a waistcoat and white gloves . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 On May 6 , 1963 , Time magazine celebrated its 40th anniversary at the hotel . The event was attended by some 1500 celebrities , including General Douglas MacArthur , Jean Monnet , Henry Cabot Lodge , Bob Hope , Joe Louis , David O. Selznick , Secretary of State Dean Rusk , Edward Kennedy , Henry Ford II , and many others . In 1968 , British rock band The Who checked into the hotel , where they encountered difficulties with the staff of the Waldorf Astoria . Due to the band 's reputation for trashing their hotel rooms and rowdy behavior , the Waldorf demanded that they pay cash up front . However , following their gig , the band members were refused access to their hotel rooms , where their luggage was being kept . Tony Fletcher , in his biography on Keith Moon , claims that Moon challenged the staff and blew the door to their room off the hinges with his cherry bombs and retrieved their luggage , which prompted The Who to be shown the door and banned from the hotel for life . However , clearly the ban was later revoked as they performed at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Induction at Waldorf on January 17 , 1990 . 
 Soon after the opening of the hotel in 1931 , hotelier Conrad Hilton , almost bankrupt at the time , reportedly cut out a photograph of the hotel from a magazine and wrote across it , " The Greatest of Them All " . He acquired management rights to the hotel on October 12 , 1949 . The Hilton Hotels Corporation finally bought the hotel outright in 1972 . 
 In the 1970s , the Waldorf Astoria continued to play an important role in international politics , particularly between the US and the Middle East . In November 1974 , a " 20 @-@ car motorcade , with eight shotgun @-@ toting police marksmen aboard in bullet @-@ proof vests " brought Palestinian Fatah party leader Farouk <unk> to the Waldorf from John F. Kennedy International Airport . The Waldorf was on red alert , and German Shepherd sniffer dogs were brought in prior to his arrival to look for possible bombs . 15 suites of the hotel were reserved for the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) Arab delegation . The following month , President Ford met with Nelson Rockefeller after he was voted Vice President , and a 90 @-@ minute press conference was held in a suite in the hotel . In November 1975 , the US government insisted that PLO leader Yasser Arafat stay at the Waldorf during his visit to America , against the wishes of the hotel staff ; security was stepped up severely . On August 12 , 1981 , IBM unveiled its Personal Computer in a press conference at the Waldorf Astoria , and in 1985 , the NBA held its first @-@ ever draft lottery between non @-@ playoff teams at the Starlight Room . The lottery was for the 1985 NBA Draft in which Patrick Ewing was the consensus number one pick . 
 Lee Jablin , of Harman Jablin Architects , fully renovated and upgraded the historical property to its original grandeur during the mid @-@ 1980s through the mid @-@ 1990s in a $ 150 million renovation . The hotel was named an official New York City Landmark in 1993 . On May 27 , 2001 , the Eastern Diocese of the Armenian Church of America had a grand banquet at the hotel to celebrate the 1700th anniversary of Armenia 's conversion to Christianity , with Ambassador Edward <unk> as guest speaker . On May 7 , 2004 , a press conference was held by MGM , discussing Steve Martin 's The Pink Panther of The Pink Panther . The 5th Annual DGA Honors Gala was held at the Waldorf on September 29 . 
 In 2006 , Hilton launched Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts , a global luxury brand named for the iconic hotel . There are now branches of the Waldorf Astoria in Arizona , California , Florida , Hawaii , Louisiana in the United States , and abroad in France , Israel , Italy and Saudi Arabia . In 2006 it was reported that Hilton were considering opening a new Waldorf Astoria hotel on the Las Vegas Strip . In 2008 the Waldorf Astoria opened the Guerlain and Spa Chakra , Inc. spa at the hotel , as part of the Waldorf Astoria Collection , which offers a " body massage and facial using Guerlain 's age @-@ defying <unk> Imperiale skincare " . 
 The Waldorf Astoria New York is a member of Historic Hotels of America , the official program of the National Trust for Historic Preservation . " The Towers of the Waldorf Astoria " continues to operate as a boutique " hotel within a hotel " . In October 2014 , it was announced that the Anbang Insurance Group , based in China , had purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York for US $ 1 @.@ 95 billion , making it the most expensive hotel ever sold . 
 On July 1 , 2016 , Anbang Insurance Group , the owner of the hotel , announced plans to convert most of the Waldorf into condominiums . Over 1 @,@ 000 of the hotel 's rooms will be turned into apartments , with the remainder of the rooms continuing as hotel suites . The hotel will be closed in the spring of 2017 and remain so for three years , while extensive renovations are done on the property . The hotel 's restaurants , including Peacock Alley , The Bull and Bear Steak House and the recently opened La Chine , will close along with the hotel and reopen when the renovation is completed . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Old buildings = = = 
 The old Waldorf Hotel , built at a reported cost of about US $ <unk> , opened on March 13 , 1893 at the corner of Fifth Avenue and 33rd Street , on the site where millionaire developer William Waldorf Astor had previously built his mansion . The hotel stood 225 feet ( 69 m ) high , about 50 feet ( 15 m ) lower than the Astoria , with a frontage of about 100 feet ( 30 m ) on Fifth Avenue , and a total area of 69 @,@ 475 square feet ( 6 @,@ 454 @.@ 4 m2 ) . It was a German Renaissance structure , designed by Henry Janeway Hardenbergh , with 15 public rooms and 450 guest rooms , and a further 100 rooms allocated to servants , with laundry facilities on the upper floors . The New York Times proclaimed the hotel a palace after it opened in 1893 . 
 The exterior featured loggias , balconies , gables , groups of chimneys , and tiled roofs . One of the chief features was the interior garden court , with fountains and flowers , walls of white terracotta , frescoes and stained glass . The entrance hall was built in Sienna marble , with a mosaic title floor and a coffered ceiling . The original reception desk of the Waldorf Hotel became a registration desk when it merged with the Astoria Hotel in 1897 . Beyond the lobby was the main corridor leading to the Empire Room , with an alcove off it containing the elevators and grand staircase . Near this was the Marie Antoinette parlor , which was used as a reception room for women . It contained 18th century antiques brought back by Boldt and his wife from an 1892 visit to Europe , including a bust of Marie Antoinette , and an antique clock which was once owned by her . The Empire Room was the largest and most lavishly adorned room in the Waldorf , and soon after opening , it became one of the best restaurants in New York City , rivaling Delmonico 's and Sherry 's . It was modeled after the grand salon in King Ludwig 's palace at Munich , with satin hangings , upholstery and marble pillars , all of pale green , and Crowninshield 's frescoes . Empire in style , the Waldorf 's restaurant feathered columns of dark @-@ green marble , and the pilasters that came opposite them were of mahogany , with ormolu work in the panels . The Waldorf State Apartments , consisting of nine suites , were located on the second floor . The apartments , including the Henry IV Drawing Room , the Francois V Bedroom , which was a reproduction of the room at the Palais de Fontainebleau , had their own music room and a banquet hall to seat 20 , with a handsome china collection including 48 Sevres plates with European portraits . 
 The old Astoria Hotel , opened in 1897 , was situated on the southeast corner of Fifth Avenue and 34th Street . It was also designed in the German Renaissance style by Henry J. Hardenbergh . With dimensions of 99 by 350 feet ( 30 m × 107 m ) , its height , from the floor of the sub @-@ basement , which was 33 feet ( 10 m ) below the street level , to the roof @-@ line , was about 270 feet ( 82 m ) , or about 240 feet ( 73 m ) above the street @-@ level . It was 16 stories in height , including the four stories in the roof . The building was constructed of stone , marble and brick , with a steel skeleton frame and modern fireproof interior construction , and was embellished with " French Second Empire Mansard @-@ roofed towers with iron @-@ work cresting as well as Austrian Baroque onion @-@ domes over corners turrets " . There were 25 public rooms and 550 guest rooms , with miles of corridors , vestibules and balls . 
 The main corridor ran the entire length of the building from east to west . To the left of it was the Astor Dining Room , fronting on Fifth Avenue , which measured 50 by 92 feet ( 15 m × 28 m ) . Great care was taken with it to faithfully reproduce the original dining room of the mansion , three floors above where it had stood , with all of the original paneling , carpeting , drapery and fireplace mantel and Italian Renaissance pilasters and columns , carved of marble from northern Russia . On the right of the main corridor was the Garden Court of Palms , decorated in the Italian style , 88 by 57 feet ( 27 m × 17 m ) . On the first floor , at the head @-@ of the east main staircase , was the Astor Gallery , 87 by 102 feet ( 27 m × 31 m ) , looking out on 34th Street , finished in the style of the Hôtel de <unk> , with a blue , gray and gold color scheme . The second floor contained a private suite of apartments at the northeast corner , with large drawing rooms , dining room , butler 's pantry , hallway , three bedrooms , three maids ' bedrooms and five bathrooms , all finished in old English oak . All the floors above the third were given up to suites and bedrooms up to the 14th floor . The ballroom , in the Louis XIV style , has been described as the " pièce de résistance " of the hotel , measuring 65 feet ( 20 m ) by 95 feet ( 29 m ) and 40 feet ( 12 m ) ( three stories ) in height . It had a capacity to seat 700 at banquets and 1 @,@ 200 at concerts , and featured tints of ivory @-@ gray and cream in its design . On the hotel 's top floor was the roof @-@ garden , enclosed on all sides by glass , with a glass roof over . It was furnished with rattan chairs and lounges in pale @-@ green and pink , hung across with gauzy fabric . 
 = = = Current building = = = 
 = = = = Exterior = = = = 
 Travel America stated : " To linger in the sumptuous salons of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria is to step back in time . Your trip down memory lane is a flashback to the glamor days of the 1930s , when this Art Deco masterpiece was the tallest hotel in the world and the epicenter of elite society . A legendary limestone landmark occupying a whole block of prime real estate in midtown Manhattan , it 's still a prestige address that embodies luxury and power in the richest city on earth . " The hotel was designed by architects Schultze and Weaver and constructed at 301 Park Avenue , just north of Grand Central Terminal . That area was developed by building atop the existing railroad tracks leading to the station , with buildings like the Waldorf Astoria utilizing " air rights " to the space above the tracks . The new building opened on October 1 , 1931 . The 47 @-@ story 190 @.@ 5 m ( 625 ft ) hotel was the tallest and largest hotel in the world , and remained so for a number of years . 1 @,@ 585 cubic feet ( 44 @.@ 9 m3 ) of black marble was imported from Belgium , 600 cubic feet ( 17 m3 ) of <unk> Montalto and 260 cubic feet ( 7 @.@ 4 m3 ) of Alps Green arrived from Italy , and some 300 antique mantles were brought in to furnish it . 200 railroad cars brought some 800 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 23 @,@ 000 m3 ) of limestone for the building 's facing , 27 @,@ 100 tons of steel for the skeleton superstructure , and 2 @,@ 595 @,@ 000 square feet ( 241 @,@ 100 m2 ) of terra cotta and gypsum block . The towers are brick @-@ faced , which led many to believe that the builders ran out of money . 
 Peacock Alley , a 300 feet ( 91 m ) long corridor lined with amber marble connects the two hotel buildings . Gilded , women of the times would enjoy walking along it and admiring themselves in the mirrors . In 1931 it was reported that as many as 36 @,@ 000 people were walking down it on any given day . The Peacock Alley restaurant of the Waldorf took its name from the alley . 
 The hotel had its own railway platform , Track 61 , that was part of the New York City Subway and was connected to the Grand Central Terminal complex . The platform was used by Franklin D. Roosevelt , James Farley , Adlai Stevenson , and Douglas MacArthur , among others . The platform was also used for the exhibition of American Locomotive Company 's new diesel locomotive in 1946 . In 1948 , Filene 's and the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad also staged a fashion show on the platform . An elevator large enough for Franklin D. Roosevelt 's automobile provides access to the platform . However , it is rarely opened to the public . 
 = = = = Interior = = = = 
 Such is the architectural and cultural heritage of the hotel that tours are conducted of the hotel for guests . Frommer 's has cited the hotel as an " icon of luxury " , and highlights the " wide stately corridors , the vintage Deco door fixtures , the white @-@ gloved <unk> , the luxe shopping arcade " , the " stunning round mosaic under an immense crystal chandelier " and the " free @-@ standing Waldorf clock , covered with bronze relief figures " in the main lobby . They compare the decor of the rooms to those of an English country house , and describe the corridors as being wide and plush @-@ carpeted which " seem to go on forever " . 
 The lobby floor contains the room registration and cashier desks , the Empire Room and Hilton Room , the private Marco Polo Club , the Wedding Salon , Kenneth 's Salon , the Peacock Alley lounge and restaurant , and Sir Harry 's Bar . From 1992 to 2013 , Kenneth , sometimes called the world 's first celebrity hairdresser , famed for creating Jacqueline Kennedy 's bouffant in 1961 , moved his hairdressing and beauty salon to the Waldorf after a 1990 fire destroyed his East 54th Street shop . In the main foyer is a chandelier measuring 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) by 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . The elevator is furnished with paneled <unk> oak and Carpathian elm . Special desks in the lobby are allocated to transportation and theatre , where exclusive tickets to many of the city 's prominent theatres can be purchased . The lobby is furnished with polished nickel @-@ bronze cornices and <unk> stone . The grand clock , a 4 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 800 kg ) bronze was built by the Goldsmith 's Company of London originally for the 1893 World Columbia Exposition in Chicago , but was purchased by the Waldorf owners . Its base is octagonal , with eight commemorative plaques of presidents George Washington , Abraham Lincoln , Ulysses S. Grant , Andrew Jackson , Benjamin Harrison and Grover Cleveland , and Queen Victoria and Benjamin Franklin . A shield once belonging to the Waldorf was moved to the Alexis restaurant on W. Franklin Street in 1984 . Several boutiques surround the lobby , which contains Cole Porter 's Steinway & Sons floral print decorated grand piano on the Cocktail Terrace , which the hotel had once given him as a gift . Porter was a resident at the hotel for 30 years and composed many of his songs here . The Empire Room is where many of the musical and dance performances were put on , from Count Basie , to Victor Borge , Gordon MacRae , George M. Cohan and Lena Horne , the first black performer at the hotel . 
 The third floor contains the Grand Ballroom , the Silver Corridor , the Basildon Room , the Jade Room and the Astor Gallery . Numerous organizations hold their annual dinners in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf , including St. John 's University President 's Dinner , the Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York 's annual gala , during which the Deus Caritas Est Award for philanthropy is presented , and the Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner . The NASCAR Sprint Cup end @-@ of @-@ season awards banquet was held at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria every year between 1981 and 2008 before moving to the Wynn in Las Vegas . It was held initially in the Starlight Room , but from 1985 , it was staged in the Grand Ballroom , except in 2001 and 2002 . On May 1 , 2004 , the Waldorf @-@ Astoria was the venue for the Manhattan Hungarian Network Grand Europe Ball , a historic black @-@ tie charitable affair co @-@ chaired by Archduke Georg of Austria @-@ Hungary which celebrated the Enlargement of the European Union . Bob Hope was such a regular performer at the Ballroom that he said , " I 've played so many dinners in the Grand Ballroom , I always make a crack when I get up to speak that I leave my dinner jacket in the lobby so that I don 't have to ship it to the Coast all the time " . Of note in the Astor Gallery are 12 allegorical females , painted by Edward Emerson Simmons . Every October the Paris Ball was held in the Grand Ballroom , before moving to the Americana ( now the Sheraton Center ) . It hosted a memorable New Year 's Eve party with Guy Lombardo and the Royal Canadians , and Lombardo used to broadcast live on the radio there from the " Starlight Roof " . Maurice Chevalier performed at the ballroom in 1965 in his last appearance . The Silver Corridor outside the ballroom bears a resemblance to the Peacock Alley , but is shorter and wider . The fourth floor has the banquet and sales offices , and many of the suites including Barron , Vanderbilt , Windsor , Conrad , <unk> , Louis XVI and Cole Porter , named after the celebrities who stayed in them . The fourth floor was where the notorious Sunday night card games were played . There is also a re @-@ creation of one of the living rooms of Hoover 's Waldorf @-@ Astoria suite in the Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum . 
 = = = = = Rooms and suites = = = = = 
 The Waldorf Astoria and Towers has a total of 1 @,@ 413 hotel rooms as of 2014 . In 2009 , when it had 1 @,@ 416 rooms , the main hotel had 1 @,@ 235 single and double rooms and 208 mini suites , 17 of which were classified as " Astoria Level " , which are upgraded rooms with deluxe amenities and complimentary access to the Astoria Lounge . The Waldorf Towers , from the 28th floor up to the 42nd , had 181 rooms , of which 115 were suites , with one to four bedrooms . As of the late 1990s , the hotel had a housekeeping staff of nearly 400 , with 150 @-@ day maids and two dozen night maids . The rooms retain the original Art Deco motifs , although each room is decorated differently . The guests rooms , classified as Deluxe , Superior , and Luxury , feature " Waldorf Serenity " beds and have a marble bath or shower with amenities designed by Salvatore Ferragamo . The suites featured King or Double beds and start in size at 450 square feet ( 42 m2 ) . The smallest are the One Bedroom suites , which range from 450 square feet ( 42 m2 ) to 600 square feet ( 56 m2 ) , then there are the Signature suites , with a separate living room and one or two bedrooms , which range from 750 square feet ( 70 m2 ) to 900 square feet ( 84 m2 ) , and finally the suites of The Towers which are generally larger and costlier still , and have a twice @-@ daily maid service . 
 The Tower suites are divided into standard ones , The Towers Luxury Series , which have their own sitting room , the Towers Penthouse Series , the Towers Presidential @-@ Style Suites , and finally the most expensive Presidential Suite on the 35th floor . The Penthouse Series contains three suites , The Penthouse , The Cole Porter Suite , and The Royal Suite , named after the Duke and Duchess of Windsor . They start at 1 @,@ 800 square feet ( 170 m2 ) in size , with two or more bedrooms , and are fitted with a kitchen and dining room which can accommodate for 8 @-@ 12 guests . The Towers Presidential @-@ Style Suites are divided into the MacArthur Suite and the Churchill Suite , and have their own grand entry foyer . Like the Penthouse Series , they have their own kitchen and dining room . The 2 @,@ 250 square feet ( 209 m2 ) Presidential Suite is designed with Georgian @-@ style furniture to emulate that of the White House . It has three large bedrooms and three bathrooms , and boasts numerous treasures , including the desk of General MacArthur and rocking chair of John F. Kennedy . 
 = = = = = Other facilities = = = = = 
 A 2 @,@ 500 square feet ( 230 m2 ) fitness center is on the 5th floor . The $ 21 @.@ 5 million Waldorf Astoria Guerlain Spa was inaugurated on September 1 , 2008 on the 19th floor . It features 16 treatment rooms and two relaxation lounges . The hotel has its own Business Center , a 1 @,@ 150 square feet ( 107 m2 ) digital facility , where guests can access the Internet and photocopy . In 2004 the hotel launched a line of products in keeping with the Art Deco style of the hotel , reportedly becoming the first individual hotel in the world to have its own merchandise collection . 
 = = Restaurants and cuisine = = 
 The Waldorf Astoria was the first hotel to offer room service and was the first major hotel in the world to hire women as chefs , beginning in 1931 . An extensive menu is available for guests , with special menus for children and for <unk> . The executive chef of the Waldorf for many years was John Doherty , following the Austrian Arno Schmidt who held the position for ten years from 1969 to 1979 . Restaurateur George Lang was awarded the <unk> of the Year Award in 1975 . As of the early 1990s , the hotel served over three million dishes a year , and got through 27 @,@ 000 pounds of lobster , 100 pounds of beluga caviar , 380 @,@ 000 pints of strawberries annually . The hotel has gained significant renown for its lavish feasts . During one grand feast for Francis Cardinal Spellman , over 200 VIP guests , according to Arno Schmidt , devoured some 3 @,@ 600 pounds of fillet , 600 pounds of fresh halibut , 1 @,@ 500 pounds of potatoes , and 260 pounds of petit fours , eating on gold china plates . One 1973 feast by the Explorer 's Club devoured hippo meat , a 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) alligator , a baby shark , an amberjack tuna , a boa , wild boar hams , 480 pieces of breaded @-@ fried cod tongues and cheeks , antelope steaks , two boxes of Chinese rabbit , and 20 pounds of rattlesnake . 
 The hotel has three main restaurants , Peacock Alley , The Bull and Bear Steak House , and Oscar 's Brasserie , as well as a secondary restaurant , the Japanese <unk> . At its peak in the late 1940s , the hotel once had nine restaurants . Peacock Alley , situated in the heart of the lobby , features an Art Deco design with gilded ceilings and includes a main restaurant , a bar and lounge , and three private dining salons . It is known primarily for its fish and seafood dishes . Sunday Brunch is particularly popular with locals and features over 180 gourmet dishes divided into 12 themed displays , with cuisine ranging from lobster and oysters to Belgian waffles , Eggs Benedict , and omelettes to hollandaise sauces . The Bull and Bear Steak House is furnished in richly polished mahogany in the English Regency style , and has a " den @-@ like " atmosphere , and is reportedly the only restaurant on the East Coast which serves 28 days prime grade USDA Certified Angus Beef . It has won awards from the National Restaurant Association and Holiday magazine . Between 2007 and 2010 , the restaurant was the filming location for Fox Business Happy Hour , presented live between 5 and 6 pm . The Bull and Bear Bar is based on the original Waldorf Astoria Bar , which was a favorite haunt of many of the financial elite of the city from the hotel 's inception in 1893 , such as Diamond Jim Brady , Buffalo Bill Cody and Bat Masterson . Behind the bar are bronze statues of a bull and a bear , which represent the successful men of Wall Street . The <unk> , meaning the " rice chrysanthemum " , serves contemporary Japanese cuisine . The restaurant opens for lunch on weekdays and cocktails and dinner in the evenings . Designed by Henry Look of San Francisco , the restaurant has four " distinctly different " rooms , including one which represents an old Japanese farmhouse , and the <unk> Room , resembling a Japanese temple . Guests have the option to reserve private orthodox tatami rooms . 
 Oscar 's Brasserie , overlooking Lexington Avenue in what was once a Savarin restaurant , is designed by Adam Tihany . The restaurant takes its name from Oscar Tschirky ( Oscar of the Waldorf ) and serves traditional American cuisine , with many dishes based upon his cookbook which have gained world renown , including the Waldorf salad , Eggs Benedict , Thousand Island dressing , and Veal Oscar . The Waldorf salad — a salad made with apples , walnuts , celery , grapes , and mayonnaise or a mayonnaise @-@ based dressing — was first created in 1896 at the Waldorf by Oscar . The original recipe , however did not contain nuts , but they had been added by the time the recipe appeared in The Rector Cook Book in 1928 . Tschirky was also noted for his " Oscar 's Sauce " , which became so popular that it was sold at the hotel . Another of the hotel 's specialties was red velvet cake , which became one of its most popular desserts . 
 Sir Harry 's Bar is one of the principal bars of the hotel , situated just off the main lobby . It is named after British Sir Harry Johnston ( 1858 – 1927 ) . In the 1970s the bar was renovated in a " plush African safari " design to honor Johnston , a notable explorer of Africa , with " zebra @-@ striped wall coverings and carpeting , with bent @-@ cane furnishings " . It has since been redecorated back to a more conservative design , with walnut paneling and leather banquettes , and featured a 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) by 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) ebony bar as of the early 1990s . A number of cocktails were invented at the bar , including the Rob Roy ( 1894 ) and the Bobbie Burns . Frank Sinatra frequented Sir Harry 's Bar for many years . In 1991 , while drinking at Sir Harry 's with Jilly Rizzo and Steve Lawrence , he was approached by a fan asking for an autograph . Sinatra responded , " Don 't you see I 'm on my own time here ? You asshole . What 's wrong with you ? " The fan said something which angered Sinatra , who lunged at the fan , and Sinatra had to be restrained . 
 = = Notable residents and tenants = = 
 = = = Leaders and businesspeople = = = 
 On the 100th anniversary of the hotel in 1993 , one publication wrote : " It isn 't the biggest hotel in New York , nor the most expensive . But when it comes to prestige , the Waldorf @-@ Astoria has no peer . When presidents come to New York , they stay at the Waldorf @-@ Astoria . Kings and queens make it their home away from home , as have people as diverse as Cary Grant , the Dalai Lama and Chris Evert . Some of them liked the hotel so well , they made their home there . " From its inception , the Waldorf was always a " must stay " hotel for foreign dignitaries . The viceroy of China , Li Hung Chang stayed at the hotel in 1896 and feasted on hundred @-@ year @-@ old eggs which he brought with him . Over the years many royals from around the world stayed at the Waldorf Astoria including Shahanshah of Iran and Empress Farah , King Frederick IX and Queen Ingrid of Denmark , Princess Astrid of Norway , Crown Prince Olav and Crown Princess Martha of Norway , King Baudouin I of Belgium and Queen <unk> , Prince Albert and Princess Paola of Belgium , King Hussein I of Jordan , Prince Rainier III and Princess Grace of Monaco , Queen Juliana of the Netherlands , King Michael of Romania , Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip of the United Kingdom and Commonwealth realms , Mohammed Zahir Shah and <unk> Shah of Afghanistan , King Bhumibol Adulyadej and Queen Sirikit of Thailand , and Crown Prince Akihito and Princess Michiko of Japan and many others . Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip stayed at the hotel during their first visit to America on October 21 , 1957 , and a banquet was held for them in the Grand Ballroom . In the Bicentennial year in 1976 , most of the heads of state from around the world and all of the Kings and Queens of Europe were invited to the hotel , and it also served the presidential candidates in the run up to the elections of that year . 
 In modern times , the clientele of the Waldorf is more typically wealthy politicians and businessmen than playboys and royalty . An entire floor was often rented out to wealthy Saudi Arabians with their own staff , and it was kept out of bounds to others due to the fact that they reportedly often walked around naked and had some bizarre eating habits and practices such as roasting monkeys and snakes . Wealthy Japanese businessmen during their stay would sometimes remove the furniture and replace it with their own floors mats . One early wealthy resident was Chicago businessman J. W. Gates who would gamble on stocks on Wall Street and play poker at the hotel . He paid up to $ 50 @,@ 000 a year to hire suites at the hotel . Princess Victoria Melita of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha was invited by Waldorf president Lucius Bloomer to stay at the hotel in the 1920s . Demands by people of prominence could often be exorbitant or bizarre , and Fidel Castro once walked into the hotel with a flock of live chickens , insisting that they be killed and freshly cooked on the premises to his satisfaction , only to be turned away . While serving as Secretary of State , Henry Kissinger ordered all of the antiques to be removed from one suite and replaced them with 36 desks for his staff . An unnamed First Lady also once demanded that all of the bulbs in her suite be changed to 100 watt ones and kept on all day and night to simulate daylight ; she further insisted that there be an abundance of chewing gum available . 
 Postmaster General James Farley occupied two adjoining suites in the current Waldorf Astoria during his tenure as the chairman of the board of Coca @-@ Cola 's International division from 1940 until his death in 1976 , arguably one of the landmark 's longest housed tenants . The Presidential Suite at the hotel come from when , during the 1950s and early 1960s , former U.S. president Herbert Hoover and retired U.S. General Douglas MacArthur lived in suites on different floors of the hotel . Hoover lived at the Waldorf Astoria for over 30 years from after the end of his presidency until he died in 1964 ; former President Dwight D. Eisenhower lived there until he died in 1969 . MacArthur 's widow , Jean MacArthur , lived there from 1952 until her death in 2000 . A plaque affixed to the wall on the 50th Street side commemorates this . John F. Kennedy was fond of the Waldorf Astoria and had a number of private meetings at the hotel , including one with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben @-@ Gurion . Since Hoover , every President of the United States has either stayed over or lived in the Waldorf Astoria , although Jimmy Carter claimed to have never stayed overnight at the hotel . Nancy Reagan was reputedly not fond of the Presidential Suite . 
 The official residence of the United States ' Permanent Representative to the United Nations , an unnamed 42nd @-@ floor apartment , has been located in the Waldorf Towers for many years . On June 17 , 2015 , however , the US Department of State announced that it was moving its headquarters during meetings of the UN General Assembly to The New York Palace Hotel . Although State Department officials did not give an official reason for the change affecting both the President and hundreds of American diplomats and support staff who travel to New York for the General Assembly each September and usually stay and hold meetings on two secured floors at the Waldorf , they pointed to Hilton Worldwide 's sale of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria to China 's Beijing @-@ based Anbang Insurance Group for $ 1 @.@ 95 billion in 2014 , a deal that prompted security concerns . While the terms of the sale allow Hilton to run the hotel for the next 100 years , they also call for " a major renovation " that the officials say has raised eyebrows in the US Government because of concerns about Chinese eavesdropping and cyber espionage . 
 Carlos P. Romulo , Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines and member of the UN had suite 3600 , below Hoover 's , for some 45 years from 1935 onwards , and fellow Filipino Imelda Marcos also spent much time and money at the hotel . Another connection with the Philippines is that many meetings were held here between President Manuel L. Quezon and high ranking American politicians and senators . Through the meetings , Quezon encouraged investment into the country and convinced General MacArthur to accompany him back to the Philippines as his military adviser . 
 = = = Celebrities = = = 
 The hotel has had many well @-@ known under its roof throughout its history , including Charlie Chaplin , Ava Gardner , Liv Ullmann , Edward G. Robinson , Gregory Peck , Ray Bolger , John Wayne , Tony Bennett , Jack Benny , Katharine Hepburn , Spencer Tracy , Muhammad Ali , Vince Lombardi , Judy Garland , Sonny Werblin , Greer Garson , Harold Lloyd , Liberace , Burt Reynolds , Robert Montgomery , Cesar Romero , and many others . Due to the number of high @-@ profile guests staying at the hotel at any one time , author Ward Morehouse III has referred to the Towers as a " kind of vertical Beverly Hills . On any one given night you might find Dinah Shore , Gregory Peck , Frank Sinatra [ or ] Zsa Zsa Gabor staying there " . Gabor married Conrad Hilton in 1941 . 
 During the 1930s , gangster Benjamin " Bugsy " Siegel owned an apartment at the Waldorf , and Frank Costello was said to have got his haircut and nails done in the Barber 's Shop at the Waldorf . Around the time of World War I , inventor Nikola Tesla lived in the earlier Waldorf @-@ Astoria . 
 In 1955 , Marilyn Monroe stayed at the hotel for several months , but due to costs of trying to finance her production company " Marilyn Monroe Productions " , only being paid $ 1 @,@ 500 a week for her role in The Seven Year Itch and being suspended from 20th Century Fox for walking out on Fox after creative differences , living at the hotel became too costly and Monroe had to move into a different hotel in New York City . Around the same time that Monroe lived in the hotel , Cole Porter and Linda Lee Thomas had an apartment in the Waldorf Towers , where Thomas died in 1954 . Porter 's 1934 song " You 're the Top " , contains the lyric , " You 're the top , you 're a Waldorf salad " . The Cole Porter Suite , Suite 33A , was the place where Porter lived and entertained for a period . Frank Sinatra paid nearly $ 1 million a year to keep it as his personal suite at the hotel between 1979 and 1988 , which he called " home " when out of Los Angeles . Sinatra took over part of the hotel during the filming of The First Deadly Sin in 1980 . 
 Grace Kelly and Rainier III were regular guests at the hotel . At one time Kelly was reputed to be in love with the hotel banquet manager of the Waldorf , Claudius Charles Philippe . Elizabeth Taylor frequented the hotel , and would often attend galas at the hotel to talk about her various causes . Her visits were excitedly awaited by the hotel staff , who would prepare long in advance . Taylor was honored at the 1983 Friars Club dinner at the hotel . 
 In 1980 , John Travolta 's brother Joey Travolta and Wendy Shawn , the daughter of comedian Dick Shawn , had their wedding reception at the hotel . Brooke Shields has stated that her very first encounter with the paparazzi was in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf at the age of 12 , stating that she " stood like a statue wondering why they were all hired to photograph me " , and that she " debuted at the Waldorf " . During her childhood in the 1980s and 1990s , Paris Hilton lived with her family in the hotel . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Waldorf Astoria has been a filming location for numerous films and TV series . Ginger Rogers headlined an all star ensemble cast in the 1945 film Week @-@ End at the Waldorf , set at the hotel and filmed partially on location there . Other films shot at the hotel include The Out @-@ of @-@ Towners ( 1970 ) , Broadway Danny Rose ( 1984 ) , Coming to America ( 1988 ) , Scent of a Woman ( 1992 ) , The Cowboy Way ( 1994 ) , Random Hearts ( 1999 ) , Analyze This ( 1999 ) , For Love of the Game ( 1999 ) , Serendipity ( 2001 ) , The Royal Tenenbaums ( 2001 ) , Maid in Manhattan ( 2002 ) , Two Weeks Notice ( 2002 ) , End of the Century ( 2005 ) , Mr. and Mrs. Smith ( 2005 ) , The Pink Panther ( 2006 ) , and The Hoax ( 2006 ) . Television series that have filmed at the Waldorf include Law and Order , Rescue Me , Sex and the City , The Sopranos and Will and Grace . 
 Several biographies have been written about the Waldorf , including Edward Hungerford 's Story of the Waldorf ( New York : G. P. Putnam 's Sons , 1925 ) and Horace Sutton 's Confessions of a Grand Hotel : The Waldorf @-@ Astoria ( New York : Henry Holt , 1953 ) . Langston Hughes wrote a poem entitled " Advertisement for the Waldorf @-@ Astoria " , criticizing the hotel and inviting the jobless and homeless to take over the space of the hotel . Wallace Stevens wrote a poem entitled " Arrival at the Waldorf " , in which he contrasts the wild country of the jungles of Guatemala to being " back at the Waldorf " . In Meg Cabot 's novel Jinx , the Chapman School Spring Formal takes place in the Waldorf @-@ Astoria . It is at this point that Tory ( the main antagonist ) reveals Jean 's first attempt at a love spell , which served as a catalyst for the novel 's events . 
 = Arthur Morris with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Arthur Morris was a key member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 . The Australians went undefeated in their 34 matches ; this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 A left @-@ handed opening batsman , Morris played in all five Tests , partnering the right @-@ handed Sid Barnes in three Tests — Barnes was injured for the other two Tests . As one of three on @-@ tour selectors , Morris was a member of the leadership group along with Bradman and vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett . 
 Morris ended the first @-@ class tour with 1 @,@ 922 runs at a batting average of 71 @.@ 18 including seven centuries , recording the second highest aggregate behind Bradman . Morris ' s form peaked in the Test series ; he headed the <unk> aggregates and averages for all players with 696 runs at 87 @.@ 00 , and was the only player to compile three Test centuries . In the Second Test at Lord 's , Morris struck 105 to set up Australia 's first innings of 350 and eventual win . He scored 182 on a deteriorating pitch on the final day of the Fourth Test at Headingley , combining for a triple @-@ century partnership with Bradman . Australia scored 3 / 404 in the second innings to win by seven wickets , setting a world record for the highest successful run @-@ chase in Test history . In the Fifth Test at The Oval , Morris scored 196 , more than half of Australia 's 389 as the tourists went on to win by an innings . 
 Based on his performance during the tour of England , Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack named Morris as one of their Cricketers of the Year in 1949 . They described him as " one of the world 's best left @-@ hand batsmen " . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Australian season of 1947 – 48 , which preceded the tour of England , Morris played in the first four Tests against the touring Indians , scoring 45 and an unbeaten 100 in the Third Test victory in Melbourne . He was omitted for the Fifth Test because the selectors wanted to trial other candidates for the 1948 tour of England . Morris ended the series with 209 runs at a batting average of 52 @.@ 25 , making him the third highest scorer as Australia won 4 – 0 . During the series , he had opened with both Bill Brown , the veteran who had been a mainstay of Australian teams of the 1930s , and New South Wales teammate Sid Barnes . The Australian selectors chose Brown for the first two Tests against the Indians , but he struggled and made only 18 and 11 — Australia batted once in both Tests — and was then dropped for Barnes , who made only 12 and 15 in the Third Test . Retained for the Fourth Test , Barnes made 112 in an Australian victory . Morris — whose place was secure — was rested for the Fifth Test to give Brown another chance to show that he was worthy of selection . Barnes made 33 while Brown made 99 run out as Australia completed a 4 – 0 series win . In the end , all three were selected for the England tour . As specialist opening batsmen , the trio were competing for the two opening positions in Bradman 's first @-@ choice team . 
 Morris — recently appointed co @-@ captain of New South Wales — greatly impressed Australian captain Don Bradman , to the extent that Bradman made himself , Morris and vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett the three on @-@ tour selectors for the 1948 visit to England . Morris was a key part of Bradman 's inner circle during the planning of the tour . Bradman had long harboured an ambition to tour England without losing a match ; his team would become the first to achieve this feat , earning themselves the sobriquet , The Invincibles . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Morris marked his first @-@ class debut on English soil in the opening match of the tour , against Worcestershire . After the hosts had batted first and made 233 , Morris stroked with a fluent 138 ( including 19 fours ) from 275 minutes . He put on an opening stand of 79 with Sid Barnes , before adding 186 for the second wicket with Bradman . Australia declared at 8 / 462 before completing an innings victory . Morris and Bradman 's scoring matched one another during their partnership and both were close to being the first Australian century @-@ maker on the tour . The former was on 95 and took three runs to move to 98 , before Bradman hit consecutive fours to progress from 91 to 99 . The Australian captain failed to score for the rest of the over , so Morris took the strike in the next over and reached his century before Bradman followed suit . After reaching triple figures , Morris added his last 38 runs in 50 minutes . Morris ’ s role indicated his standing alongside Barnes as a first @-@ choice opener , as Australia customarily selected its strongest team for the tour opener . The third opener taken on tour , Bill Brown , played out of position in the middle order . 
 Morris was rested from the second tour match , which was against Leicestershire ; Bradman ’ s team won by an innings . He returned against Yorkshire , and in a low @-@ scoring match on a damp pitch favouring slower bowling , made 17 and three as Australia won by only four wickets . The match saw 324 runs scored for the loss of 35 wickets and a top @-@ score of only 34 . Morris ’ s 17 in the first innings was actually the fourth highest score for the entire match . The match was the closest Australia came to defeat for the whole tour ; the tourists were 6 / 31 in pursuit of the target of 60 , with effectively only three wickets in hand because Sam Loxton was injured and unable to bat . The Australians travelled to London to play Surrey at The Oval . In the first hour of play , Australia 's openers played solidly and rarely missed a ball . Morris scored 65 as he and Barnes put on an opening stand of 136 , which laid the foundation for Australia 's 632 . The tourists went on to win the match by an innings . In the next fixture , Morris managed only 26 as Australia piled on 4 / 414 declared against Cambridge University . Morris bowled for the first time on tour , sending down five wicketless overs for 11 runs as Australia completed their second innings victory in succession . 
 Morris was rested as Australia crushed Essex by an innings and 451 runs , their largest winning margin for the summer . During the match , the Australian batsmen set a world record by scoring 721 runs on the first day , a new world record for the most runs in one day of first @-@ class cricket . Morris returned for the innings victory against Oxford University , putting on an opening stand of 138 with Brown before being run out for 64 . Former Australian Test batsman Jack Fingleton reported that Hubert Webb " brilliantly ran out Morris from the boundary with a throw over the stumps " . Australia amassed 431 and won completed their fourth consecutive innings victory . In the hosts ' second innings , Morris took his first wicket of the tour , bowling Indian Test batsman Abdul Hafeez Kardar to end with 1 / 6 from three overs . 
 The next match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their strongest possible team . Morris and Barnes retained their positions at the top of the order , while Brown played out of position in the middle order . It was a chance to players from both sides to gain a psychological advantage ahead of the Tests , but Morris looked uncomfortable , managing only five as Australia amassed 552 and enforced the follow on to win by an innings . In the MCC ’ s second innings , Morris caught Jim Laker from the bowling of Colin McCool . The Lord ’ s fixture was followed by Australia 's first non @-@ victory of the tour , which was against Lancashire . Morris continued to struggle , making five and 22 , falling twice to England Test paceman Dick Pollard , In the drawn match against Nottinghamshire , Morris continued his form slump , making 16 in the tourists ' only innings . 
 Morris found batting difficult for the first few weeks of the tour , as he struggled to adapt to the unfamiliar batting conditions . He reached 50 only twice in the nine innings after the Worcestershire match , totalling only 223 runs at 24 @.@ 77 ; Morris sometimes attempted to drive balls pitched just short of a good length , and if they reared suddenly , he was liable to be caught . Morris was worried about edging the ball to the slips cordon and had become fidgety and shuffled across the crease . 
 After being rested for the eight @-@ wicket win over Hampshire , Morris rectified his technical problem , and success followed against Sussex . After the hosts had been rolled for 86 in their first innings , Morris dominated an opening partnership of 153 with Brown , who made only 44 before becoming the first man to fall . Morris added a further 189 for the second wicket with Bradman before he fell for 184 at 2 / 342 . He had struck 26 fours , laying the platform for Australia 's total of 5 / 549 declared and eventual innings victory . He was to hit five more first @-@ class centuries before the end of the season . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Morris thus headed into the First Test at Trent Bridge with a century under his belt . He held his position at the top of the order along with Barnes , while Brown played out of position in the middle order . Morris bowled three overs for four runs in the first innings as England were bowled out for 165 on the first day after winning the toss and electing to bat . During the innings , Morris took a reflex catch when Godfrey Evans hit a ball strongly , directly to him at short leg to leave England at 7 / 74 . 
 Australia survived the last 15 minutes on the first evening to reach stumps on 0 / 17 , with Morris on 10 . Barnes and Morris took the score to 73 before the latter was bowled by Jim Laker 's off spin for 31 . Barnes batted confidently , while the hesitant Morris shuffled around the crease . At one stage , Morris scored only seven runs in 55 minutes , During this period , Morris unnecessarily played at a ball outside off stump from seamer Alec Bedser and edged it to wicket @-@ keeper Evans , who dropped the catch . He recomposed himself and hit left arm orthodox spinner Jack Young 's first ball — a full toss — for runs as Australia passed 50 without loss . Morris fell when he tried to force a ball from Laker away , but hit it from the middle of his bat into his back pad ; the ball rebounded onto the stumps . Australia went on to amass 509 , and when England batted again , they lost their third wicket at 150 . Joe Hardstaff junior came in , and on the third ball he aimed a cut that went low to second slip , just as he did in the first innings . However , Morris dropped the catch . Hardstaff exploited his second chance to make 43 before falling at 4 / 243 . 
 Australia eventually bowled England out for 441 , leaving them a target of 98 on the final day . Bradman ’ s openers progressed quickly at the start of the chase . Barnes took 13 runs from the opening over by Bedser , but Morris again lacked fluency . Australia reached 38 from 32 minutes when Bedser bowled Morris for nine , but the tourists steadied to reach their target with eight wickets in hand . After bowling several balls that moved away , Bedser caught out Morris with an inswinger . Morris had developed a habit of trying to defend the ball to the leg side while shuffling towards the off , and was not in a position to deal with a ball that hurried off the pitch . Following the match , Fingleton criticised Morris , feeling that he was shuffling across the crease too much instead of playing from the back foot . 
 In the match immediately after the First Test , Morris scored 60 against Northamptonshire , putting on 122 runs with Lindsay Hassett as Australian completed an innings win . He was then rested ahead of the Second Test as Australia drew with Yorkshire at Bramall Lane in Sheffield . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 In the Second Test at Lord 's , Australia elected to bat first and England made an ideal start . The debutant Alec Coxon opened the bowling and removed Barnes for a duck in his second over to leave the tourists at 1 / 3 . England restricted the Australians in the first hour and created several near misses , particularly against Bradman , who nervous early on . In contrast , Morris was playing fluently and scored many runs from the back cut . At the end of the pace bowlers ' opening spells , the leg spin of Doug Wright was introduced and Australia cut loose . Wright bowled a no ball that Morris dispatched over the leg side fence for six , before hitting another ball for four . Bradman and Morris settled down as Coxon and Wright operated steadily , although the latter was able to extract substantial spin , hitting Morris in the stomach with a ball that turned in sharply from outside off stump . At lunch , Australia were 1 / 82 with Morris on 45 and Bradman on 35 . 
 Shortly afterwards , with the score at 87 , Bradman was caught for the third consecutive time in Tests in Bedser 's leg trap . Len Hutton — who took the catch — had dropped Bradman in the same position when the Australian captain was on 13 . At the other end , Morris began to take control . He drove the ball through the covers and clipped it off his pads through the leg side . Morris reached his century with consecutive boundaries from Coxon . Fingleton called the innings " a pretty Test century in the grandest of all cricket settings " . This ended a run of poor form for Morris , a period during which he had shuffled uncertainly on the crease without moving forward or back decisively . O 'Reilly called it Morris 's best Test century to date , as this was the strongest English attack he had faced during his career , and because of the loss of wickets at the other end . O 'Reilly said Morris had been disciplined in not playing loose shots outside off stump and missing or edging them , yet still being able to score quickly at every opportunity . Morris was out soon after for 105 from 166 balls , after hitting Coxon to Hutton in the gully to leave Australia at 3 / 166 . His innings included 14 fours and one six , and was noted for powerful , well @-@ placed cover drives . With Morris gone , Australia fell to 7 / 258 at stumps , before the lower order counterattacked on the second morning and took the total to 350 . Bradman ’ s team took a 135 @-@ run lead after dismissing England for 215 . 
 The weather was fine as Australia started their second innings on the third morning . The Australian openers took a cautious approach to begin with , avoiding the hook shot and not playing at balls that were not going to hit the stumps , looking for a solid start . Both openers were given early <unk> . Barnes survived a stumping opportunity when he was 18 . Laker came on and induced Morris into hitting an airborne ball back down the pitch , but he was slow to react to the possibility of a caught and bowled . According to O 'Reilly , most other bowlers would have been able to reach the ball and attempt a catch . The openers took advantage to combine for an opening stand of 122 . Wright came on and again bowled a no ball at the start of his spell , which Morris lofted into the crowd for six . After shuffling around with uncertainty at the start of his innings , Morris began to play more fluently . He was eventually bowled for 62 , knocking a ball from Wright onto his stumps . The opening partnership laid the platform for Australia 's 7 / 460 declared , which allowed them to set an imposing target of 596 and win by 409 runs to take a 2 – 0 series lead . 
 Morris was rested by Bradman for the second match against Surrey , which started the day after the Test and ended in a ten @-@ wicket victory for the Australians . The following match was against Gloucestershire at Bristol , and in only five hours on the first day , Morris scored his career best of 290 . Having lost the first two Tests , England were contemplating changes to their team : Tom Goddard was earmarked to replace Jim Laker as the off spinner after performing strongly in county cricket , while Laker had struggled in the Second Test . The English hoped Goddard would be the strike bowler to cut through Australia 's strong batting line @-@ up . Morris 's assault ended Goddard 's hopes of Test selection . His innings was highlighted by his quick assessment of the length of the ball , followed by decisive footwork . Morris confidently advanced out of the crease when the ball was of a full length to drive and rocked onto the back foot to and cut if Goddard dropped short . Unable to contain Morris , Goddard packed the leg side field and bowled outside leg stump . Morris responded by stepping down the wicket towards the leg side , charging the bowler and repeatedly lofting the ball inside out over the off side . He reached his century before lunch and his 200 by the tea interval . By the time Morris was dismissed , he had struck 40 fours and a six . He put on stands of 102 with Barnes , 136 with Keith Miller and 162 with Neil Harvey before falling with the score at 4 / 466 . Fingleton said " Morris flayed it [ the home team 's bowling ] in all directions " , while former English Test paceman Maurice Tate said " Tom [ Goddard ] is not used to batsmen using their feet to him ... the county batsmen diddle and diddle [ shuffle about indecisively instead of quickly moving into position and attacking ] to him and that gets him many wickets . " Australia amassed 5 / 560 on the first day before declaring at 7 / 774 , their largest score of the tour and the second highest by any Australian team on English soil . Morris took a match total of 1 / 35 as Australia won by an innings . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 Following his effort in Bristol , Morris proceeded to the Third Test at Old Trafford . England batted first and made 363 . During the innings , Barnes was hit in the kidneys by a Dick Pollard pull shot while fielding at short leg . When Australia started their first innings reply , Barnes was still recuperating after being carried from the field and taken to hospital for a medical examination . 
 Having dropped Brown for the Test , Barnes 's injury left Australia with only Morris as a specialist opener . Off spinner Ian Johnson was deployed as Australia 's makeshift second opener . He was unable to make an impact , as Bedser removed him for one , before Pollard trapped Bradman leg before wicket ( lbw ) to leave Australia at 2 / 13 . The tourists were pinned down as Pollard bowled 17 consecutive overs from his long run , aiming at leg stump . Pollard was reinforced by Bedser , who bowled unchanged for 90 minutes . Morris and Hassett rebuilt the innings , adding 69 for the third wicket in 101 minutes before the latter fell . Miller joined Morris and the pair took the score to 3 / 126 at stumps , with the latter — who had been the more sedate in the partnership — on 48 . 
 Australia struggled against the new ball in the first hour of the day three . Miller played and missed three times in one over before being trapped lbw for 31 ; the tourists added only nine runs in the first hour . Four runs later , Morris reached 51 and fell to Bedser , leaving Australia at 5 / 139 . It had been a slow morning for Morris — he took 21 minutes to add a single to his overnight total and reached 50 after taking another 24 minutes to register his second run of the day . Australia fell for 221 , narrowly avoiding the follow on , and England declared at 3 / 174 on the last morning after many rain delays . This left Bradman ’ s team with a victory target of 317 , but the rain kept falling and the entire morning was lost . 
 Play finally began after the tea , and the pitch played very slowly because of the excess moisture . As Australia had no intention of chasing the runs , England captain Norman Yardley often installed seven men in close catching positions . In the first half @-@ hour , the tourists showed little attacking intent and scored only six runs . Johnson then fell for six to leave Australia at 1 / 10 . Bradman came to the crease and played 11 balls without scoring while Morris scored two streaky fours from Bedser . Yardley used his spinners for an hour , while Morris and Bradman made little effort to score . For 105 minutes , Morris stayed at one end and Bradman at the other ; neither looked to rotate the strike by taking singles . The Australian skipper faced only eight balls from Morris 's main end , and at one point was so startled when his partner wanted a single that he sent him back . Thereafter , the tourists batted steadily and defensively to ensure a draw . They ended at 1 / 92 from 61 overs , a run rate of 1 @.@ 50 , with 35 maidens ; this was the slowest innings run rate for the series to date . Morris finished unbeaten on 54 , his fourth consecutive half @-@ century during the Test series . The match finally ended after a series of periodic rain interruptions . 
 Morris struck 109 against Middlesex in the following tour match at Lord ’ <unk> hosts batted first and made 203 , and Australia stumbled to 3 / 53 before Morris combined with Sam Loxton ( 123 ) for a 172 @-@ run fourth @-@ wicket stand . Australia recovered to reach 317 and went on to a ten @-@ wicket win . Morris 's century meant he had amassed 504 runs in just over a week of cricket . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 The Fourth Test at Headingley in Leeds saw Morris at his finest ; England elected to bat and started strongly with 496 in the first innings , their highest score of the series . On a placid pitch , Morris was one of seven bowlers used as Bradman sought a breakthrough ; each of the first three wickets put on century partnerships . Bill Edrich hit a long hop from Morris 's left arm unorthodox spin to the boundary to reach his century , before Bedser lifted him high over square leg for six . This prompted Bradman to replace Morris after he conceded 20 runs in five overs as England reached 2 / 423 . Edrich was out when he attempted to pull Johnson to the on side in the large gap between mid @-@ on and square leg , but only hit it in the air to Morris , who completed the catch diving forwards at wide mid @-@ on to leave the score at 4 / 426 , before England collapsed to 496 . 
 England took a 38 @-@ run lead after Australia replied with 458 . Morris contributed only six while batting with vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett , who had been promoted from the middle order to open while Barnes was still injured ; Bradman had overlooked reserve opener Brown . Morris chipped Bedser in the air to Ken Cranston at mid @-@ wicket to leave Australia at 1 / 13 . Australia slumped to 3 / 68 before a middle @-@ order fightback took Australia to 458 early on the fourth morning . England declared at 8 / 365 early on the fifth morning , leaving Australia to chase 404 runs for victory . Batting into the final day allowed Yardley the right to ask the groundsman to use a heavy roller , which would help to break up the wicket and make the surface more likely to spin and bounce unevenly . 
 At the time , 404 would have been the highest ever fourth innings score to result in a Test victory for the batting side . Australia had only 345 minutes to reach their target , and the local press wrote them off , predicting that they would be dismissed by lunchtime on a deteriorating wicket expected to favour spin bowlers . Morris and Hassett started slowly , scoring only six runs in the first six overs on a pitch offering spin and bounce . It appeared they were playing carefully at first before deciding whether to try to achieve the target at a later point . In Bedser 's second over , the third of the innings , Morris chipped the ball in the air towards mid @-@ wicket , in a similar manner to his first innings dismissal , but this time the ball evaded Cranston . After 15 minutes , Australia had only made 0 / 10 . 
 After Bedser had bowled three overs , Laker replaced him in the seventh over as <unk> attempted to exploit the turning surface , but 13 runs were taken from his first over . Hassett hit a four and took a single to rotate the strike . Later in the over , Morris hit a four , was beaten by a bouncing ball that hurried off the pitch , before striking another boundary . Despite the expensive Laker over , only 44 runs came in the first hour , meaning that the tourists still needed 360 runs from 285 minutes . The crowd heckled the Australian openers for their slow scoring and they applauded ironically after Morris took a single . After his poor first over , Laker had settled down and conceded only two runs from his next six overs , and " was getting at least one ball every over to turn considerably " . 
 In an attempt to exploit the worn surface , Yardley brought on the part @-@ time left @-@ arm unorthodox spin of Compton to partner Laker . The occasional bowler was inaccurate and Morris struck two fours in his first over to bring up Australia 's 50 in 64 minutes . However , Compton 's deceived Morris — who danced down the pitch and missed the ball — in the next over , but Evans fumbled the stumping opportunity with the batsman on 32 and Australia at 0 / 55 . Laker beat Morris in the following over with an off break that spun a foot , before Compton removed Hassett for 17 with the score at 57 . 
 Bradman joined Morris with 347 runs needed in 271 minutes . The Australian captain signalled his intentions by reaching 12 in only six minutes . Yardley then called upon the occasional leg spin of Hutton in an attempt to exploit the turning wicket . However , Hutton did not bowl regularly so he had trouble in maintaining his consistency . Morris promptly joined Bradman in the counter @-@ attack , hitting three consecutive fours to reach 51 during Hutton 's first over , which Fingleton described as " rather terrible " due to the errant length . Bradman took two fours off Hutton 's next over before almost hitting a catch . However , the 20 runs from Hutton 's two inaccurate overs had allowed Australia to reach 1 / 96 from 90 minutes . 
 In the next over , Compton greatly troubled Bradman , who edged two balls and was dropped once . At the other end , Morris continued to take advantage of Hutton 's inaccurate leg breaks , and Australia reached lunch at 1 / 121 , with the opener on 63 and his captain on 35 . Hutton had conceded 30 runs in four overs , and in the half @-@ hour preceding the interval , Australia had added 64 runs . Although Australia had scored at a reasonable rate , they had also been troubled by many of the deliveries and were expected to face further difficulty if they were to avoid defeat . 
 Upon resumption , Compton continued as Yardley persisted with his policy of trying to exploit the deteriorating pitch with as much spin as possible . Compton was not a regular bowler and sent down a series of full tosses and long hops that were easily dispatched for runs . Morris struck seven fours in two overs of what Fingleton called " indescribably bad bowling " . This sequence included six fours in eight balls . As Morris continued to attack , Compton began to crack under the pressure and his accuracy worsened . Compton had generated trouble for the batsmen by tossing the ball up and beating the bat or inducing edges , but Morris counterattacked with drives . Compton tried to hold back his length to avoid being driven , but the Australian opener pounced on the shorter balls . Morris reached the 90s just 14 minutes after the interval and hit another boundary to reach his century in just over two hours . Morris had added 37 runs since lunch , while Bradman had furthered his total by only three . 
 The Australian onslaught against the spinners prompted Yardley to take the new ball and replace Compton with his fast men . Bradman reached 50 in 60 minutes and Yardley dropped him soon after . Australia reached 202 — halfway to the required total — with 165 minutes remaining , after Morris dispatched consecutive full tosses from Laker to the fence . Bradman then hooked two boundaries , but suffered a fibrositis attack , which put him in significant pain . Drinks were taken during a delay for treatment , and Morris had to shield Bradman from the strike until the skipper ’ s pain had subsided . Australia reached 250 shortly before tea , with Morris on 133 and Bradman on 92 . Bradman then reached his century as the second @-@ wicket stand passed 200 . 
 Morris was given another life on 136 , when Laker dropped him at square leg from the bowling of Compton . Bradman was given another life at 108 ; he advanced two metres down the pitch towards Laker and missed , but Evans fumbled the stumping opportunity . Australia reached tea at 1 / 292 with Morris on 150 . The pair had added 171 during the session . Morris was eventually dismissed by Yardley for 182 , after hitting a tired @-@ looking shot to mid @-@ off , having partnered Bradman for a stand of 301 in 217 minutes . He struck 33 fours in 290 minutes of batting . Australia still needed 46 for victory , and went on to win by seven wickets with 15 minutes to spare , setting a new world record for the highest successful Test run @-@ chase . 
 Morris was rested for the match against Derbyshire immediately after the Headingley Test , which Australia won by an innings , as well as the next match against Glamorgan , which was a rain @-@ affected draw . He returned to score 32 and 20 not out as Australia defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets . Australia faced Lancashire for the second time on the tour ; Morris made 49 and 16 as the match ended in a draw . Morris and Barnes put on 123 in the first innings , but their teammates were unable to build on the platform and Australia ended on 321 . Morris was rested from the non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , which was a rain @-@ affected draw . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 Australia proceeded to The Oval for the Fifth Test . England won the toss and elected to bat on a pitch affected by heavy rain prior to the match . With the score at 2 / 17 , Lindwall bowled a bouncer , which Compton hooked . Morris ran from his position at short square leg to take a difficult catch , described by Fingleton as " one of the catches of the season " . England collapsed to be all out for 52 as Australia ’ s pacemen extracted bounce and movement from the pitch . 
 In contrast , Australia batted with ease , as the overcast skies cleared and sun came out . The debutant Allan Watkins opened the bowling , delivering four overs for 19 runs before the after @-@ effects of a Lindwall blow to the shoulder became too much . The openers passed England 's first innings total with ease in less than an hour , and Australia reached 100 at 17 : 30 , with Barnes on 52 and Morris on 47 . The tourists reached 117 before Barnes fell to Eric Hollies for 61 , ending an opening stand that had been compiled in only 126 minutes . This brought Bradman to the crease late on the first day . As the Australian captain had already announced his retirement after the end of the series , the innings would be his last in Test cricket if Australia batted only once . The crowd gave him a standing ovation as he walked out to the wicket . Yardley led the Englishmen in giving Bradman three cheers , before shaking his hand . The Australian captain needed only four runs for a Test average of 100 , but was bowled by Hollies for a second ball duck with a googly that went between bat and pad . Bradman received another large round of applause as he left the arena . 
 Hassett came in at 2 / 117 and together with Morris saw Australia to the close at 2 / 153 . Morris was unbeaten on 77 , having hooked Hollies for two fours just before stumps . On the second morning , Morris registered his third century of the Test series and his sixth in Ashes matches . The innings had taken 208 minutes and included four fours . Hassett and Morris took the score to 226 before their 109 @-@ run stand was broken when Young trapped the former for 37 . As the Australians had dismissed their hosts cheaply on the first day and were already well in the lead , they had plenty of time to complete a victory , so Hassett and Morris had no need to take undue risks and scored at a sedate pace . The following batsmen were unable to establish themselves at the crease . Miller made five , before Harvey came to the crease and hit two quick boundaries before being dismissed . Hollies took both wickets . 
 Loxton came in and accompanied Morris for 39 further runs before falling to Edrich . Lindwall fell for nine before Morris was finally removed for 196 , ending an innings noted for his hooking and off @-@ driving . It took a run out to remove Morris ; he attempted a quick run after the ball was hit to third man . Morris was called through for a run by Don Tallon , but he was too slow for the substitute fielder Reg Simpson 's arm . Australia went on to finish with 389 . Morris had scored more than half the runs as the rest of the team struggled against the leg spin of Hollies , who took 5 / 131 . Hollies tossed the ball up repeatedly , coaxing the Australians into attacking balls that spun after pitching on off stump . Morris took four catches for the match as Australia took victory by an innings and 149 runs , sealing a 4 – 0 Test series triumph . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Australia batted first against Kent and Morris made 43 in a total of 361 before Australia enforced the follow on and completed an innings victory . Morris was rested for the following three matches against the Gentlemen of England , Somerset and the South of England . The first two matches were won by innings while the third was washed out after Australia took a large first @-@ innings lead . In the meantime , Morris underwent minor surgery for a split in his hand . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , named after H. D. G. Leveson @-@ Gower . During the last tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted only six current Test players be allowed to play for the hosts . After his demands were met , Bradman named a full @-@ strength team . After the tourists dismissed the home team for 177 , Morris made 62 in a 102 @-@ run opening stand with Barnes before Yardley bowled him . Australia declared at 8 / 489 and time ran out with Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI at 2 / 75 after multiple rain delays . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . In the first match , Morris was the mainstay of the innings , scoring 112 as Australia batted first and made 236 . The Scots replied with 85 and were forced to follow on . Morris led the wicket @-@ taking in the second innings , taking 5 / 10 from five overs as the hosts fell for 111 to hand the Australians an innings victory . He continued his success in the second match , taking three of Scotland 's first four batsmen to end with 3 / 17 as the hosts fell for 178 . Batting at No. 7 , Morris made 10 as Australia declared at 6 / 407 and bowled four overs for eight runs without taking a wicket as Bradman ’ s men ended the tour with another innings victory . 
 = = Role = = 
 A left @-@ handed opening batsman , Morris played in all five Tests , partnering the right @-@ handed Sid Barnes in three Tests ; Barnes was injured in the Third and Fourth Tests . Barnes was unable to open in the former and did not play in the latter . Three opening batsmen were taken on the tour , with Bill Brown being the reserve . During the tour matches , which were usually played consecutively with only one or no days between fixtures , Bradman rotated the trio , so one would generally be rested while the other two <unk> Notable exceptions occurred in the Test series and the opening match against Worcestershire and the clash against the MCC . In those matches , Australia fielded its first @-@ choice team ; Brown played out of position in the middle order , while Morris and Barnes opened . A very occasional left @-@ arm unorthodox spin bowler , Morris delivered only 35 overs during the first @-@ class matches , including eight in the Tests . He took two wickets , both outside the Test arena . 
 Morris ended the first @-@ class matches with 1 @,@ 922 runs at 71 @.@ 18 including seven centuries , ranking him second in runs only to Bradman ( 2 @,@ 428 at 89 @.@ 92 ) and substantially ahead of third @-@ placed Hassett ( 1 @,@ 563 at 74 @.@ 42 ) . He did so despite being troubled by a split between the first and second fingers of his left hand , caused by constant jarring from the bat as he played the ball . The wound often opened while he was batting , forcing him to undergo a minor operation which sidelined him from some matches in the latter part of the tour . 
 In recognition of his performances , Morris was named as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1949 . Wisden described him as " one of the world 's best left @-@ hand batsmen " . Neville Cardus — his former critic — praised Morris 's performance during The Invincibles tour as " masterful , stylish , imperturbable , sure in defence , quick and handsome in stroke play . His batting is true to himself , charming and good mannered but reliant and thoughtful . " 
 Morris 's form peaked in The Ashes , heading the Test averages and aggregates with 696 runs at 87 @.@ 00 . Bradman ( 502 at 72 @.@ 57 ) and Denis Compton ( 562 at 62 @.@ 44 ) were the next closest ; nobody else scored more than 360 runs . He was the only player to compile three Test centuries , and added three further fifties . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Prince Romerson = 
 Prince Romerson ( c . 1840 – March 30 , 1872 ) was an American Union Army soldier of Native Hawaiian descent . One of the " Hawaiʻi Sons of the Civil War " , he was among a group of more than one hundred documented Native Hawaiian and Hawaii @-@ born combatants who fought in the American Civil War while the Kingdom of Hawaii was still an independent nation . 
 Living in the American Northeast before the war , Romerson enlisted in the Union Navy in 1863 as part of the Blockading Squadrons responsible for maintaining the blockade of the ports of the Confederacy . After being discharged from naval service , he continued fighting and reenlisted in the Union Army under the 5th Regiment Massachusetts Colored Volunteer Cavalry , a United States Colored regiment , and was promoted to the rank of sergeant on June 1 , 1864 . Romerson fought with the 5th USCC until the end of the war . Illness prevented him from continuing with his regiment 's reassignment to Clarksville , Texas , and he was mustered out in 1865 . After the war , like many former USCT veterans , he fought in the frontier army as part of the Buffalo Soldiers . He died in 1872 . In 2010 , the Hawaiʻi Sons of the Civil War were commemorated with a bronze plaque erected along the memorial pathway at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific in Honolulu . 
 = = Life = = 
 After the outbreak of the American Civil War , King Kamehameha IV declared the Kingdom of Hawaii 's neutrality on August 26 , 1861 . Many Native Hawaiians and Hawaii @-@ born Americans ( mainly descendants of American missionaries ) abroad and in the islands volunteered and enlisted in the military regiments of various states in the Union and the Confederacy . Native Hawaiian participation in American wars was not unheard of ; Native Hawaiians had served in the United States Navy and Army since the War of 1812 , and even more served during the American Civil War . Many Hawaiians sympathized with the Union because of Hawaii 's ties to New England through missionaries and the whaling industry , and the ideological opposition of many to slavery . 
 Prince Romerson was born around 1840 , but little is known about his life before the war . There is no indication that his first name denotes any royal status , and his surname was often listed as " Robinson " . Different versions of his enlistment records noted his birthplace as " Owyhee , Sandwich Island " ( the island of Hawaii ) , or " India " . There is also disagreement over his ethnicity . Some Filipino historians have claimed him as one of their own , and he is included in lists of Filipino American Civil War combatants . 
 Romerson worked as a barber prior to his enlistment in 1863 . It is thought that he came to the United States as a sailor aboard a merchant or whaling ship in the Pacific ; Hawaiian sailors were highly regarded in the 18th- and 19th @-@ century maritime industry and sought out as crew members . Regardless , it is known that Romerson was living in New York prior to joining the Navy . Probably helped by his experience at sea , he enlisted on January 22 , 1863 , as a <unk> in the Union Navy . He served on the USS <unk> and USS <unk> as part of the Blockading Squadrons , responsible for maintaining the blockade of the ports of the Confederate States . 
 After serving in the Navy for a year , Romerson joined as a private in Company M of the 5th Regiment Massachusetts Colored Volunteer Cavalry . Like most Native Hawaiians who participated in the war , he was probably assigned to the colored regiments because of his dark skin color and the military 's segregationist policy . Romerson is one of the few Hawaiian soldiers of the Civil War whose real name is known ; many combatants served under anglicized pseudonyms ( nome de guerre ) because they were easier for English @-@ speaking Americans to pronounce than Hawaiian names . They were often registered as <unk> , the 19th @-@ century term for Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders , with the " Sandwich Islands " ( i.e. Hawaii ) noted as their place of origin . 
 Romerson was quickly promoted to sergeant on June 1 , 1864 , possibly because he was literate . Serving in the same regiment was another Hawaiian soldier named Charles Heatley . Romerson fought with his regiment at the Second Battle of Petersburg and took part in the Richmond – Petersburg Campaign , better @-@ known as the Siege of Petersburg . He also served as a guard for the Confederate prison camp at Camp Lookout , Maryland . Between the Union victory at Appomattox and the 5th Regiment 's reassignment to Clarksville , Texas , Romerson fell ill and was sent to the Corps d 'Afrique USA General Hospital in New Orleans on July 8 , 1865 . Never recovering sufficiently to rejoin his regiment , he was transferred to De Camp USA General Hospital , David 's Island , New York , before being mustered out on October 9 , 1865 . 
 In the post @-@ war period , Romerson sought to rejoin the military , and in 1867 he enlisted in the 39th United States Infantry Regiment at the reduced rank of private . The 39th later consolidated with the 40th to create the 25th United States Infantry Regiment . A racially segregated unit of the United States Army , its personnel were dubbed " Buffalo Soldiers " and included many Civil War veterans from colored regiments such as the 5th USCC . Romerson served in the 25th for a full three @-@ year term fighting in the American Indian Wars along the Texas frontier . He died on March 30 , 1872 , possibly at Fort Griffin , where he was initially buried . On May 11 , 1872 , he was re @-@ interred at the San Antonio National Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the war , the military service of Hawaiians , including Prince Romerson and many others , was largely forgotten , disappearing from the collective memories of the American Civil War and the history of Hawaii . In recent years , Hawaiian residents , historians , and descendants of Hawaiian combatants in the conflict have insisted on the need to remember " our boys from Hawaii " . Renewed interest in the stories of these individuals and this particular period of Hawaiian @-@ American history has inspired efforts to preserve the memories of the Hawaiians who served in the war . On August 26 , 2010 , on the anniversary of the signing of the Hawaiian Neutrality Proclamation , a bronze plaque was erected along the memorial pathway at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific in Honolulu recognizing these Hawaiʻi Sons of the Civil War , the more than one hundred documented Hawaiians who served during the American Civil War for both the Union and the Confederacy . As of 2014 , researchers have identified 119 documented Native Hawaiian and Hawaii @-@ born combatants from historical records . The exact number still remains unclear because many Hawaiians enlisted and served under anglicized pseudonyms , and little is known about them due to the lack of detailed records . 
 In 2015 , the sesquicentennial of the end of the American Civil War , the National Park Service released a publication entitled Asians and Pacific Islanders and the Civil War , concerning the service of the large number of combatants of Asian and Pacific Islander descent who fought during the war . The history of Hawaii 's involvement and the biographies of Romerson and others were written by historians <unk> Lum <unk> , Anita Manning and Justin Vance . 
 = Santosky v. Kramer = 
 Santosky v. Kramer , 455 U.S. 745 ( 1982 ) , is a Supreme Court case involving the burden of proof for the revocation of parental rights . The case arose when the Ulster County , New York Department of Social Services sought to revoke John Santosky II and Annie Santosky 's parental rights to their three children . Under section 622 of the New York State Family Court Act , the State was permitted to revoke parental rights to a natural child if , after a fair preponderance of the evidence , a court found " permanent neglect " . New York State Family Court found such neglect utilizing the " fair <unk> " standard . The Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the burden of proof used . 
 In a 5 – 4 opinion written by Justice Harry Blackmun , the Supreme Court of the United States vacated the Appellate Division 's ruling , holding that states seeking to irrevocably sever parental rights must show at least clear and convincing evidence of neglect . Justice William Rehnquist , joined by three others , dissented on the grounds that the majority 's focus on a single aspect of the law disregarded the fairness of the scheme as a whole . The ruling has since been criticized for its intrusion into state affairs . Because of the ruling , all states previously using the fair preponderance standard changed to the clear and convincing standard , though California has since abandoned the clear and convincing standard and returned to the fair preponderance standard . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Due Process and the 14th Amendment = = = 
 The Supreme Court has previously held that citizens have certain fundamental rights upon which the government cannot infringe , unless the deprivation of that right is necessary to achieve a compelling government interest . This doctrine , arising from the " liberty clause " of the Fourteenth Amendment , is known as substantive due process . The right to privacy was found to be fundamental under this doctrine , and a number of rights to choice came out of it , such as in Roe v. Wade , where the Court found a right to have an abortion and in Meyer v. Nebraska , where the court found a parental right to raise their children as they wish . In Griswold v. Connecticut the Court extended this doctrine to the right to procure contraception . Substantive due process was further expanded to encompass children with In re Gault establishing that children have a right to procedural due process when the state attempts to take custody of them . 
 Procedural due process , arising from the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments , is minimally the right to notice and a hearing , but has been held to include in some circumstances rights to counsel and rights to confrontation . Procedural due process is required any time a person faces the deprivation of life , liberty , or property . As substantive due process arises from the liberty clause , a deprivation of a substantive due process right is a deprivation of liberty and thus requires procedural due process . 
 The deprivation of rights secured by substantive due process requires some amount of procedural due process , but procedural due process can range from an administrative hearing to a jury trial . In Mathews v. Eldridge , the Court explained the level of due process required for the termination of Social Security benefits and , in doing so , established a method for determining the level of procedural due process required in depriving a person of life , liberty , or property . The Court did so by balancing state interests against the procedural due process rights of an individual . The Mathews test takes into account three factors : " the private interests affected by the proceeding " , " the risk of error created by the State 's chosen procedure " , and " the countervailing governmental interest supporting use of the challenged procedure . " 
 = = = Facts of the Case = = = 
 The Ulster County Department of Social Services received reports from neighbors and physicians of Tina Santosky regarding her injuries : a broken femur , bruises , and cuts . Suspecting child abuse , Bernhardt S. Kramer , the Commissioner of the Ulster County Department of Social Services initiated parental neglect proceedings and removed Tina Santosky from the custody of her parents , John and Annie Santosky , in November 1973 . 10 months later , the Santoskys ' second child , John II , was removed after he was found to be suffering from malnutrition . On that same day , Annie Santosky gave birth to Jed , the couple 's third child . Three days after Jed 's birth , he was removed from their custody and placed in a foster home . 
 About four years later , Kramer petitioned the Ulster County Family Court to revoke parental rights . Under section 622 of the New York State Family Court Act , Kramer was only required to satisfy a " fair preponderance of the evidence " burden and show that permanent neglect is more likely than not . The Santoskys challenged the constitutionality of this burden , but the Family Court rejected their challenge and found permanent neglect under the fair preponderance standard . 
 The Santoskys appealed , and the Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court affirmed the ruling of the Family Court . Their next appeal to the New York Court of Appeals was dismissed as lacking a substantial constitutional question . The Santoskys appealed again , and the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari . 
 At oral argument , Martin Guggenheim argued for the petitioners that the burden of proof under New York law was unconstitutional , stating " [ T ] he Constitution requires that the finder of fact be reasonably convinced that the result of permanent destruction of the family is appropriate before the state may force such an irrevocable and fundamental deprivation of liberty on an individual . " Respondents argued that raising the burden of proof would not have affected the outcome of the case , and that " if the Court should raise the burden , it would frustrate a specific intent of the legislature . " 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Harry Blackmun held that natural parents have a right to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment , and that the burden of proof used by New York State is not stringent enough to satisfy the constitutional requirements of the due process clause . In striking down New York 's burden , the Court utilized the Mathews test to determine what burden of proof was due . 
 The Mathews test employed consists of three considerations : the private interests affected , the risk posed by erroneous judgement , and the government interest affected . The Court found that private interests were substantially affected by the law noting that " [ w ] hen the State initiates a parental rights termination proceeding , it seeks not merely to infringe that fundamental liberty interest , but to end it " and that such a termination was irreversible . In analyzing the second factor , the Court stated that the interests of the parents and the child in their natural relationship are not distinct and thus the balancing factors are between the parents and the State . The Court then found that the " fair preponderance " burden did not fairly allocate risk and that a higher burden would be practically and symbolically important . The Court found that while the State had an interest , a higher burden would have little impact on the ability for the State to achieve its goal . Following from this review , the Court held that " the State [ must ] support its allegations by at least clear and convincing evidence . " 
 = = = Dissenting opinion = = = 
 The dissent , written by Justice Rehnquist , opposed the ruling of the Court on two main points : matters of family law should be left to the states , and that the Court 's analysis was too narrow . While the dissent agreed with the Court 's determination that parents have a due process right , they disagreed in the application of Mathews v. Eldridge . Quoting that case , the dissent clarified stating , " substantial weight must be given to the good faith judgments of the individuals [ administering a program ] ... that the procedures they have provided assure fair consideration of the ... claims of individuals . " The dissent further argued that , by focusing narrowly on only the burden of proof in the statute , the majority failed to take into account the fairness of New York 's scheme as a whole . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 By the early 1990s , all states previously using the " fair preponderance " standard had adapted to using the " clear and convincing " standard in termination proceedings . New York , among other states , did not apply the elevated burden of proof to the fact @-@ finding phase of the proceedings , but rather only to the termination proceedings . The Colorado Supreme Court , conducting its own Mathews test , found that such a burden need not be applied to the fact @-@ finding portion of the case . In the 1990s , California , a state that had previously used the clear and convincing standard , lowered its burden in termination proceedings . The constitutionality of this scheme was challenged and brought before the California Supreme Court in 1993 . The court specifically rejected Santosky , citing substantial differences between California 's procedures and New York 's in Santosky , and upheld the constitutionality of the statute . 
 Seven years after the Santosky decision , the United States Supreme Court held in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins that Santosky 's higher burden of proof is an exception to the " conventional rules of civil litigation [ ... ] that parties to civil litigation need only prove their case by a preponderance of the evidence . " The Court later extended Santosky 's finding of governmental interest in " preserving and promoting the welfare of the child " when it held in Reno v. Flores that children with no available guardians may be held in custody pending deportation hearings . In 2000 , the right of parents to choose how to raise their child , one of the main constitutional interests at issue in Santosky , was affirmed in <unk> v. Granville when the Court struck down a Washington law that allowed for third parties to petition for visitation rights over parental objections . In his dissent , Justice John Paul Stevens rebutted the assumption of Santosky that interests of the parent and the interests of the child do not diverge , arguing that " the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment leaves room for States to consider the impact on a child of possibly arbitrary parental decisions that neither serve nor are motivated by the best interests of the child . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Court made clear that the interests of children should be assumed to be covered as part of the interests of the parent , not treated as separate , but this doctrine has been less clear in practice as termination proceedings still focus on the fitness of the parent . This has resulted in further constitutional protections for parents and increasingly formal termination proceedings that limit the contribution of the child 's interests in the proceedings . Santosky has also contributed to the role of parental rights of undocumented immigrants as the constitutionally protected parental rights may apply to non @-@ citizens as well as United States citizens . 
 The ruling has been criticized for its intrusion into state affairs and its basis in previous rulings . Prior to Santosky , the realm of family life had been left to the states . Because of this , Santosky 's direct intervention into the affairs of state interests was seen as contrary to United States v. <unk> , which held that federal courts should only overturn state statutes when those statutes cannot adequately serve a clear and substantial federal interest . 
 = Russell Foskett = 
 Russell George Foskett , OBE , DFC ( 7 May 1917 – 31 October 1944 ) was an Australian aviator and flying ace of the Second World War . Born in a suburb of Sydney , Foskett was employed as a clerk in 1940 when he enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force . Accepted as a pilot under the Empire Air Training Scheme , he completed his training in Australia and Southern Rhodesia , before transferring for service over North Africa . In subsequent aerial engagements , Foskett was officially credited with the destruction of 6 ½ Axis aircraft and awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Appointed to command No. 94 Squadron RAF , he was transferred to the Mediterranean Theatre in 1944 . Foskett was killed on 31 October 1944 , after his aircraft developed engine trouble and he was forced to bail out over the Aegean Sea , where his parachute failed to open . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Foskett was born in the Sydney suburb of Roseville , New South Wales , on 7 May 1917 to Edward George Foskett , an accountant , and his wife Dora Mabel ( née Cotterill ) . Foskett was educated at Hornsby Junior Technical School , before going on to study accountancy . He later gained employment as a clerk in the credit department of Shell Co. of Australia Pty Ltd . In his youth , Foskett was active in scouting as a Rover as well as sport , particularly hockey ; he was a member of the Gordon district hockey club and represented New South Wales . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Training = = = 
 On 18 September 1940 , Foskett enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force for service during the Second World War . Accepted for flight training under the Empire Air Training Scheme , he received his initial flight instruction at No. 2 Initial Training School , Bradfield Park . Completing this course on 9 November , Foskett was advanced to leading aircraftman and posted to No. 2 Embarkation Depot . On 10 December , he embarked from Sydney bound for Africa . 
 Foskett disembarked at Southern Rhodesia in January 1941 , following a three @-@ week voyage . Allocated to the Initial Training Wing , he completed a two @-@ week stint with the unit before proceeding to No. 25 Empire Flight Training School . On graduating from the school , Foskett was posted to No. 20 Service Flying School for advanced flight instruction on 5 March ; he was promoted to acting sergeant the following day . On 23 April , Foskett was awarded his flying badge , becoming a fully qualified pilot . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 Promoted to the substantive rank of sergeant on 10 June 1941 , Foskett was transferred to the RAF Headquarters , Middle East the following day . He spent two weeks with the headquarters , prior to moving on to No. 71 Operation Training Unit . In July , Foskett was posted to No. 80 Squadron RAF , flying Hawker Hurricanes over North Africa . Commissioned as a pilot officer on 15 March 1942 , Foskett was further promoted to acting flight lieutenant in July and appointed a flight commander of the squadron the following month . The commanding officer of No. 80 Squadron , Donald Jack , later commented of Foskett during this time : " the man , who was a born leader ... had everything required ; enthusiasm , aggression , humour , a zest for life and boundless energy " . 
 On 3 November 1942 , Foskett led his squadron in a sortie over El Alamein against a formation of Stuka dive bombers that were escorted by Messerschmitt 109s . During the ensuing engagement , seven Stukas were shot down , with an additional eight probably destroyed and several others damaged . Foskett himself shot down two of the Axis aircraft before he was hit by fire from one of the Messerschmitts . Forced down , Foskett landed his aircraft in a minefield , where he was safely extracted by a formation of the British Army in the area . Returning to his squadron that evening , Foskett resumed flying duties the following morning . Foskett was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions during the engagement . The announcement and accompanying citation for the award was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 4 December 1942 , reading : 
 Air Ministry , 4th December , 1942 . 
 ROYAL AIR FORCE . 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve the following awards in recognition of gallantry displayed in flying operations against the enemy : — 
 Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 Acting Flight Lieutenant Russell George <unk> ( <unk> ) , Royal Australian Air Force , No. 80 Squadron . 
 One day in November , 1942 , this officer led his squadron in an attack on a formation of Stuka dive bombers , heavily escorted by fighters . During the combat 7 Stukas were shot down , a further 8 probably destroyed and several others were damaged . Flight Lieutenant Foskett , who displayed great skill and daring , destroyed 2 of the enemy aircraft before his own was hit . He landed safely , however , and re @-@ joined his squadron the same night . The following morning he resumed his flying duties . This officer has participated in a large number of sorties and has displayed inspiring leadership . 
 = = = No. 94 Squadron = = = 
 Foskett continued to undertake sorties with No. 80 Squadron until late March 1943 , when his operational tour came to an end . Promoted to acting squadron leader , he was posted as a staff officer to the headquarters of No. 209 Group , located in Haifa , Palestine , on 25 May . Foskett 's service with the headquarters lasted until 6 October , when he was appointed as commander of No. 94 Squadron RAF . Based in the Libyan town of El Adem , the squadron was equipped with Hawker Hurricanes and consisted of a mixture of Commonwealth personnel , in addition to a contingent of Yugoslavian pilots . 
 Foskett administered and led No. 94 Squadron as it operated over North Africa and the Middle East throughout 1944 . Noted as " outstanding " as " a fighter pilot and commander " during this time , Foskett was consequently Mentioned in Despatches and awarded the wings of the Royal Yugoslav Air Force by King Peter II . The squadron was re @-@ equipped with Supermarine Spitfires during February that year , and it was while piloting one of these aircraft that Foskett scored his final victory of the war . On 6 June , Foskett was involved in a sweeping sortie over Crete when he became engaged with a Junkers Ju 52 . In the ensuing battle , Foskett managed to shoot down the opposing aircraft over Tmimi , Libya . During October 1944 , No. 94 Squadron was relocated to Kalamaki , Greece . 
 On 31 October 1944 , Foskett was returning to base following an operation when his Spitfire developed engine trouble between the islands of Skiathos and <unk> over the Aegean Sea . He attempted to bail out of the aircraft , but his altitude was too low for his parachute to open , and he was consequently killed . Foskett 's body was later recovered , and he was buried at sea ; he is commemorated on the Malta Memorial . Foskett 's younger brother Bruce William , a Royal Australian Air Force navigator , had been killed in an operation over Berlin the previous February . By the time of his death , Foskett had been officially credited with a tally of 6 ½ Axis aircraft shot down . For his command of No. 94 Squadron , Foskett was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire , which was posthumously announced in a supplement to the London Gazette on 1 January 1945 . On 16 February 1946 , Foskett 's father , Edward , attended an investiture ceremony at Government House , Sydney , where he was presented with his late son 's decorations by the Governor @-@ General of Australia , Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester . 
 = Low @-@ frequency radio range = 
 The low @-@ frequency radio range ( LFR ) , also known as the four @-@ course radio range , LF / MF four @-@ course radio range , A @-@ N radio range , Adcock radio range , or commonly " the range " , was the main navigation system used by aircraft for instrument flying in the 1930s and 1940s , until the advent of the VHF omnidirectional range ( VOR ) , beginning in the late 1940s . It was used for en route navigation as well as instrument approaches and holds . 
 Based on a network of radio towers which transmitted directional radio signals , the LFR defined specific airways in the sky . Pilots navigated the LFR by listening to a stream of automated " A " and " N " Morse codes . For example , they would turn the aircraft to the right when hearing an " N " stream ( " dah @-@ dit , dah @-@ dit , ... " ) , to the left when hearing an " A " stream ( " di @-@ dah , di @-@ dah , ... " ) , and fly straight ahead while hearing a steady tone . 
 As the VOR system was phased in around the world , the LFR was gradually phased out , mostly disappearing by the 1970s . There are no remaining operational LFR facilities today . At its maximum deployment , there were nearly 400 LFR stations in the U.S. alone . 
 = = History = = 
 After World War I , aviation began to expand its role into the civilian arena , starting with airmail flights . It soon became apparent that for reliable mail delivery , as well as the passenger flights which were soon to follow , a solution was required for navigation at night and in poor visibility . In the U.S. , a network of lighted beacons , similar to maritime lighthouses , was constructed for the airmail pilots . But the beacons were useful mostly at night and in good weather , while in poor visibility conditions they could not be seen . Scientists and engineers realized that a radio based navigation solution would allow pilots to " see " under all flight conditions , and decided a network of directional radio beams was needed . 
 On September 24 , 1929 , then @-@ Lieutenant ( later General ) James H. " Jimmy " Doolittle , U.S. Army , demonstrated the first " blind " flight , performed exclusively by reference to instruments and without outside visibility , and proved that instrument flying was feasible . Doolittle used newly developed gyroscopic instruments — attitude indicator and gyrocompass — to help him maintain his aircraft 's attitude and heading , and a specially designed directional radio system to navigate to and from the airport . Doolittle 's experimental equipment was purpose @-@ built for his demonstration flights ; for instrument flying to become practical , the technology had to be reliable , mass @-@ produced and widely deployed , both on the ground and in the aircraft fleet . 
 There were two technological approaches for both the ground and air radio navigation components , which were being evaluated during the late 1920s and early 1930s . 
 On the ground , to obtain directional radio beams with a well @-@ defined navigable course , crossed loop antennas were used initially . The first loop @-@ based LFR system was commissioned by the U.S. Commerce Department on June 30 , 1928 . But the loop antenna design suffered from poor performance , especially at night , and by 1932 the Adcock antenna array , which had superior accuracy , became the preferred solution and replaced the loop antennas . The U.S. Commerce Department 's Aeronautics Branch referred to the Adcock solution as the " T @-@ L Antenna " ( for " Transmission Line " ) and did not initially mention Adcock 's name . 
 In the air , there were also two competing designs , originating from groups of different backgrounds and needs . The Army Signal Corps , representing military aviators , preferred a solution based on a stream of audio navigation signals , constantly fed into the pilots ' ears via a headset . Civilian pilots on the other hand , who were mostly airmail pilots flying cross @-@ country to deliver the mail , felt the audio signals would be annoying and difficult to use over long flights , and preferred a visual solution , with an indicator in the instrument panel . 
 A visual indicator was developed based on vibrating reeds , which provided a simple panel @-@ mounted " turn left @-@ right " indicator . It was reliable , easy to use and more immune to erroneous signals than the competing audio based system . Pilots who had flown with both aural and visual systems strongly preferred the visual type , according to a published report . The reed @-@ based solution was passed over by the U.S. government , however , and the audio signals became standard for decades to come . 
 By the 1930s the LFR network of ground @-@ based radio transmitters , coupled with on @-@ board AM radio receivers , became a vital part of instrument flying . LFR provided navigational guidance to aircraft for en route operations and approaches , under virtually all weather conditions , helping to make consistent and reliable flight schedules a reality . 
 LFR remained as the main radio navigation system in the U.S. and other countries until it was gradually replaced by the much @-@ improved VHF @-@ based VOR technology , starting in the late 1940s . The VOR , still used today , includes a visual left @-@ right indicator . 
 = = Technology = = 
 = = = Ground = = = 
 The LFR ground component consisted of a network of radio transmission stations which were strategically located around the country , often near larger airports , approximately 200 miles apart . Early LFR stations used crossed loop antennas , but later designs were all based on the Adcock vertical antenna array for improved performance , especially at night . 
 Each Adcock range station had four 134 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 41 m ) antenna towers erected on the corners of a 425 × 425 ft square , with an optional extra tower in the center for voice transmission and homing . The stations emitted directional electromagnetic radiation at 190 to 535 kHz and 1 @,@ 500 watts , into four quadrants . The radiation of one opposing quadrant pair was modulated ( at an audio frequency of 1 @,@ 020 Hz ) with a Morse code for the letter A ( · — ) , and the other pair with the letter N ( — · ) . The intersections between the quadrants defined four course lines emanating from the transmitting station , along four compass directions , where the A and N signals were of equal intensity , with their combined Morse codes merging into a steady 1 @,@ 020 Hz audio tone . These course lines ( also called " legs " ) , where only a tone could be heard , defined the airways . 
 In addition to the repeating A or N modulation signal , each transmitting station would also transmit its two @-@ letter Morse code identifier once every thirty seconds for positive identification . The station identification would be sent twice : first on the N pair of transmitters , then on the A , to ensure coverage in all quadrants . Also , in some installations local weather conditions were periodically broadcast in voice over the range frequency , preempting the navigational signals , but eventually this was done on the central fifth tower . 
 The LFR was originally accompanied by airway beacons , which were used as a visual backup , especially for night flights . Additional " marker beacons " ( low power VHF radio transmitters ) were sometimes included as supplementary orientation points . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The airborne radio receivers — initially simple Amplitude Modulation ( AM ) sets — were tuned to the frequency of the LFR ground transmitters , and the Morse code audio was detected and amplified into speakers , typically in headsets worn by the pilots . The pilots would constantly listen to the audio signal , and attempt to fly the aircraft along the course lines ( " flying the beam " ) , where a uniform tone would be heard . If the signal of a single letter ( A or N ) became audibly distinct , the aircraft would be turned as needed so that the modulation of the two letters would overlap again , and the Morse code audio would become a steady tone . The " on course " region , where the A and N audibly merged , was approximately 3 ° wide , which translated into a course width of ± 2 @.@ 6 miles when 100 miles away from the station . 
 Pilots had to verify that they were tuned to the correct range station frequency by comparing its Morse code identifier against the one published on their navigation charts . They would also verify they were flying towards or away from the station , by determining if the signal level ( i.e. the audible tone volume ) was getting stronger or weaker , respectively . 
 = = Approaches and holds = = 
 Final approach segments of LFR instrument approaches were normally flown near the range station , which ensured increased accuracy . When the aircraft was over the station , the audio signal disappeared , since there was no modulation signal directly above the transmitting towers . This quiet zone , called the " Cone of Silence " , signified to the pilots that the aircraft was directly overhead the station , serving as a positive ground reference point for the approach procedure . 
 In a typical LFR instrument approach procedure , final approach would begin over the range station , with a turn to a specific course . The pilot would descend to a specified minimum descent altitude ( MDA ) , and if the airport was not in sight within a specified time ( based on ground speed ) , a missed approach procedure would be initiated . In the depicted Joliet , IL LFR approach procedure , minimum descent altitude could be as low as 300 feet AGL , and required minimum visibility one mile , depending on aircraft type . 
 The LFR also allowed air traffic control to instruct pilots to enter a holding pattern " on the beam " , i.e. on one of the LFR legs , with the holding fix ( key turning point ) over the LFR station , in the Cone of Silence , or over one of the fan markers . The holds were used either during the en route portion of a flight or as part of the approach procedure near the terminal airport . LFR holds were more accurate than NDB holds , since NDB holding courses are predicated on the accuracy of the on @-@ board magnetic compass , whereas the LFR hold was as accurate as the LFR leg , with an approximate course width of 3 ° . 
 = = Non @-@ directional beacons = = 
 From its beginning in the early 1930s , the LFR was augmented with Low Frequency Non @-@ directional beacons ( <unk> ) . While the LFR required a complex ground installation and only a simple AM receiver on board the aircraft , NDB ground installations were simple single @-@ antenna transmitters requiring somewhat more complex equipment on board the aircraft . The NDB 's radio emission pattern was uniform in all directions in the horizontal plane . The NDB 's on @-@ board receiver was called a radio direction finder ( RDF ) . The NDB @-@ RDF combination allowed pilots to determine the direction of the NDB ground station relative to the direction the airplane was pointing . When used in conjunction with the on board magnetic compass , the pilot could navigate to or from the station along any chosen course radiating from the station . 
 Early RDF receivers were costly , bulky and difficult to operate , but the simpler and less expensive ground installation allowed the easy addition of NDB based waypoints and approaches , to supplement the LFR system . Modern RDF receivers , called " automatic direction finders " ( or " ADF " ) are small , low cost and easy to operate . The NDB @-@ ADF system remains today as a supplement and backup to the newer VOR and GPS navigation systems , although it is gradually being phased out . 
 = = Limitations = = 
 Although the LFR system was used for decades as the main aeronautical navigation method during low visibility and night flying , it had some well known limitations and drawbacks . The course lines , which were a result of a balance between the radiation patterns from different transmitters , would fluctuate depending on weather conditions , vegetation or snow cover near the station , and even the airborne receiver 's antenna angle . Under some conditions , the signals from the A quadrant would " skip " into the N quadrant ( or vice versa ) , causing a false " virtual course " away from any real course line . Also , thunderstorms and other atmospheric disturbances would create electromagnetic interference to disrupt the range signals and produce crackling " static " in the pilots ' headsets . 
 = = Replacement by VOR = = 
 The LFR navigation system required , at a minimum , only a simple AM radio receiver on board the aircraft to accurately navigate the airways under instrument meteorological conditions , and even execute an instrument approach to low minimums . On the downside , however , it had only four course directions per station , was sensitive to atmospheric and other types of interference and aberrations , and required pilots to listen for hours to an annoying monotonous beep , or a faint stream of Morse codes , often embedded in background " static " . Its eventual replacement , the VHF band VOR navigation system , had many advantages . The VOR was virtually immune to interference , had 360 available course directions , had a visual " on course " display ( with no listening needed ) , and was far easier to use . Consequently , when the VOR system became available in the early 1950s its acceptance was rapid , and within a decade the LFR was mostly phased out . VOR itself is gradually being phased out today in favor of the far superior Global Positioning System ( GPS ) . 
 = = Sounds = = 
 The following are simulated sounds for the Silver Lake LFR . The range station — located about 10 miles north of Baker , California — would preempt the navigational signals every 30 seconds to transmit its Morse code identifier ( " RL " ) . The station identification would be heard once or twice , possibly with different relative amplitudes , depending on the aircraft location . Pilots would listen to and navigate by these sounds for hours while flying . Actual sounds contained " static " , interference and other distortions , not reproduced by the simulation . Adjusting the volume would affect the effective course width . For example , in the simulated sound for " twilight " A below , where the aircraft is nearly on the beam but slightly inside the A quadrant , a low volume almost obscures the weak A sound , whereas a loud one makes it more distinct . 
 ( See Wikipedia : Media help if you encounter problems playing these sound files . ) 
 = Universe = 
 The Universe is all of time and space and its contents . It includes planets , moons , minor planets , stars , galaxies , the contents of intergalactic space , and all matter and energy . The observable universe is about 28 billion parsecs ( 91 billion light @-@ years ) in diameter . The size of the entire Universe is unknown , but there are many hypotheses about the composition and evolution of the Universe . 
 The earliest scientific models of the Universe were developed by ancient Greek and Indian philosophers and were geocentric , placing the Earth at the center of the Universe . Over the centuries , more precise astronomical observations led Nicolaus Copernicus ( 1473 – 1543 ) to develop the heliocentric model with the Sun at the center of the Solar System . In developing the law of universal gravitation , Sir Isaac Newton ( NS : 1643 – 1727 ) built upon Copernicus 's work as well as observations by Tycho Brahe ( 1546 – 1601 ) and Johannes Kepler 's ( 1571 – 1630 ) laws of planetary motion . Further observational improvements led to the realization that our Solar System is located in the Milky Way galaxy and is one of many solar systems and galaxies . It is assumed that galaxies are distributed uniformly and the same in all directions , meaning that the Universe has neither an edge nor a center . Discoveries in the early 20th century have suggested that the Universe had a beginning and that it is expanding at an increasing rate . The majority of mass in the Universe appears to exist in an unknown form called dark matter . 
 The Big Bang theory , the prevailing cosmological model describing the development of the Universe , states that space and time were created in the Big Bang and were given a fixed amount of energy and matter that becomes less dense as space expands . After the initial expansion , the Universe cooled , allowing the first subatomic particles to form and then simple atoms . Giant clouds later merged through gravity to form stars . Assuming that the standard model of the Big Bang theory is correct , the age of the Universe is measured to be 13 @.@ 799 ± 0 @.@ 021 billion years . 
 There are many competing hypotheses about the ultimate fate of the Universe and about what , if anything , preceded the Big Bang , while other physicists and philosophers refuse to speculate , doubting that information about prior states will ever be accessible . Some physicists have suggested various multiverse hypotheses , in which the Universe might be one among many universes that likewise exist . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The Universe can be defined as everything that exists , everything that has existed , and everything that will exist . According to our current understanding , the Universe consists of spacetime , forms of energy ( including electromagnetic radiation and matter ) , and the physical laws that relate them . The Universe encompasses all of life , all of history , and some philosophers and scientists suggest that it even encompasses ideas such as mathematics and logic . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word universe derives from the Old French word <unk> , which in turn derives from the Latin word <unk> . The Latin word was used by Cicero and later Latin authors in many of the same senses as the modern English word is used . 
 = = = Synonyms = = = 
 A term for " universe " among the ancient Greek philosophers from Pythagoras onwards was τὸ <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " the all " ) , defined as all matter and all space , and τὸ <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " all things " ) , which did not necessarily include the void . Another synonym was ὁ <unk> ho <unk> ( meaning the world , the cosmos ) . Synonyms are also found in Latin authors ( totum , mundus , natura ) and survive in modern languages , e.g. , the German words Das All , <unk> , and Natur for Universe . The same synonyms are found in English , such as everything ( as in the theory of everything ) , the cosmos ( as in cosmology ) , the world ( as in the many @-@ worlds interpretation ) , and nature ( as in natural laws or natural philosophy ) . 
 = = Chronology and the Big Bang = = 
 The prevailing model for the evolution of the Universe is the Big Bang theory . The Big Bang model states that the earliest state of the Universe was extremely hot and dense and that it subsequently expanded . The model is based on general relativity and on simplifying assumptions such as homogeneity and isotropy of space . A version of the model with a cosmological constant ( Lambda ) and cold dark matter , known as the Lambda @-@ CDM model , is the simplest model that provides a reasonably good account of various observations about the Universe . The Big Bang model accounts for observations such as the correlation of distance and redshift of galaxies , the ratio of the number of hydrogen to helium atoms , and the microwave radiation background . 
 The initial hot , dense state is called the Planck epoch , a brief period extending from time zero to one Planck time unit of approximately 10 − 43 seconds . During the Planck epoch , all types of matter and all types of energy were concentrated into a dense state , where gravitation is believed to have been as strong as the other fundamental forces , and all the forces may have been unified . Since the Planck epoch , the Universe has been expanding to its present form , possibly with a very brief period of cosmic inflation which caused the Universe to reach a much larger size in less than 10 − 32 seconds . 
 After the Planck epoch and inflation came the quark , hadron , and lepton epochs . Together , these epochs encompassed less than 10 seconds of time following the Big Bang . The observed abundance of the elements can be explained by combining the overall expansion of space with nuclear and atomic physics . As the Universe expands , the energy density of electromagnetic radiation decreases more quickly than does that of matter because the energy of a photon decreases with its wavelength . As the Universe expanded and cooled , elementary particles associated stably into ever larger combinations . Thus , in the early part of the matter @-@ dominated era , stable protons and neutrons formed , which then formed atomic nuclei through nuclear reactions . This process , known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis , led to the present abundances of lighter nuclei , particularly hydrogen , deuterium , and helium . Big Bang nucleosynthesis ended about 20 minutes after the Big Bang , when the Universe had cooled enough so that nuclear fusion could no longer occur . At this stage , matter in the Universe was mainly a hot , dense plasma of negatively charged electrons , neutral neutrinos and positive nuclei . This era , called the photon epoch , lasted about 380 thousand years . 
 Eventually , at a time known as recombination , electrons and nuclei formed stable atoms , which are transparent to most wavelengths of radiation . With photons decoupled from matter , the Universe entered the matter @-@ dominated era . Light from this era could now travel freely , and it can still be seen in the Universe as the cosmic microwave background ( CMB ) . After around 100 million years , the first stars formed ; these were likely very massive , luminous , and responsible for the reionization of the Universe . Having no elements heavier than lithium , these stars also produced the first heavy elements through stellar nucleosynthesis . The Universe also contains a mysterious energy called dark energy ; the energy density of dark energy does not change over time . After about 9 @.@ 8 billion years , the Universe had expanded sufficiently so that the density of matter was less than the density of dark energy , marking the beginning of the present dark @-@ energy @-@ dominated era . In this era , the expansion of the Universe is accelerating due to dark energy . 
 = = Properties = = 
 The spacetime of the Universe is usually interpreted from a Euclidean perspective , with space as consisting of three dimensions , and time as consisting of one dimension , the " fourth dimension " . By combining space and time into a single manifold called Minkowski space , physicists have simplified a large number of physical theories , as well as described in a more uniform way the workings of the Universe at both the <unk> and subatomic levels . 
 Spacetime events are not absolutely defined spatially and temporally but rather are known relative to the motion of an observer . Minkowski space approximates the Universe without gravity ; the pseudo @-@ Riemannian manifolds of general relativity describe spacetime with matter and gravity . String theory postulates the existence of additional dimensions . 
 Of the four fundamental interactions , gravitation is dominant at cosmological length scales , including galaxies and larger @-@ scale structures . Gravity 's effects are cumulative ; by contrast , the effects of positive and negative charges tend to cancel one another , making electromagnetism relatively insignificant on cosmological length scales . The remaining two interactions , the weak and strong nuclear forces , decline very rapidly with distance ; their effects are confined mainly to sub @-@ atomic length scales . 
 The Universe appears to have much more matter than antimatter , an asymmetry possibly related to the observations of CP violation . The Universe also appears to have neither net momentum nor angular momentum . The absence of net charge and momentum would follow from accepted physical laws ( Gauss 's law and the non @-@ divergence of the stress @-@ energy @-@ momentum pseudotensor , respectively ) if the Universe were finite . 
 = = = Shape = = = 
 General relativity describes how spacetime is curved and bent by mass and energy . The topology or geometry of the Universe includes both local geometry in the observable universe and global geometry . <unk> often work with a given space @-@ like slice of spacetime called the comoving coordinates . The section of spacetime which can be observed is the backward light cone , which delimits the cosmological horizon . The cosmological horizon ( also called the particle horizon or the light horizon ) is the maximum distance from which particles can have traveled to the observer in the age of the Universe . This horizon represents the boundary between the observable and the unobservable regions of the Universe . The existence , properties , and significance of a cosmological horizon depend on the particular cosmological model . 
 An important parameter determining the future evolution of the Universe theory is the density parameter , Omega ( Ω ) , defined as the average matter density of the universe divided by a critical value of that density . This selects one of three possible geometries depending on whether Ω is equal to , less than , or greater than 1 . These are called , respectively , the flat , open and closed universes . 
 Observations , including the Cosmic Background Explorer ( COBE ) , Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe ( WMAP ) , and Planck maps of the CMB , suggest that the Universe is infinite in extent with a finite age , as described by the Friedmann – Lemaître – Robertson – Walker ( FLRW ) models . These FLRW models thus support inflationary models and the standard model of cosmology , describing a flat , homogeneous universe presently dominated by dark matter and dark energy . 
 = = = Size and regions = = = 
 The size of the Universe is somewhat difficult to define . According to a restrictive definition , the Universe is everything within our connected spacetime that could have a chance to interact with us and vice versa . According to the general theory of relativity , some regions of space may never interact with ours even in the lifetime of the Universe due to the finite speed of light and the ongoing expansion of space . For example , radio messages sent from Earth may never reach some regions of space , even if the Universe were to exist forever : space may expand faster than light can traverse it . 
 Distant regions of space are assumed to exist and to be part of reality as much as we are , even though we can never interact with them . The spatial region that we can affect and be affected by is the observable universe . The observable universe depends on the location of the observer . By traveling , an observer can come into contact with a greater region of spacetime than an observer who remains still . Nevertheless , even the most rapid traveler will not be able to interact with all of space . Typically , the observable universe is taken to mean the portion of the Universe that is observable from our vantage point in the Milky Way . 
 The proper distance — the distance as would be measured at a specific time , including the present — between Earth and the edge of the observable universe is 46 billion light @-@ years ( 14 billion parsecs ) , making the diameter of the observable universe about 91 billion light @-@ years ( 28 × 10 ^ 9 pc ) . The distance the light from the edge of the observable universe has travelled is very close to the age of the Universe times the speed of light , 13 @.@ 8 billion light @-@ years ( 4 @.@ 2 × 10 ^ 9 pc ) , but this does not represent the distance at any given time because the edge of the observable universe and the Earth have since moved further apart . For comparison , the diameter of a typical galaxy is 30 @,@ 000 light @-@ years , and the typical distance between two neighboring galaxies is 3 million light @-@ years . As an example , the Milky Way is roughly 100 @,@ 000 light years in diameter , and the nearest sister galaxy to the Milky Way , the Andromeda Galaxy , is located roughly 2 @.@ 5 million light years away . Because we cannot observe space beyond the edge of the observable universe , it is unknown whether the size of the Universe is finite or infinite . 
 = = = Age and expansion = = = 
 Astronomers calculate the age of the Universe by assuming that the Lambda @-@ CDM model accurately describes the evolution of the Universe from a very uniform , hot , dense primordial state to its present state and measuring the cosmological parameters which constitute the model . This model is well understood theoretically and supported by recent high @-@ precision astronomical observations such as WMAP and Planck . Commonly , the set of observations fitted includes the cosmic microwave background anisotropy , the brightness / redshift relation for Type Ia supernovae , and large @-@ scale galaxy clustering including the baryon acoustic oscillation feature . Other observations , such as the Hubble constant , the abundance of galaxy clusters , weak gravitational lensing and globular cluster ages , are generally consistent with these , providing a check of the model , but are less accurately measured at present . With the prior that the Lambda @-@ CDM model is correct , the measurements of the parameters using a variety of techniques by numerous experiments yield a best value of the age of the Universe as of 2015 of 13 @.@ 799 ± 0 @.@ 021 billion years . 
 Over time , the Universe and its contents have evolved ; for example , the relative population of quasars and galaxies has changed and space itself has expanded . Due to this expansion , scientists on Earth can observe the light from a galaxy 30 billion light years away even though that light has traveled for only 13 billion years ; the very space between them has expanded . This expansion is consistent with the observation that the light from distant galaxies has been redshifted ; the photons emitted have been stretched to longer wavelengths and lower frequency during their journey . Analyses of Type Ia supernovae indicate that the spatial expansion is accelerating . 
 The more matter there is in the Universe , the stronger the mutual gravitational pull of the matter . If the Universe were too dense then it would re @-@ collapse into a gravitational singularity . However , if the Universe contained too little matter then the expansion would accelerate too rapidly for planets and planetary systems to form . Since the Big Bang , the universe has expanded monotonically . Perhaps unsurprisingly , our universe has just the right mass density of about 5 protons per cubic meter which has allowed it to expand for the last 13 @.@ 8 billion years , giving time to form the universe as observed today . 
 There are dynamical forces acting on the particles in the Universe which affect the expansion rate . Before 1998 , it was expected that the rate of increase of the Hubble Constant would be decreasing as time went on due to the influence of gravitational interactions in the Universe , and thus there is an additional observable quantity in the Universe called the deceleration parameter which cosmologists expected to be directly related to the matter density of the Universe . In 1998 , the deceleration parameter was measured by two different groups to be consistent with − 1 but not zero , which implied that the present @-@ day rate of increase of the Hubble Constant is increasing over time . 
 = = = Spacetime = = = 
 <unk> are the arenas in which all physical events take place — an event is a point in spacetime specified by its time and place . The basic elements of spacetime are events . In any given spacetime , an event is a unique position at a unique time . Because events are spacetime points , in classical relativistic physics , the location of an elementary ( point @-@ like ) particle at a particular time can be written as ( x , y , z , t ) . A spacetime is the union of all events in the same way that a line is the union of all of its points , formally organized into a manifold . 
 The Universe appears to be a smooth spacetime continuum consisting of three spatial dimensions and one temporal ( time ) dimension . On the average , space is observed to be very nearly flat ( close to zero curvature ) , meaning that Euclidean geometry is empirically true with high accuracy throughout most of the Universe . Spacetime also appears to have a simply connected topology , in analogy with a sphere , at least on the length @-@ scale of the observable Universe . However , present observations cannot exclude the possibilities that the Universe has more dimensions and that its spacetime may have a multiply connected global topology , in analogy with the cylindrical or toroidal topologies of two @-@ dimensional spaces . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The Universe is composed almost completely of dark energy , dark matter , and ordinary matter . Other contents are electromagnetic radiation ( estimated to be from 0 @.@ 005 % to close to 0 @.@ 01 % ) and antimatter . The total amount of electromagnetic radiation generated within the universe has decreased by 1 / 2 in the past 2 billion years . 
 The percent of all types matter and energy has changed over the history of the Universe . Today , ordinary matter , which includes atoms , stars , galaxies , and life , accounts for only 4 @.@ 9 % of the contents of the Universe . The present overall density of this type of matter is very low , roughly 4 @.@ 5 × 10 − 31 grams per cubic centimetre , corresponding to a density of the order of only one proton for every four cubic meters of volume . The nature of both dark energy and dark matter is unknown . Dark matter , a mysterious form of matter that has not yet been identified , accounts for 26 @.@ 8 % of the contents . Dark energy , which is the energy of empty space and that is causing the expansion of the Universe to accelerate , accounts for the remaining 68 @.@ 3 % of the contents . 
 Matter , dark matter , and dark energy are distributed homogeneously throughout the Universe over length scales longer than 300 million light @-@ years or so . However , over shorter length @-@ scales , matter tends to clump hierarchically ; many atoms are condensed into stars , most stars into galaxies , most galaxies into clusters , superclusters and , finally , large @-@ scale galactic filaments . The observable Universe contains approximately 300 sextillion ( 3 × 1023 ) stars and more than 100 billion ( 1011 ) galaxies . Typical galaxies range from dwarfs with as few as ten million ( 107 ) stars up to giants with one trillion ( 1012 ) stars . Between the structures are voids , which are typically 10 – 150 Mpc ( 33 million – 490 million ly ) in diameter . The Milky Way is in the Local Group of galaxies , which in turn is in the Laniakea Supercluster . This supercluster spans over 500 million light years , while the Local Group spans over 10 million light years . The Universe also has vast regions of relative emptiness ; the largest known void measures 1 @.@ 8 billion ly ( 550 Mpc ) across . 
 The observable Universe is isotropic on scales significantly larger than superclusters , meaning that the statistical properties of the Universe are the same in all directions as observed from Earth . The Universe is bathed in highly isotropic microwave radiation that corresponds to a thermal equilibrium blackbody spectrum of roughly 2 @.@ <unk> kelvin . The hypothesis that the large @-@ scale Universe is homogeneous and isotropic is known as the cosmological principle . A Universe that is both homogeneous and isotropic looks the same from all vantage points and has no center . 
 = = = Dark energy = = = 
 An explanation for why the expansion of the Universe is accelerating remains elusive . It is often attributed to " dark energy " , an unknown form of energy that is hypothesized to permeate space . On a mass – energy equivalence basis , the density of dark energy ( ~ 7 × 10 − 30 g / cm3 ) is much less than the density of ordinary matter or dark matter within galaxies . However , in the present dark @-@ energy era , it dominates the mass – energy of the universe because it is uniform across space . 
 Two proposed forms for dark energy are the cosmological constant , a constant energy density filling space homogeneously , and scalar fields such as quintessence or moduli , dynamic quantities whose energy density can vary in time and space . Contributions from scalar fields that are constant in space are usually also included in the cosmological constant . The cosmological constant can be formulated to be equivalent to vacuum energy . <unk> fields having only a slight <unk> of spatial inhomogeneity would be difficult to distinguish from a cosmological constant . 
 = = = Dark matter = = = 
 Dark matter is a hypothetical kind of matter that is invisible to the entire electromagnetic spectrum , but which accounts for most of the matter in the Universe . The existence and properties of dark matter are inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter , radiation , and the large @-@ scale structure of the Universe . Other than neutrinos , a form of hot dark matter , dark matter has not been detected directly , making it one of the greatest mysteries in modern astrophysics . Dark matter neither emits nor absorbs light or any other electromagnetic radiation at any significant level . Dark matter is estimated to constitute 26 @.@ 8 % of the total mass – energy and 84 @.@ 5 % of the total matter in the Universe . 
 = = = Ordinary Matter = = = 
 The remaining 4 @.@ 9 % of the mass – energy of the Universe is ordinary matter , that is , atoms , ions , electrons and the objects they form . This matter includes stars , which produce nearly all of the light we see from galaxies , as well as interstellar gas in the interstellar and intergalactic media , planets , and all the objects from everyday life that we can bump into , touch or squeeze . As a matter of fact , the great majority of ordinary matter in the universe is unseen , since visible stars and gas inside galaxies and clusters account for less than 10 per cent of the ordinary matter contribution to the mass @-@ energy density of the universe . 
 Ordinary matter commonly exists in four states ( or phases ) : solid , liquid , gas , and plasma . However , advances in experimental techniques have revealed other previously theoretical phases , such as Bose – Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates . 
 Ordinary matter is composed of two types of elementary particles : quarks and leptons . For example , the proton is formed of two up quarks and one down quark ; the neutron is formed of two down quarks and one up quark ; and the electron is a kind of lepton . An atom consists of an atomic nucleus , made up of protons and neutrons , and electrons that orbit the nucleus . Because most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus , which is made up of baryons , astronomers often use the term baryonic matter to describe ordinary matter , although a small fraction of this " baryonic matter " is electrons . 
 Soon after the Big Bang , primordial protons and neutrons formed from the quark – gluon plasma of the early Universe as it cooled below two trillion degrees . A few minutes later , in a process known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis , nuclei formed from the primordial protons and neutrons . This nucleosynthesis formed lighter elements , those with small atomic numbers up to lithium and beryllium , but the abundance of heavier elements dropped off sharply with increasing atomic number . Some boron may have been formed at this time , but the next heavier element , carbon , was not be formed in significant amounts . Big Bang nucleosynthesis shut down after about 20 minutes due to the rapid drop in temperature and density of the expanding Universe . Subsequent formation of heavier elements resulted from stellar nucleosynthesis and supernova nucleosynthesis . 
 = = = Particles = = = 
 Ordinary matter and the forces that act on matter can be described in terms of elementary particles . These particles are sometimes described as being fundamental , since they have an unknown substructure , and it is unknown whether or not they are composed of smaller and even more fundamental particles . Of central importance is the Standard Model , a theory that is concerned with electromagnetic interactions and the weak and strong nuclear interactions . The Standard Model is supported by the experimental confirmation of the existence of particles that compose matter : quarks and leptons , and their corresponding " antimatter " duals , as well as the force particles that mediate interactions : the photon , the W and Z bosons , and the gluon . The Standard Model predicted the existence of the recently discovered Higgs boson , a particle that is a manifestation of a field within the Universe that can endow particles with mass . Because of its success in explaining a wide variety of experimental results , the Standard Model is sometimes regarded as a " theory of almost everything " . The Standard Model does not , however , accommodate gravity . A true force @-@ particle " theory of everything " has not been attained . 
 = = = = Hadrons = = = = 
 A hadron is a composite particle made of quarks held together by the strong force . Hadrons are categorized into two families : baryons ( such as protons and neutrons ) made of three quarks , and mesons ( such as pions ) made of one quark and one antiquark . Of the hadrons , protons are stable , and neutrons bound within atomic nuclei are stable . Other hadrons are unstable under ordinary conditions and are thus insignificant constituents of the modern Universe . From approximately 10 − 6 seconds after the Big Bang , during a period is known as the hadron epoch , the temperature of the universe had fallen sufficiently to allow quarks to bind together into hadrons , and the mass of the Universe was dominated by hadrons . Initially the temperature was high enough to allow the formation of hadron / anti @-@ hadron pairs , which kept matter and antimatter in thermal equilibrium . However , as the temperature of the Universe continued to fall , hadron / anti @-@ hadron pairs were no longer produced . Most of the hadrons and anti @-@ hadrons were then eliminated in particle @-@ antiparticle annihilation reactions , leaving a small residual of hadrons by the time the Universe was about one second old . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A lepton is an elementary , half @-@ integer spin particle that does not undergo strong interactions but is subject to the Pauli exclusion principle ; no two leptons of the same species can be in exactly the same state at the same time . Two main classes of leptons exist : charged leptons ( also known as the electron @-@ like leptons ) , and neutral leptons ( better known as neutrinos ) . Electrons are stable and the most common charged lepton in the Universe , whereas muons and <unk> are unstable particle that quickly decay after being produced in high energy collisions , such as those involving cosmic rays or carried out in particle accelerators . Charged leptons can combine with other particles to form various composite particles such as atoms and positronium . The electron governs nearly all of chemistry , as it is found in atoms and is directly tied to all chemical properties . Neutrinos rarely interact with anything , and are consequently rarely observed . Neutrinos stream throughout the Universe but rarely interact with normal matter . 
 The lepton epoch was the period in the evolution of the early Universe in which the leptons dominated the mass of the Universe . It started roughly 1 second after the Big Bang , after the majority of hadrons and anti @-@ hadrons annihilated each other at the end of the hadron epoch . During the lepton epoch the temperature of the Universe was still high enough to create lepton / anti @-@ lepton pairs , so leptons and anti @-@ leptons were in thermal equilibrium . Approximately 10 seconds after the Big Bang , the temperature of the Universe had fallen to the point where lepton / anti @-@ lepton pairs were no longer created . Most leptons and anti @-@ leptons were then eliminated in annihilation reactions , leaving a small residue of leptons . The mass of the Universe was then dominated by photons as it entered the following photon epoch . 
 = = = = Photons = = = = 
 A photon is the quantum of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation . It is the force carrier for the electromagnetic force , even when static via virtual photons . The effects of this force are easily observable at the microscopic and at the macroscopic level because the photon has zero rest mass ; this allows long distance interactions . Like all elementary particles , photons are currently best explained by quantum mechanics and exhibit wave – particle duality , exhibiting properties of waves and of particles . 
 The photon epoch started after most leptons and anti @-@ leptons were annihilated at the end of the lepton epoch , about 10 seconds after the Big Bang . Atomic nuclei were created in the process of nucleosynthesis which occurred during the first few minutes of the photon epoch . For the remainder of the photon epoch the Universe contained a hot dense plasma of nuclei , electrons and photons . About 380 @,@ 000 years after the Big Bang , the temperature of the Universe fell to the point where nuclei could combine with electrons to create neutral atoms . As a result , photons no longer interacted frequently with matter and the Universe became transparent . The highly redshifted photons from this period form the cosmic microwave background . Tiny variations in temperature and density detectable in the CMB were the early " seeds " from which all subsequent structure formation took place . 
 = = Cosmological models = = 
 = = = Model of the Universe based on general relativity = = = 
 General relativity is the geometric theory of gravitation published by Albert Einstein in 1915 and the current description of gravitation in modern physics . It is the basis of current cosmological models of the Universe . General relativity generalizes special relativity and Newton 's law of universal gravitation , providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time , or spacetime . In particular , the curvature of spacetime is directly related to the energy and momentum of whatever matter and radiation are present . The relation is specified by the Einstein field equations , a system of partial differential equations . In general relativity , the distribution of matter and energy determines the geometry of spacetime , which in turn describes the acceleration of matter . Therefore , solutions of the Einstein field equations describe the evolution of the Universe . Combined with measurements of the amount , type , and distribution of matter in the Universe , the equations of general relativity describe the evolution of the Universe over time . 
 With the assumption of the cosmological principle that the Universe is homogeneous and isotropic everywhere , a specific solution of the field equations that describes the Universe is the metric tensor called the Friedmann – Lemaître – Robertson – Walker metric , 
 <formula> 
 where ( r , θ , φ ) correspond to a spherical coordinate system . This metric has only two undetermined parameters . An overall dimensionless length scale factor R describes the size scale of the Universe as a function of time ; an increase in R is the expansion of the Universe . A curvature index k describes the geometry . The index k is defined so that it can be only 0 , corresponding to flat Euclidean geometry , 1 , corresponding to a space of positive curvature , or − 1 , a space of positive or negative curvature . The value of R as a function of time t depends upon k and the cosmological constant Λ . The cosmological constant represents the energy density of the vacuum of space and could be related to dark energy . The equation describing how R varies with time is known as the Friedmann equation after its inventor , Alexander Friedmann . 
 The solutions for R ( t ) depend on k and Λ , but some qualitative features of such solutions are general . First and most importantly , the length scale R of the Universe can remain constant only if the Universe is perfectly isotropic with positive curvature ( k = 1 ) and has one precise value of density everywhere , as first noted by Albert Einstein . However , this equilibrium is unstable : because the Universe is known to be inhomogeneous on smaller scales , R must change over time . When R changes , all the spatial distances in the Universe change in tandem ; there is an overall expansion or contraction of space itself . This accounts for the observation that galaxies appear to be flying apart ; the space between them is stretching . The stretching of space also accounts for the apparent paradox that two galaxies can be 40 billion light years apart , although they started from the same point 13 @.@ 8 billion years ago and never moved faster than the speed of light . 
 Second , all solutions suggest that there was a gravitational singularity in the past , when R went to zero and matter and energy were infinitely dense . It may seem that this conclusion is uncertain because it is based on the questionable assumptions of perfect homogeneity and isotropy ( the cosmological principle ) and that only the gravitational interaction is significant . However , the Penrose – Hawking singularity theorems show that a singularity should exist for very general conditions . Hence , according to Einstein 's field equations , R grew rapidly from an unimaginably hot , dense state that existed immediately following this singularity ( when R had a small , finite value ) ; this is the essence of the Big Bang model of the Universe . Understanding the singularity of the Big Bang likely requires a quantum theory of gravity , which has not yet been formulated . 
 Third , the curvature index k determines the sign of the mean spatial curvature of spacetime averaged over sufficiently large length scales ( greater than about a billion light years ) . If k = 1 , the curvature is positive and the Universe has a finite volume . Such universes are often visualized as a three @-@ dimensional sphere embedded in a four @-@ dimensional space . Conversely , if k is zero or negative , the Universe has infinite volume . It may seem counter @-@ intuitive that an infinite and yet infinitely dense Universe could be created in a single instant at the Big Bang when R = 0 , but exactly that is predicted mathematically when k does not equal 1 . By analogy , an infinite plane has zero curvature but infinite area , whereas an infinite cylinder is finite in one direction and a torus is finite in both . A toroidal Universe could behave like a normal Universe with periodic boundary conditions . 
 The ultimate fate of the Universe is still unknown , because it depends critically on the curvature index k and the cosmological constant Λ . If the Universe were sufficiently dense , k would equal + 1 , meaning that its average curvature throughout is positive and the Universe will eventually <unk> in a Big Crunch , possibly starting a new Universe in a Big Bounce . Conversely , if the Universe were insufficiently dense , k would equal 0 or − 1 and the Universe would expand forever , cooling off and eventually reaching the Big Freeze and the heat death of the Universe . Modern data suggests that the rate of expansion of the Universe is not decreasing , as originally expected , but increasing ; if this continues indefinitely , the Universe may eventually reach a Big Rip . <unk> , the Universe appears to be flat ( k = 0 ) , with an overall density that is very close to the critical value between <unk> and eternal expansion . 
 = = = Multiverse hypothesis = = = 
 Some speculative theories have proposed that our Universe is but one of a set of disconnected universes , collectively denoted as the multiverse , challenging or enhancing more limited definitions of the Universe . Scientific multiverse models are distinct from concepts such as alternate planes of consciousness and simulated reality . 
 Max Tegmark developed a four @-@ part classification scheme for the different types of <unk> that scientists have suggested in various problem domains . An example of such a model is the chaotic inflation model of the early universe . Another is the many @-@ worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics . Parallel worlds are generated in a manner similar to quantum superposition and <unk> , with all states of the wave function being realized in separate worlds . Effectively , the multiverse evolves as a universal wavefunction . If the Big Bang that created our multiverse created an ensemble of <unk> , the wave function of the ensemble would be entangled in this sense . 
 The least controversial category of multiverse in Tegmark 's scheme is Level I , which describes distant spacetime events " in our own universe " , but suggests that statistical analysis exploiting the anthropic principle provides an opportunity to test multiverse theories in some cases . If space is infinite , or sufficiently large and uniform , identical instances of the history of Earth 's entire Hubble volume occur every so often , simply by chance . Tegmark calculated our nearest so @-@ called doppelgänger , is <unk> meters away from us ( a double exponential function larger than a <unk> ) . In principle , it would be impossible to scientifically verify an identical Hubble volume . However , it does follow as a fairly straightforward consequence from otherwise unrelated scientific observations and theories . 
 It is possible to conceive of disconnected spacetimes , each existing but unable to interact with one another . An easily visualized metaphor is a group of separate soap bubbles , in which observers living on one soap bubble cannot interact with those on other soap bubbles , even in principle . According to one common terminology , each " soap bubble " of spacetime is denoted as a universe , whereas our particular spacetime is denoted as the Universe , just as we call our moon the Moon . The entire collection of these separate spacetimes is denoted as the multiverse . With this terminology , different Universes are not causally connected to each other . In principle , the other unconnected Universes may have different <unk> and topologies of spacetime , different forms of matter and energy , and different physical laws and physical constants , although such possibilities are purely speculative . Others consider each of several bubbles created as part of chaotic inflation to be separate Universes , though in this model these universes all share a causal origin . 
 = = = Fine @-@ tuned Universe = = = 
 The fine @-@ tuned Universe is the proposition that the conditions that allow life in the Universe can only occur when certain universal fundamental physical constants lie within a very narrow range , so that if any of several fundamental constants were only slightly different , the Universe would be unlikely to be conducive to the establishment and development of matter , astronomical structures , elemental diversity , or life as it is understood . The proposition is discussed among philosophers , scientists , theologians , and proponents and detractors of creationism . 
 = = Historical development = = 
 Historically , there have been many ideas of the cosmos ( cosmologies ) and its origin ( <unk> ) . Theories of an impersonal Universe governed by physical laws were first proposed by the Greeks and Indians . Ancient Chinese philosophy encompassed the notion of the Universe including both all of space and all of time . Over the centuries , improvements in astronomical observations and theories of motion and gravitation led to ever more accurate descriptions of the Universe . The modern era of cosmology began with Albert Einstein 's 1915 general theory of relativity , which made it possible to quantitatively predict the origin , evolution , and conclusion of the Universe as a whole . Most modern , accepted theories of cosmology are based on general relativity and , more specifically , the predicted Big Bang . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Many cultures have stories describing the origin of the world and universe . Cultures generally regard these stories as having some truth . There are however many differing beliefs in how these stories apply amongst those believing in a supernatural origin , ranging from a god directly creating the Universe as it is now to a god just setting the " wheels in motion " ( for example via mechanisms such as the big bang and evolution ) . 
 <unk> and anthropologists who study myths have developed various classification schemes for the various themes that appear in creation stories . For example , in one type of story , the world is born from a world egg ; such stories include the Finnish epic poem Kalevala , the Chinese story of <unk> or the Indian Brahmanda Purana . In related stories , the Universe is created by a single entity emanating or producing something by him- or herself , as in the Tibetan Buddhism concept of Adi @-@ Buddha , the ancient Greek story of Gaia ( Mother Earth ) , the Aztec goddess <unk> myth , the ancient Egyptian god Atum story , and the Judeo @-@ Christian Genesis creation narrative in which the Abrahamic God created the Universe . In another type of story , the Universe is created from the union of male and female deities , as in the Maori story of Rangi and Papa . In other stories , the Universe is created by crafting it from pre @-@ existing materials , such as the corpse of a dead god — as from Tiamat in the Babylonian epic Enuma Elish or from the giant Ymir in Norse mythology – or from chaotic materials , as in Izanagi and Izanami in Japanese mythology . In other stories , the Universe emanates from fundamental principles , such as Brahman and <unk> , the creation myth of the Serers , or the yin and yang of the Tao . 
 = = = Philosophical models = = = 
 The pre @-@ Socratic Greek philosophers and Indian philosophers developed some of the earliest philosophical concepts of the Universe . The earliest Greek philosophers noted that appearances can be deceiving , and sought to understand the underlying reality behind the appearances . In particular , they noted the ability of matter to change forms ( e.g. , ice to water to steam ) and several philosophers proposed that all the physical materials in the world are different forms of a single primordial material , or <unk> . The first to do so was Thales , who proposed this material to be water . Thales ' student , Anaximander , proposed that everything came from the limitless <unk> . Anaximenes proposed the primordial material to be air on account of its perceived attractive and repulsive qualities that cause the <unk> to condense or dissociate into different forms . Anaxagoras proposed the principle of Nous ( Mind ) , while Heraclitus proposed fire ( and spoke of logos ) . Empedocles proposed the elements to be earth , water , air and fire . His four @-@ element model became very popular . Like Pythagoras , Plato believed that all things were composed of number , with Empedocles ' elements taking the form of the Platonic solids . Democritus , and later philosophers — most notably Leucippus — proposed that the Universe is composed of indivisible atoms moving through void ( vacuum ) , although Aristotle did not believe that to be feasible because air , like water , offers resistance to motion . Air will immediately rush in to fill a void , and moreover , without resistance , it would do so indefinitely fast . 
 Although Heraclitus argued for eternal change , his contemporary Parmenides made the radical suggestion that all change is an illusion , that the true underlying reality is eternally unchanging and of a single nature . Parmenides denoted this reality as τὸ ἐν ( The One ) . Parmenides ' idea seemed implausible to many Greeks , but his student Zeno of Elea challenged them with several famous paradoxes . Aristotle responded to these paradoxes by developing the notion of a potential countable infinity , as well as the infinitely divisible continuum . Unlike the eternal and unchanging cycles of time , he believed that the world is bounded by the celestial spheres and that cumulative stellar magnitude is only finitely multiplicative . 
 The Indian philosopher Kanada , founder of the <unk> school , developed a notion of atomism and proposed that light and heat were varieties of the same substance . In the 5th century AD , the Buddhist <unk> philosopher <unk> proposed atoms to be point @-@ sized , <unk> , and made of energy . They denied the existence of substantial matter and proposed that movement consisted of momentary flashes of a stream of energy . 
