 The notion of temporal <unk> was inspired by the doctrine of creation shared by the three Abrahamic religions : Judaism , Christianity and Islam . The Christian philosopher , John Philoponus , presented the philosophical arguments against the ancient Greek notion of an infinite past and future . Philoponus ' arguments against an infinite past were used by the early Muslim philosopher , Al @-@ Kindi ( <unk> ) ; the Jewish philosopher , Saadia Gaon ( Saadia ben Joseph ) ; and the Muslim theologian , Al @-@ Ghazali ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Astronomical concepts = = = 
 Astronomical models of the Universe were proposed soon after astronomy began with the Babylonian astronomers , who viewed the Universe as a flat disk floating in the ocean , and this forms the premise for early Greek maps like those of Anaximander and Hecataeus of Miletus . 
 Later Greek philosophers , observing the motions of the heavenly bodies , were concerned with developing models of the Universe @-@ based more profoundly on empirical evidence . The first coherent model was proposed by Eudoxus of <unk> . According to Aristotle 's physical interpretation of the model , celestial spheres eternally rotate with uniform motion around a stationary Earth . Normal matter is entirely contained within the terrestrial sphere . 
 De Mundo ( composed before 250 BC or between 350 and 200 BC ) , stated , Five elements , situated in spheres in five regions , the less being in each case surrounded by the greater — namely , earth surrounded by water , water by air , air by fire , and fire by ether — make up the whole Universe . 
 This model was also refined by Callippus and after concentric spheres were abandoned , it was brought into nearly perfect agreement with astronomical observations by Ptolemy . The success of such a model is largely due to the mathematical fact that any function ( such as the position of a planet ) can be decomposed into a set of circular functions ( the Fourier modes ) . Other Greek scientists , such as the Pythagorean philosopher <unk> , postulated ( according to Stobaeus account ) that at the center of the Universe was a " central fire " around which the Earth , Sun , Moon and Planets revolved in uniform circular motion . 
 The Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known individual to propose a heliocentric model of the Universe . Though the original text has been lost , a reference in Archimedes ' book The Sand Reckoner describes Aristarchus 's heliocentric model . Archimedes wrote : ( translated into English ) : 
 " You , King <unk> , are aware the Universe is the name given by most astronomers to the sphere the center of which is the center of the Earth , while its radius is equal to the straight line between the center of the Sun and the center of the Earth . This is the common account as you have heard from astronomers . But Aristarchus has brought out a book consisting of certain hypotheses , wherein it appears , as a consequence of the assumptions made , that the Universe is many times greater than the Universe just mentioned . His hypotheses are that the fixed stars and the Sun remain unmoved , that the Earth revolves about the Sun on the circumference of a circle , the Sun lying in the middle of the orbit , and that the sphere of fixed stars , situated about the same center as the Sun , is so great that the circle in which he supposes the Earth to revolve bears such a proportion to the distance of the fixed stars as the center of the sphere bears to its surface " 
 Aristarchus thus believed the stars to be very far away , and saw this as the reason why stellar parallax had not been observed , that is , the stars had not been observed to move relative each other as the Earth moved around the Sun . The stars are in fact much farther away than the distance that was generally assumed in ancient times , which is why stellar parallax is only detectable with precision instruments . The geocentric model , consistent with planetary parallax , was assumed to be an explanation for the <unk> of the parallel phenomenon , stellar parallax . The rejection of the heliocentric view was apparently quite strong , as the following passage from Plutarch suggests ( On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon ) : 
 " Cleanthes [ a contemporary of Aristarchus and head of the Stoics ] thought it was the duty of the Greeks to indict Aristarchus of Samos on the charge of impiety for putting in motion the Hearth of the Universe [ i.e. the Earth ] , . . . supposing the heaven to remain at rest and the Earth to revolve in an oblique circle , while it rotates , at the same time , about its own axis " 
 The only other astronomer from antiquity known by name who supported Aristarchus 's heliocentric model was Seleucus of Seleucia , a Hellenistic astronomer who lived a century after Aristarchus . According to Plutarch , Seleucus was the first to prove the heliocentric system through reasoning , but it is not known what arguments he used . Seleucus ' arguments for a heliocentric cosmology were probably related to the phenomenon of tides . According to Strabo ( 1 @.@ 1 @.@ 9 ) , Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon , and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon 's position relative to the Sun . Alternatively , he may have proved <unk> by determining the constants of a geometric model for it , and by developing methods to compute planetary positions using this model , like what Nicolaus Copernicus later did in the 16th century . During the Middle Ages , heliocentric models were also proposed by the Indian astronomer Aryabhata , and by the Persian astronomers <unk> and Al @-@ <unk> . 
 The Aristotelian model was accepted in the Western world for roughly two millennia , until Copernicus revived Aristarchus 's perspective that the astronomical data could be explained more plausibly if the earth rotated on its axis and if the sun were placed at the center of the Universe . 
 In the center rests the Sun . For who would place this lamp of a very beautiful temple in another or better place than this <unk> it can illuminate everything at the same time ? 
 As noted by Copernicus himself , the notion that the Earth rotates is very old , dating at least to <unk> ( c . 450 BC ) , Heraclides <unk> ( c . 350 BC ) and <unk> the Pythagorean . Roughly a century before Copernicus , the Christian scholar Nicholas of Cusa also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis in his book , On Learned Ignorance ( 1440 ) . Al @-@ <unk> also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis . Empirical evidence for the Earth 's rotation on its axis , using the phenomenon of comets , was given by Tusi ( 1201 – 1274 ) and Ali <unk> ( 1403 – 1474 ) . 
 This cosmology was accepted by Isaac Newton , Christiaan Huygens and later scientists . Edmund Halley ( 1720 ) and Jean @-@ Philippe de <unk> ( 1744 ) noted independently that the assumption of an infinite space filled uniformly with stars would lead to the prediction that the nighttime sky would be as bright as the Sun itself ; this became known as Olbers ' paradox in the 19th century . Newton believed that an infinite space uniformly filled with matter would cause infinite forces and instabilities causing the matter to be crushed inwards under its own gravity . This instability was clarified in 1902 by the Jeans instability criterion . One solution to these paradoxes is the Charlier Universe , in which the matter is arranged hierarchically ( systems of orbiting bodies that are themselves orbiting in a larger system , ad infinitum ) in a fractal way such that the Universe has a negligibly small overall density ; such a cosmological model had also been proposed earlier in 1761 by Johann Heinrich Lambert . A significant astronomical advance of the 18th century was the realization by Thomas Wright , Immanuel Kant and others of nebulae . 
 The modern era of physical cosmology began in 1917 , when Albert Einstein first applied his general theory of relativity to model the structure and dynamics of the Universe . 
 = United States Declaration of Independence = 
 The Declaration of Independence is the statement adopted by the Second Continental Congress meeting at Philadelphia , Pennsylvania on July 4 , 1776 , which announced that the thirteen American colonies , then at war with the Kingdom of Great Britain , regarded themselves as thirteen newly independent sovereign states , and no longer under British rule . Instead they formed a new nation — the United States of America . John Adams was a leader in pushing for independence , which was passed on July 2 with no opposing vote cast . A committee of five had already drafted the formal declaration , to be ready when Congress voted on independence . The term " Declaration of Independence " is not used in the document itself . 
 John Adams persuaded the committee to select Thomas Jefferson to compose the original draft of the document , which Congress would edit to produce the final version . The Declaration was ultimately a formal explanation of why Congress had voted on July 2 to declare independence from Great Britain , more than a year after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War . The next day , July 3 , John Adams wrote to his wife Abigail : " The Second Day of July 1776 , will be the most memorable <unk> , in the History of America . " But the national birthday , Independence Day , is celebrated on July 4 , the date that the Declaration of Independence was signed . 
 After ratifying the text on July 4 , Congress issued the Declaration of Independence in several forms . It was initially published as the printed Dunlap broadside that was widely distributed and read to the public . The source copy used for this printing has been lost , and may have been a copy in Thomas Jefferson 's hand . Jefferson 's original draft , complete with changes made by John Adams and Benjamin Franklin , and Jefferson 's notes of changes made by Congress , are preserved at the Library of Congress . The best known version of the Declaration , a signed copy that is popularly regarded as the official document , is displayed at the National Archives in Washington , D.C. This engrossed copy was ordered by Congress on July 19 , and signed primarily on August 2 . 
 The sources and interpretation of the Declaration have been the subject of much scholarly inquiry . The Declaration justified the independence of the United States by listing colonial grievances against King George III , and by asserting certain natural and legal rights , including a right of revolution . Having served its original purpose in announcing independence , references to the text of the Declaration were few in the following years . Abraham Lincoln made it the centerpiece of his rhetoric ( as in the Gettysburg Address of 1863 ) , and his policies . Since then , it has become a well @-@ known statement on human rights , particularly its second sentence : 
 We hold these truths to be self @-@ evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights , that among these are Life , Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness . 
 This has been called " one of the best @-@ known sentences in the English language " , containing " the most potent and consequential words in American history " . The passage came to represent a moral standard to which the United States should strive . This view was notably promoted by Abraham Lincoln , who considered the Declaration to be the foundation of his political philosophy , and argued that the Declaration is a statement of principles through which the United States Constitution should be interpreted . 
 The United States Declaration of Independence inspired many other similar documents in other countries in the 18th and 19th centuries , spreading to the Low Countries , and then to the Caribbean , Spanish America , the Balkans , West Africa , and Central Europe in the decades up to 1848 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Believe me , dear Sir : there is not in the British empire a man who more cordially loves a union with Great Britain than I do . But , by the God that made me , I will cease to exist before I yield to a connection on such terms as the British Parliament propose ; and in this , I think I speak the sentiments of America . 
 By the time the Declaration of Independence was adopted in July 1776 , the Thirteen Colonies and Great Britain had been at war for more than a year . Relations between the colonies and the mother country had been deteriorating since 1763 . Parliament enacted a series of measures to increase revenue from the colonies . Parliament believed that these acts , such as the Stamp Act of 1765 and the Townshend Acts of 1767 , were a legitimate means of having the colonies pay their fair share of the costs to keep the colonies in the British Empire . 
 Many colonists , however , had developed a different conception of the empire . Because the colonies were not directly represented in Parliament , colonists argued that Parliament had no right to levy taxes upon them . This tax dispute was part of a larger divergence between British and American interpretations of the British Constitution and the extent of Parliament 's authority in the colonies . The orthodox British view , dating from the Glorious Revolution of 1688 , was that Parliament was the supreme authority throughout the empire , and so by definition anything Parliament did was constitutional . In the colonies , however , the idea had developed that the British Constitution recognized certain fundamental rights that no government — not even Parliament — could violate . After the Townshend Acts , some essayists even began to question whether Parliament had any legitimate jurisdiction in the colonies at all . Anticipating the arrangement of the British Commonwealth , by 1774 American writers such as Samuel Adams , James Wilson , and Thomas Jefferson were arguing that Parliament was the legislature of Great Britain only , and that the colonies , which had their own legislatures , were connected to the rest of the empire only through their allegiance to the Crown . 
 = = = Congress convenes = = = 
 The issue of Parliament 's authority in the colonies became a crisis after Parliament passed the Coercive Acts ( known as the Intolerable Acts in the colonies ) in 1774 to punish the Province of Massachusetts for the Boston Tea Party of 1773 . Many colonists saw the Coercive Acts as a violation of the British Constitution and thus a threat to the liberties of all of British America . In September 1774 , the First Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia to coordinate a response . Congress organized a boycott of British goods and petitioned the king for repeal of the acts . These measures were unsuccessful because King George and the ministry of Prime Minister Lord North were determined not to retreat on the question of parliamentary supremacy . As the king wrote to North in November 1774 , " blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent " . 
 Even after fighting in the American Revolutionary War began at Lexington and Concord in April 1775 , most colonists still hoped for reconciliation with Great Britain . When the Second Continental Congress convened at the Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia in May 1775 , some delegates hoped for eventual independence , but no one yet advocated declaring it . Although many colonists no longer believed that Parliament had any sovereignty over them , they still professed loyalty to King George , whom they hoped would intercede on their behalf . They were to be disappointed : in late 1775 , the king rejected Congress 's second petition , issued a Proclamation of Rebellion , and announced before Parliament on October 26 that he was considering " friendly offers of foreign assistance " to suppress the rebellion . A pro @-@ American minority in Parliament warned that the government was driving the colonists toward independence . 
 = = Toward independence = = 
 In January 1776 , just as it became clear in the colonies that the king was not inclined to act as a conciliator , Thomas Paine 's pamphlet Common Sense was published . Paine , who had only recently arrived in the colonies from England , argued in favor of colonial independence , advocating republicanism as an alternative to monarchy and hereditary rule . Common Sense introduced no new ideas , and probably had little direct effect on Congress 's thinking about independence ; its importance was in stimulating public debate on a topic that few had previously dared to openly discuss . Public support for separation from Great Britain steadily increased after the publication of Paine 's enormously popular pamphlet . 
 Although some colonists still held out hope for reconciliation , developments in early 1776 further strengthened public support for independence . In February 1776 , colonists learned of Parliament 's passage of the Prohibitory Act , which established a blockade of American ports and declared American ships to be enemy vessels . John Adams , a strong supporter of independence , believed that Parliament had effectively declared American independence before Congress had been able to . Adams labeled the Prohibitory Act the " Act of Independency " , calling it " a compleat Dismemberment of the British Empire " . Support for declaring independence grew even more when it was confirmed that King George had hired German mercenaries to use against his American subjects . 
 Despite this growing popular support for independence , Congress lacked the clear authority to declare it . Delegates had been elected to Congress by thirteen different governments — which included extralegal conventions , ad hoc committees , and elected assemblies — and were bound by the instructions given to them . Regardless of their personal opinions , delegates could not vote to declare independence unless their instructions permitted such an action . Several colonies , in fact , expressly prohibited their delegates from taking any steps towards separation from Great Britain , while other delegations had instructions that were ambiguous on the issue . As public sentiment for separation from Great Britain grew , advocates of independence sought to have the Congressional instructions revised . For Congress to declare independence , a majority of delegations would need authorization to vote for independence , and at least one colonial government would need to specifically instruct ( or grant permission for ) its delegation to propose a declaration of independence in Congress . Between April and July 1776 , a " complex political war " was waged to bring this about . 
 = = = Revising instructions = = = 
 In the campaign to revise Congressional instructions , many Americans formally expressed their support for separation from Great Britain in what were effectively state and local declarations of independence . Historian Pauline Maier identified more than ninety such declarations that were issued throughout the Thirteen Colonies from April to July 1776 . These " declarations " took a variety of forms . Some were formal , written instructions for Congressional delegations , such as the Halifax Resolves of April 12 , with which North Carolina became the first colony to explicitly authorize its delegates to vote for independence . Others were legislative acts that officially ended British rule in individual colonies , such as on May 4 , when the Rhode Island legislature became the first to declare its independence from Great Britain . Many " declarations " were resolutions adopted at town or county meetings that offered support for independence . A few came in the form of jury instructions , such as the statement issued on April 23 , 1776 , by Chief Justice William Henry Drayton of South Carolina : " the law of the land authorizes me to declare ... that George the Third , King of Great Britain ... has no authority over us , and we owe no obedience to him . " Most of these declarations are now obscure , having been overshadowed by the declaration approved by Congress on July 4 . 
 Some colonies held back from endorsing independence . Resistance was centered in the middle colonies of New York , New Jersey , Maryland , Pennsylvania , and Delaware . Advocates of independence saw Pennsylvania as the key : if that colony could be converted to the pro @-@ independence cause , it was believed that the others would follow . On May 1 , however , opponents of independence retained control of the Pennsylvania Assembly in a special election that had focused on the question of independence . In response , on May 10 Congress passed a resolution , which had been promoted by John Adams and Richard Henry Lee , calling on colonies without a " government sufficient to the exigencies of their affairs " to adopt new governments . The resolution passed unanimously , and was even supported by Pennsylvania 's John Dickinson , the leader of the anti @-@ independence faction in Congress , who believed that it did not apply to his colony . 
 = = = May 15 preamble = = = 
 As was the custom , Congress appointed a committee to draft a preamble to explain the purpose of the resolution . John Adams wrote the preamble , which stated that because King George had rejected reconciliation and was hiring foreign mercenaries to use against the colonies , " it is necessary that the exercise of every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed " . Adams 's preamble was meant to encourage the overthrow of the governments of Pennsylvania and Maryland , which were still under proprietary governance . Congress passed the preamble on May 15 after several days of debate , but four of the middle colonies voted against it , and the Maryland delegation walked out in protest . Adams regarded his May 15 preamble effectively as an American declaration of independence , although a formal declaration would still have to be made . 
 = = = Lee 's resolution and the final push = = = 
 On the same day that Congress passed Adams 's radical preamble , the Virginia Convention set the stage for a formal Congressional declaration of independence . On May 15 , the Convention instructed Virginia 's congressional delegation " to propose to that respectable body to declare the United Colonies free and independent States , absolved from all allegiance to , or dependence upon , the Crown or Parliament of Great Britain " . In accordance with those instructions , Richard Henry Lee of Virginia presented a three @-@ part resolution to Congress on June 7 . The motion , which was seconded by John Adams , called on Congress to declare independence , form foreign alliances , and prepare a plan of colonial confederation . The part of the resolution relating to declaring independence read : 
 Resolved , that these United Colonies are , and of right ought to be , free and independent States , that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown , and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain is , and ought to be , totally dissolved . 
 Lee 's resolution met with resistance in the ensuing debate . Opponents of the resolution , while conceding that reconciliation with Great Britain was unlikely , argued that declaring independence was premature , and that securing foreign aid should take priority . Advocates of the resolution countered that foreign governments would not intervene in an internal British struggle , and so a formal declaration of independence was needed before foreign aid was possible . All Congress needed to do , they insisted , was to " declare a fact which already exists " . Delegates from Pennsylvania , Delaware , New Jersey , Maryland , and New York were still not yet authorized to vote for independence , however , and some of them threatened to leave Congress if the resolution were adopted . Congress therefore voted on June 10 to postpone further discussion of Lee 's resolution for three weeks . Until then , Congress decided that a committee should prepare a document announcing and explaining independence in the event that Lee 's resolution was approved when it was brought up again in July . 
 Support for a Congressional declaration of independence was consolidated in the final weeks of June 1776 . On June 14 , the Connecticut Assembly instructed its delegates to propose independence , and the following day the legislatures of New Hampshire and Delaware authorized their delegates to declare independence . In Pennsylvania , political struggles ended with the dissolution of the colonial assembly , and on June 18 a new Conference of Committees under Thomas McKean authorized Pennsylvania 's delegates to declare independence . On June 15 , the Provincial Congress of New Jersey , which had been governing the province since January 1776 , resolved that Royal Governor William Franklin was " an enemy to the liberties of this country " and had him arrested . On June 21 , they chose new delegates to Congress and empowered them to join in a declaration of independence . 
 Only Maryland and New York had yet to authorize independence towards the end of June . Previously , when the Continental Congress had adopted Adams 's radical May 15 preamble , Maryland 's delegates walked out and sent to the Annapolis Convention for instructions . On May 20 , the Annapolis Convention rejected Adams 's preamble , instructing its delegates to remain against independence , but Samuel Chase went to Maryland and , thanks to local resolutions in favor of independence , was able to get the Annapolis Convention to change its mind on June 28 . Only the New York delegates were unable to get revised instructions . When Congress had been considering the resolution of independence on June 8 , the New York Provincial Congress told the delegates to wait . But on June 30 , the Provincial Congress evacuated New York as British forces approached , and would not convene again until July 10 . This meant that New York 's delegates would not be authorized to declare independence until after Congress had made its decision . 
 = = Draft and adoption = = 
 While political maneuvering was setting the stage for an official declaration of independence , a document explaining the decision was being written . On June 11 , 1776 , Congress appointed a " Committee of Five " , consisting of John Adams of Massachusetts , Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania , Thomas Jefferson of Virginia , Robert R. Livingston of New York , and Roger Sherman of Connecticut , to draft a declaration . Because the committee left no minutes , there is some uncertainty about how the drafting process proceeded — accounts written many years later by Jefferson and Adams , although frequently cited , are contradictory and not entirely reliable . What is certain is that the committee , after discussing the general outline that the document should follow , decided that Jefferson would write the first draft . The committee in general , and Jefferson in particular , thought Adams should write the document , but Adams persuaded the committee to choose Jefferson and promised to consult with Jefferson personally . Considering Congress 's busy schedule , Jefferson probably had limited time for writing over the next seventeen days , and likely wrote the draft quickly . He then consulted the others , made some changes , and then produced another copy incorporating these alterations . The committee presented this copy to the Congress on June 28 , 1776 . The title of the document was " A Declaration by the Representatives of the United States of America , in General Congress assembled . " 
 Congress ordered that the draft " lie on the table " . For two days Congress methodically edited Jefferson 's primary document , shortening it by a fourth , removing unnecessary wording , and improving sentence structure . Congress removed Jefferson 's assertion that Britain had forced slavery on the colonies , in order to moderate the document and appease persons in Britain who supported the Revolution . Although Jefferson wrote that Congress had " mangled " his draft version , the Declaration that was finally produced , according to his biographer John Ferling , was " the majestic document that inspired both contemporaries and posterity . " 
 On Monday , July 1 , having tabled the draft of the declaration , Congress resolved itself into a committee of the whole , with Benjamin Harrison of Virginia presiding , and resumed debate on Lee 's resolution of independence . John Dickinson made one last effort to delay the decision , arguing that Congress should not declare independence without first securing a foreign alliance and finalizing the Articles of Confederation . John Adams gave a speech in reply to Dickinson , restating the case for an immediate declaration . 
 After a long day of speeches , a vote was taken . As always , each colony cast a single vote ; the delegation for each colony — numbering two to seven members — voted amongst themselves to determine the colony 's vote . Pennsylvania and South Carolina voted against declaring independence . The New York delegation , lacking permission to vote for independence , abstained . Delaware cast no vote because the delegation was split between Thomas McKean ( who voted yes ) and George Read ( who voted no ) . The remaining nine delegations voted in favor of independence , which meant that the resolution had been approved by the committee of the whole . The next step was for the resolution to be voted upon by the Congress itself . Edward Rutledge of South Carolina , who was opposed to Lee 's resolution but desirous of unanimity , moved that the vote be postponed until the following day . 
 On July 2 , South Carolina reversed its position and voted for independence . In the Pennsylvania delegation , Dickinson and Robert Morris abstained , allowing the delegation to vote three @-@ to @-@ two in favor of independence . The tie in the Delaware delegation was broken by the timely arrival of Caesar Rodney , who voted for independence . The New York delegation abstained once again , since they were still not authorized to vote for independence , although they would be allowed to do so by the New York Provincial Congress a week later . The resolution of independence had been adopted with twelve affirmative votes and one abstention . With this , the colonies had officially severed political ties with Great Britain . In a now @-@ famous letter written to his wife on the following day , John Adams predicted that July 2 would become a great American holiday . Adams thought that the vote for independence would be commemorated ; he did not foresee that Americans — including himself — would instead celebrate Independence Day on the date that the announcement of that act was finalized . 
 After voting in favor of the resolution of independence , Congress turned its attention to the committee 's draft of the declaration . Over several days of debate , Congress made a few changes in wording and deleted nearly a fourth of the text , most notably a passage critical of the slave trade , changes that Jefferson resented . On July 4 , 1776 , the wording of the Declaration of Independence was approved and sent to the printer for publication . 
 There is a distinct change in wording from this original Broadside printing of the Declaration to the final official engrossed copy . The word " unanimous " was inserted as a result of a Congressional resolution passed on July 19 , 1776 : 
 Resolved , That the Declaration passed on the 4th , be fairly engrossed on parchment , with the title and stile of " The unanimous declaration of the thirteen United States of America , " and that the same , when engrossed , be signed by every member of Congress . 
 = = Annotated text of the engrossed Declaration = = 
 The Declaration is not divided into formal sections ; but it is often discussed as consisting of five parts : Introduction , the Preamble , the Indictment of King George , the Denunciation of the British people , and the Conclusion . 
 = = Influences and legal status = = 
 Historians have often sought to identify the sources that most influenced the words and political philosophy of the Declaration of Independence . By Jefferson 's own admission , the Declaration contained no original ideas , but was instead a statement of sentiments widely shared by supporters of the American Revolution . As he explained in 1825 : 
 Neither aiming at originality of principle or sentiment , nor yet copied from any particular and previous writing , it was intended to be an expression of the American mind , and to give to that expression the proper tone and spirit called for by the occasion . 
 Jefferson 's most immediate sources were two documents written in June 1776 : his own draft of the preamble of the Constitution of Virginia , and George Mason 's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights . Ideas and phrases from both of these documents appear in the Declaration of Independence . They were , in turn , directly influenced by the 1689 English Declaration of Rights , which formally ended the reign of King James II . During the American Revolution , Jefferson and other Americans looked to the English Declaration of Rights as a model of how to end the reign of an unjust king . The Scottish Declaration of Arbroath ( 1320 ) and the Dutch Act of <unk> ( 1581 ) have also been offered as models for Jefferson 's Declaration , but these models are now accepted by few scholars . 
 Jefferson wrote that a number of authors exerted a general influence on the words of the Declaration . The English political theorist John Locke , whom Jefferson called one of " the three greatest men that have ever lived " , is usually cited as one of the primary influences . In 1922 , historian Carl L. Becker wrote that " Most Americans had absorbed Locke 's works as a kind of political gospel ; and the Declaration , in its form , in its phraseology , follows closely certain sentences in Locke 's second treatise on government . " The extent of Locke 's influence on the American Revolution has been questioned by some subsequent scholars , however . Historian Ray Forrest Harvey declared in 1937 , as he argued for the dominant influence of the Swiss jurist Jean Jacques <unk> , that Jefferson and Locke were at " two opposite poles " in their political philosophy , as evidenced by Jefferson 's use in the Declaration of Independence of the phrase " pursuit of happiness " instead of " property " . Other scholars emphasized the influence of republicanism rather than Locke 's classical liberalism . Historian Garry Wills argued that Jefferson was influenced by the Scottish Enlightenment , particularly Francis Hutcheson , rather than Locke , an interpretation that has been strongly criticized . 
 Legal historian John Phillip Reid has written that the emphasis on the political philosophy of the Declaration has been misplaced . The Declaration is not a philosophical tract about natural rights , argues Reid , but is instead a legal document — an indictment against King George for violating the constitutional rights of the colonists . Historian David Armitage has argued that the Declaration was strongly influenced by de Vattel 's The Law of Nations , the dominant international law treatise of the period , and a book that Benjamin Franklin said was " continually in the hands of the members of our Congress " . Armitage writes that because " Vattel made independence fundamental to his definition of statehood " , the primary purpose of the Declaration was " to express the international legal sovereignty of the United States " . If the United States were to have any hope of being recognized by the European powers , the American revolutionaries had first to make it clear that they were no longer dependent on Great Britain . The Declaration of Independence does not have the force of law domestically , but nevertheless it may help to provide historical and legal clarity about the Constitution and other laws . 
 = = Signing = = 
 The Declaration became official when Congress voted for it on July 4 ; signatures of the delegates were not needed to make it official . The handwritten copy of the Declaration of Independence that was signed by Congress is dated July 4 , 1776 . The signatures of fifty @-@ six delegates are affixed ; however , the exact date each person signed it has long been the subject of debate . Jefferson , Franklin , and Adams all wrote that the Declaration had been signed by Congress on July 4 . But in 1796 , signer Thomas McKean disputed that the Declaration had been signed on July 4 , pointing out that some signers were not then present , including several who were not even elected to Congress until after that date . 
 According to the 1911 record of events by the U.S. State Department , under Secretary Philander C. Knox , the Declaration was transposed on paper , adopted by the Continental Congress , and signed by John Hancock , President of the Congress , on July 4 , 1776 . On August 2 , 1776 , a parchment paper copy of the Declaration was signed by 56 persons . Many of these signers were not present when the original Declaration was adopted on July 4 . One signer , Matthew Thornton from New Hampshire , who was seated in the Continental Congress in November , asked for and received the privilege of adding his signature at that time , and signed on November 4 , 1776 . 
 Historians have generally accepted McKean 's version of events , arguing that the famous signed version of the Declaration was created after July 19 , and was not signed by Congress until August 2 , 1776 . In 1986 , legal historian Wilfred Ritz argued that historians had misunderstood the primary documents and given too much credence to McKean , who had not been present in Congress on July 4 . According to Ritz , about thirty @-@ four delegates signed the Declaration on July 4 , and the others signed on or after August 2 . Historians who reject a July 4 signing maintain that most delegates signed on August 2 , and that those eventual signers who were not present added their names later . Two future U.S. presidents , Thomas Jefferson and John Adams , were among the signatories . 
 The most famous signature on the engrossed copy is that of John Hancock , who , as President of Congress , presumably signed first . Hancock 's large , flamboyant signature became iconic , and John Hancock emerged in the United States as an informal synonym for " signature " . A commonly circulated but apocryphal account claims that after Hancock signed , the delegate from Massachusetts commented , " The British ministry can read that name without spectacles . " Another apocryphal report indicates that Hancock proudly declared , " There ! I guess King George will be able to read that ! " 
 Various legends about the signing of the Declaration emerged years later , when the document had become an important national symbol . In one famous story , John Hancock supposedly said that Congress , having signed the Declaration , must now " all hang together " , and Benjamin Franklin replied : " Yes , we must indeed all hang together , or most assuredly we shall all hang separately . " The quotation did not appear in print until more than fifty years after Franklin 's death . 
 The <unk> inkstand , used at the signing , was also used at the signing of the United States Constitution in 1787 . 
 = = Publication and reaction = = 
 After Congress approved the final wording of the Declaration on July 4 , a handwritten copy was sent a few blocks away to the printing shop of John Dunlap . Through the night Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides for distribution . Before long , the Declaration was read to audiences and reprinted in newspapers across the thirteen states . The first official public reading of the document was by John Nixon in the yard of Independence Hall on July 8 ; public readings also took place on that day in Trenton , New Jersey , and Easton , Pennsylvania . A German translation of the Declaration was published in Philadelphia by July 9 . 
 President of Congress John Hancock sent a broadside to General George Washington , instructing him to have it proclaimed " at the Head of the Army in the way you shall think it most proper " . Washington had the Declaration read to his troops in New York City on July 9 , with thousands of British troops on ships in the harbor . Washington and Congress hoped the Declaration would inspire the soldiers , and encourage others to join the army . After hearing the Declaration , crowds in many cities tore down and destroyed signs or statues representing royal authority . An equestrian statue of King George in New York City was pulled down and the lead used to make musket balls . 
 British officials in North America sent copies of the Declaration to Great Britain . It was published in British newspapers beginning in mid @-@ August , it had reached Florence and Warsaw by mid @-@ September , and a German translation appeared in Switzerland by October . The first copy of the Declaration sent to France got lost , and the second copy arrived only in November 1776 . It reached Portuguese America by Brazilian medical student ' <unk> ' José Joaquim Maia e <unk> , who had met with Thomas Jefferson in Nîmes . Though the Spanish @-@ American authorities banned the circulation of the Declaration , it was widely transmitted and translated , by the Venezuelan Manuel García de Sena , by the Colombian Miguel de Pombo , by the Ecuadorian Vicente <unk> and by the New Englanders Richard Cleveland and William Shaler , who distributed the Declaration and the United States Constitution among creoles in Chile and Indians in Mexico in 1821 . The North Ministry did not give an official answer to the Declaration , but instead secretly commissioned pamphleteer John Lind to publish a response , which was entitled Answer to the Declaration of the American Congress . British Tories denounced the signers of the Declaration for not applying the same principles of " life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness " to African Americans . Thomas Hutchinson , the former royal governor of Massachusetts , also published a rebuttal . These pamphlets challenged various aspects of the Declaration . Hutchinson argued that the American Revolution was the work of a few conspirators who wanted independence from the outset , and who had finally achieved it by inducing otherwise loyal colonists to rebel . Lind 's pamphlet had an anonymous attack on the concept of natural rights , written by Jeremy Bentham , an argument which he would repeat during the French Revolution . Both pamphlets asked how the American slaveholders in Congress could proclaim that " all men are created equal " without freeing their own slaves . 
 William Whipple , a signer of the Declaration of Independence who had fought in the war , freed his slave , Prince Whipple , because of revolutionary ideals . In the postwar decades , other slaveholders also freed their slaves ; from 1790 to 1810 , the percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased to 8 @.@ 3 percent from less than one percent of the black population . All Northern states abolished slavery by 1804 . 
 = = History of the documents = = 
 The official copy was the one printed on July 4 , 1776 , under Jefferson 's supervision . It was sent to the states and the Army , and was widely reprinted in newspapers . The slightly different " engrossed copy " ( shown at the top of this article ) was made later for members to sign . The engrossed version is the one widely distributed in the 21st century . Note the opening lines of the two version differ . 
 The copy of the Declaration that was signed by Congress is known as the engrossed or parchment copy . It was probably engrossed ( that is , carefully handwritten ) by clerk Timothy Matlack . Because of poor conservation of the engrossed copy through the 19th century , a facsimile made in 1823 , rather than the original , has become the basis of most modern reproductions . In 1921 , custody of the engrossed copy of the Declaration , along with the United States Constitution , was transferred from the State Department to the Library of Congress . After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 , the documents were moved for safekeeping to the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox in Kentucky , where they were kept until 1944 . In 1952 , the engrossed Declaration was transferred to the National Archives , and is now on permanent display at the National Archives in the " Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom " . 
 Although the document signed by Congress and enshrined in the National Archives is usually regarded as the Declaration of Independence , historian Julian P. Boyd argued that the Declaration , like Magna Carta , is not a single document . Boyd considered the printed broadsides ordered by Congress to be official texts as well . The Declaration was first published as a broadside that was printed the night of July 4 by John Dunlap of Philadelphia . Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides , of which 26 are known to survive . The 26th copy was discovered in The National Archives in England in 2009 . In 1777 , Congress commissioned Mary Katherine Goddard to print a new broadside that , unlike the Dunlap broadside , listed the signers of the Declaration . Nine copies of the Goddard broadside are known to still exist . A variety of broadsides printed by the states are also extant . 
 Several early handwritten copies and drafts of the Declaration have also been preserved . Jefferson kept a four @-@ page draft that late in life he called the " original Rough draught " . How many drafts Jefferson wrote prior to this one , and how much of the text was contributed by other committee members , is unknown . In 1947 , Boyd discovered a fragment of an earlier draft in Jefferson 's handwriting . Jefferson and Adams sent copies of the rough draft , with slight variations , to friends . 
 During the writing process , Jefferson showed the rough draft to Adams and Franklin , and perhaps other members of the drafting committee , who made a few more changes . Franklin , for example , may have been responsible for changing Jefferson 's original phrase " We hold these truths to be sacred and undeniable " to " We hold these truths to be self @-@ evident " . Jefferson incorporated these changes into a copy that was submitted to Congress in the name of the committee . The copy that was submitted to Congress on June 28 has been lost , and was perhaps destroyed in the printing process , or destroyed during the debates in accordance with Congress 's secrecy rule . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Having served its original purpose in announcing the independence of the United States , the Declaration was initially neglected in the years immediately following the American Revolution . Early celebrations of Independence Day , like early histories of the Revolution , largely ignored the Declaration . Although the act of declaring independence was considered important , the text announcing that act attracted little attention . The Declaration was rarely mentioned during the debates about the United States Constitution , and its language was not incorporated into that document . George Mason 's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights was more influential , and its language was echoed in state constitutions and state bills of rights more often than Jefferson 's words . " In none of these documents " , wrote Pauline Maier , " is there any evidence whatsoever that the Declaration of Independence lived in men 's minds as a classic statement of American political principles . " 
 = = = Influence in other countries = = = 
 Many leaders of the French Revolution admired the Declaration of Independence but were also interested in the new American state constitutions . The inspiration and content of the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen ( 1789 ) emerged largely from the ideals of the American Revolution . Its key drafts were prepared by Lafayette , working closely in Paris with his friend , Thomas Jefferson . It also borrowed language from George Mason 's Virginia Declaration of Rights . The declaration also influenced the Russian Empire . The document had a particular impact on the Decembrist revolt and other Russian thinkers . 
 According to historian David Armitage , the Declaration of Independence did prove to be internationally influential , but not as a statement of human rights . Armitage argued that the Declaration was the first in a new genre of declarations of independence that announced the creation of new states . 
 Other French leaders were directly influenced by the text of the Declaration of Independence itself . The Manifesto of the Province of Flanders ( 1790 ) was the first foreign derivation of the Declaration ; others include the Venezuelan Declaration of Independence ( 1811 ) , the Liberian Declaration of Independence ( 1847 ) , the declarations of secession by the Confederate States of America ( 1860 – 61 ) , and the Vietnamese Proclamation of Independence ( 1945 ) . These declarations echoed the United States Declaration of Independence in announcing the independence of a new state , without necessarily endorsing the political philosophy of the original . 
 Some other countries that used the Declaration as inspiration or directly copied sections from it is the Haitian declaration of January 1 , 1804 from the Haitian Revolution , the United Provinces of New Granada in 1811 , the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816 , the Chilean Declaration of Independence in 1818 , Costa Rica in 1821 , El Salvador in 1821 , Guatemala in 1821 , Honduras in ( 1821 ) , Mexico in 1821 , Nicaragua in 1821 , Peru in 1821 , Bolivian War of Independence in 1825 , Uruguay in 1825 , Ecuador in 1830 , Colombia in 1831 , Paraguay in 1842 , Dominican Republic in 1844 , Texas Declaration of Independence in March 1836 , California Republic in November 1836 , Hungarian Declaration of Independence in 1849 , Declaration of the Independence of New Zealand in 1835 , and the Czechoslovak declaration of independence from 1918 drafted in Washington D.C. with Gutzon Borglum among the drafters . The Rhodesian declaration of independence , ratified in November 1965 , is based on the American one as well , however , it omits the phrases " all men are created equal " and " the consent of the governed " . The South Carolina declaration of secession from December 1860 also mentions the U.S. Declaration of Independence , though it , like the Rhodesian one , omits references to " all men are created equal " and " consent of the governed " . 
 = = = Revival of interest = = = 
 Interest in the Declaration was revived in the 1790s with the emergence of the United States 's first political parties . Throughout the 1780s , few Americans knew , or cared , who wrote the Declaration . But in the next decade , Jeffersonian Republicans sought political advantage over their rival Federalists by promoting both the importance of the Declaration and Jefferson as its author . Federalists responded by casting doubt on Jefferson 's authorship or originality , and by emphasizing that independence was declared by the whole Congress , with Jefferson as just one member of the drafting committee . Federalists insisted that Congress 's act of declaring independence , in which Federalist John Adams had played a major role , was more important than the document announcing that act . But this view , like the Federalist Party , would fade away , and before long the act of declaring independence would become synonymous with the document . 
 A less partisan appreciation for the Declaration emerged in the years following the War of 1812 , thanks to a growing American nationalism and a renewed interest in the history of the Revolution . In 1817 , Congress commissioned John Trumbull 's famous painting of the signers , which was exhibited to large crowds before being installed in the Capitol . The earliest commemorative printings of the Declaration also appeared at this time , offering many Americans their first view of the signed document . Collective biographies of the signers were first published in the 1820s , giving birth to what Garry Wills called the " cult of the signers " . In the years that followed , many stories about the writing and signing of the document would be published for the first time . 
 When interest in the Declaration was revived , the sections that were most important in 1776 — the announcement of the independence of the United States and the grievances against King George — were no longer relevant . But the second paragraph , with its talk of self @-@ evident truths and unalienable rights , were applicable long after the war had ended . Because the Constitution and the Bill of Rights lacked sweeping statements about rights and equality , advocates of marginalized groups turned to the Declaration for support . Starting in the 1820s , variations of the Declaration were issued to proclaim the rights of workers , farmers , women , and others . In 1848 , for example , the Seneca Falls Convention , a meeting of women 's rights advocates , declared that " all men and women are created equal " . 
 = = = Slavery and the Declaration = = = 
 The contradiction between the claim that " all men are created equal " and the existence of American slavery attracted comment when the Declaration was first published . As mentioned above , although Jefferson had included a paragraph in his initial draft that strongly indicted Great Britain 's role in the slave trade , this was deleted from the final version . Jefferson himself was a prominent Virginia slave holder having owned hundreds of slaves . Referring to this seeming contradiction , English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter , " If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature , it is an American patriot , signing resolutions of <unk> with the one hand , and with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves . " In the 19th century , the Declaration took on a special significance for the abolitionist movement . Historian Bertram Wyatt @-@ Brown wrote that " abolitionists tended to interpret the Declaration of Independence as a theological as well as a political document " . Abolitionist leaders Benjamin Lundy and William Lloyd Garrison adopted the " twin rocks " of " the Bible and the Declaration of Independence " as the basis for their philosophies . " As long as there remains a single copy of the Declaration of Independence , or of the Bible , in our land , " wrote Garrison , " we will not despair . " For radical abolitionists like Garrison , the most important part of the Declaration was its assertion of the right of revolution : Garrison called for the destruction of the government under the Constitution , and the creation of a new state dedicated to the principles of the Declaration . 
 The controversial question of whether to add additional slave states to the United States coincided with the growing stature of the Declaration . The first major public debate about slavery and the Declaration took place during the Missouri controversy of 1819 to 1821 . Antislavery Congressmen argued that the language of the Declaration indicated that the Founding Fathers of the United States had been opposed to slavery in principle , and so new slave states should not be added to the country . <unk> Congressmen , led by Senator Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina , argued that since the Declaration was not a part of the Constitution , it had no relevance to the question . 
 With the antislavery movement gaining momentum , defenders of slavery such as John Randolph and John C. Calhoun found it necessary to argue that the Declaration 's assertion that " all men are created equal " was false , or at least that it did not apply to black people . During the debate over the Kansas – Nebraska Act in 1853 , for example , Senator John Pettit of Indiana argued that " all men are created equal " , rather than a " self @-@ evident truth " , was a " self @-@ evident lie " . Opponents of the Kansas – Nebraska Act , including Salmon P. Chase and Benjamin Wade , defended the Declaration and what they saw as its antislavery principles . 
 = = = Lincoln and the Declaration = = = 
 The Declaration 's relationship to slavery was taken up in 1854 by Abraham Lincoln , a little @-@ known former Congressman who idolized the Founding Fathers . Lincoln thought that the Declaration of Independence expressed the highest principles of the American Revolution , and that the Founding Fathers had tolerated slavery with the expectation that it would ultimately wither away . For the United States to legitimize the expansion of slavery in the Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act , thought Lincoln , was to repudiate the principles of the Revolution . In his October 1854 Peoria speech , Lincoln said : 
 Nearly eighty years ago we began by declaring that all men are created equal ; but now from that beginning we have run down to the other declaration , that for some men to enslave others is a " sacred right of self @-@ government . … Our republican robe is soiled and trailed in the dust . Let us <unk> it . … Let us re @-@ adopt the Declaration of Independence , and with it , the practices , and policy , which harmonize with it . … If we do this , we shall not only have saved the Union : but we shall have saved it , as to make , and keep it , forever worthy of the saving . 
 The meaning of the Declaration was a recurring topic in the famed debates between Lincoln and Stephen Douglas in 1858 . Douglas argued that " all men are created equal " in the Declaration referred to white men only . The purpose of the Declaration , he said , had simply been to justify the independence of the United States , and not to proclaim the equality of any " inferior or degraded race " . Lincoln , however , thought that the language of the Declaration was deliberately universal , setting a high moral standard for which the American republic should aspire . " I had thought the Declaration contemplated the progressive improvement in the condition of all men everywhere , " he said . During the seventh and last joint debate with Steven Douglas at Alton , Illinois on October 15 , 1858 Lincoln said about the declaration : 
 I think the authors of that notable instrument intended to include all men , but they did not mean to declare all men equal in all respects . They did not mean to say all men were equal in color , size , intellect , moral development , or social capacity . They defined with tolerable distinctness in what they did consider all men created equal — equal in " certain inalienable rights , among which are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness . " This they said , and this they meant . They did not mean to assert the obvious untruth that all were then actually enjoying that equality , or yet that they were about to confer it immediately upon them . In fact , they had no power to confer such a boon . They meant simply to declare the right , so that the enforcement of it might follow as fast as circumstances should permit . They meant to set up a standard maxim for free society which should be familiar to all , constantly looked to , constantly labored for , and even , though never perfectly attained , constantly approximated , and thereby constantly spreading and deepening its influence , and augmenting the happiness and value of life to all people , of all colors , everywhere . 
 According to Pauline Maier , Douglas 's interpretation was more historically accurate , but Lincoln 's view ultimately prevailed . " In Lincoln 's hands , " wrote Maier , " the Declaration of Independence became first and foremost a living document " with " a set of goals to be realized over time " . 
 Like Daniel Webster , James Wilson , and Joseph Story before him , Lincoln argued that the Declaration of Independence was a founding document of the United States , and that this had important implications for interpreting the Constitution , which had been ratified more than a decade after the Declaration . Although the Constitution did not use the word " equality " , Lincoln believed that " all men are created equal " remained a part of the nation 's founding principles . He famously expressed this belief in the opening sentence of his 1863 Gettysburg Address : " Four score and seven years ago [ i.e. in 1776 ] our fathers brought forth on this continent , a new nation , conceived in Liberty , and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . " 
 Lincoln 's view of the Declaration as a moral guide to interpreting the Constitution became influential . " For most people now , " wrote Garry Wills in 1992 , " the Declaration means what Lincoln told us it means , as a way of correcting the Constitution itself without overthrowing it . " Admirers of Lincoln , such as Harry V. Jaffa , praised this development . Critics of Lincoln , notably <unk> Kendall and Mel Bradford , argued that Lincoln dangerously expanded the scope of the national government , and violated states ' rights , by reading the Declaration into the Constitution . 
 = = = Women 's suffrage and the Declaration = = = 
 In July 1848 , the first Woman 's Rights Convention , the Seneca Falls Convention , was held in Seneca Falls , New York . The convention was organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Lucretia Mott , Mary Ann McClintock , and Jane Hunt . In their " Declaration of Sentiments " , patterned on the Declaration of Independence , the convention members demanded social and political equality for women . Their motto was that " All men and women are created equal " and the convention demanded suffrage for women . The suffrage movement was supported by William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick Douglass . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The adoption of the Declaration of Independence was dramatized in the 1969 Tony Award – winning musical play 1776 , and the 1972 movie of the same name , as well as in the 2008 television miniseries John Adams . 
 The text of the Declaration was chosen to become the first e @-@ book available on the Internet in 1971 . 
 The Declaration is featured in The Probability Broach ( 1980 ) , an alternative history novel , when one word is added to the document , to read that governments " derive their just power from the unanimous consent of the governed " . 
 In 1984 the Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration was dedicated in Constitution Gardens on the National Mall in Washington , D.C. , where the signatures of all the original signers are carved in stone with their names , places of residences and occupations . 
 The Declaration document is at risk in Honour Among Thieves ( 1993 ) , a novel by Jeffrey Archer in which Saddam Hussein tries to steal the Declaration to burn it publicly on July 4 . 
 The engrossed copy of the Declaration is central to the 2004 Hollywood film National Treasure , in which the main character steals the document because he believes it has secret clues to a treasure hidden by some of the Founding Fathers . 
 The signing of the Declaration is featured on the back of the United States two @-@ dollar bill . 
 The One World Trade Center building in New York City is 1776 feet high to symbolize the year the Declaration of Independence was signed . 
 = Norman Hsu = 
 Norman Yung Yuen Hsu , born October 1951 , is a convicted pyramid investment promoter who associated himself with the apparel industry . His business activities were intertwined with his role as a major fundraiser for the Democratic Party , and he gained notoriety after suspicious patterns of bundled campaign contributions were reported in 2007 . Subsequently he was discovered to have been a long @-@ time fugitive in connection with a 1992 fraud conviction . After turning himself in to California authorities in 2007 he fled the state again and was quickly recaptured . 
 The U.S. Justice Department investigated whether Hsu illegally reimbursed political donations by associates and formally charged him with fraud . On 27 November 2007 , a federal grand jury indicted Hsu on charges of violating federal campaign finance laws and defrauding investors " out of at least $ 20 million . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hsu was born and raised in Hong Kong , though his family was originally from Shanghai . At age 18 , he immigrated to the United States and obtained a BS degree in computer science from the University of California , Berkeley in 1973 . Hsu married in 1974 and received a California real estate license in 1976 . In 1981 , he completed an M.B.A. from the Wharton School . He and other Hong Kong partners formed the sportswear company <unk> in 1982 , which went bankrupt in 1984 . He then created other sportswear companies , including Wear This , Base , and Foreign Exchange . He engaged in other businesses as well , including clothing stores and restaurants . During this time , he became a naturalized American citizen . 
 = = = Ponzi scheme conviction and flight = = = 
 Hsu was able to gain the trust of investors by his dress , by his warm and personable manner , by his educational credentials , by being quoted in trade magazines , and by the long list of business under his name , but had a record of changing addresses and leaving disappointed investors behind . Starting in 1989 , Hsu raised $ 1 million from investors to launch a latex glove business . Some of these partners invested their life savings or mortgaged their homes , and some sued Hsu when it appeared their money was lost . In 1990 , Hsu , then living in Foster City , California , declared a bankruptcy , stating that he was practically destitute , with no job , no income , and few possessions other than an SUV and a ring . That same year , he was also divorced as well as allegedly kidnapped by San Francisco Triad society gang leader Raymond Kwok Chow . In 1991 , California authorities brought fraud charges against him , describing his operation as a Ponzi scheme . Specifically , authorities claimed Hsu had not engaged in any legitimate business activity , but instead was using funds from later investors to pay returns to earlier ones . In February 1992 Hsu plead no contest to one count of grand theft and agreed to serve up to three years in prison and pay a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine . Hsu subsequently failed to appear at the sentencing hearing and a warrant was issued for his arrest . 
 Hsu fled to Hong Kong and lived there from 1992 to 1996 while working in the garment industry . He started at least two companies there , both with vague charters . Aided by what others described as a magnetic personality , he prospered for a while , living in a luxury building . However the companies were dissolved in 1997 and 1998 , and by 1998 Hong Kong courts had declared Hsu once again bankrupt . He would not emerge from this Hong Kong bankruptcy until 2006 . 
 = = = Entry into politics = = = 
 Hsu then returned to the United States in the late 1990s , despite his fugitive status , and established several addresses in the San Francisco and Los Angeles areas . He became an investor in Silicon Valley , invested in real estate in the San Francisco Bay Area , and still had engagements in the garment industry . He later relocated to New York , where he seemed to become involved in the apparel business once again and lived in a luxury apartment in SoHo while flying chartered jets . 
 Starting in 2003 , Hsu began contributing to , and collecting contributions for , the Democratic Party , although he did not join the party and was not registered to vote . He also donated to causes such as the Innocence Project and Clinton Global Initiative . He also became a trustee of The New School in New York , to whom he donated $ 100 @,@ 000 and provided the money for a scholarship . 
 Democratic Party figures claimed they did not know much about him or his businesses , but appreciated his support ; and he became known to them as someone who could quickly raise large amounts of money , and as someone who networked tirelessly and always found ways to be included in high @-@ profile events . By 2007 , Hsu 's status within Hillary Rodham Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign had risen to the level where he was a " <unk> " , someone who had " bundled " more than $ 100 @,@ 000 for her campaign , and to where he co @-@ hosted a $ 1 million fundraiser at wealthy Democratic Party supporter Ron Burkle 's Beverly Hills estate , and in September , he was scheduled to co @-@ host a major gala fundraising event featuring music legend Quincy Jones . 
 = = Controversy regarding political donations = = 
 = = = Relationship with Paw family = = = 
 In August 2007 , an investigation by The Wall Street Journal revealed potential campaign finance irregularities involving Hsu , in his role as a " <unk> " , and his long @-@ time associates , the Paw family of Daly City , California . Specifically , members of the Paw family made donations of over $ 200 @,@ 000 to Democratic candidates since 2005 . These donations closely coordinated with those of Hsu in terms of timing , amounts and <unk> . In addition , the donations appeared to be much larger than would be expected given the Paw 's modest income . According to records obtained for the investigation , the Paws own a gift shop and live in a 1 @,@ 280 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 119 m2 ) house that they recently refinanced for $ 270 @,@ 000 . William Paw , the 64 @-@ year @-@ old head of the household , is a mail carrier with the U.S. Postal Service and earns approximately $ 49 @,@ 000 a year . Other records linked Hsu to the Paws , including a campaign finance filing in which Hsu lists the Paw 's home as his residence . 
 In September 2007 , it was reported that the U.S. Justice Department has launched a formal investigation into possible campaign finance violations by Hsu and his associates . One focal point for the investigation concerns whether any of the donations by the Paws were reimbursed by Hsu , which would constitute a felony . Through his attorney , Hsu has denied any wrongdoing . 
 = = = Status as fugitive = = = 
 One day after the release of The Wall Street Journal 's investigation , it was reported that the warrant issued after Hsu 's failure to appear for sentencing for his 1992 fraud conviction was still valid . On 31 August 2007 , Hsu surrendered to authorities at the district court house in Redwood City , California . The California Attorney General 's office had negotiated $ 1 million bail to be eventually applied to restitution , but the presiding judge set the amount at the $ 2 million . Hsu was jailed briefly that day until his attorney returned with the increased bail . The following week , Hsu failed to appear for a bail reduction hearing on 5 September at which he was expected to turn in his passport . A " no bail " warrant was immediately issued for his arrest and Hsu forfeited the $ 2 million . On 6 September , he was arrested by the FBI in Grand Junction , Colorado , after falling ill on the California Zephyr train headed for Chicago . It was subsequently revealed that Hsu mailed suicide notes to several acquaintances and organizations before boarding the train , and was discovered with prescription pills loose in his compartment . 
 It was unclear how Hsu could have remained at large for 15 years and engage in prominent political activity without being detected . It was also unclear how a convicted felon , having already fled prosecution once , was allowed out on bail without first having to surrender his passport . Prior to Hsu 's second attempt to flee , James Brosnahan , Hsu 's attorney in California , defended Hsu stating that Hsu 's prominence showed that he did not behave like a fugitive and that Hsu was moving towards a resolution of the matter , including a plan of restitution for victims of Hsu 's actions . 
 On 13 September 2007 , a Colorado judge denied a prosecutor 's request for bail to be set at $ 50 million and instead set bail for Hsu at $ 5 million . The prosecutor reported Hsu to have a checkbook listing a balance of $ 6 million at the time of his capture in Grand Junction . The presiding judge remarked , " $ 2 million wasn 't enough to keep Mr. Hsu from running . We 'll see if $ 5 million will do it . " 
 On 4 January 2008 , Hsu was sentenced to jail for 3 years by California Superior Court Judge Stephen Hall for the original fraud conviction , now 16 years old . Judge Hall rejected Hsu 's argument that his right to a speedy trial was denied by authorities who could have easily found and arrested him . 
 = = = Source of income = = = 
 The source of Hsu 's income once he returned to the United States is unclear . While he claims to be involved in several businesses in the fashion industry , visits to those addresses " found no trace of Mr. Hsu . " At several business addresses provided on Hsu 's campaign donation forms , none of the listed businesses could be located . A New Jersey fashion designer that Hsu had listed as a co @-@ investor , said he had never heard of Hsu . Lawrence Barcella , Hsu 's Washington , D.C. attorney , claims that Hsu 's post @-@ 1996 @-@ return Silicon Valley investments account for some of his ability to make his political contributions . However , detailed financial records for Components Ltd , a Hsu @-@ controlled entity with no obvious business purpose , reveal payments of $ 100 @,@ 000 to nine political donors whose contributions were later bundled by Hsu . 
 Upon learning about Hsu 's proposed investment scheme , Irvine , California , businessman Jack Cassidy became concerned and warned the California Democratic Party that Hsu 's activities may not have been legitimate . Apparently , Hsu was soliciting investors for a " bridge loan " operation that returned approximately 6 % every 3 months . However , investors were told few details about the operation and investigators are trying to determine whether the " bridge loans " involved bona fide business activity or were simply a front for a new Ponzi scheme . 
 Hsu may in fact have been running multiple cons on a massive scale . As an example , a New York investment fund run by Woodstock Festival founder Joel Rosenman invested $ 40 million spread over 37 separate deals with a Hsu company . Hsu reportedly told Rosenman the money would be used to manufacture apparel for well known luxury brands , yielding a 40 % profit on each deal . When Rosenman 's fund recently attempted to cash checks from Hsu 's company in September 2007 , there were insufficient funds . Federal charges of fraud have since been brought against Hsu . 
 = = Legal actions against Hsu = = 
 Since his re @-@ incarceration , a variety of legal actions have been brought against Hsu . 
 = = = Federal charges = = = 
 On 19 September 2007 , a federal complaint was issued against Hsu by the U.S. Attorney in Manhattan . The complaint alleges that Hsu 's investment offerings were a Ponzi scheme that paid early investors with money that was contributed by later investors , that Hsu pressured investors to contribute to candidates for office , providing them with a list of candidates to choose from and that Hsu reimbursed some contributors to candidates for office in the amount of their contributions . Based on these actions , Hsu is charged with mail fraud , wire fraud and violating the Federal Election Campaign Act . He could face a sentence of up to 45 years in prison . 
 The Complaint cites to statements from three " victims " and two " witnesses " as well as a confession by Hsu to an FBI agent . 
 On 27 November 2007 , a federal grand jury sitting in Manhattan indicted Hsu on charges of violating federal campaign finance laws and defrauding investors out of at least $ 20 million . According to the indictment , Hsu made " false promises " to private investors in his companies that they would be paid " guaranteed high rates of return on investments in the short term . " 
 On 7 May 2009 , Hsu pleaded guilty in federal court in New York to ten counts of mail and wire fraud in connection with the Ponzi scheme . Hsu stated that " I knew what I was doing was illegal " and faced up to 20 years in prison on each count . Hsu was still contesting the charges of campaign finance fraud , however . 
 Hsu was sentenced to 24 years in prison and is currently incarcerated in Federal Correctional Institution , Milan . His date of release is 12 August 2030 . 
 = = = Source Financing = = = 
 " Source Financing Investors LLC , " an investment fund started by Joel Rosenman ( a Woodstock founder ) , claims that Hsu owes it $ 40 million . Source Financing sued Hsu on 20 September 2007 . It has asked that all candidates who received campaign contributions from Hsu not donate them to charity as the money may have been improperly channeled from investors . 
 = = = Briar Wood Investors = = = 
 On 21 September 2007 a group of Southern California investors ( " Briar Wood Investors " ) sued Hsu , claiming that he defrauded them , and that he pressured them into making contributions to the campaigns of elected officials . 
 It is not clear whether the recipients of Hsu 's campaign contributions will be added as defendants to any of the lawsuits as the various funds seek solvent entities from which to recover their initial investments . 
 = = Democratic party reaction = = 
 After initial reports of suspicious contributions , prominent Democrats defended Hsu 's reputation . Supporters began to distance themselves after his long @-@ time fugitive status was revealed . After Hsu fled the California justice system again in 2007 , his contributions were renounced by an increasing number of elected officials . 
 The general pattern of reaction has been typified by Bob Kerrey , president of the New School and former Senator from Nebraska , who originally stated that Hsu had been " a terrific member " of the New School board . After Hsu resigned as a board member , Kerrey said the university did not do background checks of prospective trustees and that he hoped that Hsu " didn 't break the law . " After Hsu became a two @-@ time fugitive , Kerrey remarked , " I thought that I knew him , but obviously I didn ’ t . " 
 One of Hsu 's most tenacious supporters was Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell , who called Hsu " one of the best 10 people I 've met . " Later , Rendell said , " Though Norman is my friend and remains so , his failure to appear casts a new light on his assertions regarding the original [ fraud ] case . As a result I will follow other elected officials and donate the money he contributed to me to charity . " 
 In comparison , 2008 Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton began to disengage from Hsu at an earlier phase of the scandal when Hsu 's long time fugitive status was first revealed . After indications of additional misconduct by Hsu , the Clinton campaign then decided to refund a total of $ 850 @,@ 000 in bundled contributions Clinton was the first major candidate to give up bundled contributions from associates of Norman Hsu . However , it is also true that her campaign ignored earlier private warnings about Hsu and that Clinton was the largest recipient of bundled donations from Hsu . 
 In 2006 , former President Clinton referred to Hsu as " our friend Norman " . After the scandal went public , Bill Clinton remarked in colloquial language , " You could have knocked me over with a straw " . Democrats are continuing to try to reconcile positive personal impressions of Hsu with his criminal behavior . Mark <unk> , who sat on President Barack Obama campaign 's national finance committee , remarked , " Despite it all , I still love the guy , despite everything you read , every experience I ever had with him was nothing but delightful , and I just scratch my head . " 
 Hsu never appeared to want or expect anything in return for his many contributions , other than to appear in high @-@ profile circles ; indeed a West Coast Democratic fundraiser said , " He seemed so desperate to be included in every big @-@ ticket event in California … It was a little sad . " One Clinton campaign aide attempted to penetrate more deeply into Hsu 's motives , remarking that Hsu 's business activity " was reinforced by his efforts in politics and philanthropy ; he seemed like a generous guy , but only later did you realize what he was up to . " 
 = Michael 's Last Dundies = 
 " Michael 's Last Dundies " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 147th episode overall . It originally aired on NBC on April 21 , 2011 . The episode was written and directed by co @-@ executive producer Mindy Kaling . " Michael 's Last Dundies " guest stars Will Ferrell as Deangelo Vickers and Jack Coleman as State Senator Robert Lipton . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) trains his office replacement , Deangelo Vickers ( Ferrell ) on how to properly host the branch 's annual Dundie Awards . Michael soon learns that Deangelo has a terrible problem with speaking in front of others . Meanwhile , Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) deals with her dislike of her boyfriend , Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) . 
 The episode — which was originally going to be called " Goodbye , Michael Part 1 " — was the first installment in the series to be both written and directed by Kaling , who also portrays Kelly Kapoor on the series . The episode also marks the second appearance of Ferrell as Deangelo Vickers ; Ferrell had originally signed onto the series to make Carell 's exit transition easier . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . " Michael 's Last Dundies " was viewed by 6 @.@ 849 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 3 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49 . The episode was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the week that it aired , as well as the sixth @-@ most watched episode in the 18 – 49 demographic for the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the office , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) announces to the employees that Deangelo Vickers ( Will Ferrell ) will be his co @-@ host at the Dundies . The Dundies are an annual award program created by Michael to motivate his employees . The idea of performance is worrisome to Deangelo , but Michael insists he take the job . Michael brings some of the staff together in the conference room to help Deangelo get prepared for the show , but he struggles to be humorous . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) tries to help him , saying he should just think of performing like conducting a meeting , but Michael objects , wanting Deangelo to mimic his style . Michael tries a number of different things to help Deangelo , such as sitting on his stomach and making him listen to a Walkman at full volume so he cannot hear himself think , but none are effective . 
 Meanwhile , Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) see Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) sitting in her car eating a sandwich . She explains that she has begun eating lunch in her car to get some time away from Gabe Lewis ( Zach Woods ) , whom she is starting to despise . Pam advises Erin to tell Gabe her real feelings as soon as possible . This amuses Jim , given Pam 's history with Roy Anderson , and he leaves in order to avoid the temptation to comment on the irony . 
 After work , the employees arrive at an Italian restaurant named Louie Volpe 's to celebrate the Dundies . Moments after being introduced , Deangelo disappears into the bathroom to vomit . Eventually , Michael is able to psych him up , and the show begins . The show continues to go poorly , with most of Michael 's jokes offending more than amusing the employees . Dwight wins the " Promising Assistant Manager " Dundie , but as he is still mad at Michael , he tosses his award in the trash . Erin wins the " Cutest Redhead " award and gives a speech in which she breaks up with Gabe , who takes the stage to protest , then leaves in humiliation . Michael awards Deangelo with the " Best Dundies Host " award . The staff urges him to make a speech , but as he nervously tries to yell over his Walkman , the ceremony is kicked out of the restaurant . Michael is upset that his last Dundies Award show was a disappointment , but the staff convinces him to continue the event at the office . 
 After Dwight , still angry with Michael , insults the Dundies and leaves , Michael and Deangelo continue the event in the conference room . After the last award , Andy leads the employees in serenading the soon @-@ to @-@ depart Michael with an altered version of the song " Seasons of Love " ; Michael is touched . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Michael 's Last Dundies " was written and directed by co @-@ executive producer Mindy Kaling , the first time that she has both directed and written an episode of the series . Kaling was also the writer of the second season episode " The Dundies " , which inspired the plot of " Michael 's Last Dundies " . In the episode , a cue card features Dwight 's last name spelled incorrectly as " Shrute " . Kaling later admitted on Twitter than she had spelled the name that way " in every script I 've written since ' Hot Girl ' . " The episode is the second of Will Ferrell 's four @-@ episode guest stint on the series . Ferrell signed on to appear in Carell 's final three episodes , and the first episode without Carell , " The Inner Circle " , to make Carell 's transition easier . Ferrell initially called the producers and offered to appear in a few episodes in Carell 's last season , because he is " a fan and wanted to commemorate Carell ’ s swan song " . He had previously starred alongside Carell , in the 2004 film , Anchorman : The Legend of Ron Burgundy . The episode serves as a sequel to the second season premiere , " The Dundies " . The episode was originally titled " Goodbye , Michael Part 1 " before NBC announced that " Goodbye , Michael " would be an extended 50 @-@ minute episode and this episode was retitled " Michael 's Last Dundies " . 
 The Season Seven DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Michael talking about his last Dundies using comedians as metaphors , Dwight booing Deangelo in order to adequately prepare him for his actual speech , various clips from the actual Dundies awards and of people accepting their awards , a cut scene featuring a video of Michael interviewing Danny Cordray ( Timothy Olyphant ) at his house , and Andy talking to Erin about loading the printer so that she can take her mind off of Gabe . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In this episode , Michael Scott describes the Dundies as " like the Golden Globes but less mean " referring to Ricky Gervais ' hosting of the 2011 Golden Globe Awards ; which left critics questioning if he had gone " too far " . As executive producer of the American series and creator of the original British series , Gervais stated on his blog that the line was inserted as a <unk> was intended as " a little in @-@ joke " . Near the beginning of the episode , Deangelo compares Meredith Palmer 's ( Kate Flannery ) house to the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . Michael notes that " When Larry King died , they didn 't just cancel his show " , showing that Michael is unaware that Larry King is not deceased . Later , he notes that " they got Piers Morgan to come in and do his show " instead . The final song that the office sings to Michael is a parody of " Seasons of Love " from the Broadway musical Rent . Dwight later reveals in a talking head that he is always the <unk> learner , and never a Jedi knight , a reference to the 1977 film Star Wars and its franchise . Michael notes that he wanted his last Dundies celebration to be like the 1990 film The Godfather Part III , rather than the " confusing " 1972 film The Godfather I , which he notes had " three big laughs " . Additionally , the episode contains several references to the film The King 's Speech , notably during the scene in which Deangelo gives his speech at the Dundies while listening to his Walkman played at a high volume . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Michael 's Last Dundies " was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 849 million households and received a 3 @.@ 3 rating / 10 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 3 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a significant drop in the ratings from the previous episode , " Training Day " . Despite this , the episode became the highest @-@ rated NBC program for the original week it aired and also became the sixth @-@ most @-@ watched show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . 
 The episode received a moderately positive review from Cindy White of IGN . She said " the laughs were scarce this episode " but the lack of humor was compensated by the " emotional highlights " . However , she praised the performances of many of the supporting cast . She ultimately gave the episode a 7 out of 10 , denoting a " good " episode . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix felt that the episode was " very up @-@ and @-@ down " , largely due to inconsistent writing . He did , however , feel that the ending song was " beautiful " and " enough to justify " the episode . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and called it " funny and sweet " and " a perfect penultimate episode for Steve Carell " . 
 Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . He felt that it was appropriate that Steve Carell 's time on the series was bookended largely by the Dundies ; he noted that the episode in which the awards were introduced — the eponymous second season entry — served as " a second pilot of sorts " for the series , and the idea to bring the Dundies back made sense at the time in order to see how the characters had grown . However , he felt that the episode at large did not live up to its source material , and that it was " occasionally funny but unfortunately meaningless " . The ending song , however , in McNutt 's opinion , was a highlight of the episode . 
 Will Ferrell 's character received criticism in the episode . White criticized Deangelo Vickers , noting that she did not have a handle on the character and that he was too " downright normal " and " practically boring " . McNutt argued that , while Ferrell " is not really the problem with the role " of Deangelo Vickers , the actions between Ferrell and Carell felt more like " hanging out to commemorate the former ’ s departure from a television show " rather than the two playing believable characters . He also felt that Deangelo " feels disruptive to the show ’ s narrative " because his character gets in the way of the plot . Sepinwall felt that parts of the episode fell flat because it spent " so much time giving Will Ferrell stuff to do " . He further noted that " nobody has come up with a good reason for him being here other than that he 's Will Ferrell . " 
 = Josquin des Prez = 
 Josquin des Prez ( French : [ <unk> ̃ <unk> ] ; c . 1450 / 1455 – 27 August 1521 ) , often referred to simply as Josquin , was a Franco @-@ Flemish composer of the Renaissance . His original name is sometimes given as Josquin Lebloitte and his later name is given under a wide variety of spellings in French , Italian , and Latin , including <unk> <unk> and Iodocus a Prato . His motet <unk> Dei virgo <unk> includes an acrostic of his name , where he spelled it " Josquin des Prez " . He was the most famous European composer between Guillaume Dufay and Palestrina , and is usually considered to be the central figure of the Franco @-@ Flemish School . Josquin is widely considered by music scholars to be the first master of the high Renaissance style of polyphonic vocal music that was emerging during his lifetime . 
 During the 16th century , Josquin gradually acquired the reputation as the greatest composer of the age , his mastery of technique and expression universally imitated and admired . Writers as diverse as Baldassare Castiglione and Martin Luther wrote about his reputation and fame ; theorists such as Heinrich Glarean and <unk> Zarlino held his style as that best representing perfection . He was so admired that many anonymous compositions were attributed to him by copyists , probably to increase their sales . More than 370 works are attributed to him ; it was only after the advent of modern analytical scholarship that some of these mistaken attributions have been challenged , on the basis of stylistic features and manuscript evidence . Yet in spite of Josquin 's colossal reputation , which endured until the beginning of the Baroque era and was revived in the 20th century , his biography is shadowy , and next to nothing is known about his personality . The only surviving work which may be in his own hand is a graffito on the wall of the Sistine Chapel , and only one contemporary mention of his character is known , in a letter to Duke Ercole I of Ferrara . The lives of dozens of minor composers of the Renaissance are better documented than the life of Josquin . 
 Josquin wrote both sacred and secular music , and in all of the significant vocal forms of the age , including masses , motets , chansons and frottole . During the 16th century , he was praised for both his supreme melodic gift and his use of ingenious technical devices . In modern times , scholars have attempted to ascertain the basic details of his biography , and have tried to define the key characteristics of his style to correct misattributions , a task that has proved difficult , as Josquin liked to solve compositional problems in different ways in successive compositions — sometimes he wrote in an austere style devoid of ornamentation , and at other times he wrote music requiring considerable virtuosity . Heinrich Glarean wrote in 1547 that Josquin was not only a " magnificent virtuoso " ( the Latin can be translated also as " show @-@ off " ) but capable of being a " mocker " , using satire effectively . While the focus of scholarship in recent years has been to remove music from the " Josquin canon " ( including some of his most famous pieces ) and to <unk> it to his contemporaries , the remaining music represents some of the most famous and enduring of the Renaissance . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Birth and early career = = = 
 Little is known for certain of Josquin 's early life . Much is inferential and speculative , though numerous clues have emerged from his works and the writings of contemporary composers , theorists , and writers of the next several generations . Josquin was born in the area controlled by the Dukes of Burgundy , and was possibly born either in Hainaut ( modern @-@ day Belgium ) , or immediately across the border in modern @-@ day France , since several times in his life he was classified legally as a Frenchman ( for instance , when he made his will ) . Josquin was long mistaken for a man with a similar name , Josquin de <unk> , born around the year 1440 , who sang in Milan from 1459 to 1474 , dying in 1498 . More recent scholarship has shown that Josquin des Prez was born around 1450 or a few years later , and did not go to Italy until the early 1480s . 
 Around 1466 , perhaps on the death of his father , Josquin was named by his uncle and aunt , Gille Lebloitte dit Desprez and Jacque <unk> , as their heir . Their will gives Josquin 's actual surname as Lebloitte . According to Matthews and Merkley , " des Prez " was a nickname . 
 According to an account by Claude <unk> , a friend and librarian of Cardinal Richelieu whose evidence dates as late as 1633 , and who used the records of the collegiate church of Saint @-@ Quentin , Josquin became a choirboy with his friend and colleague the Franco Flemish composer Jean Mouton at Saint @-@ Quentin 's royal church , probably around 1460 . Doubt has been cast on the accuracy of <unk> 's account , however . He may have studied counterpoint under Ockeghem , whom he greatly admired throughout his life : this is suggested both by the testimony of <unk> Zarlino and Lodovico <unk> , writing later in the 16th century , and by Josquin 's eloquent lament on the death of Ockeghem in 1497 , Nymphes des bois / Requiem aeternam , based on the poem by Jean Molinet . All records from Saint @-@ Quentin were destroyed in 1669 ; however the collegiate chapel there was a center of music @-@ making for the entire area , and in addition was an important center of royal patronage . Both Jean Mouton and <unk> Compère were buried there and it is certainly possible that Josquin acquired his later connections with the French royal chapel through early experiences at Saint @-@ Quentin . 
 The first definite record of his employment is dated 19 April 1477 , and it shows that he was a singer at the chapel of René , Duke of Anjou , in Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence . He remained there at least until 1478 . No certain records of his movements exist for the period from March 1478 until 1483 , but if he remained in the employ of René he would have transferred to Paris in 1481 along with the rest of the chapel . One of Josquin 's early motets , Misericordias Domini in aeternum <unk> , suggests a direct connection with Louis XI , who was king during this time . In 1483 Josquin returned to Condé to claim his inheritance from his aunt and uncle , who may have been killed by the army of Louis XI in May 1478 , when they besieged the town , locked the population into the church , and burned them alive . 
 = = = Milan = = = 
 The period from 1480 to 1482 has puzzled biographers ; contradictory evidence exists suggesting either that Josquin was still in France , or was already in the service of the Sforza family , specifically with Ascanio Sforza , who had been banished from Milan and resided temporarily in Ferrara or Naples . Residence in Ferrara in the early 1480s could explain the Missa Hercules dux Ferrariae , composed for Ercole d 'Este , but which stylistically does not fit with the usual date of 1503 – 4 when Josquin was known to be in Ferrara . Alternatively it has been suggested that Josquin spent some of that time in Hungary , based on a mid @-@ 16th @-@ century Roman document describing the Hungarian court in those years , and including Josquin as one of the musicians present . 
 In either 1483 or 1484 , Josquin is known to have been in the service of the Sforza family in Milan . While in their employ , he made one or more trips to Rome , and possibly also to Paris ; while in Milan he made the acquaintance of <unk> <unk> , who was maestro di cappella of the cathedral there . He was in Milan again in 1489 , after a possible period of travel ; but he left that year . 
 = = = Rome = = = 
 From 1489 to 1495 , Josquin was a member of the papal choir , first under Pope Innocent VIII , and later under the Borgia pope Alexander VI . He may have gone there as part of a singer exchange with Gaspar van <unk> , who went back to Milan at the same time . While there , he may have been the one who carved his name into the wall of the Sistine Chapel ; a " <unk> " was recently revealed by workers restoring the chapel . Since it was traditional for singers to carve their names into the walls , and hundreds of names were inscribed there during the period from the 15th to the 18th centuries , it is considered highly likely that the graffiti is by Josquin – and if so , it would be his only surviving autograph . 
 Josquin 's mature style evolved during this period ; as in Milan he had absorbed the influence of light Italian secular music , in Rome he refined his techniques of sacred music . Several of his motets have been dated to the years he spent at the papal chapel . 
 = = = Departure from Rome ; Milan and France = = = 
 Around 1498 , Josquin most likely re @-@ entered the service of the Sforza family , on the evidence of a pair of letters between the Gonzaga and Sforza families . He probably did not stay in Milan long , for in 1499 Louis XII captured Milan in his invasion of northern Italy and imprisoned Josquin 's former employers . Around this time Josquin most likely returned to France , although documented details of his career around the turn of the 16th century are lacking . Prior to departing Italy he most likely wrote one of his most famous secular compositions , the <unk> El <unk> ( the Cricket ) , as well as In te Domine speravi ( " I have placed my hope in you , Lord " ) , based on Psalm 30 . The latter composition may have been a veiled reference to the religious reformer Girolamo Savonarola , who had been burned at the stake in Florence in 1498 , and for whom Josquin seems to have had a special reverence ; the text was the Dominican friar 's favorite psalm , a meditation on which he left incomplete in prison prior to his execution . 
 Some of Josquin 's compositions , such as the instrumental Vive le roy , have been tentatively dated to the period around 1500 when he was in France . A motet , Memor esto verbi tui servo tuo ( " Remember thy promise unto thy servant " ) , was , according to Heinrich Glarean writing in the <unk> of 1547 , composed as a gentle reminder to the king to keep his promise of a benefice to Josquin , which he had forgotten to keep . According to Glarean 's story , it worked : the court applauded , and the king gave Josquin his benefice . Upon receiving it , Josquin reportedly wrote a motet on the text <unk> servo tuo , Domine ( " Lord , thou hast dealt graciously with thy servant " ) to show his gratitude to the king . 
 = = = Ferrara = = = 
 Josquin probably remained in the service of Louis XII until 1503 , when Duke Ercole I of Ferrara hired him for the chapel there . One of the rare mentions of Josquin 's personality survives from this time . Prior to hiring Josquin , one of Duke Ercole 's assistants recommended that he hire Heinrich Isaac instead , since Isaac was easier to get along with , more companionable , was more willing to compose on demand , and would cost significantly less ( 120 ducats vs. 200 ) . Ercole , however , chose Josquin . 
 While in Ferrara , Josquin wrote some of his most famous compositions , including the austere , Savonarola @-@ influenced Miserere , which became one of the most widely distributed motets of the 16th century ; the utterly contrasting , virtuoso motet Virgo <unk> ; and possibly the Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae , which is written on a cantus firmus derived from the musical letters in the Duke 's name , a technique known as soggetto cavato . 
 Josquin did not stay in Ferrara long . An outbreak of the plague in the summer of 1503 prompted the evacuation of the Duke and his family , as well as two @-@ thirds of the citizens , and Josquin left by April of the next year , possibly also to escape the plague . His replacement , Jacob Obrecht , died of the plague in the summer of 1505 , to be replaced by Antoine <unk> in 1506 , who stayed until the disbanding of the chapel in 1510 . 
 = = = Retirement to Condé @-@ sur @-@ l 'Escaut = = = 
 Josquin went directly from Ferrara to his home region of Condé @-@ sur @-@ l 'Escaut , southeast of Lille on the present @-@ day border between Belgium and France , becoming provost of the collegiate church of Notre @-@ Dame on 3 May 1504 , a large musical establishment that he headed for the rest of his life . While the chapter at Bourges Cathedral asked him to become master of the choirboys there in 1508 , it is not known how he responded , and there is no record of his having been employed there ; most scholars presume he remained in Condé . In 1509 , he held concurrently provost and choir master offices at Saint Quentin collegiate church . 
 During the last two decades of his life , Josquin 's fame spread abroad along with his music . The newly developed technology of printing made wide dissemination of his music possible , and Josquin was the favorite of the first printers : one of Petrucci 's first publications , and the earliest surviving print of music by a single composer , was a book of Josquin 's masses which he printed in Venice in 1502 . This publication was successful enough that Petrucci published two further volumes of Josquin 's masses , in 1504 and 1514 , and reissued them several times . 
 On his death @-@ bed , Josquin asked that he be listed on the rolls as a foreigner , so that his property would not pass to the Lords and Ladies of Condé . This bit of evidence has been used to show that he was French by birth . Additionally , he left an endowment for the performance of his late motet , Pater noster , at all general processions in the town when they passed in front of his house , stopping to place a wafer on the marketplace altar to the Holy Virgin . Pater noster may have been his last work . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Josquin lived during a transitional stage in music history . Musical styles were changing rapidly , in part owing to the movement of musicians between different regions of Europe . Many northern musicians moved to Italy , the heart of the Renaissance , attracted by the Italian nobility 's patronage of the arts ; while in Italy , these composers were influenced by the native Italian styles , and often brought those ideas with them back to their homelands . The sinuous musical lines of the Ockeghem generation , the contrapuntal complexity of the Netherlanders , and the homophonic textures of the Italian <unk> and secular music began to merge into a unified style ; indeed Josquin was to be the leading figure in this musical process , which eventually resulted in the formation of an international musical language , of which the most famous composers included Palestrina and Lassus . 
 Josquin likely learned his craft in his home region in the North , in France , and then in Italy when he went to Milan and Rome . His early sacred works emulate the contrapuntal complexity and ornamented , melismatic lines of Ockeghem and his contemporaries , but at the same time he was learning his contrapuntal technique he was acquiring an Italianate idiom for his secular music : after all , he was surrounded by Italian popular music in Milan . By the end of his long creative career , which spanned approximately 50 productive years , he had developed a simplified style in which each voice of a polyphonic composition exhibited free and smooth motion , and close attention was paid to clear setting of text as well as clear alignment of text with musical motifs . While other composers were influential on the development of Josquin 's style , especially in the late 15th century , he himself became the most influential composer in Europe , especially after the development of music printing , which was concurrent with the years of his maturity and peak output . This event made his influence even more decisive than it might otherwise have been . 
 Many " modern " musical compositional practices were being born in the era around 1500 . Josquin made extensive use of " motivic cells " in his compositions , short , easily recognizable melodic fragments which passed from voice to voice in a contrapuntal texture , giving it an inner unity . This is a basic organizational principle in music which has been practiced continuously from approximately 1500 until the present day . 
 Josquin wrote in all of the important forms current at the time , including masses , motets , chansons , and frottole . He even contributed to the development of a new form , the motet @-@ chanson , of which he left at least three examples . In addition , some of his pieces were probably intended for instrumental performance . 
 Each area of his output can be further subdivided by form or by hypothetical period of composition . Since dating Josquin 's compositions is particularly problematic , with scholarly consensus only achieved on a minority of works , discussion here is by type . 
 = = = Masses = = = 
 Josquin wrote towards the end of the period in which the mass was the predominant form of sacred composition in Europe . The mass , as it had developed through the 15th century , was a long , multi @-@ section form , with opportunities for large @-@ scale structure and organization not possible in the other forms such as the motet . Josquin wrote some of the most famous examples of the genre , most using some kind of cyclic organization . 
 He wrote masses using the following general techniques , although there is considerable overlap between techniques in individual compositions : 
 cantus firmus mass , in which a pre @-@ existing tune appeared , mostly unchanged , in one voice of the texture , with the other voices being more or less freely composed ; 
 paraphrase mass , in which a pre @-@ existing tune was used freely in all voices , and in many variations ; 
 parody mass , in which a pre @-@ existing multi @-@ voice song appeared in whole or in part , with material from all voices in use , not just the tune ; 
 soggetto cavato , or solmization mass , in which the tune is drawn from the syllables of a name or phrase ( for example " la sol fa re mi " — A , G , F , D , E — based on the syllables of Lascia fare mi ( " let me do it " , a phrase used by an unknown patron , in a context around which much legend has arisen ) . 
 canon , in which an entire mass is based on canonic techniques , and no pre @-@ existing material has been identified . 
 Most of these techniques , particularly paraphrase and parody , became standardized during the first half of the 16th century ; Josquin was very much a pioneer , and what was perceived by later observers as the mixing of these techniques was actually the process by which they were created . 
 = = = = Cantus @-@ firmus masses = = = = 
 Prior to Josquin 's mature period , the most common technique for writing masses was the cantus firmus , a technique which had been in use already for most of the 15th century . It was the technique that Josquin used earliest in his career , with the Missa L 'ami <unk> , possibly his first mass . This mass is based on a secular – indeed ribald – tune similar to " Three Blind Mice " . That basing a mass on such a source was an accepted procedure is evident from the existence of the mass in Sistine Chapel part @-@ books copied during the papacy of Julius II ( 1503 to 1513 ) . 
 Josquin 's most famous cantus @-@ firmus masses are the two based on the L 'homme armé tune , which was the favorite tune for mass composition of the entire Renaissance . The earlier of the two , Missa L 'homme armé super voces musicales , is a technical tour @-@ de @-@ force on the tune , containing numerous mensuration canons and contrapuntal display . It was by far the most famous of all his masses . The second , Missa L 'homme armé sexti toni , is a " fantasia on the theme of the armed man . " While based on a cantus firmus , it is also a paraphrase mass , for fragments of the tune appear in all voices . Technically it is almost restrained , compared to the other L 'homme armé mass , until the closing Agnus Dei , which contains a complex canonic structure including a rare retrograde canon , around which other voices are woven . 
 = = = = Paraphrase masses = = = = 
 The paraphrase technique differs from the cantus @-@ firmus technique in that the source material , though it still consists of a monophonic original , is embellished , often with ornaments . As in the cantus @-@ firmus technique , the source tune may appear in many voices of the mass . 
 Several of Josquin 's masses feature the paraphrase technique , and they include some of his most famous work . The relatively early Missa Ave maris stella , which probably dates from his years in the Sistine Chapel choir , paraphrases the Marian antiphon of the same name ; it is also one of his shortest masses . The late Missa de Beata Virgine paraphrases <unk> in praise of the Virgin Mary ; it is a Lady Mass , a votive mass for Saturday performance , and was his most popular mass in the 16th century . 
 By far the most famous of Josquin 's masses using the technique , and one of the most famous mass settings of the entire era , was the Missa <unk> lingua , based on the hymn by Thomas Aquinas for the Vespers of Corpus Christi . It was probably the last mass that Josquin composed . This mass is an extended fantasia on the tune , using the melody in all voices and in all parts of the mass , in elaborate and ever @-@ changing polyphony . One of the high points of the mass is the et incarnatus est section of the Credo , where the texture becomes homophonic , and the tune appears in the topmost voice ; here the portion which would normally set " Sing , O my tongue , of the mystery of the divine body " is instead given the words " And he became incarnate by the Holy Ghost from the Virgin Mary , and was made man . " 
 = = = = Parody masses , masses on popular songs = = = = 
 In parody masses , the source material was not a single line , but an entire texture , often of a popular song . Several works by Josquin fall loosely into this category , including the Missa Fortuna desperata , based on the three @-@ voice song Fortuna desperata ( possibly by Antoine <unk> ) ; the Missa Malheur me bat ( based on a chanson variously ascribed to Obrecht , Ockeghem , or , most likely , <unk> <unk> ) ; and the Missa Mater Patris , based on a three @-@ voice motet by Antoine <unk> . The Missa Mater Patris is probably the first true parody mass to be composed , for it no longer contains any hint of a cantus firmus . Parody technique was to become the most usual means of mass composition for the remainder of the 16th century , although the mass gradually fell out of favor as the motet grew in esteem . 
 = = = = Masses on solmization syllables = = = = 
 The earliest known mass by any composer using this method of composition – the soggetto cavato – is the Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae , which Josquin probably wrote in the early 1480s for the powerful Ercole I , Duke of Ferrara . The notes of the cantus firmus are drawn from the musical syllables of the Duke 's name in the following way : Ercole , Duke of Ferrara in Latin is Hercules Dux <unk> . Taking the solmization syllables with the same vowels gives : Re – Ut – Re – Ut – Re – Fa – Mi – Re ( in modern nomenclature : D – C – D – C – D – F – E – D ) . Another mass using this technique is the Missa La sol fa re mi , based on the musical syllables contained in " Lascia fare mi " ( " let me do it " ) . The story , as told by <unk> in 1547 , was that an unknown aristocrat used to order suitors away with this phrase , and Josquin immediately wrote an " exceedingly elegant " mass on it as a jab at him . 
 = = = = <unk> masses = = = = 
 <unk> masses came into increasing prominence in the latter part of the 15th century . Early examples include Ockeghem 's famous Missa <unk> , consisting entirely of mensuration canons , the Missa L 'homme armé of Guillaume <unk> , whose cantus firmus is presented in canon at the descending fifth , and the Missa [ Ad fugam ] of <unk> de Orto , based on freely composed canons at the fifth between <unk> and tenor . Josquin makes use of canon in the Osanna and Agnus Dei III of the Missa L 'homme armé sexti toni , throughout the Missa Sine nomine , and in the final three movements of the Missa De <unk> virgine . The Missa L 'homme armé super voces musicales incorporates mensuration canons in the Kyrie , Benedictus , and Agnus Dei II . 
 = = = Motets = = = 
 Josquin 's motet style varied from almost strictly homophonic settings with block chords and syllabic text declamation to highly ornate contrapuntal fantasias , to the psalm settings which combined these extremes with the addition of rhetorical figures and text @-@ painting that foreshadowed the later development of the madrigal . He wrote many of his motets for four voices , an ensemble size which had become the compositional norm around 1500 , and he also was a considerable innovator in writing motets for five and six voices . No motets of more than six voices have been reliably attributed to Josquin . 
 Almost all of Josquin 's motets use some kind of compositional constraint on the process ; they are not freely composed . Some of them use a cantus firmus as a unifying device ; some are canonic ; some use a motto which repeats throughout ; some use several of these methods . The motets that use canon can be roughly divided into two groups : those in which the canon is plainly designed to be heard and appreciated as such , and another group in which a canon is present , but almost impossible to hear , and seemingly written to be appreciated by the eye , and by connoisseurs . 
 Josquin frequently used imitation , especially paired imitation , in writing his motets , with sections akin to fugal expositions occurring on successive lines of the text he was setting . An example is his setting of Dominus <unk> ( Psalm 93 ) , for four voices ; each of the lines of the psalm begins with a voice singing a new tune alone , quickly followed by entries of other three voices in imitation . 
 In writing polyphonic settings of psalms , Josquin was a pioneer , and psalm settings form a large proportion of the motets of his later years . Few composers prior to Josquin had written polyphonic psalm settings . Some of Josquin 's settings include the famous Miserere , written in Ferrara in 1503 or 1504 and most likely inspired by the recent execution of the reformist monk Girolamo Savonarola , Memor esto verbi tui , based on Psalm 119 , and two settings of De profundis ( Psalm 130 ) , both of which are often considered to be among his most significant accomplishments . 
 = = = Chansons and instrumental compositions = = = 
 In the domain of secular music , Josquin left numerous French chansons , for from three to six voices , as well as a handful of Italian secular songs known as frottole , as well as some pieces which were probably intended for instrumental performance . Problems of attribution are even more acute with the chansons than they are with other portions of his output : while about 70 three and four @-@ voice chansons were published under his name during his lifetime , only six of the more than thirty five- and six @-@ voice chansons attributed to him were circulated under his name during the same time . Many of the attributions added after his death are considered to be unreliable , and much work has been done in the last decades of the 20th century to correct attributions on stylistic grounds . 
 Josquin 's earliest chansons were probably composed in northern Europe , under the influence of composers such as Ockeghem and <unk> . Unlike them , however , he never adhered strictly to the conventions of the formes fixes – the rigid and complex repetition patterns of the rondeau , <unk> , and ballade – instead he often wrote his early chansons in strict imitation , a feature they shared with many of his sacred works . He was one of the first composers of chansons to make all voices equal parts of the texture ; and many of his chansons contain points of imitation , in the manner of motets . However he did use melodic repetition , especially where the lines of text rhymed , and many of his chansons had a lighter texture , as well as a faster tempo , than his motets . 
 Inside of his chansons , he often used a cantus firmus , sometimes a popular song whose origin can no longer be traced , as in Si j <unk> Marion . Other times he used a tune originally associated with a separate text ; and still other times he freely composed an entire song , using no apparent external source material . Another technique he sometimes used was to take a popular song and write it as a canon with itself , in two inner voices , and write new melodic material above and around it , to a new text : he used this technique in one of his most famous chansons , <unk> d 'argent ( " The problem with money " ) , a song sung by a man who wakes in bed with a prostitute , broke and unable to pay her . 
 Some of his chansons were doubtless designed to be performed instrumentally . That Petrucci published many of them without text is strong evidence of this ; additionally , some of the pieces ( for example , the fanfare @-@ like Vive le roy ) contain writing more idiomatic for instruments than voices . 
 Josquin 's most famous chansons circulated widely in Europe . Some of the better known include his lament on the death of Ockeghem , Nymphes des bois / Requiem aeternam ; Mille regretz ( the attribution of which has recently been questioned ) ; Plus <unk> regretz ; and Je me complains . 
 In addition to his French chansons , he wrote at least three pieces in the manner of the Italian <unk> , a popular Italian song form which he would have encountered during his years in Milan . These songs include Scaramella , El <unk> , and In te domine speravi . They are even simpler in texture than his French chansons , being almost uniformly syllabic and homophonic , and they remain among the most frequently sung portions of his output . 
 = = = Motet @-@ chansons = = = 
 While in Milan , Josquin wrote several examples of a new type of piece developed by the composers there , the motet @-@ chanson . These compositions were texturally very similar to 15th century chansons in the formes fixes mold , except that unlike those completely secular works , they contained a chant @-@ derived Latin cantus @-@ firmus in the lowest of the three voices . The other voices , in French , sang a secular text which had either a symbolic relationship to the sacred Latin text , or commented on it . Josquin 's three known motet @-@ chansons , Que vous madame / In pace , A la mort / Monstra te esse matrem , and Fortune <unk> <unk> / Pauper sum ego , are similar stylistically to those by the other composers of the Milan chapel , such as <unk> Compère and Alexander Agricola . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Josquin 's fame lasted throughout the 16th century , and indeed increased for several decades after his death . Zarlino , writing in the 1580s , was still using examples from Josquin in his treatises on composition ; and Josquin 's fame was only eclipsed after the beginning of the Baroque era , with the decline of the pre @-@ tonal polyphonic style . During the 18th and 19th centuries Josquin 's fame was overshadowed by later Roman School composer Palestrina , whose music was seen as the summit of polyphonic refinement , and codified into a system of composition by theorists such as Johann <unk> ; however , during the 20th century , Josquin 's reputation has grown steadily , to the point where scholars again consider him " the greatest and most successful composer of the age . " According to Richard Sherr , writing in the introduction to the Josquin Companion , addressing specifically the shrinking of Josquin 's canon due to correction of misattributions , " Josquin will survive because his best music really is as magnificent as everybody has always said it was . " 
 Since the 1950s Josquin 's reputation has been boosted by the increasing availability of recordings , of which there are many , and the rise of ensembles specializing in the performance of 16th century vocal music , many of which place Josquin 's output at the heart of their repertoire . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = Works list = = 
 The difficulties in compiling a works list for Josquin cannot be overstated . Because of his immense prestige in the early sixteenth century , many scribes and publishers did not resist the temptation of attributing anonymous or otherwise spurious works to Josquin . The German editor Georg Forster summed up the situation admirably in 1540 when he wrote , " I remember a certain eminent man saying that , now that Josquin is dead , he is putting out more works than when he was alive . " Thus , the authenticity of many of the works listed below is disputed . 
 = = = Masses = = = 
 Missa Ad fugam ( canonic , four voices ; authorship doubted by some scholars ) 
 Missa Ave maris stella ( Rome , 1486 – 1495 ) ( four voices ) 
 Missa D 'ung <unk> <unk> ( four voices ; authorship doubted by some scholars ) 
 Missa de Beata Virgine ( around 1510 ) ( four voices in parts I – II , five voices in parts III – V ) 
 Missa Di <unk> ( = N <unk> je jamais ) ( four voices ; authorship doubted by some scholars ) 
 Missa <unk> regretz ( four voices ) 
 Missa Fortuna desperata ( four voices ) 
 Missa <unk> ( four voices ) 
 Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae ( Ferrara , 1503 / 04 ) ( four voices , six in Agnus III ) 
 Missa La sol fa re mi ( four voices ) 
 Missa L 'ami <unk> ( four voices ) 
 Missa L 'homme armé sexti toni ( four voices , six in Agnus III ) 
 Missa L 'homme armé super voces musicales ( four voices ) 
 Missa Malheur me bat ( four voices , six in Agnus III ) 
 Missa Mater patris ( four voices ; authorship doubted by some scholars ) 
 Missa <unk> lingua ( Condé , around 1514 ) ( four voices ) 
 Missa Sine nomine ( four voices ; canonic mass , also titled " Missa Ad fugam " in later print ) 
 Doubtful works : 
 Missa da pacem ( four voices ; probably Noel <unk> ) 
 Missa Una <unk> de <unk> ( Une mousse de <unk> ) ( four voices ) 
 = = = Mass fragments = = = 
 All are of questionable authenticity , except the Credo De tous biens playne and Credo [ <unk> toni ] 
 Credo <unk> me <unk> ( = Des rouges nez ) 
 Credo De tous biens playne 
 Credo <unk> ( II ) 
 Credo [ <unk> toni ] ( canonic ) 
 Gloria De <unk> virgine 
 Sanctus De <unk> 
 Sanctus D 'ung <unk> <unk> 
 Credo <unk> ( I ) 
 Credo La belle se <unk> ( probably Robert de <unk> ) 
 = = = Motets = = = 
 <unk> , <unk> mi ( 4vv ) ( attribution has been challenged ; possibly Pierre de La Rue ) 
 Absolve , <unk> , Domine / Requiem aeternam ( <unk> ) ( attribution has been challenged ) 
 Alma redemptoris mater ; 
 Alma redemptoris mater / Ave regina <unk> ; 
 Ave Maria ... <unk> tu ( 4vv ) ; 
 Ave Maria ... Virgo <unk> ( Milan 1484 / 85 ) ; 
 Ave <unk> spes , Maria ( not in first complete works edition ) 
 Ave <unk> <unk> 
 Ave verum corpus <unk> 
 Benedicta es , <unk> regina 
 Christum <unk> , qui per <unk> ( 4vv ) 
 De profundis <unk> ( 4vv ) ( possibly middle @-@ period composition : attribution has been questioned ) 
 De profundis <unk> ( 5vv ) ( late composition ) 
 Domine exaudi <unk> meam 
 Domine , ne in <unk> tuo ( 4vv ) 
 Domine , non @-@ secundum peccata nostra ( 2 @-@ 4vv ; for Rome ) 
 Ecce , tu pulchra es , <unk> mea 
 <unk> est autem 
 <unk> virgo , mater Christi 
 Homo quidam fecit <unk> magnam 
 Honor , <unk> , imperium 
 <unk> me <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 5vv ) 
 <unk> Dei virgo <unk> 
 In <unk> Israel de <unk> 
 In illo tempore assumpsit Jesus <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 4vv , only tenor part survives ) 
 In principio erat <unk> ( authenticity has been questioned ) 
 <unk> , <unk> et casta es , Maria 
 Jubilate Deo omnis terra 
 Liber <unk> Jesu Christi 
 Magnificat <unk> toni ( attributed to Josquin on stylistic grounds ) 
 Magnificat tertii toni ( attributed to Josquin on stylistic grounds ) 
 Memor esto verbi tui 
 Miserere mei Deus ( Ferrara , 1503 ) 
 Misericordias Domini in aeternum <unk> ( France , 1480 / 83 ) 
 Missus est Gabriel <unk> ad Mariam <unk> 
 <unk> ad <unk> 
 Monstra te esse matrem 
 O <unk> <unk> ( part of a 5 @-@ motet cycle ) 
 O bone et <unk> Jesu 
 O Domine Jesu Christe ( part of a Passion setting in 5 sections ) 
 O virgo <unk> 
 O virgo <unk> 
 Pater noster , qui es in <unk> ( Condé , 1505 – 1521 ) 
 <unk> autem David 
 <unk> rerum <unk> 
 Qui <unk> me <unk> 
 Qui habitat in <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 Qui <unk> facie <unk> ( part of a Passion setting in 6 sections ) 
 Salve regina ( 4vv ) 
 Salve regina ( 5vv , 1502 ) 
 Stabat Mater 
 Tu lumen , tu splendor 
 Tu solus qui <unk> mirabilia 
 <unk> Domine <unk> me ( <unk> on stylistic grounds ; only part survives ) 
 Ut <unk> <unk> 
 Veni , sancte spiritus ( also <unk> to Forestier ) 
 Victimae paschali laudes 
 Virgo <unk> 
 Virgo <unk> ( Ferrara , 1504 / 05 ) 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 7 @-@ part Passion cycle ) ( 1480s ) 
 = = = Motet @-@ chansons = = = 
 A la mort / Monstra te esse matrem 
 Fortune <unk> <unk> / Pauper sum ego 
 Que vous madame / In pace in <unk> 
 = = = Chansons = = = 
 A l 'heure que je vous 
 A l 'ombre d 'ung buissonet , au <unk> ( 3vv ) 
 Adieu mes amours 
 Adieu mes amours ( <unk> or <unk> ) 
 <unk> <unk> , ma <unk> <unk> ( 4vv ) 
 Belle , pour l 'amour de vous 
 <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> sans plus 
 Comment <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> 
 De tous biens plaine ( 3vv ) 
 De tous biens plaine ( 4vv ) 
 <unk> me bat 
 Du mien <unk> 
 Dulces exuviae 
 En l 'ombre d 'ung buissonet tout , au long ( 3vv ) 
 En l 'ombre d 'ung buissonet tout , au long ( 4vv ) 
 <unk> je suis en grant pensée ( 3vv ) 
 <unk> je suis en grant pensée ( 4vv ) 
 Fama <unk> 
 <unk> d 'argent 
 <unk> <unk> ( only one of six voice parts survives ) 
 Fortuna d 'un gran tempo 
 <unk> madame 
 Ile <unk> de <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> suis à <unk> 
 Je me complains 
 Je n <unk> plus 
 Je ris et si ay <unk> 
 Je sey bien dire 
 La belle se <unk> 
 La Bernardina 
 La plus de plus 
 Le villain [ jaloux ] 
 Ma bouche <unk> et mon <unk> <unk> 
 Mille <unk> ( 4 voices ) 
 Mon <unk> m 'a <unk> 
 N <unk> pas ung grant <unk> 
 Nymphes des bois ( written for the death of Johannes Ockeghem ) 
 Nymphes , <unk> / <unk> me 
 <unk> regretz 
 Petite <unk> ; 
 Plaine de <unk> 
 Plus n <unk> ma <unk> 
 Plus <unk> regretz ( written between 1508 and 1511 , commemorating the 1507 Treaty of Calais ( 1507 ) ) ; 
 <unk> regretz 
 Pour <unk> 
 Quant je vous <unk> 
 Qui belles amours a 
 <unk> de my <unk> 
 <unk> sans fin ; 
 Se <unk> <unk> 
 Si j 'ay perdu mon amy ( 3vv ) 
 Si j 'ay perdu mon amy ( 4vv ) 
 Tant vous <unk> <unk> 
 Tenz <unk> en voz bras 
 Une <unk> de <unk> ; 
 Vive le roy ( instrumental piece , written for Louis XII ) 
 Vous l <unk> , s 'il vous <unk> 
 Vous ne l <unk> pas 
 textless ( 4vv ) 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 El Grillo 
 In te Domine speravi per <unk> pietà 
 Scaramella va alla guerra 
 = Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway = 
 The Lincoln Alexander Parkway , officially nicknamed The Linc , is a municipal expressway in the Canadian city of Hamilton , Ontario , which connects Highway 403 with the Red Hill Valley Parkway , which continues north to the Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) . Collectively , the two expressways form a southern and eastern bypass of Hamilton . Located on the Hamilton mountain , atop the Niagara Escarpment , the freeway was named after the former Progressive Conservative MP and first black Lieutenant Governor of Ontario , Lincoln Alexander in July 1997 , despite him never holding a driver 's license of his own . 
 Although planning for the Red Hill Creek Expressway began in 1963 , construction did not begin until 1991 , by which point the project had become a contentious issue . The province agreed to split the cost for the east – west portion of the planned expressway , but opposed the north – south link . Nevertheless , construction continued throughout the mid @-@ 1990s , and the expressway opened on October 15 , 1997 , just over a decade before the controversial Red Hill Valley Parkway , which opened on November 17 , 2007 . The speed limit along the parkway is 90 kilometres per hour ( 56 mph ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway begins in the west end of Hamilton at a large turbine interchange with Highway 403 , which also provides access to Mohawk Road from Westbound Highway 403 and The Linc . Travelling southeast , the expressway descends into a ditch , which it travels along throughout most of its length . It passes north of the Meadowlands Centre mall and the interchanges with Mohawk Road / Golf Links Road . The route then becomes sandwiched between residential subdivisions at Upper Horning Road , which was bisected by construction of the route . The route continues , passing beneath a pedestrian overpass and Upper Paradise Road before interchanging with Garth Street . 
 Between Garth Street and Upper Ottawa Street , <unk> Road — a concession road bisected by interchanges at Upper James Street , Upper Wentworth Street and Upper Gage Avenue — travels parallel to the parkway approximately 200 metres ( 660 ft ) to the north . The route passes beneath another pedestrian bridge and West 5th Street then interchanges with Upper James Street ( former Highway 6 ) . It continues , with Upper Wellington Street crossing the parkway before an interchange with Upper Wentworth Street . On the northeast corner of this interchange is Lime Ridge Mall , while Thomas B. McQuesten Park lies on the southeast corner . East of these , the route once again lies between subdivisions , with Upper Sherman Avenue crossing the freeway midway to the interchange with Upper Gage Avenue . 
 Beyond the Upper Ottawa Street crossing , residential developments are confined to the north side of the Linc as it curves southward , descending towards the top of the Red Hill Valley . Surrounded by undeveloped land , it meets the northern end of Dartnall Road at a trumpet interchange , with Mt . Albion Conservation Area to the southeast and the Red Hill Creek passing beneath the interchange to traverse the Niagara Escarpment at Albion Falls . The Linc gradually curves back northeast , now surrounded , passing under Pritchard Road . Immediately east of there , the Mud Street interchange branches off as the route curves northward and becomes the Red Hill Valley Parkway , which descends the escarpment towards the QEW . 
 = = History = = 
 The parkway was one of two phases to build an expressway bypass on the south side of Hamilton . Despite this , plans for both The Linc as well as the Red Hill Valley Parkway appeared simultaneously in 1963 , when Hamilton City Council approved the ' Hamilton Area Transportation Study ' which included the Highway 53 Freeway as one of five proposed expressways . These were subsequently added to the city 's official plan in 1964 . However , political change and shifting public attitudes would soon reject the idea of inner @-@ city expressways , instead shifting the focus to public transportation . The cancellation of the Spadina Expressway in Toronto was the turning point in this shift . 
 It would take until 1982 before serious consideration was given to any expressway plan . While most of the planned 1963 routes had vanished from the drawing board , a north – south link through the Red Hill Valley Creek and an east – west route along the brow of the escarpment remained in place . An environmental assessment of both links began and was approved in 1985 . However , expressway opponents launched an appeal to the provincial cabinet . This appeal was rejected in 1987 , and engineering began . Preliminary designs were submitted to the Regional Municipality of Hamilton – Wentworth and approved in April 1990 . Construction began immediately on structures to carry three routes ( two road and one rail ) over the future Red Hill Valley Parkway . 
 However , the election of the NDP government in September 1990 — with representatives whom were all vocally opposed to the expressway since the late 1970s winning all six Hamilton @-@ area seats — provincial funding was pulled from the north – south portion of the project in December . Despite this , construction began on the east – west expressway in 1991 under a 50 / 50 cost @-@ sharing agreement while the City of Hamilton attempted to sue the provincial government for the reinstatement of funding for the north – south portion . In April 1992 , work began on overpasses at Upper Paradise Road and Upper Sherman Avenue . This was followed in late 1993 by a project to link Mohawk Road and Golf Links Road along with an interchange to connect the two with Highway 403 at the former Mohawk Road interchange , which would become the connection point for the future expressway . As part of this project , Stone Church Road was extended west from Upper Horning Road to Golf Links Road . Work continued on the new expressway over the next several years , wrapping up in mid @-@ 1997 . By then , a new Progressive Conservative government was in power , and committed $ 100 million towards the two projects . An opening ceremony was held on October 5 , 1997 , with local , regional and provincial politicians in attendance . The new expressway opened to vehicular traffic ten days later on October 15 . The cost of the parkway , initially projected at $ 187 million , was under budget at $ 180 million . 
 The expressway was named after the former Progressive Conservative MP , first black Lieutenant Governor of Ontario , and first black lawyer in Hamilton , Lincoln Alexander , despite him never holding a driver 's license of his own . Hamilton city council voted unanimously on July 16 , 1997 to name the east – west portion of the bypass , until then known as the Red Hill Creek Expressway , after Alexander , an honour happily endorsed by the former MP ; the official nickname was adopted as part of this vote . He would later appear with his family alongside premier Mike Harris at the ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony for the parkway on October 5 . 
 At the time of completion , the Linc ended at Dartnall Road . On June 5 , 1999 , an extension to connect with Mud Street was opened , designed to fit within the future interchange with the Red Hill Valley Parkway . The extension became prone to accidents over the following years , prompting the addition of safety features along the extended ramps . The interchange with Highway 403 also initially remained unmodified from the design constructed in 1969 , with access between westbound Highway 403 and eastbound on the parkway being provided by a loop ramp and access between westbound on the parkway and westbound Highway 403 requiring a left turn at a traffic light . This issue , which became a serious bottleneck when traffic on the new expressway greatly exceeded expectations , was remedied beginning in 2001 with the construction of two flyovers to replace the problematic movements and the removal of the under @-@ utilized connection from eastbound Mohawk Road to westbound Highway 403 . The $ 16 million project was completed in late 2002 . 
 In June 2014 , the City of Hamilton modified the eastern terminus of the Linc from west of Dartnall Road to the interchange with the Red Hill Valley Parkway and Mud Street . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway . The entire route is located in Hamilton , Ontario . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow = 
 Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow is a 2004 American science fiction action @-@ adventure film written and directed by Kerry Conran in his directorial debut , and produced by Jon Avnet , Sadie Frost , Jude Law , and Marsha Oglesby . The film stars Law , Gwyneth Paltrow , and Angelina Jolie ; it is an example of the " <unk> " genre . 
 Conran spent four years making a black and white teaser with a bluescreen set up in his living room and using a Macintosh IIci . He was able to show it to Avnet , who was so impressed that he spent two years working with him on his screenplay . No major was interested Sky Captain , but Avnet convinced Aurelio De Laurentiis to finance Sky Captain without a distribution deal . 
 Almost 100 digital artists , modelers , animators and compositors created the multi @-@ layered 2D and 3D backgrounds for the live @-@ action footage while the entire movie was sketched out via hand @-@ drawn storyboards and then re @-@ created as CGI animatics . Ten months before Conran made it , he shot it entirely with stand @-@ ins in Los Angeles and then created it in animatics so the actors could envision it . 
 Despite being a box office bomb , generating $ 58 million for a $ 70 million budget , Sky Captain received largely positive reviews , and is regarded as a cult classic . It is notable as one of the first major films , along of 2004 's Casshern and Immortal , and 2005 's Sin City , to be shot entirely on a " digital backlot " , blending actors with CGI surroundings . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a technologically advanced 1939 , the zeppelin Hindenburg III arrives in New York City , mooring atop the Empire State Building . Aboard the airship is Dr. Jorge Vargas ( Julian Curry ) , a scientist who arranges for a package containing two vials to be delivered to Dr. Walter Jennings ( Trevor Baxter ) . Moments later , as the courier looks back while leaving with the vials , Dr. Vargas is nowhere to be seen . 
 Polly Perkins ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) , a newspaper reporter for The Chronicle , is looking into the disappearances of Vargas and five other renowned scientists . She receives a cryptic message telling her to go to Radio City Music Hall . Ignoring the warning of her editor , Mr. Paley ( Michael Gambon ) , she meets Dr. Jennings during a showing of The Wizard of Oz . Dr Jennings tells Polly that Dr. Totenkopf ( " Deathshead " in German ) is coming for him next . Suddenly , air raid sirens go off as giant , seemingly indestructible robots attack the city . Clearly outmatched , the police and other authorities call for " Sky Captain " Joe Sullivan ( Jude Law ) . Joe commands a private air force based in New York State known as the Flying Legion . 
 Polly shows little regard for her personal safety as she photographs the action from the street . Meanwhile , Joe engages the robots with his highly modified Curtiss P @-@ 40 pursuit fighter and eventually manages to disable one robot . The rest of the robots leave soon after . News reports show similar attacks around the globe . The disabled robot is taken back to the Legion 's air base so that its science and technology expert , Dex ( Giovanni Ribisi ) , can examine it . Polly follows , hoping to get information for her story . She and Joe are ex @-@ lovers who broke up three years earlier in China , where Joe was serving with the Flying Tigers . Since it appears Polly has useful information , Joe reluctantly agrees to let her in on the investigation . Her lead takes them to the ransacked laboratory of Dr. Jennings , with the scientist himself near death . The mysterious female assailant ( Bai Ling ) escapes . Just before he dies , Jennings gives Polly the two vials from Vargas , and says they are crucial to Dr. Totenkopf 's plans . Polly hides the vials and withholds the information from Joe . They return to the Legion 's base just before it comes under attack from squadrons of ornithopter drones . Dex manages to track the origin of the robot control signal , but is then captured . However , he leaves behind a part of a map marking the location of Dr. Totenkopf 's base . 
 Joe and Polly find Dex 's map and fly to Nepal . Traveling into the Himalayas and Tibet , they discover an abandoned mining outpost and meet up with Joe 's old friend Kaji ( Omid Djalili ) . Two guides who turn out to be working for Totenkopf force Polly to turn over the vials and then lock her and Joe in a room full of explosives . The guides light fuses to the dynamite but Joe and Polly narrowly escape and are knocked unconscious by the explosion , which also destroys most of Polly 's camera film . They wake up together in the mythical Shangri @-@ La . The Tibetan @-@ speaking monks there tell of Dr. Totenkopf 's enslavement of their people , forcing them to work in the uranium mines . Most were killed by the radiation , but the final survivor ( who was suffering from radiation poisoning ) provides a clue to where Dr. Totenkopf is hiding . This leads them to another of Joe 's ex @-@ flames , Commander Franky Cook ( Angelina Jolie ) , who commands a Royal Navy flying aircraft carrier with submarine aircraft . 
 Franky leads the attack on Dr. Totenkopf 's island lair while Joe and Polly enter through an underwater inlet . After surfacing , Polly notices that the reflection in the water of the identification number on Joe 's aircraft reads " Polly " when viewed upside @-@ down . Joe and Polly find themselves on an island with dinosaur @-@ like creatures , which Polly hesitates to photograph as she has only two shots left on her camera . They head to a mountain and find a secret underground facility , where robots are loading animals , as well as the mysterious vials , onto a large " Noah 's Ark " rocket . Joe and Polly are detected and nearly killed . Dex , piloting a flying barge , arrives in the nick of time with three of the missing scientists . Dex explains that Dr. Totenkopf has given up on humanity and seeks to start the world over again : the " World of Tomorrow " . The vials are genetic material for a male and female human : a new Adam and Eve . 
 As the group attempts to enter Dr. Totenkopf 's lair , one scientist is electrocuted to death and ends up as a skeleton by the defense system . A hologram of Dr. Totenkopf ( Laurence Olivier ) appears and speaks about his hate for humanity and his evil plans to rebuild it as a new master race . Dex disables the defenses and the group discovers Dr. Totenkopf 's mummified corpse inside with a scrap of paper reading " forgive me " still clutched in his hand . He had died 20 years prior , but his machines continued his plan . Joe decides to sabotage the rocket from the inside while the others escape . Polly tries to tag along , but Joe kisses her and then knocks her out . Polly recovers and follows Joe , arriving in time to save him from Dr. Jennings ' mysterious female assassin , who turns out to be a robot . Joe and Polly then manage to board the rocket . Before the rocket reaches 100 km , when its second stage is scheduled to fire and thereby incinerate the Earth , Polly pushes an emergency button that ejects all the animals in escape pods . Joe tries to disable the rocket only to be interrupted by the same robot . He jolts the robot with its electric weapon and then uses it on the controls , disabling the rocket . They use the last pod to save themselves as the rocket safely explodes . 
 Joe and Polly watch the animal pods splash down around their escape pod . Polly then uses the last shot on her camera to take a picture of Joe rather than the animal pods . Joe grins and says : " Polly — lens cap . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jude Law stars as Joseph " Joe " Sullivan , a.k.a. Sky Captain : He commands a private air force known as the Flying Legion . His personal aircraft is a modified Curtiss P @-@ 40 . In 2002 , producer Jon Avnet showed Law the teaser trailer and the actor was very impressed by what he saw . He remembers , " All I got at that early stage was that he 'd used pretty advanced and unused technology to create a very retrospective look . " Avnet gave him the script to read and some preliminary artwork to look at . Law : " What was clear was also that at the center was a really great cinematic relationship , which you could put into any genre and it would work . You know , the kind of bickering [ relationship ] . I always like to call it The African Queen meets Buck Rogers . " Avnet wanted to work with Law because he knew that the actor had " worked both period , who worked both having theatrical experience , who worked on blue screen , who hadn 't hit yet as a major action star . " The actor had just finished filming Cold Mountain ( 2003 ) and was intrigued at going from filming on real locations to working on a movie done completely on a soundstage . Sky Captain would be one of three Jude Law films released by Paramount Pictures in 2004 , along with the remake of Alfie ( 2004 ) and Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events ( 2004 ) . It also was one of six overall Jude Law films released that year . 
 Gwyneth Paltrow as Polly Perkins , reporter for the New York Chronicle . Law believed so much in Conran 's movie that he became one of the producers and used his clout to get Paltrow involved . Once she had been suggested for the role , Law did not remember " any other name coming up . It just seems that she was perfect . She was as enthusiastic about the script and about the visual references that were sort of put to her , and jumped on board . " Paltrow said in an interview , " I thought that this is the time to do a movie like this where it 's kind of breaking into new territory and it 's not your basic formulaic action @-@ adventure movie . " 
 Angelina Jolie as Commander Francesca " Franky " Cook : She commands a Royal Navy flying aircraft carrier . Jolie had just arrived from the set of Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life ( 2003 ) and agreed to work on the movie for three days . Despite her small role , she reportedly had conducted hours of interviews with fighter pilots in order to absorb their jargon and get a feel for the role . 
 Giovanni Ribisi as Dex , ace mechanic of the Flying Legion . Ribisi met with Avnet and , initially , was not sure that he wanted to do the movie but after seeing the teaser trailer , he signed on without hesitation . 
 Michael Gambon as Editor Paley , editor of the Chronicle newspaper in New York 
 Omid Djalili as Kaji , former comrade @-@ in @-@ arm from the Flying Legion 
 Bai Ling as The Mysterious Woman , Totenkopf 's henchwoman , who is also a gynoid . 
 Julian Curry as Dr. Jorge Vargas , a missing scientist 
 Trevor Baxter as Dr. Walter Jennings , a missing scientist 
 Peter Law as Dr. Kessler , a missing scientist 
 Laurence Olivier as Dr. Totenkopf , the mysterious mad scientist and supervillain ; Olivier had been deceased for nearly 13 years at the time of filming , and was depicted in the film via computer manipulation of video and audio from when he was a young actor . 
 Khan Bonfils as one of the double @-@ agent guides working for Totenkopf ( identified in the credits as " Creepy " ; the other guide is " Scary " ) 
 Peter Law , who plays Dr. Kessler , is the father of Jude Law . The novelization written by Kevin J. Anderson gives the full names for Dex and Editor Paley as Dexter Dearborn and Morris Paley . 
 = = Development = = 
 Kerry Conran grew up on films and comic books of the 1930s and 1940s . He and his brother , Kevin , were encouraged by their parents to develop their creative side at a young age . Kerry studied at a feeder program for Disney animators at CalArts , and became interested in 2 @-@ D computer animation . While there , he realized that it was possible to apply some of the techniques associated with animation to live @-@ action . Conran had been out of film school for two years and was trying to figure out how to make a movie . He figured that Hollywood would never take a chance on an inexperienced , first @-@ time filmmaker , so he decided to make the movie himself . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Conran was influenced by the designs of Norman Bel Geddes , an industrial designer who did work for the 1933 Chicago World ’ s Fair and designed exhibits for the 1939 New York World 's Fair . Geddes also designed an Airliner # 4 that was to fly from Chicago to London . 
 Another key influence was Hugh Ferriss , one of the designers for the 1939 World ’ s Fair who designed bridges and huge housing complexes . He was an American delineator ( one who creates perspective drawings of buildings ) and architect . In 1922 , skyscraper architect Harvey Wiley Corbett commissioned Ferriss to draw a series of four step @-@ by @-@ step perspectives demonstrating the architectural consequences of the 1916 Zoning Resolution . These four drawings would later be used in his 1929 book The Metropolis of Tomorrow ( Dover Publications , 2005 , ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) . 
 Regarding the 1939 New York World 's Fair itself and its futuristic theme of the World of Tomorrow , Conran noted : " ... obviously the title refers to the World Expo and the spirit of that was looking at the future with a sense of optimism and a sense of the whimsical , you know , something that we 've lost a lot in our fantasies . We 're more cynical , more practical ... I think what this film attempts to do is to take that enthusiasm and innocence and celebrate it @-@ to not get mired in the practicality that we 're fixated upon today . " 
 Conran acknowledged his debt to German Expressionism , which was particularly evident in the opening scenes in New York City : " Early German cinema was born of just a completely different aesthetic than what we see nowadays . One of the last things I watched before starting this project was the Dr. Mabuse series that Lang had done - terribly inspirational , the use of art and propaganda even . " 
 Conran summed up what influenced him in making Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow : " We tried to approach it almost as though we lived in that era and were just another group of artists trying to make a work out of those pieces and inspirations . We wanted the film to feel like a lost film of that era . If we 're a footnote in the history of pulp art and Golden Age comics , that 'd be enough , that 'd be great . If we even just inspire some people to go back and investigate some of that stuff , we 'd have done enough . " 
 Sky Captain has a number of commonalities with Hayao Miyazaki 's 1986 anime movie Laputa : Castle in the Sky . The sky pirates ' focus on primitive mechanics , large airships , and military cultures is similar . Both stories center on an evil madman controlling an island of high technology , and the search for that island . Laputa has the evil madman searching for the island , while Sky Captain has the island as the base of the madman from the beginning . Sky Captain is also different in its message , which is largely about the film genre , while Laputa has strong anti @-@ war and anti @-@ technology themes , found in most of Miyazaki 's work . Additionally , both the Miyazaki film and Sky Captain pay homage to the 1941 Superman animated short The Mechanical Monsters . 
 = = = Teaser trailer = = = 
 In 1994 , Conran set up a bluescreen in his living room and began assembling the tools he would need to create his movie . He was not interested in working his way through the system and instead wanted to follow the route of independent filmmakers like Steven Soderbergh . Initially , Kerry and his brother had nothing more than " just a vague idea of this guy who flew a plane . We would talk about all the obvious things like Indiana Jones and all the stuff we liked . " Conran spent four years making a black and white teaser trailer in the style of an old @-@ fashioned movie serial on his Macintosh IIci personal computer . Once he was finished , Conran showed it to producer Marsha Oglesby , who was a friend of his brother 's wife and she recommended that he let producer Jon Avnet see it . Conran met Avnet and showed him the trailer . Conran told him that he wanted to make it into a movie . They spent two or three days just talking about the tone of the movie . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Avnet and Conran spent two years working on the screenplay , which included numerous genre @-@ related references and homages , and developing a working relationship . Then , the producer took the script and the trailer and began approaching actors . In order to protect Conran 's vision , Avnet decided to shoot the movie independently with a lot of his own money . The producer realized that " the very thing that made this film potentially so exciting for me , and I think for an audience , which was the personal nature of it and the singularity of the vision , would never succeed and never survive the development process within a studio . " 
 Avnet went to Aurelio De Laurentiis and convinced him to finance the film without a distribution deal . Nine months before filming , Avnet had Conran meet the actors and begin rehearsals in an attempt to get the shy filmmaker out of his shell . Avnet set up a custom digital effects studio with a blue screen soundstage in an abandoned building in Van Nuys , California . A group of almost 100 digital artists , modelers , animators and compositors created multi @-@ layered 2D and 3D backgrounds for the live action footage yet to be filmed . 
 The entire movie was sketched out via hand @-@ drawn storyboards and then re @-@ created as computer @-@ generated 3D animatics with all of the 2D background photographs digitally painted to resemble the 1939 setting . With the animatics as a guide , grids were created to map camera and actor movements with digital characters standing in for the real actors . The grids were made into actual maps on the blue screen stage floor to help the actors move around invisible scenery . 
 Ten months before Conran made the movie with his actors , he shot it entirely with stand @-@ ins in Los Angeles and then created the whole movie in animatics so that the actors had an idea of what the film would look like and where to move on the soundstage . To prepare for the film , Conran had his cast watch old movies , such as Lauren Bacall in To Have and Have Not ( 1944 ) for Paltrow 's performance and The Thin Man ( 1934 ) for the relationship between Nick and Nora that was to be echoed in the one between Joe and Polly . Avnet constantly pushed for room in this meticulously designed movie for the kind of freedom the actors needed , like being able to move around on the soundstage . 
 = = = Principal photography and post @-@ production = = = 
 Conran and Avnet were able to cut costs considerably by shooting the entire movie in 26 days ( not the usual three to four months that this kind of movie normally takes ) on high @-@ definition video using a Sony HDW @-@ F900 and working entirely on three different blue screen soundstages in London , England with one notable exception . Conran wrote a scene that was added later in which Polly talks to her editor in his office that was shot on a physical set because there was no time to shoot it on a blue screen soundstage . The footage from the HD camera was run through a switcher and then through a Macintosh computer running Final Cut Pro that allowed the filmmakers to line up the animatics with the live onstage footage . Conran said , " I don 't know how we would have made this movie . It 's really what allowed us to line up everything , given there was nothing there . " After each day of shooting , footage was edited and sent overnight to editors in L.A. who added CGI and sent it back . 
 After filming ended , they put together a 24 @-@ minute presentation and took it to every studio in June 2003 . There was a lot of interest and Avnet selected the studio that gave Conran the most creative control . They needed studio backing to finish the film 's ambitious visuals . At one point , the producer remembers that Conran was " working 18 to 20 hours a day for a long period of time . It 's 2 @,@ 000 some odd CGI shots done in one year , and we literally had to write code to figure out how to do this stuff ! " Most of the post @-@ production work was done on Mac workstations using After Effects for compositing and Final Cut Pro for editing ( seven workstations were dedicated to visual effects and production editing ) . The distinctive look of the film was achieved by running footage through a diffusion filter and then tinting it in black and white before color was blended , balanced and added back in . 
 Laurence Olivier , who died in 1989 , posthumously appears as the villain and mad scientist Dr. Totenkopf . His likeness was produced using digitally manipulated archival BBC footage of the actor and thus adding one more film to his repertoire . A similar move was made two years later in Superman Returns ( 2006 ) with Marlon Brando . Avnet cultivated a calculated release for the movie by first moving its release date from the summer ( it was supposed to open a week before Spider @-@ Man 2 ( 2004 ) ) to September , then courting the Internet press and finally making an appearance at the San Diego Comic Con with key cast members in an attempt to generate some advance buzz . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Composer Edward Shearmur wrote the film 's lavish orchestral score in the style of Hollywood 's golden @-@ age composers , and the film 's end @-@ title sequence featured a new recording of the Oscar @-@ winning standard " Over the Rainbow " sung by American jazz singer Jane <unk> , which were all featured on Sony Classical 's original motion picture soundtrack recording . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " The World of Tomorrow " – 1 : 07 
 " The Zeppelin Arrives " – 1 : 53 
 " The Robot Army " – 3 : 01 
 " Calling Sky Captain " – 3 : 26 
 " Back at the Base " – 2 : 49 
 " The Flying Wings Attack " – 6 : 31 
 " An Aquatic Escape " – 2 : 29 
 " Flight to Nepal " – 4 : 38 
 " Treacherous Journey " – 2 : 22 
 " Dynamite " – 2 : 26 
 " Three in a Bed " – 0 : 57 
 " Finding Frankie " – 5 : 02 
 " Manta Squadron " – 6 : 33 
 " h @-@ 770 @-@ d " – 1 : 14 
 " Flying Lizard " – 1 : 06 
 " Totenkopf 's Ark " – 5 : 01 
 " Back to Earth " – 3 : 14 
 " Over the Rainbow " – 3 : 54 
 = = Box office = = 
 Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow had high box office expectations , opening in first place on its September 17 , 2004 release date and grossing USD $ 15 @.@ 5 million on its opening weekend . However the film only grossed $ 37 @.@ 7 million in North America , below its estimated $ 70 million budget . It managed to gross $ 20 @.@ 1 million in the rest of the world , making its final worldwide tally $ 57 @.@ 9 million . The film is considered a box office flop . 
 Kevin Conran disputed this budget figure in a 2015 interview . “ I take great issue with that [ budget figure ] personally and I ’ d like someone to show me where all that money went , ” says Kevin . “ I don ’ t support those numbers and I never have . We walked into Jon Avnet ’ s office that first day and he said , ‘ What do you want for the production ? ’ and we said $ 3 million . We could have done a version of this film for $ 3 million . It would have been black @-@ and @-@ white and sans name actors … 
 “ But even still , this whole thing was going to be under $ 20 million . How it went from 20 to 70 , you tell me . ” 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reviews were largely positive . The film currently has a 72 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes . The Canadian network Space awarded it the 2005 Spacey Award for Best Science Fiction / Fantasy Film . Roger Ebert was among those who strongly supported the film , giving it a 4 out of a possible 4 stars and praising it for " its heedless energy and joy , it reminded me of how I felt the first time I saw Raiders of the Lost Ark . It 's like a film that escaped from the imagination directly onto the screen , without having to pass through reality along the way " . The film is also one of few to be awarded five out of five stars by IGN <unk> . In his review for the Chicago Reader , J.R. Jones wrote , " This debut feature by Kerry Conran is a triumph not only for its technical mastery but for its good taste " . Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A- " rating , saying , " The investment is optimistic and wise ; Sky Captain is a gorgeous , funny , and welcome novelty " . 
 Other critics ' enthusiasm was somewhat tempered . For instance , Stephen Holden of The New York Times lauded its visuals and its evocation of a bygone era but felt that " the monochromatic variations on sepia keep the actors and their adventures at a refined aesthetic distance ... At times the film is hard to see . And as the action accelerates , the wonder of its visual concept starts giving way to sci @-@ fi clichés " . USA Today said that the film was " all style over substance , a clever parlor trick but a dull movie " . Stephen Hunter , of the Washington Post , called it " a $ 70 million novelty item " . 
 = = Homages = = 
 First @-@ time director Conran incorporated many references to classic genre films into his own movie : " The work of those artists and writers from the pulps and Golden Age of Comic Books like <unk> was really the template for us . To some extent we stole from it , to some extent we expanded on it -- hopefully we added enough of our own sensibility . We tried to approach it almost as though we lived in that era and were just another group of artists trying to make a work comprised of those pieces and inspirations . We wanted the film to feel like a lost film of that era . " 
 The army of giant robots seen in the film - both flying over the city and later various models in Sky Captain 's massive warehouse , particularly one designated as number " 5 " - are an homage to the 1941 Paramount Pictures Superman cartoon , The Mechanical Monsters , produced by Fleischer Studios . 
 When early in the film newspaper clippings from around the globe are shown , in the Japanese newspaper the iconic silhouette of Godzilla is clearly visible . Similarly , during the New York sequence when Sky Captain deploys a bomb to stop a giant robot , the shape of King Kong can be seen on the Empire State Building in the background . During the underwater dogfight sequence a light momentarily displays the wreckage of a ship with the name Venture — the tramp steamer that sailed to Skull Island in the 1933 version of King Kong . In the same scene , what appears to be the wreckage of the Titanic can be seen , as well an ancient underwater city which seems to be a nod to the legend of Atlantis . 
 The villain 's main logo bears striking similarities to the logo for Crimson Skies , a game universe that some critics noted bore stylistic and plot similarities to the film . 
 Also the rays launched from the robots share similar sound effects to the ones used in the 1953 film of The War of the Worlds for the heat rays on the fighting machines . 
 = = = Pulp magazines and comic books = = = 
 The Flying Legion is a homage to pulp @-@ comic book heroes such as G @-@ 8 , Captain Midnight , and Blackhawk . Also , production designer Kevin Conran , the brother of director Kerry Conran , based the design of the flying humanoid robots , in part , on the helmet worn by the DC Comics superhero Adam Strange and controls on Commando Cody 's rocket @-@ pack . 
 = Avondale Agricultural Research Station = 
 Avondale Agriculture Research Station or Avondale Discovery Farm is one of thirteen research farms and stations operated by Western Australia 's Department of Agriculture and Food . In addition to its research , Avondale has historical buildings , a farming equipment museum and operates as an agriculture education centre specialising in introducing primary school children to farming , and teaching of its history in Western Australia . 
 Avondale is situated on land where the Dale River joins the Avon River 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) northwest of Beverley . It is located on land originally granted to the first Governor of Western Australia , Captain ( later Admiral Sir ) James Stirling and Captain Mark Currie RN in 1836 . These grants were combined in 1849 and with additional land purchases they became known as Avondale Estate , expanding to in excess of 13 @,@ 330 acres ( 53 @.@ 9 km2 ) . 
 On 4 April 1924 the remaining 1 @,@ 740 acres ( 7 @.@ 0 km2 ) of Avondale were passed on to the Department of Agriculture and Food . Initially Avondale continued its involvement with the Group Settlement Scheme , it was not until 1926 that research activities commenced . During the 1930s it was to be the laboratory for Dr Harold Bennetts successful research into Bacillus <unk> . As part of Western Australia 's 1979 sesquicentennial celebrations a machinery museum was built and the other buildings were restored to original condition . 
 = = Early farm years = = 
 In November 1835 , an expedition led by Governor James Stirling joined another party led by the Surveyor General John Septimus Roe in King George Sound . Roe had made arrangement for both parties to return to the Swan River Colony via an alternative route . The route was intended to join the settlements of King George Sound , York and the Swan River Colony along with the newly established settlement of Williams . This expedition passed through the area of Avondale sighting the Dale River and a granite hill that Roe name Bald Hill on 27 December . Bald Hill was to become the primary reference point for surveying the region . 
 In 1836 , the surveyor Thomas Watson returned to area and used Bald Hill as the principal trigonometric reference . Watson was to map out a number of lots in the area including the western boundary for Beverley town site . Two of the lots surveyed were Avon location 14 with 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 km2 ) , and Avon location K with 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 km2 ) ; location 14 was given to Captain Mark Currie , Fremantle Harbour Master , while location K was given to Stirling . Stirling as Governor and Currie as harbour master were not paid salaries by the colony but given land grants as compensation for their services . In 1978 , surveyors using current equipment were engaged to determine the exact location of these original holdings , and commented on the remarkable accuracy of Watson 's survey 142 years before . 
 Currie sold his grant of land to a Nicholas Carey in September 1838 for ₤ 330 . Carey entered into a lease agreement in December with Governor Stirling for his grant , which included Carey purchasing the property at the end of the lease for ₤ 750 in 1846 . Carey also purchased 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 12 km2 ) to west of location 14 he also received an additional grant of land in 1849 . With all the land in the vee formed by the Avon River and the Dale River the property was now 13 @,@ 330 acres ( 53 @.@ 9 km2 ) in size and was named Avondale Estate . During the late 1840s Carey moved to Guernsey leaving Avondale to be operated by an unknown caretaker . 
 Upon Carey 's death in March 1889 , Avondale was inherited by his 16 @-@ year @-@ old grand nephew William Herbert <unk> <unk> arrived and took up residence there in 1893 , and assumed the land title in 1894 . Avondale had been a pastoral property until <unk> 's arrival , over the next ten years sections of the estate were sold off to fund its development . During this period , the house was expanded and the stable built , which included 20 horse stalls with hollow walls and an overhead loft . The hollow walls enable feed from the loft to gravitate directly to the feed bins in each stall . 
 The remaining 5 @,@ 232 acres ( 21 @.@ 2 km2 ) were sold to William James Butcher and Charles John Hunt Butcher in 1904 . The brothers purchased adjoining properties adding 4 @,@ 403 acres ( 17 @.@ 8 km2 ) which enlarged Avondale to 9 @,@ 635 acres ( 39 @.@ 0 km2 ) . In 1908 they offered to sell Avondale to the Western Australian Government for £ 5 / 10 / - per acre . The Government countered with an offer of £ 5 / 5 / - per acre , which was accepted . Avondale was purchased in March 1910 under the Agricultural Land Purchase act for a total of £ 51 @,@ 494 / 12 / 6 , equivalent to approximately A $ 5 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in 2006 . 
 = = = 1910 to 1924 = = = 
 Even though the Butcher brothers ' farming operations continued until January 1911 , the government began preparations for subdivision . John Hall was sent to Avondale in April 1910 to locate all improvements and draw subdivision lines following existing fencing where possible . His arrival sparked considerable controversy , because not only had he set up camp on the golf course but the golf club also had leased 40 acres ( 160 @,@ 000 m2 ) of Avondale that joined the edge of town . Investigations found that the lease was terminated when the land was sold . 
 Hall divided Avondale into nine substantial size farms whose boundaries have remained unchanged since , the 40 acres ( 160 @,@ 000 m2 ) that had been occupied by the golf course was made into small lots which have since been further subdivided . Lands Department accountants calculated that the sale of the lots would return £ 8 @,@ 768 / 3 / 3 after expenses , and the estate was gazetted and land made available on 21 December 1910 . Of the nine substantial lots only four were taken up as settlers were unable to pay the £ 6 per acre price . Lot 1 was taken up by George Hancock , the father of mining magnate Lang Hancock , and George 's brother Richard took up Lot 2 . Lot 13 was taken up by G.W. Isbister , and Lot 4 was taken up by former Premier Sir Newton Moore , who then proceeded to London with the plans . As Agent General Newton was to offer to prospective settlers lots at Avondale , although a number telegram inquiries to ascertain availability of lots at Avondale were sent , there is no record any lots being allocated in London . 
 As none of the remaining 5 substantial lots had been taken up by November 1911 , it was suggested that 4 of those remaining be used for an Agricultural College with the Lands Department responsible for continuing to farm the remaining lots . This left one lot known as <unk> available , in 1914 a <unk> farmer tried to lease <unk> after losing his property there from drought , but was unable to negotiate an acceptable rate . In December , the Hancock brothers had abandoned lots 1 & 2 , Isbister had also abandoned Lot 13 , although it is not known exactly when , leaving only the 780 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 km2 ) of Lot 4 in private hands . With the outbreak of World War I the Agricultural College plans were abandoned as well . 
 Near the end of 1916 , the Beverley community requested that Avondale be subdivided into 20 lots for returning Soldiers . It was also suggested that Avondale be a nursery where soldiers are given small allotments and those that succeed are then given larger grants elsewhere in the state . In July 1918 , it was decided that Avondale would have 6 lots made available for servicemen from the Beverley area and that 1 @,@ 740 acres ( 7 @.@ 0 km2 ) which included the area around the homestead was to remain under control of the Lands Department . 
 = = Department of Agriculture = = 
 The original homestead block faced an uncertain future for many years , until it was given to the Department of Agriculture in 1924 . Initially intended for the production of pure seed wheat and oats , very little was produced for several years . Avondale was used as an assembly and holding ground for dairy cattle , prior to them being sent to group settlers in the state 's South West . During this period , the Silo was built with a capacity of 100 tonnes ; the silo is now heritage listed . 
 The local farming community raised concerns about cattle being unsuitable for the area , while the concerns were not immediately addressed Avondale was turned towards seed production and research . The first research began in 1926 ; this was in the application of <unk> its alternatives and the timing of application . Initial results were published in the Journal of Agriculture in 1927 . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 A <unk> @-@ like disease originated in the Beverley @-@ York region in 1915 . Over the next 15 years it spread across most of the state 's farming districts . Flock losses generally were around 5 % though there were reported cases of 30 % loss . In 1918 Professor Dakin of the University of Western Australia identified the disease as a toxaemia of bacterial origin but was unable to establish the source . 
 Dr Harold Bennetts was appointed the state 's first veterinary pathologist in May 1925 . Bennetts commenced an immediate investigation into the disease , using alleyways and open space around the department 's city offices to house the sheep needed for the research . In 1930 a field laboratory was built at Avondale ; a flock of 1000 sheep were purchased to enable feed experiments . In 1931 Bennetts had identified Bacillus <unk> as the cause of the disease . With this knowledge he was able to develop the infectious <unk> vaccine ; for his efforts Bennetts received a CBE . 
 The sheep populations that were required by Bennetts at Avondale also afforded additional research opportunities . From 1931 for several years experiments were conducted with the object of determining how to best produce prime export lambs . This investigated various breeds and cross breeds determining that cross @-@ bred ewes where significantly more productive than pure @-@ bred Merinos . 
 In 1934 , Bennetts teamed with state botanist Charles Gardner to study the toxic effect of native plants species on sheep . Gardner would collect the plants and supply them fresh to Bennetts who would then feed them to the sheep . They confirmed 24 species of plants as being poisonous , most which were from the native pea genera Gastrolobium and <unk> . Based on this and later research , Gardner and Bennetts published The Toxic Plants of Western Australia in 1956 . During 1935 , investigations into the effects of castrating male lambs with either mechanical pincers compared to using a knife , both of these methods have since been replaced with rubber elastrator rings . The experiment on 499 sheep concluded that no significant differences were observable in respect of mortality , maturity rates and meat quality . 
 Dr Eric Underwood began his research at Avondale in the mid @-@ 1930s also utilising the sheep flocks . Underwood 's initial research was into the effects of sulfur on wool growth , he followed that research with investigations into botulism in sheep during 1935 . These experiments were the first of many by Underwood over the next 30 years . During the 1940s he studied the nutritional value of hay and pasture for sheep , the ongoing results from these Studies in Cereal Hay production in Western Australia were published in the Journal of Agriculture . 
 During World War II , Avondale farm provided research into farming of linseed and flax in Western Australia , although it was not the most suitable location for growing either . Three varieties of Linseed were trialled : Riga Crown , an early maturing variety , Italian also early maturing and Walsh , a mid @-@ season maturing variety . It was discovered that all were susceptible to <unk> with greater damage occurring later in the season ; early trails of the insecticide DDT was said to show promising results in combating this . 
 = = = Other efforts = = = 
 In 1942 there was some pioneering in the development and use of contour banks , the equipment required a team 4 horses or two Clydesdales , a teamster and two labourers . Through the 1950s Avondale had monitored its sheep flocks as part of the research into <unk> strain of clover as a livestock feed and its effect on ewe fertility . On into the 1960s and 1970s Avondale was involved with the breeding and trial of various cereal crops for use within Western Australia . Since the early 1980s Avondale has focused on environmental and sustainable farming along with farm income supplemental alternatives like marron farming . 
 Avondale like most Western Australian farms utilised horses and Clydesdales in particular for pulling farming equipment . Farm economics of the 1930s meant that the Clydesdales weren 't retired to enjoy the governments grassy paddocks . In 1937 a letter to the Agricultural minister details the disposal of horses that were no longer useful ; 
 With regard to the two horses at the station which are old and incapable of any further work . I request approval for these animals , instead of being destroyed at the station , to be made available to the Zoo authorities for lions food ... 
 The letter details how the Perth Zoo is responsible for the freight and that the Minister had approved the transaction . Many Clydesdales were to follow the first two bay mares with the consignment note description for lions food , freight payable by <unk> . This practice continued until well into the 1950s until tractors replaced the use of horses in farming . Since the opening of the museum in 1978 Avondale again utilised Clydesdales for demonstrations of the old equipment these horse are sold as pets once they are incapable of working . 
 = = = 1976 to present = = = 
 In 1976 , as part of the preparations for Western Australia 's 1979 sesquicentennial celebrations , the Department of Agriculture decided to restore the historic Avondale farm to its original state to display the achievements of Western Australian farmers . In response to the announcement , farmers from around the state responded generously with donations of old machinery and equipment . Most of this machinery was restored by Department of Agriculture mechanics . In 1978 an invitation to visit and open Avondale 's agricultural displays was sent to Prince Charles , this was accepted and on 16 March 1979 Avondale was officially opened with commemorative tree planting near the entrance to the farm . 
 The farm continues its research into improving farming and farm practices under Western Australian conditions . Avondale 's displays are open to the public with picnic facilities available , included in the displays are the original homestead , the stables complete with Clydesdales and a machinery shed . There is also road maintained around the farm with information boards on each paddock explaining its current usage . 
 = Cold War = 
 The Cold War was a state of political and military tension after World War II between powers in the Western Bloc ( the United States , its NATO allies and others ) and powers in the Eastern Bloc ( the Soviet Union and its satellite states ) . Historians do not fully agree on the dates , but a common timeframe is the period between 1947 , the year the Truman Doctrine ( a U.S. policy pledging to aid nations threatened by Soviet expansionism ) was announced , and 1991 , the year the Soviet Union collapsed . 
 The term " cold " is used because there was no large @-@ scale fighting directly between the two sides , although there were major regional wars , known as proxy wars , supported by the two sides . The Cold War split the temporary wartime alliance against Nazi Germany , leaving the Soviet Union and the United States as two superpowers with profound economic and political differences : the former being a single @-@ party Marxist – Leninist empire ruled by a dictatorship operating a socialist economy and state @-@ controlled press and owning exclusively the right to establish and govern communities , and the latter being a democratic republic with a capitalist economy state with free elections and press , the freedom of religion , which also granted freedom of expression and freedom of association to its citizens . A self @-@ proclaimed neutral bloc arose with the Non @-@ Aligned Movement founded by Egypt , India , Indonesia and Yugoslavia ; this faction rejected association with either the American @-@ led West or the Soviet @-@ controlled East . The two superpowers never engaged directly in full @-@ scale armed combat , but they were heavily armed in preparation for a possible all @-@ out nuclear world war . Each side had a nuclear deterrent that deterred an attack by the other side , on the basis that such an attack would lead to total destruction of the attacker : the doctrine of mutually assured destruction ( MAD ) . Aside from the development of the two sides ' nuclear arsenals , and deployment of conventional military forces , the struggle for dominance was expressed via proxy wars around the globe , psychological warfare , massive propaganda campaigns and espionage , rivalry at sports events , and technological competitions such as the Space Race . 
 The first phase of the Cold War began in the first two years after the end of the Second World War in 1945 . The USSR consolidated its control over the states of the Eastern Bloc , while the United States began a strategy of global containment to challenge Soviet power , extending military and financial aid to the countries of Western Europe ( for example , supporting the anti @-@ communist side in the Greek Civil War ) and creating the NATO alliance . The Berlin Blockade ( 1948 – 49 ) was the first major crisis of the Cold War . With the victory of the communist side in the Chinese Civil War and the outbreak of the Korean War ( 1950 – 53 ) , the conflict expanded . The USSR and USA competed for influence in Latin America , and the <unk> states of Africa and Asia . Meanwhile , the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 was stopped by the Soviets . The expansion and escalation sparked more crises , such as the Suez Crisis ( 1956 ) , the Berlin Crisis of 1961 , and the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962 . Following the Cuban Missile Crisis , a new phase began that saw the Sino @-@ Soviet split complicate relations within the communist sphere , while US allies , particularly France , demonstrated greater independence of action . The USSR crushed the 1968 Prague Spring liberalization program in Czechoslovakia , and the Vietnam War ( 1955 – 75 ) ended with a defeat of the US @-@ backed Republic of South Vietnam , prompting further adjustments . 
 By the 1970s , both sides had become interested in accommodations to create a more stable and predictable international system , inaugurating a period of détente that saw Strategic Arms Limitation Talks and the US opening relations with the People 's Republic of China as a strategic counterweight to the Soviet Union . Détente collapsed at the end of the decade with the Soviet war in Afghanistan beginning in 1979 . The early 1980s were another period of elevated tension , with the Soviet downing of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 ( 1983 ) , and the " Able Archer " NATO military exercises ( 1983 ) . The United States increased diplomatic , military , and economic pressures on the Soviet Union , at a time when the communist state was already suffering from economic stagnation . In the mid @-@ 1980s , the new Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev introduced the liberalizing reforms of perestroika ( " reorganization " , 1987 ) and glasnost ( " openness " , c . 1985 ) and ended Soviet involvement in Afghanistan . Pressures for national independence grew stronger in Eastern Europe , especially Poland . Gorbachev meanwhile refused to use Soviet troops to bolster the faltering Warsaw Pact regimes as had occurred in the past . The result in 1989 was a wave of revolutions that peacefully ( with the exception of the Romanian Revolution ) overthrew all of the communist regimes of Central and Eastern Europe . The Communist Party of the Soviet Union itself lost control and was banned following an abortive coup attempt in August 1991 . This in turn led to the formal dissolution of the USSR in December 1991 and the collapse of communist regimes in other countries such as Mongolia , Cambodia and South Yemen . The United States remained as the world 's only superpower . 
 The Cold War and its events have left a significant legacy . It is often referred to in popular culture , especially in media featuring themes of espionage ( e.g. the internationally successful James Bond movie franchise ) and the threat of nuclear warfare . 
 = = Origins of the term = = 
 At the end of World War II , English writer George Orwell used cold war , as a general term , in his essay " You and the Atomic Bomb " , published 19 October 1945 in the British newspaper Tribune . Contemplating a world living in the shadow of the threat of nuclear warfare , Orwell looked at James Burnham 's predictions of a polarized world , writing : 
 Looking at the world as a whole , the drift for many decades has been not towards anarchy but towards the <unk> of slavery .... James Burnham 's theory has been much discussed , but few people have yet considered its ideological implications — that is , the kind of world @-@ view , the kind of beliefs , and the social structure that would probably prevail in a state which was at once unconquerable and in a permanent state of " cold war " with its neighbours . 
 In The Observer of 10 March 1946 , Orwell wrote , " after the Moscow conference last December , Russia began to make a ' cold war ' on Britain and the British Empire . " 
 The first use of the term to describe the specific post @-@ war geopolitical confrontation between the USSR and the United States came in a speech by Bernard Baruch , an influential advisor to Democratic presidents , on 16 April 1947 . The speech , written by journalist Herbert Bayard Swope , proclaimed , " Let us not be deceived : we are today in the midst of a cold war . " Newspaper columnist Walter Lippmann gave the term wide currency with his book The Cold War ; when asked in 1947 about the source of the term , Lippmann traced it to a French term from the 1930s , la guerre <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 There is disagreement among historians regarding the starting point of the Cold War . While most historians trace its origins to the period immediately following World War II , others argue that it began with the October Revolution in Russia in 1917 when the Bolsheviks took power . Vladimir Lenin stated that the new Soviet Union was surrounded by a " hostile capitalist encirclement " , and he viewed diplomacy as a weapon to keep Soviet enemies divided , beginning with the establishment of the Comintern , which called for revolutionary upheavals abroad . His successor Joseph Stalin viewed the USSR as a " socialist island " , stating that it must see that " the present capitalist encirclement is replaced by a socialist encirclement . " 
 Various events before the Second World War demonstrated the mutual distrust and suspicion between the Western powers and the Soviet Union , apart from the general philosophical challenge communism posed towards capitalism . There was Western support of the anti @-@ Bolshevik White movement in the Russian Civil War , the Soviet funding of the 1926 United Kingdom general strike causing Britain to break relations with the Soviet Union , Stalin 's 1927 declaration of peaceful coexistence with capitalist countries " receding into the past , " conspiratorial allegations during the 1928 <unk> show trial of a planned <unk> and French @-@ led coup d 'état , the American refusal to recognize the Soviet Union until 1933 and the Stalinist Moscow Trials of the Great Purge , with allegations of British , French , Japanese and Nazi German espionage . However , both the US and USSR were generally isolationist between the two world wars . 
 The Soviet Union initially signed a non @-@ aggression pact with Germany . But after the German Army invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 and the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor in December 1941 , the Soviet Union and the Allied powers formed an alliance of convenience . Britain signed a formal alliance and the United States made an informal agreement . In wartime , the United States supplied both Britain and the Soviets through its Lend @-@ Lease Program . However , Stalin remained highly suspicious and believed that the British and the Americans had conspired to ensure the Soviets bore the brunt of the fighting against Nazi Germany . According to this view , the Western Allies had deliberately delayed opening a second anti @-@ German front in order to step in at the last moment and shape the peace settlement . Thus , Soviet perceptions of the West left a strong undercurrent of tension and hostility between the Allied powers . 
 = = End of World War II ( 1945 – 47 ) = = 
 = = = Wartime conferences regarding post @-@ war Europe = = = 
 The Allies disagreed about how the European map should look , and how borders would be drawn , following the war . Each side held dissimilar ideas regarding the establishment and maintenance of post @-@ war security . The western Allies desired a security system in which democratic governments were established as widely as possible , permitting countries to peacefully resolve differences through international organizations . 
 The Soviet Union sought to dominate the internal affairs of countries that bordered it . During the war , Stalin had created special training centers for communists from different countries so that they could set up secret police forces loyal to Moscow as soon as the Red Army took control . Soviet agents took control of the media , especially radio ; they quickly harassed and then banned all independent civic institutions , from youth groups to schools , churches and rival political parties . Stalin also sought continued peace with Britain and the United States , hoping to focus on internal reconstruction and economic growth . 
 The Western Allies were divided in their vision of the new post @-@ war world . Roosevelt 's goals – military victory in both Europe and Asia , the achievement of global American economic supremacy over the British Empire , and the creation of a world peace organization – were more global than Churchill 's , which were mainly centered on securing control over the Mediterranean , ensuring the survival of the British Empire , and the independence of Central and Eastern European countries as a buffer between the Soviets and the United Kingdom . 
 In the American view , Stalin seemed a potential ally in accomplishing their goals , whereas in the British approach Stalin appeared as the greatest threat to the fulfillment of their agenda . With the Soviets already occupying most of Central and Eastern Europe , Stalin was at an advantage and the two western leaders vied for his favors . The differences between Roosevelt and Churchill led to several separate deals with the Soviets . In October 1944 , Churchill traveled to Moscow and agreed to divide the Balkans into respective spheres of influence , and at Yalta Roosevelt signed a separate deal with Stalin in regard of Asia and refused to support Churchill on the issues of Poland and the Reparations . 
 Further Allied negotiations concerning the post @-@ war balance took place at the Yalta Conference in February 1945 , albeit this conference also failed to reach a firm consensus on the framework for a post @-@ war settlement in Europe . In April 1945 , President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by Harry S. Truman , who distrusted Stalin and turned for advice to an elite group of foreign policy intellectuals . Both Churchill and Truman opposed , among other things , the Soviets ' decision to prop up the Lublin government , the Soviet @-@ controlled rival to the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile in London , whose relations with the Soviets had been severed . 
 Following the Allies ' May 1945 victory , the Soviets effectively occupied Central and Eastern Europe , while strong US and Western allied forces remained in Western Europe . In Allied @-@ occupied Germany , the Soviet Union , United States , Britain and France established zones of occupation and a loose framework for parceled four @-@ power control . 
 The 1945 Allied conference in San Francisco established the multi @-@ national United Nations ( UN ) for the maintenance of world peace , but the enforcement capacity of its Security Council was effectively paralyzed by individual members ' ability to use veto power . Accordingly , the UN was essentially converted into an inactive forum for exchanging polemical rhetoric , and the Soviets regarded it almost exclusively as a propaganda tribune . 
 = = = Potsdam Conference and defeat of Japan = = = 
 At the Potsdam Conference , which started in late July after Germany 's surrender , serious differences emerged over the future development of Germany and the rest of Central and Eastern Europe . Moreover , the participants ' mounting antipathy and bellicose language served to confirm their suspicions about each other 's hostile intentions and entrench their positions . At this conference Truman informed Stalin that the United States possessed a powerful new weapon . 
 Stalin was aware that the Americans were working on the atomic bomb and , given that the Soviets ' own rival program was in place , he reacted to the news calmly . The Soviet leader said he was pleased by the news and expressed the hope that the weapon would be used against Japan . One week after the end of the Potsdam Conference , the US bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Shortly after the attacks , Stalin protested to US officials when Truman offered the Soviets little real influence in occupied Japan . 
 = = = Beginnings of the Eastern Bloc = = = 
 During the opening stages of World War II , the Soviet Union laid the foundation for the Eastern Bloc by invading and then annexing several countries as Soviet Socialist Republics , by agreement with Nazi Germany in the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact . These included eastern Poland ( incorporated into two different SSRs ) , Latvia ( which became the Latvian SSR ) , Estonia ( which became the Estonian SSR ) , Lithuania ( which became the Lithuanian SSR ) , part of eastern Finland ( which became the <unk> @-@ Finnish SSR ) and eastern Romania ( which became the Moldavian SSR ) . 
 The Central and Eastern European territories liberated from the Nazis and occupied by the Soviet armed forces were added to the Eastern Bloc by converting them into satellite states , such as East Germany , the People 's Republic of Poland , the People 's Republic of Bulgaria , the People 's Republic of Hungary , the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic , the People 's Republic of Romania and the People 's Republic of Albania . 
 The Soviet @-@ style regimes that arose in the Bloc not only reproduced Soviet command economies , but also adopted the brutal methods employed by Joseph Stalin and Soviet secret police to suppress real and potential opposition . In Asia , the Red Army had overrun Manchuria in the last month of the war , and went on to occupy the large swathe of Korean territory located north of the 38th parallel . 
 As part of consolidating Stalin 's control over the Eastern Bloc , the NKVD , led by Lavrentiy <unk> , supervised the establishment of Soviet @-@ style secret police systems in the Bloc that were supposed to crush anti @-@ communist resistance . When the slightest stirrings of independence emerged in the Bloc , Stalin 's strategy matched that of dealing with domestic pre @-@ war rivals : they were removed from power , put on trial , imprisoned , and in several instances , executed . 
 British Prime Minister Winston Churchill was concerned that , given the enormous size of Soviet forces deployed in Europe at the end of the war , and the perception that Soviet leader Joseph Stalin was unreliable , there existed a Soviet threat to Western Europe . 
 = = = Preparing for a " new war " = = = 
 In February 1946 , George F. Kennan 's " Long Telegram " from Moscow helped to articulate the US government 's increasingly hard line against the Soviets , and became the basis for US strategy toward the Soviet Union for the duration of the Cold War . That September , the Soviet side produced the Novikov telegram , sent by the Soviet ambassador to the US but commissioned and " co @-@ authored " by Vyacheslav Molotov ; it portrayed the US as being in the grip of monopoly capitalists who were building up military capability " to prepare the conditions for winning world supremacy in a new war " . 
 On 6 September 1946 , James F. Byrnes delivered a speech in Germany repudiating the Morgenthau Plan ( a proposal to partition and de @-@ industrialize post @-@ war Germany ) and warning the Soviets that the US intended to maintain a military presence in Europe indefinitely . As Byrnes admitted a month later , " The nub of our program was to win the German people ... it was a battle between us and Russia over minds ... " 
 A few weeks after the release of this " Long Telegram " , former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill delivered his famous " Iron Curtain " speech in Fulton , Missouri . The speech called for an Anglo @-@ American alliance against the Soviets , whom he accused of establishing an " iron curtain " from " Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic " . 
 = = Beginnings of the Cold War ( 1947 – 53 ) = = 
 = = = Cominform and the Tito – Stalin split = = = 
 In September 1947 , the Soviets created Cominform , the purpose of which was to enforce orthodoxy within the international communist movement and tighten political control over Soviet satellites through coordination of communist parties in the Eastern Bloc . Cominform faced an embarrassing setback the following June , when the Tito – Stalin split obliged its members to expel Yugoslavia , which remained communist but adopted a non @-@ aligned position . 
 = = = Containment and the Truman Doctrine = = = 
 By 1947 , US president Harry S. Truman 's advisers urged him to take immediate steps to counter the Soviet Union 's influence , citing Stalin 's efforts ( amid post @-@ war confusion and collapse ) to undermine the US by encouraging rivalries among capitalists that could precipitate another war . In February 1947 , the British government announced that it could no longer afford to finance the Greek monarchical military regime in its civil war against communist @-@ led insurgents ( see Greek Civil War ) . 
 The American government 's response to this announcement was the adoption of containment , the goal of which was to stop the spread of communism . Truman delivered a speech that called for the allocation of $ 400 million to intervene in the war and unveiled the Truman Doctrine , which framed the conflict as a contest between free peoples and totalitarian regimes . Even though the insurgents were helped by Josip Broz Tito 's Yugoslavia , US policymakers accused the Soviet Union of conspiring against the Greek royalists in an effort to expand Soviet influence . 
 <unk> of the Truman Doctrine marked the beginning of a US bipartisan defense and foreign policy consensus between Republicans and Democrats focused on containment and deterrence that weakened during and after the Vietnam War , but ultimately persisted thereafter . Moderate and conservative parties in Europe , as well as social democrats , gave virtually unconditional support to the Western alliance , while European and American communists , paid by the KGB and involved in its intelligence operations , adhered to Moscow 's line , although dissent began to appear after 1956 . Other critiques of consensus politics came from anti @-@ Vietnam War activists , the CND and the nuclear freeze movement . 
 = = = Marshall Plan and Czechoslovak coup d 'état = = = 
 In early 1947 , Britain , France and the United States unsuccessfully attempted to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union for a plan envisioning an economically self @-@ sufficient Germany , including a detailed accounting of the industrial plants , goods and infrastructure already removed by the Soviets . In June 1947 , in accordance with the Truman Doctrine , the United States enacted the Marshall Plan , a pledge of economic assistance for all European countries willing to participate , including the Soviet Union . 
 The plan 's aim was to rebuild the democratic and economic systems of Europe and to counter perceived threats to Europe 's balance of power , such as communist parties seizing control through revolutions or elections . The plan also stated that European prosperity was contingent upon German economic recovery . One month later , Truman signed the National Security Act of 1947 , creating a unified Department of Defense , the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , and the National Security Council ( NSC ) . These would become the main bureaucracies for US policy in the Cold War . 
 Stalin believed that economic integration with the West would allow Eastern Bloc countries to escape Soviet control , and that the US was trying to buy a pro @-@ US re @-@ alignment of Europe . Stalin therefore prevented Eastern Bloc nations from receiving Marshall Plan aid . The Soviet Union 's alternative to the Marshall plan , which was purported to involve Soviet subsidies and trade with central and eastern Europe , became known as the Molotov Plan ( later institutionalized in January 1949 as the Comecon ) . Stalin was also fearful of a reconstituted Germany ; his vision of a post @-@ war Germany did not include the ability to rearm or pose any kind of threat to the Soviet Union . 
 In early 1948 , following reports of strengthening " reactionary elements " , Soviet operatives executed a coup d 'état in Czechoslovakia , the only Eastern Bloc state that the Soviets had permitted to retain democratic structures . The public brutality of the coup shocked Western powers more than any event up to that point , set in a motion a brief scare that war would occur and swept away the last vestiges of opposition to the Marshall Plan in the United States Congress . 
 The twin policies of the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan led to billions in economic and military aid for Western Europe , Greece , and Turkey . With US assistance , the Greek military won its civil war . Under the leadership of Alcide De Gasperi the Italian Christian Democrats defeated the powerful Communist @-@ Socialist alliance in the elections of 1948 . At the same time there was increased intelligence and espionage activity , Eastern Bloc defections and diplomatic expulsions . 
 = = = Berlin Blockade and airlift = = = 
 The United States and Britain merged their western German occupation zones into " <unk> " ( 1 January 1947 , later " <unk> " with the addition of France 's zone , April 1949 ) . As part of the economic rebuilding of Germany , in early 1948 , representatives of a number of Western European governments and the United States announced an agreement for a merger of western German areas into a federal governmental system . In addition , in accordance with the Marshall Plan , they began to re @-@ industrialize and rebuild the German economy , including the introduction of a new Deutsche Mark currency to replace the old Reichsmark currency that the Soviets had debased . 
 Shortly thereafter , Stalin instituted the Berlin Blockade ( 24 June 1948 – 12 May 1949 ) , one of the first major crises of the Cold War , preventing food , materials and supplies from arriving in West Berlin . The United States , Britain , France , Canada , Australia , New Zealand and several other countries began the massive " Berlin airlift " , supplying West Berlin with food and other provisions . 
 The Soviets mounted a public relations campaign against the policy change . Once again the East Berlin communists attempted to disrupt the Berlin municipal elections ( as they had done in the 1946 elections ) , which were held on 5 December 1948 and produced a turnout of 86 @.@ 3 % and an overwhelming victory for the non @-@ communist parties . The results effectively divided the city into East and West versions of its former self . 300 @,@ 000 Berliners demonstrated and urged the international airlift to continue , and US Air Force pilot Gail Halvorsen created " Operation <unk> " , which supplied candy to German children . In May 1949 , Stalin backed down and lifted the blockade . 
 In 1952 , Stalin repeatedly proposed a plan to unify East and West Germany under a single government chosen in elections supervised by the United Nations if the new Germany were to stay out of Western military alliances , but this proposal was turned down by the Western powers . Some sources dispute the sincerity of the proposal . 
 = = = NATO beginnings and Radio Free Europe = = = 
 Britain , France , the United States , Canada and eight other western European countries signed the North Atlantic Treaty of April 1949 , establishing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) . That August , the first Soviet atomic device was detonated in <unk> , Kazakh SSR . Following Soviet refusals to participate in a German rebuilding effort set forth by western European countries in 1948 , the US , Britain and France spearheaded the establishment of West Germany from the three Western zones of occupation in April 1949 . The Soviet Union proclaimed its zone of occupation in Germany the German Democratic Republic that October . 
 Media in the Eastern Bloc was an organ of the state , completely reliant on and subservient to the communist party , with radio and television organizations being state @-@ owned , while print media was usually owned by political organizations , mostly by the local communist party . Soviet propaganda used Marxist philosophy to attack capitalism , claiming labor exploitation and war @-@ mongering imperialism were inherent in the system . 
 Along with the broadcasts of the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Voice of America to Central and Eastern Europe , a major propaganda effort begun in 1949 was Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty , dedicated to bringing about the peaceful demise of the communist system in the Eastern Bloc . Radio Free Europe attempted to achieve these goals by serving as a surrogate home radio station , an alternative to the controlled and party @-@ dominated domestic press . Radio Free Europe was a product of some of the most prominent architects of America 's early Cold War strategy , especially those who believed that the Cold War would eventually be fought by political rather than military means , such as George F. Kennan . 
 American policymakers , including Kennan and John Foster Dulles , acknowledged that the Cold War was in its essence a war of ideas . The United States , acting through the CIA , funded a long list of projects to counter the communist appeal among intellectuals in Europe and the developing world . The CIA also covertly sponsored a domestic propaganda campaign called Crusade for Freedom . 
 In the early 1950s , the US worked for the rearmament of West Germany and , in 1955 , secured its full membership of NATO . In May 1953 , Beria , by then in a government post , had made an unsuccessful proposal to allow the reunification of a neutral Germany to prevent West Germany 's incorporation into NATO . 
 = = = Chinese Civil War and SEATO = = = 
 In 1949 , Mao Zedong 's People 's Liberation Army defeated Chiang Kai @-@ shek 's United States @-@ backed Kuomintang ( KMT ) Nationalist Government in China , and the Soviet Union promptly created an alliance with the newly formed People 's Republic of China . According to Norwegian historian Odd Arne <unk> , the communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang Kai @-@ Shek , and because in his search for a powerful centralized government , Chiang antagonized too many interest groups in China . Moreover , his party was weakened in the war against Japan . Meanwhile , the communists told different groups , such as peasants , exactly what they wanted to hear , and cloaked themselves in the cover of Chinese nationalism . 
 Chiang and his KMT government retreated to the island of Taiwan . Confronted with the communist revolution in China and the end of the American atomic monopoly in 1949 , the Truman administration quickly moved to escalate and expand the containment policy . In NSC @-@ 68 , a secret 1950 document , the National Security Council proposed to reinforce pro @-@ Western alliance systems and quadruple spending on defense . 
 United States officials moved thereafter to expand containment into Asia , Africa , and Latin America , in order to counter revolutionary nationalist movements , often led by communist parties financed by the USSR , fighting against the restoration of Europe 's colonial empires in South @-@ East Asia and elsewhere . In the early 1950s ( a period sometimes known as the " <unk> " ) , the US formalized a series of alliances with Japan , Australia , New Zealand , Thailand and the Philippines ( notably ANZUS in 1951 and SEATO in 1954 ) , thereby guaranteeing the United States a number of long @-@ term military bases . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 One of the more significant impacts of containment was the outbreak of the Korean War . In June 1950 , Kim Il @-@ sung 's North Korean People 's Army invaded South Korea . Joseph Stalin " planned , prepared , and initiated " the invasion , creating " detailed [ war ] plans " that were communicated to the North Koreans . To Stalin 's surprise , the UN Security Council backed the defense of South Korea , though the Soviets were then boycotting meetings in protest that Taiwan and not Communist China held a permanent seat on the Council . A UN force of personnel from South Korea , the United States , the United Kingdom , Turkey , Canada , Colombia , Australia , France , South Africa , the Philippines , the Netherlands , Belgium , New Zealand and other countries joined to stop the invasion . 
 Among other effects , the Korean War galvanised NATO to develop a military structure . Public opinion in countries involved , such as Great Britain , was divided for and against the war . Many feared an escalation into a general war with Communist China , and even nuclear war . The strong opposition to the war often strained Anglo @-@ American relations . For these reasons British officials sought a speedy end to the conflict , hoping to unite Korea under United Nations auspices and withdrawal of all foreign forces . 
 Even though the Chinese and North Koreans were exhausted by the war and were prepared to end it by late 1952 , Stalin insisted that they continue fighting , and the Armistice was approved only in July 1953 , after Stalin 's death . North Korean leader Kim Il Sung created a highly centralized , totalitarian dictatorship – which continues to date – according himself unlimited power and generating a formidable cult of personality . In the South , the American @-@ backed strongman Syngman Rhee ran a significantly less brutal but deeply corrupt and authoritarian regime . After Rhee was overthrown in 1960 , South Korea fell within a year under a period of military rule that lasted until the re @-@ establishment of a multi @-@ party system in the late 1980s . 
 = = Crisis and escalation ( 1953 – 62 ) = = 
 = = = Khrushchev , Eisenhower and de @-@ Stalinization = = = 
 In 1953 , changes in political leadership on both sides shifted the dynamic of the Cold War . Dwight D. Eisenhower was inaugurated president that January . During the last 18 months of the Truman administration , the American defense budget had quadrupled , and Eisenhower moved to reduce military spending by a third while continuing to fight the Cold War effectively . 
 After the death of Joseph Stalin , Nikita Khrushchev became the Soviet leader following the deposition and execution of Lavrentiy <unk> and the pushing aside of rivals Georgy Malenkov and Vyacheslav Molotov . On 25 February 1956 , Khrushchev shocked delegates to the 20th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party by cataloguing and denouncing Stalin 's crimes . As part of a campaign of de @-@ Stalinization , he declared that the only way to reform and move away from Stalin 's policies would be to acknowledge errors made in the past . 
 On 18 November 1956 , while addressing Western ambassadors at a reception at the Polish embassy in Moscow , Khrushchev used his famous " Whether you like it or not , history is on our side . We will bury you " expression , shocking everyone present . He later claimed that he had not been talking about nuclear war , but rather about the historically determined victory of communism over capitalism . In 1961 , Khrushchev declared that even if the USSR was behind the West , within a decade its housing shortage would disappear , consumer goods would be abundant , and within two decades , the " construction of a communist society " in the USSR would be completed " in the main " . 
 Eisenhower 's secretary of state , John Foster Dulles , initiated a " New Look " for the containment strategy , calling for a greater reliance on nuclear weapons against US enemies in wartime . Dulles also enunciated the doctrine of " massive retaliation " , threatening a severe US response to any Soviet aggression . Possessing nuclear superiority , for example , allowed Eisenhower to face down Soviet threats to intervene in the Middle East during the 1956 Suez Crisis . U.S. plans for nuclear war in the late 1950s included the " systematic destruction " of 1200 major urban centers in the Eastern Bloc and China , including Moscow , East Berlin and Beijing , with their civilian populations among the primary targets . 
 = = = Warsaw Pact and Hungarian Revolution = = = 
 While Stalin 's death in 1953 slightly relaxed tensions , the situation in Europe remained an uneasy armed truce . The Soviets , who had already created a network of mutual assistance treaties in the Eastern Bloc by 1949 , established a formal alliance therein , the Warsaw Pact , in 1955 . 
 The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 occurred shortly after Khrushchev arranged the removal of Hungary 's Stalinist leader Mátyás Rákosi . In response to a popular uprising , the new regime formally disbanded the secret police , declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact and pledged to re @-@ establish free elections . The Soviet army invaded . Thousands of Hungarians were arrested , imprisoned and deported to the Soviet Union , and approximately 200 @,@ 000 Hungarians fled Hungary in the chaos . Hungarian leader Imre Nagy and others were executed following secret trials . 
 From 1957 through 1961 , Khrushchev openly and repeatedly threatened the West with nuclear annihilation . He claimed that Soviet missile capabilities were far superior to those of the United States , capable of wiping out any American or European city . However , Khrushchev rejected Stalin 's belief in the inevitability of war , and declared his new goal was to be " peaceful coexistence " . This formulation modified the Stalin @-@ era Soviet stance , where international class struggle meant the two opposing camps were on an inevitable collision course where communism would triumph through global war ; now , peace would allow capitalism to collapse on its own , as well as giving the Soviets time to boost their military capabilities , which remained for decades until Gorbachev 's later " new thinking " envisioning peaceful coexistence as an end in itself rather than a form of class struggle . 
 The events in Hungary produced ideological fractures within the communist parties of the world , particularly in Western Europe , with great decline in membership as many in both western and communist countries felt disillusioned by the brutal Soviet response . The communist parties in the West would never recover from the effect the Hungarian Revolution had on their membership , a fact that was immediately recognized by some , such as the Yugoslavian politician Milovan Đilas who shortly after the revolution was crushed said that " The wound which the Hungarian Revolution inflicted on communism can never be completely healed " . 
 America 's pronouncements concentrated on American strength abroad and the success of liberal capitalism . However , by the late 1960s , the " battle for men 's minds " between two systems of social organization that Kennedy spoke of in 1961 was largely over , with tensions henceforth based primarily on clashing geopolitical objectives rather than ideology . 
 = = = Berlin Ultimatum and European integration = = = 
 During November 1958 , Khrushchev made an unsuccessful attempt to turn all of Berlin into an independent , demilitarized " free city " , giving the United States , Great Britain , and France a six @-@ month ultimatum to withdraw their troops from the sectors they still occupied in West Berlin , or he would transfer control of Western access rights to the East Germans . Khrushchev earlier explained to Mao Zedong that " Berlin is the testicles of the West . Every time I want to make the West scream , I squeeze on Berlin . " NATO formally rejected the ultimatum in mid @-@ December and Khrushchev withdrew it in return for a Geneva conference on the German question . 
 More broadly , one hallmark of the 1950s was the beginning of European integration — a fundamental by @-@ product of the Cold War that Truman and Eisenhower promoted politically , economically , and militarily , but which later administrations viewed ambivalently , fearful that an independent Europe would forge a separate détente with the Soviet Union , which would use this to exacerbate Western disunity . 
 = = = Competition in the Third World = = = 
 Nationalist movements in some countries and regions , notably Guatemala , Indonesia and Indochina were often allied with communist groups , or perceived in the West to be allied with communists . In this context , the United States and the Soviet Union increasingly competed for influence by proxy in the Third World as decolonization gained momentum in the 1950s and early 1960s ; additionally , the Soviets saw continuing losses by imperial powers as presaging the eventual victory of their ideology . Both sides were selling armaments to gain influence . 
 The United States made use of the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) to do away with a string of unfriendly Third World governments and to support allied ones . In 1953 , President Eisenhower 's CIA implemented Operation Ajax , a covert operation aimed at the overthrow of the Iranian prime minister , Mohammad Mosaddegh . The popularly elected and non @-@ aligned Mosaddegh had been a Middle Eastern nemesis of Britain since nationalizing the British @-@ owned Anglo @-@ Iranian Oil Company in 1951 . Winston Churchill told the United States that Mosaddegh was " increasingly turning towards communism . " The pro @-@ Western shah , Mohammad Reza Pahlavi , assumed control as an autocratic monarch . The shah 's policies included the banning of the communist <unk> Party and general suppression of political dissent by SAVAK , the shah 's domestic security and intelligence agency . 
 In Guatemala , a CIA @-@ backed military coup ousted the left @-@ wing President Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán in 1954 . The post @-@ Arbenz government — a military junta headed by Carlos Castillo Armas — repealed a progressive land reform law , returned nationalized property belonging to the United Fruit Company , set up a National Committee of Defense Against Communism , and decreed a Preventive Penal Law Against Communism at the request of the United States . 
 The non @-@ aligned Indonesian government of Sukarno was faced with a major threat to its legitimacy beginning in 1956 , when several regional commanders began to demand autonomy from Jakarta . After mediation failed , Sukarno took action to remove the dissident commanders . In February 1958 , dissident military commanders in Central Sumatera ( Colonel Ahmad Hussein ) and North Sulawesi ( Colonel <unk> <unk> ) declared the Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Indonesia @-@ <unk> Movement aimed at overthrowing the Sukarno regime . They were joined by many civilian politicians from the Masyumi Party , such as <unk> <unk> , who were opposed to the growing influence of the communist Partai Komunis Indonesia party . Due to their anti @-@ communist rhetoric , the rebels received arms , funding , and other covert aid from the CIA until Allen Lawrence Pope , an American pilot , was shot down after a bombing raid on government @-@ held Ambon in April 1958 . The central government responded by launching airborne and seaborne military invasions of rebel strongholds Padang and Manado . By the end of 1958 , the rebels were militarily defeated , and the last remaining rebel guerilla bands surrendered by August 1961 . 
 In the Republic of the Congo , newly independent from Belgium since June 1960 , the CIA @-@ cultivated President Joseph Kasa @-@ Vubu ordered the dismissal of the democratically elected Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba and the Lumumba cabinet in September ; Lumumba called for Kasa @-@ Vubu 's dismissal instead . In the ensuing Congo Crisis , the CIA @-@ backed Colonel Mobutu quickly mobilized his forces to seize power through a military coup d 'état . 
 In British Guiana , the leftist People 's Progressive Party ( PPP ) candidate <unk> Jagan won the position of chief minister in a colonially administered election in 1953 , but was quickly forced to resign from power after Britain 's suspension of the still @-@ dependent nation 's constitution . Embarrassed by the landslide electoral victory of Jagan 's allegedly Marxist party , the British imprisoned the PPP 's leadership and maneuvered the organization into a divisive rupture in 1955 , engineering a split between Jagan and his PPP colleagues . Jagan again won the colonial elections in 1957 and 1961 ; despite Britain 's shift to a reconsideration of its view of the left @-@ wing Jagan as a Soviet @-@ style communist at this time , the United States pressured the British to withhold Guyana 's independence until an alternative to Jagan could be identified , supported , and brought into office . 
 Worn down by the communist guerrilla war for Vietnamese independence and handed a watershed defeat by communist Viet Minh rebels at the 1954 Battle of Điện Biên Phủ , the French accepted a negotiated abandonment of their colonial stake in Vietnam . In the Geneva Conference , peace accords were signed , leaving Vietnam divided between a pro @-@ Soviet administration in North Vietnam and a pro @-@ Western administration in South Vietnam at the 17th parallel north . Between 1954 and 1961 , Eisenhower 's United States sent economic aid and military advisers to strengthen South Vietnam 's pro @-@ Western regime against communist efforts to destabilize it . 
 Many emerging nations of Asia , Africa , and Latin America rejected the pressure to choose sides in the East @-@ West competition . In 1955 , at the Bandung Conference in Indonesia , dozens of Third World governments resolved to stay out of the Cold War . The consensus reached at Bandung culminated with the creation of the Belgrade @-@ headquartered Non @-@ Aligned Movement in 1961 . Meanwhile , Khrushchev broadened Moscow 's policy to establish ties with India and other key neutral states . Independence movements in the Third World transformed the post @-@ war order into a more pluralistic world of <unk> African and Middle Eastern nations and of rising nationalism in Asia and Latin America . 
 = = = Sino @-@ Soviet split = = = 
 The period after 1956 was marked by serious setbacks for the Soviet Union , most notably the breakdown of the Sino @-@ Soviet alliance , beginning the Sino @-@ Soviet split . Mao had defended Stalin when Khrushchev attacked him after his death in 1956 , and treated the new Soviet leader as a superficial upstart , accusing him of having lost his revolutionary edge . For his part , Khrushchev , disturbed by Mao 's glib attitude toward nuclear war , referred to the Chinese leader as a " lunatic on a throne " . 
 After this , Khrushchev made many desperate attempts to reconstitute the Sino @-@ Soviet alliance , but Mao considered it useless and denied any proposal . The Chinese @-@ Soviet animosity spilled out in an intra @-@ communist propaganda war . Further on , the Soviets focused on a bitter rivalry with Mao 's China for leadership of the global communist movement . 
 Historian Lorenz M. Lüthi argues : 
 The Sino @-@ Soviet split was one of the key events of the Cold War , equal in importance to the construction of the Berlin Wall , the Cuban Missile Crisis , the Second Vietnam War , and Sino @-@ American rapprochement . The split helped to determine the framework of the Second Cold War in general , and influenced the course of the Second Vietnam War in particular . 
 = = = Space race = = = 
 On the nuclear weapons front , the United States and the USSR pursued nuclear rearmament and developed long @-@ range weapons with which they could strike the territory of the other . In August 1957 , the Soviets successfully launched the world 's first intercontinental ballistic missile ( ICBM ) and in October , launched the first Earth satellite , Sputnik . The launch of Sputnik inaugurated the Space Race . This culminated in the Apollo Moon landings , which astronaut Frank Borman later described as " just a battle in the Cold War . " 
 = = = Cuban Revolution and the Bay of Pigs Invasion = = = 
 In Cuba , the July 26 Movement seized power in January 1959 , toppling President Fulgencio Batista , whose unpopular regime had been denied arms by the Eisenhower administration . 
 Diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States continued for some time after Batista 's fall , but President Eisenhower deliberately left the capital to avoid meeting Cuba 's young revolutionary leader Fidel Castro during the latter 's trip to Washington in April , leaving Vice President Richard Nixon to conduct the meeting in his place . Cuba began negotiating arms purchases from the Eastern Bloc in March 1960 . 
 In January 1961 , just prior to leaving office , Eisenhower formally severed relations with the Cuban government . In April 1961 , the administration of newly elected American President John F. Kennedy mounted an unsuccessful CIA @-@ organized ship @-@ borne invasion of the island at Playa Girón and Playa Larga in Las Villas Province — a failure that publicly humiliated the United States . Castro responded by publicly embracing Marxism – Leninism , and the Soviet Union pledged to provide further support . 
 = = = Berlin Crisis of 1961 = = = 
 The Berlin Crisis of 1961 was the last major incident in the Cold War regarding the status of Berlin and post – World War II Germany . By the early 1950s , the Soviet approach to restricting emigration movement was emulated by most of the rest of the Eastern Bloc . However , hundreds of thousands of East Germans annually emigrated to West Germany through a " loophole " in the system that existed between East and West Berlin , where the four occupying World War II powers governed movement . 
 The emigration resulted in a massive " brain drain " from East Germany to West Germany of younger educated professionals , such that nearly 20 % of East Germany 's population had migrated to West Germany by 1961 . That June , the Soviet Union issued a new ultimatum demanding the withdrawal of Allied forces from West Berlin . The request was rebuffed , and on 13 August , East Germany erected a barbed @-@ wire barrier that would eventually be expanded through construction into the Berlin Wall , effectively closing the loophole . 
 = = = Cuban Missile Crisis and Khrushchev ouster = = = 
 Continuing to seek ways to oust Castro following the Bay of Pigs Invasion , Kennedy and his administration experimented with various ways of covertly facilitating the overthrow of the Cuban government . Significant hopes were pinned on a covert program named the Cuban Project , devised under the Kennedy administration in 1961 . 
 In February 1962 , Khrushchev learned of the American plans regarding Cuba : a " Cuban project " — approved by the CIA and stipulating the overthrow of the Cuban government in October , possibly involving the American military — and yet one more Kennedy @-@ ordered operation to assassinate Castro . Preparations to install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba were undertaken in response . 
 Alarmed , Kennedy considered various reactions , and ultimately responded to the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba with a naval blockade and presented an ultimatum to the Soviets . Khrushchev backed down from a confrontation , and the Soviet Union removed the missiles in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba again . Castro later admitted that " I would have agreed to the use of nuclear weapons . ... we took it for granted that it would become a nuclear war anyway , and that we were going to disappear . " 
 The Cuban Missile Crisis ( October – November 1962 ) brought the world closer to nuclear war than ever before . The aftermath of the crisis led to the first efforts in the nuclear arms race at nuclear disarmament and improving relations , although the Cold War 's first arms control agreement , the Antarctic Treaty , had come into force in 1961 . 
 In 1964 , Khrushchev 's Kremlin colleagues managed to oust him , but allowed him a peaceful retirement . Accused of rudeness and incompetence , he was also credited with ruining Soviet agriculture and bringing the world to the brink of nuclear war . Khrushchev had become an international embarrassment when he authorized construction of the Berlin Wall , a public humiliation for Marxism – Leninism . 
 = = Confrontation through détente ( 1962 – 79 ) = = 
 In the course of the 1960s and 1970s , Cold War participants struggled to adjust to a new , more complicated pattern of international relations in which the world was no longer divided into two clearly opposed blocs . From the beginning of the post @-@ war period , Western Europe and Japan rapidly recovered from the destruction of World War II and sustained strong economic growth through the 1950s and 1960s , with per capita GDPs approaching those of the United States , while Eastern Bloc economies stagnated . 
 As a result of the 1973 oil crisis , combined with the growing influence of Third World alignments such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) and the Non @-@ Aligned Movement , less @-@ powerful countries had more room to assert their independence and often showed themselves resistant to pressure from either superpower . Meanwhile , Moscow was forced to turn its attention inward to deal with the Soviet Union 's deep @-@ seated domestic economic problems . During this period , Soviet leaders such as Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin embraced the notion of détente . 
 = = = French NATO withdrawal = = = 
 The unity of NATO was breached early in its history , with a crisis occurring during Charles de Gaulle 's presidency of France from 1958 onwards . De Gaulle protested at the United States ' strong role in the organization and what he perceived as a special relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom . In a memorandum sent to President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan on 17 September 1958 , he argued for the creation of a tripartite directorate that would put France on an equal footing with the United States and the United Kingdom , and also for the expansion of NATO 's coverage to include geographical areas of interest to France , most notably French Algeria , where France was waging a counter @-@ insurgency and sought NATO assistance . 
 Considering the response given to be unsatisfactory , de Gaulle began the development of an independent French nuclear deterrent and in 1966 withdrew from NATO 's military structures and expelled NATO troops from French soil . 
 = = = Czechoslovakia invasion = = = 
 In 1968 , a period of political liberalization in Czechoslovakia called the Prague Spring took place that included " Action Program " of <unk> , which described increasing freedom of the press , freedom of speech and freedom of movement , along with an economic emphasis on consumer goods , the possibility of a multiparty government , limiting the power of the secret police and potentially withdrawing from the Warsaw Pact . 
 In answer to the Prague Spring , the Soviet army , together with most of their Warsaw Pact allies , invaded Czechoslovakia . The invasion was followed by a wave of emigration , including an estimated 70 @,@ 000 Czechs and Slovaks initially fleeing , with the total eventually reaching 300 @,@ 000 . The invasion sparked intense protests from Yugoslavia , Romania and China , and from Western European communist parties . 
 = = = Brezhnev Doctrine = = = 
 In September 1968 , during a speech at the Fifth Congress of the Polish United Workers ' Party one month after the invasion of Czechoslovakia , Brezhnev outlined the Brezhnev Doctrine , in which he claimed the right to violate the sovereignty of any country attempting to replace Marxism – Leninism with capitalism . During the speech , Brezhnev stated : 
 When forces that are hostile to socialism try to turn the development of some socialist country towards capitalism , it becomes not only a problem of the country concerned , but a common problem and concern of all socialist countries . 
 The doctrine found its origins in the failures of Marxism – Leninism in states like Poland , Hungary and East Germany , which were facing a declining standard of living contrasting with the prosperity of West Germany and the rest of Western Europe . 
 = = = Third World escalations = = = 
 Under the Lyndon Johnson Administration , which gained power after the assassination of John Kennedy , the U.S. took a more hardline stance on Latin America — sometimes called the " Mann Doctrine " . In 1964 , the Brazilian military overthrew the government of president João Goulart with U.S. backing . In late April 1965 , the U.S. sent some 22 @,@ 000 troops to the Dominican Republic for a one @-@ year occupation in an invasion codenamed Operation Power Pack , citing the threat of the emergence of a Cuban @-@ style revolution in Latin America . Héctor García @-@ Godoy acted as provisional president , until conservative former president Joaquín Balaguer won the 1966 presidential election against non @-@ campaigning former President Juan Bosch . Activists for Bosch 's Dominican Revolutionary Party were violently harassed by the Dominican police and armed forces . 
 In Indonesia , the hardline anti @-@ communist General Suharto wrested control of the state from his predecessor Sukarno in an attempt to establish a " New Order " . From 1965 to 1966 , the military led the mass killing of an estimated half @-@ million members and sympathizers of the Indonesian Communist Party and other leftist organizations . 
 <unk> the scale of American intervention in the ongoing conflict between Ngô Đình Diệm 's South Vietnamese government and the communist National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam ( NLF ) insurgents opposing it , Johnson deployed some 575 @,@ 000 troops in Southeast Asia to defeat the NLF and their North Vietnamese allies in the Vietnam War , but his costly policy weakened the US economy and , by 1975 , ultimately culminated in what most of the world saw as a humiliating defeat of the world 's most powerful superpower at the hands of one of the world 's poorest nations . North Vietnam received Soviet approval for its war effort in 1959 ; the Soviet Union sent 15 @,@ 000 military advisors and annual arms shipments worth $ 450 million to North Vietnam during the war , while China sent 320 @,@ 000 troops and annual arms shipments worth $ 180 million . 
 In Chile , the Socialist Party candidate Salvador Allende won the presidential election of 1970 , becoming the first democratically elected Marxist to become president of a country in the Americas . The CIA targeted Allende for removal and operated to undermine his support domestically , which contributed to a period of unrest culminating in General Augusto Pinochet 's coup d 'état on 11 September 1973 . Pinochet consolidated power as a military dictator , Allende 's reforms of the economy were rolled back , and leftist opponents were killed or detained in internment camps under the Dirección de <unk> Nacional ( <unk> ) . 
 The Middle East remained a source of contention . Egypt , which received the bulk of its arms and economic assistance from the USSR , was a troublesome client , with a reluctant Soviet Union feeling obliged to assist in both the 1967 Six @-@ Day War ( with advisers and technicians ) and the War of Attrition ( with pilots and aircraft ) against pro @-@ Western Israel . Despite the beginning of an Egyptian shift from a pro @-@ Soviet to a pro @-@ American orientation in 1972 ( under Egypt 's new leader Anwar El Sadat ) , rumors of imminent Soviet intervention on the Egyptians ' behalf during the 1973 Yom Kippur War brought about a massive American mobilization that threatened to wreck détente . Although pre @-@ Sadat Egypt had been the largest recipient of Soviet aid in the Middle East , the Soviets were also successful in establishing close relations with communist South Yemen , as well as the nationalist governments of Algeria and Iraq . Indirect Soviet assistance to the Palestinian side of the Israeli – Palestinian conflict included support for Yasser Arafat 's Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) . According to historian Charles R. H. Tripp , the Iraqi Ba 'athist coup of 1968 upset " the US @-@ sponsored security system established as part of the Cold War in the Middle East . It appeared that any enemy of the Baghdad regime was a potential ally of the United States . " From 1973 to 1975 , the CIA colluded with the Iranian government to finance and arm Kurdish rebels in the Second Kurdish – Iraqi War to weaken Iraq 's Ahmed Hassan al @-@ Bakr . 
 In Africa , Somali army officers led by Mohamed Siad Barre carried out a bloodless coup in 1969 , creating the socialist Somali Democratic Republic . The Soviet Union vowed to support Somalia . Four years later , the pro @-@ American Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie was overthrown in a 1974 coup by the Derg , a radical group of Ethiopian army officers led by the pro @-@ Soviet Mengistu Haile Mariam , who built up relations with the Cubans and Soviets . When fighting between the Somalis and Ethiopians broke out in the 1977 – 1978 Somali @-@ Ethiopian Ogaden War , Barre lost his Soviet support and turned to the Safari Club — a group of pro @-@ American intelligence agencies including Iran , Egypt , and Saudi Arabia — for support and weapons . The Ethiopian military was supported by Cuban soldiers along with Soviet military advisors and armaments . Carter remained mostly neutral during the conflict , insisting that Somalia was violating Ethiopian sovereignty . Carter initiated military cooperation with Somalia in 1980 . 
 The 1974 Portuguese Carnation Revolution against the authoritarian Estado Novo returned Portugal to a multi @-@ party system and facilitated the independence of the Portuguese colonies Angola and East Timor . In Africa , where Angolan rebels had waged a multi @-@ faction independence war against Portuguese rule since 1961 , a two @-@ decade civil war replaced the anti @-@ colonial struggle as fighting erupted between the communist People 's Movement for the Liberation of Angola ( MPLA ) , backed by the Cubans and Soviets , and the National Liberation Front of Angola ( FNLA ) , backed by the United States , the People 's Republic of China , and Mobutu 's government in Zaire . The United States , the apartheid government of South Africa , and several other African governments also supported a third faction , the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola ( UNITA ) . Without bothering to consult the Soviets in advance , the Cuban government sent a number of combat troops to fight alongside the MPLA . Foreign mercenaries and a South African armoured column were deployed to support UNITA , but the MPLA , bolstered by Cuban personnel and Soviet assistance , eventually gained the upper hand . 
 During the Vietnam War , North Vietnam invaded and occupied parts of Cambodia to use as military bases , which contributed to the violence of the Cambodian Civil War between the pro @-@ American government of Lon Nol and Maoist Khmer Rouge insurgents . Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives reveal that the North Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the request of the Khmer Rouge after negotiations with Nuon Chea . US and South Vietnamese forces responded to these actions with a bombing campaign and ground incursion , the effects of which are disputed by historians . Under the leadership of Pol Pot , the Khmer Rouge would eventually kill 1 – 3 million Cambodians in the killing fields , out of a 1975 population of roughly 8 million . Martin Shaw described these atrocities as " the purest genocide of the Cold War era . " Vietnam deposed Pol Pot in 1979 and installed Khmer Rouge defector Heng Samrin , only to be bogged down in a guerilla war and suffer a punitive Chinese attack . 
 = = = Sino @-@ American rapprochement = = = 
 As a result of the Sino @-@ Soviet split , tensions along the Chinese – Soviet border reached their peak in 1969 , and United States President Richard Nixon decided to use the conflict to shift the balance of power towards the West in the Cold War . The Chinese had sought improved relations with the Americans in order to gain advantage over the Soviets as well . 
 In February 1972 , Nixon announced a stunning rapprochement with Mao 's China by traveling to Beijing and meeting with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai . At this time , the USSR achieved rough nuclear parity with the United States ; meanwhile , the Vietnam War both weakened America 's influence in the Third World and cooled relations with Western Europe . Although indirect conflict between Cold War powers continued through the late 1960s and early 1970s , tensions were beginning to ease . 
 = = = Nixon , Brezhnev , and détente = = = 
 Following his China visit , Nixon met with Soviet leaders , including Brezhnev in Moscow . These Strategic Arms Limitation Talks resulted in two landmark arms control treaties : SALT I , the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers , and the Anti @-@ Ballistic Missile Treaty , which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles . These aimed to limit the development of costly anti @-@ ballistic missiles and nuclear missiles . 
 Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of " peaceful coexistence " and established the groundbreaking new policy of détente ( or cooperation ) between the two superpowers . Meanwhile , Brezhnev attempted to revive the Soviet economy , which was declining in part because of heavy military expenditures . Between 1972 and 1974 , the two sides also agreed to strengthen their economic ties , including agreements for increased trade . As a result of their meetings , détente would replace the hostility of the Cold War and the two countries would live mutually . 
 Meanwhile , these developments coincided with the " Ostpolitik " of West German Chancellor Willy Brandt . Other agreements were concluded to stabilize the situation in Europe , culminating in the Helsinki Accords signed at the Conference on Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe in 1975 . 
 = = = Late 1970s deterioration of relations = = = 
 In the 1970s , the KGB , led by Yuri Andropov , continued to persecute distinguished Soviet personalities such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Andrei Sakharov , who were criticising the Soviet leadership in harsh terms . Indirect conflict between the superpowers continued through this period of détente in the Third World , particularly during political crises in the Middle East , Chile , Ethiopia , and Angola . 
 Although President Jimmy Carter tried to place another limit on the arms race with a SALT II agreement in 1979 , his efforts were undermined by the other events that year , including the Iranian Revolution and the KGB @-@ backed Nicaraguan Revolution , which both ousted pro @-@ US regimes , and his retaliation against Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in December . 
 = = " Second Cold War " ( 1979 – 85 ) = = 
 The term second Cold War refers to the period of intensive reawakening of Cold War tensions and conflicts in the late 1970s and early 1980s . Tensions greatly increased between the major powers with both sides becoming more militaristic . Diggins says , " Reagan went all out to fight the second cold war , by supporting <unk> in the third world . " Cox says , " The intensity of this ' second ' Cold War was as great as its duration was short . " 
 = = = Soviet war in Afghanistan = = = 
 In April 1978 , the communist People 's Democratic Party of Afghanistan ( PDPA ) seized power in Afghanistan in the Saur Revolution . Within months , opponents of the communist government launched an uprising in eastern Afghanistan that quickly expanded into a civil war waged by guerrilla mujahideen against government forces countrywide . The Peshawar Seven insurgents received military training and weapons in neighboring Pakistan and China , as well as weapons and billions of dollars from the United States , the United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia , while the Soviet Union sent thousands of military advisers to support the PDPA government . Meanwhile , increasing friction between the competing factions of the PDPA – the dominant Khalq and the more moderate Parcham – resulted in the dismissal of Parchami cabinet members and the arrest of Parchami military officers under the pretext of a Parchami coup . By mid @-@ 1979 , the United States had started a covert program to assist the mujahideen . 
 In September 1979 , Khalqist President Nur Muhammad Taraki was assassinated in a coup within the PDPA orchestrated by fellow Khalq member Hafizullah Amin , who assumed the presidency . <unk> by the Soviets , Amin was assassinated by Soviet special forces in December 1979 . A Soviet @-@ organized government , led by Parcham 's Babrak Karmal but inclusive of both factions , filled the vacuum . Soviet troops were deployed to stabilize Afghanistan under Karmal in more substantial numbers , although the Soviet government did not expect to do most of the fighting in Afghanistan . As a result , however , the Soviets were now directly involved in what had been a domestic war in Afghanistan . 
 Carter responded to the Soviet intervention by withdrawing the SALT II treaty from the Senate , imposing embargoes on grain and technology shipments to the USSR , and demanding a significant increase in military spending , and further announced that the United States would boycott the 1980 Moscow Summer Olympics . He described the Soviet incursion as " the most serious threat to the peace since the Second World War " . 
 = = = Reagan and Thatcher = = = 
 In January 1977 , four years prior to becoming president , Ronald Reagan bluntly stated , in a conversation with Richard V. Allen , his basic expectation in relation to the Cold War . " My idea of American policy toward the Soviet Union is simple , and some would say simplistic , " he said . " It is this : We win and they lose . What do you think of that ? " In 1980 , Ronald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential election , vowing to increase military spending and confront the Soviets everywhere . Both Reagan and new British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher denounced the Soviet Union and its ideology . Reagan labeled the Soviet Union an " evil empire " and predicted that Communism would be left on the " ash heap of history " . 
 By early 1985 , Reagan 's anti @-@ communist position had developed into a stance known as the new Reagan Doctrine — which , in addition to containment , formulated an additional right to subvert existing communist governments . Besides continuing Carter 's policy of supporting the Islamic opponents of the Soviet Union and the Soviet @-@ backed PDPA government in Afghanistan , the CIA also sought to weaken the Soviet Union itself by promoting political Islam in the majority @-@ Muslim Central Asian Soviet Union . Additionally , the CIA encouraged anti @-@ communist Pakistan 's ISI to train Muslims from around the world to participate in the jihad against the Soviet Union . 
 = = = Polish Solidarity movement and martial law = = = 
 Pope John Paul II provided a moral focus for anti @-@ communism ; a visit to his native Poland in 1979 stimulated a religious and nationalist resurgence centered on the Solidarity movement that galvanized opposition and may have led to his attempted assassination two years later . 
 In December 1981 , Poland 's Wojciech Jaruzelski reacted to the crisis by imposing a period of martial law . Reagan imposed economic sanctions on Poland in response . Mikhail Suslov , the Kremlin 's top ideologist , advised Soviet leaders not to intervene if Poland fell under the control of Solidarity , for fear it might lead to heavy economic sanctions , representing a catastrophe for the Soviet economy . 
 = = = Soviet and US military and economic issues = = = 
 Moscow had built up a military that consumed as much as 25 percent of the Soviet Union 's gross national product at the expense of consumer goods and investment in civilian sectors . Soviet spending on the arms race and other Cold War commitments both caused and exacerbated deep @-@ seated structural problems in the Soviet system , which saw at least a decade of economic stagnation during the late Brezhnev years . 
 Soviet investment in the defense sector was not driven by military necessity , but in large part by the interests of massive party and state bureaucracies dependent on the sector for their own power and privileges . The Soviet Armed Forces became the largest in the world in terms of the numbers and types of weapons they possessed , in the number of troops in their ranks , and in the sheer size of their military – industrial base . However , the quantitative advantages held by the Soviet military often concealed areas where the Eastern Bloc dramatically lagged behind the West . 
 By the early 1980s , the USSR had built up a military arsenal and army surpassing that of the United States . Soon after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , president Carter began massively building up the United States military . This buildup was accelerated by the Reagan administration , which increased the military spending from 5 @.@ 3 percent of GNP in 1981 to 6 @.@ 5 percent in 1986 , the largest peacetime defense buildup in United States history . 
 Tensions continued intensifying in the early 1980s when Reagan revived the B @-@ 1 Lancer program that was canceled by the Carter administration , produced LGM @-@ 118 Peacekeepers , installed US cruise missiles in Europe , and announced his experimental Strategic Defense Initiative , dubbed " Star Wars " by the media , a defense program to shoot down missiles in mid @-@ flight . 
 With the background of a buildup in tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States , and the deployment of Soviet RSD @-@ 10 Pioneer ballistic missiles targeting Western Europe , NATO decided , under the impetus of the Carter presidency , to deploy MGM @-@ 31 Pershing and cruise missiles in Europe , primarily West Germany . This deployment would have placed missiles just 10 minutes ' striking distance from Moscow . 
 After Reagan 's military buildup , the Soviet Union did not respond by further building its military because the enormous military expenses , along with inefficient planned manufacturing and collectivized agriculture , were already a heavy burden for the Soviet economy . At the same time , Saudi Arabia increased oil production , even as other non @-@ OPEC nations were increasing production . These developments contributed to the 1980s oil glut , which affected the Soviet Union , as oil was the main source of Soviet export revenues . Issues with command economics , oil price decreases and large military expenditures gradually brought the Soviet economy to stagnation . 
 On 1 September 1983 , the Soviet Union shot down Korean Air Lines Flight 007 , a Boeing 747 with 269 people aboard , including sitting Congressman Larry McDonald , when it violated Soviet airspace just past the west coast of Sakhalin Island near Moneron Island — an act which Reagan characterized as a " massacre " . This act increased support for military deployment , overseen by Reagan , which stood in place until the later accords between Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev . The Able Archer 83 exercise in November 1983 , a realistic simulation of a coordinated NATO nuclear release , was perhaps the most dangerous moment since the Cuban Missile Crisis , as the Soviet leadership feared that a nuclear attack might be imminent . 
 American domestic public concerns about intervening in foreign conflicts persisted from the end of the Vietnam War . The Reagan administration emphasized the use of quick , low @-@ cost counter @-@ insurgency tactics to intervene in foreign conflicts . In 1983 , the Reagan administration intervened in the <unk> Lebanese Civil War , invaded Grenada , bombed Libya and backed the Central American Contras , anti @-@ communist paramilitaries seeking to overthrow the Soviet @-@ aligned Sandinista government in Nicaragua . While Reagan 's interventions against Grenada and Libya were popular in the United States , his backing of the Contra rebels was mired in controversy . 
 Meanwhile , the Soviets incurred high costs for their own foreign interventions . Although Brezhnev was convinced in 1979 that the Soviet war in Afghanistan would be brief , Muslim guerrillas , aided by the US , China , Britain , Saudi Arabia and Pakistan , waged a fierce resistance against the invasion . The Kremlin sent nearly 100 @,@ 000 troops to support its puppet regime in Afghanistan , leading many outside observers to dub the war " the Soviets ' Vietnam " . However , Moscow 's quagmire in Afghanistan was far more disastrous for the Soviets than Vietnam had been for the Americans because the conflict coincided with a period of internal decay and domestic crisis in the Soviet system . 
 A senior US State Department official predicted such an outcome as early as 1980 , positing that the invasion resulted in part from a " domestic crisis within the Soviet system . ... It may be that the thermodynamic law of entropy has ... caught up with the Soviet system , which now seems to expend more energy on simply maintaining its equilibrium than on improving itself . We could be seeing a period of foreign movement at a time of internal decay " . 
 = = Final years ( 1985 – 91 ) = = 
 = = = Gorbachev reforms = = = 
 By the time the comparatively youthful Mikhail Gorbachev became General Secretary in 1985 , the Soviet economy was stagnant and faced a sharp fall in foreign currency earnings as a result of the downward slide in oil prices in the 1980s . These issues prompted Gorbachev to investigate measures to revive the ailing state . 
 An ineffectual start led to the conclusion that deeper structural changes were necessary and in June 1987 Gorbachev announced an agenda of economic reform called perestroika , or restructuring . Perestroika relaxed the production quota system , allowed private ownership of businesses and paved the way for foreign investment . These measures were intended to redirect the country 's resources from costly Cold War military commitments to more productive areas in the civilian sector . 
