 Despite initial skepticism in the West , the new Soviet leader proved to be committed to reversing the Soviet Union 's deteriorating economic condition instead of continuing the arms race with the West . Partly as a way to fight off internal opposition from party cliques to his reforms , Gorbachev simultaneously introduced glasnost , or openness , which increased freedom of the press and the transparency of state institutions . Glasnost was intended to reduce the corruption at the top of the Communist Party and moderate the abuse of power in the Central Committee . Glasnost also enabled increased contact between Soviet citizens and the western world , particularly with the United States , contributing to the accelerating détente between the two nations . 
 = = = Thaw in relations = = = 
 In response to the Kremlin 's military and political concessions , Reagan agreed to renew talks on economic issues and the scaling @-@ back of the arms race . The first was held in November 1985 in Geneva , Switzerland . At one stage the two men , accompanied only by an interpreter , agreed in principle to reduce each country 's nuclear arsenal by 50 percent . A second Reykjavík Summit was held in Iceland . Talks went well until the focus shifted to Reagan 's proposed Strategic Defense Initiative , which Gorbachev wanted eliminated . Reagan refused . The negotiations failed , but the third summit in 1987 led to a breakthrough with the signing of the Intermediate @-@ Range Nuclear Forces Treaty ( INF ) . The INF treaty eliminated all nuclear @-@ armed , ground @-@ launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges between 500 and 5 @,@ 500 kilometers ( 300 to 3 @,@ 400 miles ) and their infrastructure . 
 East – West tensions rapidly subsided through the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s , culminating with the final summit in Moscow in 1989 , when Gorbachev and George H. W. Bush signed the START I arms control treaty . During the following year it became apparent to the Soviets that oil and gas subsidies , along with the cost of maintaining massive troops levels , represented a substantial economic drain . In addition , the security advantage of a buffer zone was recognised as irrelevant and the Soviets officially declared that they would no longer intervene in the affairs of allied states in Central and Eastern Europe . 
 In 1989 , Soviet forces withdrew from Afghanistan and by 1990 Gorbachev consented to German reunification , the only alternative being a Tiananmen scenario . When the Berlin Wall came down , Gorbachev 's " Common European Home " concept began to take shape . 
 On 3 December 1989 , Gorbachev and Reagan 's successor , George H. W. Bush , declared the Cold War over at the Malta Summit ; a year later , the two former rivals were partners in the Gulf War against Iraq . 
 = = = East Europe breaks away = = = 
 By 1989 , the Soviet alliance system was on the brink of collapse , and , deprived of Soviet military support , the communist leaders of the Warsaw Pact states were losing power . Grassroots organizations , such as Poland 's Solidarity movement , rapidly gained ground with strong popular bases . In 1989 , the communist governments in Poland and Hungary became the first to negotiate the organizing of competitive elections . In Czechoslovakia and East Germany , mass protests unseated entrenched communist leaders . The communist regimes in Bulgaria and Romania also crumbled , in the latter case as the result of a violent uprising . Attitudes had changed enough that US Secretary of State James Baker suggested that the American government would not be opposed to Soviet intervention in Romania , on behalf of the opposition , to prevent bloodshed . The tidal wave of change culminated with the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 , which symbolized the collapse of European communist governments and graphically ended the Iron Curtain divide of Europe . The 1989 revolutionary wave swept across Central and Eastern Europe peacefully overthrew all the Soviet @-@ style communist states : East Germany , Poland , Hungary , Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria ; Romania was the only Eastern @-@ bloc country to topple its communist regime violently and execute its head of state . 
 = = = Soviet republics break away = = = 
 In the USSR itself , glasnost weakened the bonds that held the Soviet Union together and by February 1990 , with the dissolution of the USSR looming , the Communist Party was forced to surrender its 73 @-@ year @-@ old monopoly on state power . At the same time freedom of press and dissent allowed by glasnost and the festering " nationalities question " increasingly led the Union 's component republics to declare their autonomy from Moscow , with the Baltic states withdrawing from the Union entirely . 
 = = = Soviet dissolution = = = 
 Gorbachev 's permissive attitude toward Central and Eastern Europe did not initially extend to Soviet territory ; even Bush , who strove to maintain friendly relations , condemned the January 1991 killings in Latvia and Lithuania , privately warning that economic ties would be frozen if the violence continued . The USSR was fatally weakened by a failed coup and a growing number of Soviet republics , particularly Russia , who threatened to secede from the USSR . The Commonwealth of Independent States , created on 21 December 1991 , is viewed as a successor entity to the Soviet Union but , according to Russia 's leaders , its purpose was to " allow a civilized divorce " between the Soviet Republics and is comparable to a loose confederation . The USSR was declared officially dissolved on 25 December 1991 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Russia drastically cut military spending , and restructuring the economy left millions unemployed . The capitalist reforms culminated in a recession in the early 1990s more severe than the Great Depression as experienced by the United States and Germany . 
 The Cold War continues to influence world affairs . The post @-@ Cold War world is considered to be unipolar , with the United States the sole remaining superpower . The Cold War defined the political role of the United States after World War II — by 1989 the United States had military alliances with 50 countries , with 526 @,@ 000 troops stationed abroad , with 326 @,@ 000 in Europe ( two @-@ thirds of which in west Germany ) and 130 @,@ 000 in Asia ( mainly Japan and South Korea ) . The Cold War also marked the zenith of peacetime military – industrial complexes , especially in the United States , and large @-@ scale military funding of science . These complexes , though their origins may be found as early as the 19th century , snowballed considerably during the Cold War . 
 Cumulative U.S. military expenditures throughout the entire Cold War amounted to an estimated $ 8 trillion . Further nearly 100 @,@ 000 Americans lost their lives in the Korean and Vietnam Wars . Although Soviet casualties are difficult to estimate , as a share of their gross national product the financial cost for the Soviet Union was much higher than that incurred by the United States . 
 In addition to the loss of life by uniformed soldiers , millions died in the superpowers ' proxy wars around the globe , most notably in Southeast Asia . Most of the proxy wars and subsidies for local conflicts ended along with the Cold War ; interstate wars , ethnic wars , revolutionary wars , as well as refugee and displaced persons crises have declined sharply in the post @-@ Cold War years . Left over from the Cold War are numbers stations , which are shortwave radio stations thought to be used to broadcast covert messages , some of which can still be heard today . 
 The aftermath of Cold War conflict , however , is not always easily erased , as many of the economic and social tensions that were exploited to fuel Cold War competition in parts of the Third World remain acute . The breakdown of state control in a number of areas formerly ruled by communist governments produced new civil and ethnic conflicts , particularly in the former Yugoslavia . In Central and Eastern Europe , the end of the Cold War has ushered in an era of economic growth and an increase in the number of liberal democracies , while in other parts of the world , such as Afghanistan , independence was accompanied by state failure . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 During the Cold War itself , with the United States and the Soviet Union invested heavily in propaganda designed to influence the hearts and minds of people around the world , especially using motion pictures . 
 The Cold War endures as a popular topic reflected extensively in entertainment media , and continuing to the present with numerous post @-@ 1991 Cold War @-@ themed feature films , novels , television , and other media . In 2013 , a KGB @-@ sleeper @-@ agents @-@ living @-@ next @-@ door action drama series , The Americans , set in the early 1980s , was ranked # 6 on the Metacritic annual Best New TV Shows list and is in its second season . At the same time , movies like Crimson Tide ( 1995 ) are shown in their entirety to educate college students about the Cold War . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 As soon as the term " Cold War " was popularized to refer to post @-@ war tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union , interpreting the course and origins of the conflict has been a source of heated controversy among historians , political scientists , and journalists . In particular , historians have sharply disagreed as to who was responsible for the breakdown of Soviet – US relations after the Second World War ; and whether the conflict between the two superpowers was inevitable , or could have been avoided . Historians have also disagreed on what exactly the Cold War was , what the sources of the conflict were , and how to disentangle patterns of action and reaction between the two sides . 
 Although explanations of the origins of the conflict in academic discussions are complex and diverse , several general schools of thought on the subject can be identified . Historians commonly speak of three differing approaches to the study of the Cold War : " orthodox " accounts , " revisionism " , and " post @-@ revisionism " . 
 " Orthodox " accounts place responsibility for the Cold War on the Soviet Union and its expansion further into Europe . " Revisionist " writers place more responsibility for the breakdown of post @-@ war peace on the United States , citing a range of US efforts to isolate and confront the Soviet Union well before the end of World War II . " Post @-@ revisionists " see the events of the Cold War as more nuanced , and attempt to be more balanced in determining what occurred during the Cold War . Much of the historiography on the Cold War weaves together two or even all three of these broad categories . 
 = Byzantine – Ottoman Wars = 
 The Byzantine – Ottoman Wars were a series of decisive conflicts between the Ottoman Turks and Byzantines that led to the final destruction of the Byzantine Empire and the rise of the Ottoman Empire . 
 In 1204 the Byzantine capital of Constantinople was sacked and occupied by the Fourth Crusaders , an important moment of the Christian East – West Schism . The Byzantine Empire , already weakened by misrule , was left divided and in chaos . Taking advantage of the situation , the Sultanate of Rum began seizing territory in Western Asia Minor until the Nicaean Empire was able to repulse the Seljuk Turks against the remaining territories still under Roman rule . Eventually Constantinople was re @-@ taken from the Latin Empire in 1261 by the Nicaean Empire . However the position of the Byzantine Empire in the European continent remained uncertain due to the presence of the rival kingdoms of the Despotate of Epirus , Serbia and the Second Bulgarian Empire . This , combined with the reduced power of the Sultanate of Rum ( Byzantium 's chief rival in Asia ) led to the removal of troops from Asia Minor to maintain Byzantium 's grip on Thrace . However the weakening of the Sultanate of Rum was by no means a blessing to the Empire as nobles known as ghazis began setting up their fiefdoms , at the expense of the Byzantine Empire . While many Turkish beys participated in the conquest of Byzantine and Seljuk territory , the territories under the control of one such Bey named Osman I posed the greatest threat to Nicaea and to Constantinople . By 1299 , Osman I felt assured of his position to declare himself Sultan and thereafter his territories became known as the Ottoman Empire . 
 Within 50 years of Osman I 's establishment of the Ottoman <unk> , Byzantine Asia Minor had ceased to exist and by ca . 1380 , Byzantine Thrace was lost to the Ottomans . By ca . 1400 , the once mighty Byzantine Empire was nothing more than a collection of the Despotate of the Morea , a few Aegean islands and a strip of land in Thrace in the immediate vicinity of the Capital . The Crusade of Nicopolis in 1396 , Timur 's invasion in 1402 and the final Crusade of Varna in 1444 allowed a ruined Constantinople to stave off defeat until 1453 . With the conclusion of the war Ottoman supremacy became established in the eastern Mediterranean . 
 = = Rise of the Ottomans : 1265 – 1328 = = 
 Following Michael VIII Palaeologus ' reconquest of Constantinople in 1261 , the Byzantine Empire was left in a grave position . There was plenty of talk among the Latin states of the Greek mainland and other regions of retaking Constantinople for the Latin Empire whilst to the north the main threat came from Serbian expansion into the Balkans by king Stephen <unk> . What was once a strong frontier under the Komnenian dynasty at the Danube river now threatened Constantinople itself . 
 To solve these problems Michael Palaeologus began consolidating his rule ; he had the younger co @-@ emperor John IV blinded , which resulted in much resentment . To counter this , the Byzantine Emperor installed a new Patriarch of Constantinople , Germanus III , ordering him to lift an excommunication that had been placed against him by the former Patriarch Arsenios Autoreianos and to submit to the authority of Rome in order to alleviate the Latin threat . 
 As the Byzantine Empire continued the conquest of Latin territory , the Turks under Osman I began their raids into Byzantine Anatolia ; <unk> and <unk> were taken in 1265 and 1289 respectively . Michael Palaeologus was unable to deal with these early setbacks due to the need to transfer troops to the West . 
 In 1282 , Michael Palaeologus died and his son Andronicus II took power . The death of the old Byzantine Emperor came as a relief for the society at large ; his policy of Latin appeasement to the Church in Rome , heavy taxation and military expenditure placed a severe burden on the people . As the Ottoman Turks began taking land from the Empire , they were seen as liberators of <unk> and many soon converted to Islam undermining the Byzantine 's Orthodox power base . 
 Andronicus ' rule was marked with incompetence and short @-@ sighted decisions that in the long run would ruin the Byzantine Empire beyond repair . He began to debase the Byzantine hyperpyron , resulting in a reduction of the value of the Byzantine economy ; taxes were decreased for the Powerful , i.e. landed aristocracy and instead placed upon the Knight @-@ class <unk> . To popularize his rule he repudiated the union of the Orthodox and Catholic Churches decreed by the Second Council of Lyon in 1274 , thereby further increasing hostilities between the Latins and the Byzantines . 
 Andronicus II took a deep interest in preserving the Anatolian lands of Byzantium and ordered construction of forts in Asia Minor and vigorous training of the army . The Byzantine Emperor ordered that his court be moved to Anatolia to oversee the campaigns there and instructed his General Alexios Philanthropenos to push back the Turks . Early successes were rendered useless when Alexios staged an unsuccessful coup , leading to his blinding and the end of his campaigns . This allowed the Ottomans to lay siege to Nicaea in 1301 . A further defeat on Andronicus ' son Michael IX and the Byzantine general George Mouzalon occurred at Magnesia and <unk> in 1302 . 
 Despite this , Andronicus tried once more to strike a decisive blow back at the Turks , this time hiring Catalan mercenaries . Under the guidance of Michael IX and the leadership of Roger de Flor , the 6 @,@ 500 @-@ strong Catalan Company in the spring and summer of 1303 to drive back the Turks . The mercenaries ' expensive services drove them back from Philadelphia to Cyzicus and in doing so brought great destruction to the Anatolian landscape . Once again these gains were thwarted by internal matters . Roger de Flor was assassinated and , in revenge , his company began pillaging the Anatolian countryside . When they finally left in 1307 to attack Byzantine Thrace , the locals welcomed the Ottomans who once again began blockading key fortresses in Asia Minor . 
 The Ottomans were able to implement their military success due to the numerous divisions amongst their opponents . Many of the peasant classes in Anatolia saw the Ottomans as the better master . 
 After these defeats , Andronicus was in no position to send many troops . In 1320 , Andronicus II 's grandson , Andronicus III , was disinherited following the death of his father , Michael IX , the Emperor 's son and heir apparent . The following year , Andronicus III retaliated by marching on Constantinople and was given Thrace as an appanage . He kept on pressing for his inheritance and , in 1322 , was made co @-@ emperor . This culminated into a Byzantine civil war of 1321 @-@ 1328 in which Serbia backed Andronicus II and the Bulgarians backed his grandson . Eventually Andronicus III emerged triumphant on May 23 , 1328 . As Andronicus III consolidated his hold on Byzantium , the Ottomans succeeded in taking Bursa from the Byzantines in 1326 . 
 = = Byzantium counter : 1328 – 1341 = = 
 Andronicus III 's reign was to be marked by Byzantium 's last genuine and promising attempt at restoring " the glory that was once Rome " . In 1329 , Byzantine troops were sent to meet the Ottoman forces who had been blockading , and in effect laying siege to , Nicaea since 1301 . Byzantine counter @-@ attacks coupled with the scale of Nicaea 's defenses had frustrated the Ottomans ' attempts at taking any cities . The fate of Nicaea was sealed when the Byzantine relief army was defeated at <unk> on 10 June 1329 . In 1331 , Nicaea surrendered , resulting in a massive blow considering that it was the capital of the Empire 70 years prior . 
 Once again the Byzantines ' military power was depleted and Andronicus III was forced into diplomacy as his grandfather was before him ; in return for the safety of the remaining Byzantine settlements in Asia Minor , tribute would be paid to the Ottomans . Unfortunately for the Byzantine Empire , this did not stop the Ottomans from laying siege to Nicomedia in 1333 ; the city finally fell in 1337 . 
 Despite these setbacks , Andronicus III was able to score a few successes against his opponents in Greece and Asia Minor ; Epirus along with Thessalonika were subjugated . In 1329 , the Byzantines captured Chios and , in 1335 , secured Lesbos . Nonetheless , these isolated Islands were isolated exceptions to the general trend of increasing Ottoman conquests . Furthermore , none of the Islands were a part of the Ottoman domain ; their capture demonstrates the potential that the Byzantines had at the time of Andronicus III . Byzantine military ability would be further weakened by Serbian expansions into recent acquisitions by Andronicus III ( Epirus ) and finally by a devastating civil war that would subjugate the Byzantine Empire as a vassal to the Ottomans . 
 = = Balkan invasion and civil war : 1341 – 1371 = = 
 Andronicus III died in 1341 leaving his 10 @-@ year @-@ old son John V to rule . A regency was set up with John Cantacuzenus , the young Emperor 's mother , Anna of Savoy , and the Patriarch John XIV Kalekas . Rivalries between Kalekas and Cantacuzenus led to a destructive civil war , in which Cantacuzenus emerged triumphant at Constantinople in February 1347 . During this time plague , earthquakes and Ottoman raiding continued until only Philadelphia remained in Byzantine hands and only so by payment of a tribute . Throughout the civil war the Byzantines on both sides employed Turks and Serbs with mercenaries pillaging at will , leaving much of Macedonia in ruin and in the hands of the newly created Serbian Empire . Following this victory , Kantakouzenos ruled as co @-@ emperor with John V. 
 This dual rule eventually failed and the two waged a new civil war further diminishing what was left of Byzantium 's integrity in the eyes of her troublesome neighbors . John VI Cantacuzenus emerged triumphant once again and replaced the now exiled John V Palaeologus with his son Matthew Cantacuzenus as junior co @-@ emperor . However , the Turks , under Osman I 's son , Orhan I , now came into play by capturing the fort of <unk> ( Gallipoli ) in 1354 and gaining access to the European mainland . The arrival of the seemingly unbeatable Ottoman soldiers surrounding Constantinople caused a panic in Constantinople , capitalized by John V who , with the assistance of the Genoese , staged a coup and ousted John VI Cantacuzenus in November 1354 . As a result , John VI would later become a monk . 
 The civil war did not end there ; Matthew Cantacuzenus now obtained troops from Orhan and began a bid for taking Constantinople . His capture in 1356 ended his dreams of becoming Emperor and with it came an ephemeral defeat for the Ottomans who had favored the overthrow of John V. 
 Following the end of the civil conflict came a small lull in fighting between the expanding Ottomans and Byzantines . In 1361 Didymoteichon fell to the Turks . Orhan 's successor , Murad I was more concerned with his Anatolian positions . However , just like Alp Arslan of the Seljuk Turks , Murad I left the taking of Byzantine territory to his vassals with Philippopolis falling after major campaigning between 1363 – 4 and Adrianople succumbing to the Ottomans in 1369 . 
 The Byzantine Empire was in no position to launch any decent counter @-@ attack or defence of these lands ; by now the Ottomans had become supremely powerful . Murad I crushed an army of Serbians on 26 September 1371 at the Battle of Maritsa leading to the end of Serbian power . The Ottomans were now poised to conquer Constantinople . In an attempt to stave off defeat , John V appealed to the Pope for support offering submission to Rome in return for military support . Despite publicly confessing the Roman Catholic Faith in St. Peter 's Basilica , John V received no help . John V therefore was forced to turn to reason with his enemies , the Ottomans . Murad I and John V then came to an agreement whereby Byzantium would provide regular tribute in troops and money in exchange for security . 
 = = Byzantine civil war and vassalage : 1371 – 1394 = = 
 By now the Ottomans had essentially won the war ; Byzantium was reduced to a few settlements other than Constantinople and was forced to recognize its vassal status to the Ottoman Sultan . This vassalage continued until 1394 . However , whilst Constantinople had been neutralized , the surrounding Christian powers were still a threat to the Ottomans and Asia Minor was not under complete Ottoman control . The Ottomans continued their thrust into the Balkans , proving to be great conquerors in Europe as they were in Anatolia ; in 1385 Sofia was captured from the Bulgarians and Niš was taken the following year . Other smaller states were subjugated as vassals , including the Serbs . Serbian resistance was crushed at the Battle of Kosovo in 1389 , much of Bulgaria was taken in 1393 by Bayezid I ( the Thunderbolt ) and in 1396 the last bastion of Bulgarian independence was wiped out when Vin fell . 
 Ottoman advances into the Balkans were aided by further Byzantine civil conflict — this time between John V Palaeologus and his eldest son Andronicus IV . With Ottoman aid from Murad I , John V was able to blind Andronikus IV and his son John VII Palaeologus in September 1373 . Andronicus escaped with his son and secured Murad 's aid by promising a higher tribute than John V 's . The civil strife continued as late as September 1390 though potential for conflict continued until 1408 . John V eventually forgave Andronicus IV and his son in 1381 , angering his second son and heir apparent , Manuel II Palaeologus . He seized Thessalonika , alarming the Ottoman Sultan in liberating parts of Greece from Ottoman rule . 
 The death of Andronicus IV in 1385 and the capitulation of Thessalonika in 1387 to Hayreddin Pasha encouraged Manuel II Palaeologus to seek the forgiveness of the Sultan and John V. His increasingly close relationship with John V angered John VII who saw his right as the heir threatened . John VII launched a coup against John V but despite Ottoman and Genoese aid his reign lasted mere five months before he was toppled by Manuel II and his father . 
 = = = Fall of Philadelphia = = = 
 Whilst the civil war was raging , the Turks in Anatolia took the opportunity to seize Philadelphia in 1390 , marking the end of Byzantine rule in Anatolia , although by now the city was far from Imperial rule . The city had long been under only nominal Imperial rule and its fall was of little strategic consequence to the Byzantines – whose Emperor had to suffer the humiliation of accompanying the Sultan during the campaign . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Following John V 's death , Manuel II Palaeologus was able to secure his throne and establish good relations with the Sultan , becoming his vassal . In return for Ottoman acceptance of his reign Manuel II was forced to dismantle the fortifications at the Golden Gate , something that he did not take lightly to . 
 = = Resumption of hostilities : 1394 – 1424 = = 
 In 1394 , relations between the Byzantines and the Ottomans changed for the worse and the war between the two resumed when the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid ( ruled 1389 – 1402 ) ordered the execution of Manuel II after the Emperor attempted to reconcile his nephew John VII . The Ottoman Sultan then later changed his decision and demanded that a mosque and a Turkish colony be established in Constantinople . Manuel II not only refused this , he also refused to pay the Sultan tribute and went so far as to ignore the Sultan 's messages , leading to a siege of the city in 1394 . Manuel II called for a Crusade , which came in 1396 . Under the future Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund , the Crusade was crushed at Nicopolis in 1396 . 
 The defeat convinced Manuel II to escape the city and travel to Western Europe for aid . During this time the reconciled John VII led the city 's successful defence against the Ottomans . The siege was finally broken when Timur of the Chagatai Mongols led an army into Anatolia , dismantling the network of beyliks loyal to the Ottoman Sultan . At the Battle of Ankara , Timur 's forces routed Bayezid I 's forces , a shocking defeat for which no one was prepared . In the aftermath , the Ottoman Turks began fighting each other led by Bayezid 's sons . 
 The Byzantines wasted no time exploiting the situation and signed a peace treaty with their Christian neighbours and with one of Bayezid 's sons . By signing the treaty , they were able to recover Thessalonika and much of the Peloponnese . The Ottoman civil war ended in 1413 when Mehmed I , with the support of the Byzantine Empire , defeated his opponents . 
 The rare amity established between the two states would not last ; the death of Mehmed I and the rise of Murad II in 1421 coupled with the ascent of John VIII to the Byzantine throne led to a deteriorated change in relations between the two . Neither leader was content with the status quo . John VIII made the first and foolish move by inciting a rebellion in the Ottoman Empire : a certain Mustafa had been released by the Byzantines and claimed that he was Bayezid 's lost son . 
 Despite the odds , a sizable force had mustered in Europe under his banner , defeating Murad II 's subordinates . Murad II 's furious reply eventually smashed this upstart and , in 1422 , began the Siege of Thessalonica and Constantinople . John VIII then turned to his aging father , Manuel II , for advice . The result was that he incited yet another rebellion in the Ottoman ranks — this time supporting Murad II brother 's claim , <unk> Mustafa . The seemingly promising rebellion had its origins in Asia Minor with Bursa coming under siege . After a failed assault on Constantinople , Murad II was forced to turn back his army and defeat <unk> . With these defeats , the Byzantines were forced once more into vassalage — 300 @,@ 000 coins of silver were to be delivered to the Sultan as tribute on an annual basis . 
 = = Ottoman victory 1424 – 1453 = = 
 The Ottomans faced numerous opponents between 1424 and 1453 . Tied down by the siege of Thessalonika , the Ottomans had to contend with the Serbs under George Brankovic , the Hungarians under John Hunyadi and the Albanians under George Kastrioti Skanderbeg . This resistance culminated into the Crusade of Varna of 1444 , which , despite much local support and deception - a peace treaty was unilaterally revoked by the Hungarians - was defeated . 
 In 1448 and 1451 , there was a change in the Byzantine and Ottoman leaderships , respectively . Murad II died and was succeeded by Mehmed the Conqueror whilst Constantine XI Palaiologos succeeded John VIII . Constantine XI and Mehmed did not get along well ; the former 's successful conquests of Crusader territory in the Peloponnese alarmed the latter , who had since subjugated as vassals the crusaders in the region , and Mehmed had around 40 @,@ 000 soldiers sent to nullify these gains . Constantine XI threatened to rebel against Mehmed unless certain conditions were met by the Sultan regarding the status quo . Mehmed responded to these threats by building fortifications in the Bosporus and thus closed Constantinople from outside naval assistance . The Ottomans already controlled the land around Constantinople and so they began an assault on the city on 6 April 1453 . Despite a union of the Catholic and Orthodox Churches , the Byzantines received no official aid from the Pope or Western Europe , with the exception of a few soldiers from Venice and Genoa . 
 England and France were in the concluding stages of the Hundred Years War . The French did not wish to lose their advantage in the fight by sending knights and the English were in no position to do so . Spain was in the final stages of the Reconquista . The Holy Roman Empire , never centralized enough behind the Hohenstaufen to unite the principalities , had exhausted what could be spared at Varna . Further fighting among the German princes and the Hussite wars seriously reduced the willingness of most to perform a crusade . Poland and Hungary were key participants at Varna and the defeat there along with the Polish – Teutonic Wars kept them busy and unwilling for further commitments . 
 Other than these major European powers , the only others were the Italian city @-@ states . Genoa and Venice were both enemies of the Ottomans , but also of each other . The Venetians considered sending their fleet up to attack the fortifications guarding the Dardanelles and the Bosporus , thereby relieving the city but the force was too small and arrived too late . The Ottomans would have overpowered any military assistance provided by one city , even one as large and powerful as the Venetian Republic . In any case some 2 @,@ 000 mercenaries , mostly Italian under Giovanni Giustiniani Longo , arrived to assist in the defence of the city . The city 's entire defence fell to these mercenaries and 5 @,@ 000 militia soldiers raised from a city whose population had been seriously eroded by heavy taxation , plague and civil conflict . Though poorly trained , the defenders were well armed in many weapons , except for any cannons to match the Ottoman 's own artillery . 
 The city 's fall was not a result of the Ottoman artillery nor their naval supremacy ( many Italian ships were able to aid and then escape the city ) . The Fall came about due to the combined weight of overwhelming odds stacked against the city — outnumbered by more than 10 to 1 , the defenders were overcome by sheer attrition as well as the skill of the Ottoman Janissaries . As the Ottomans continued their seemingly unsuccessful and costly assaults , many in their camp began to doubt the success of the siege ; history had shown the city to be invincible to Ottoman siege and the memories of Ankara and Varna , even if they had not altered the status quo for long , lingered in their minds and in the minds of the hopeful defenders . In an effort to raise morale , the Sultan then made a speech reminding his troops of the vast wealth and pillaging of the city to come . An all @-@ out assault captured the city on May 29 , 1453 . As the Ottomans fanned out to sack the city , their naval discipline began to collapse and many Genoans and Venetians escaped in vessels from the city , including Niccolò Barbaro , a Venetian surgeon present at the siege who wrote : 
 After the siege , the Ottomans went on to take Morea in 1460 , and Trebizond in 1461 . With the fall of Trebizond came the end of the Roman Empire ; the <unk> dynasty continued to be recognized as the rightful emperors of Constantinople by the crowned heads of Europe until the 16th century when the Reformation , the Ottoman threat to Europe and decreased interest in crusading forced European powers to recognize the Ottoman Empire as masters of Anatolia and the Levant . 
 = = Causes of the Byzantine defeat = = 
 = = = Latin intervention = = = 
 The Latin presence in the Balkans seriously undermined the Byzantines ' ability to coordinate their efforts against the Ottoman Turks . This is exemplified by Michael VIII Palaeologus , whose attempts to drive the Latins out of Greece led to the abandonment of the Anatolian borders which allowed several beyliks , as well as the Turks of Osman I to raid and settle former Byzantine lands . Andronicus II 's campaigns in Anatolia , though it obtained some military success , was constantly thwarted by events in the west of the Empire . In any event , the Byzantines were forced to choose between Papal and Latin threat of attack or an unpopular union , which was exploited by numerous rival claimants as cause for a coup against the Byzantine Emperor . 
 Nonetheless , towards the mid- and late @-@ 14th century , the Byzantines began to receive nominal aid from the West . This was little more than sympathy toward a fellow @-@ Christian power fighting a Muslim power and despite two Crusades , the Byzantines " received as much help from Rome as we did from the [ Mamluk ] sultan [ of Egypt ] . " The Mamluk Sultanate in the 13th century had been one of the most determined powers to remove Christian influence in the Middle East and raiding by Cyprus did not change this in the 14th and 15th centuries . 
 = = = Byzantine weakness = = = 
 Following the Fourth Crusade , the Byzantines were left in an unstable position . The capture of Constantinople in 1261 and subsequent campaigning did not come at a good time — the weakening of the Sultanate of Rum resulted in many beyliks breaking away as autonomous states , such as the Emirate founded by Osman I. Although this weakening of power gave the Empire of Nicaea a temporary free hand , it was nothing more than a small respite not capitalized as much as it could have been . 
 In order to implement these Greek re @-@ conquests , Michael VIII was forced to levy crushing taxes on the Anatolian peasantry in order to pay for the expensive army that modeled around the Komnenian army . This led to much peasant support for the Turks whose system resulted in fewer taxes initially . 
 After Michael VIII 's death , the Byzantines suffered from constant civil strife early on . The Ottomans suffered civil conflict as well , but this occurred much later on in the 15th century , by that time the Byzantines were too weak to reconquer much territory . This is in contrast to the civil strife of Byzantium , occurring at a time ( 1341 – 71 ) when the Ottomans were crossing into Europe through a devastated Gallipoli and surrounding the city , thus sealing its fate as a vassal . When attempts were made to break this vassalage , the Byzantines found themselves out @-@ matched and at the mercy of Latin assistance , which despite two Crusades , ultimately amounted to nothing . 
 = = = Ottoman strengths = = = 
 The Ottomans had great diplomatic skill and ability to raise vast numbers of troops . Initially , their raiding gave them great support from other Turks near Osman 's small domain . In time however , as the Turks began to settle in land poorly defended by the Byzantines , they were able to exploit the hardships of the peasant classes by recruiting their aid . Those that did not assist the Ottomans were raided themselves . Eventually , the cities in Asia Minor , cut off from the outside surrendered and the Ottomans soon mastered the art of siege warfare . 
 It was the Ottomans ' skill with dealing with their opponents that made them very powerful very quickly . They would subjugate their opponents as vassals rather than destroy them , otherwise they would have exhausted themselves in the process . The exacting of tribute from conquered states in the form of children and money was effective in forcing subjugation over conquest . Coupled with this , the entire region was composed of many states ( Bulgaria , Serbia , Latin states ) who would just as soon fight each other as the Ottomans and realized too late that the Ottoman forces defeated them by integrating them in a network of subordinate states . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The fall of Constantinople came as a shock to the papacy , which ordered an immediate counter @-@ attack in the form of a crusade . Only Philip the Good , Duke of Burgundy responded but under the condition that a powerful monarch assist him ; however , none would do so . Pope Pius II then ordered another crusade . Again , no substantial efforts were seen by any of Europe 's major leaders of the time . This forced the Pope himself to lead a crusade . His death in 1464 led to the disbanding of the crusade at the port of Ancona . 
 The Fall also had many implications in Europe : the influx of Greek science and culture into Europe by those escaping the Ottomans was a crucial factor in catalyzing the European Renaissance . 
 The failed attempts at defeating the Ottomans at Nicopolis and Varna , the loss of the Holy Land ( without Byzantium the Crusades could not re @-@ supply en route ) and the lack of a genuine counter @-@ attack led many , including Martin Luther , into believing that the Turks were God 's punishment against the sins of Christians : 
 How shamefully ... the pope has this long time baited us with the war against the Turks , taken our money , destroyed so many Christians and made so much mischief ! " 
 Nonetheless , by 1529 , Europe began to rise to the threat of the Ottomans . Martin Luther , changing his views , wrote that the " Scourge of God " had to be fought with great vigour by secular leaders rather than as Crusades initiated by the Papacy . 
 With the Ottomans ' hold on Constantinople de facto recognized by Europe 's lack of action , the Ottomans went on to facilitate further conquests in Europe and in the Middle East . Their power finally reached a peak in the mid 17th century . Their success through the Janissaries became their new weakness ; conservative and extremely powerful , Ottoman reform was difficult to implement whilst European armies became increasingly more resourceful and modernized . As a result , Russian and Austrian attempts to contain the Ottoman threat became more and more a formality until the official dissolution of the Empire after World War I. 
 = Mountain Grove Campground = 
 The Mountain Grove Campground was a campground , active between 1872 and 1901 , that formed part of the 19th- to early 20th @-@ century camp meeting movement , where camping was combined with worshiping and listening to preachers . These meetings were often held by Protestants , in this case , Methodists . Mountain Grove Campground was a site and resort on the Danville , Hazleton and Wilkes @-@ Barre Railroad in Black Creek Township , Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It existed for approximately 30 years and was run by the Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association . A businessman named G.M. Shoop was the original owner of the campground 's land . Many prominent citizens of the surrounding area were in the association . During the campground 's operation between 1872 and 1901 , it was renovated and expanded several times . While the camp meetings that were held there were intended for Methodists , non @-@ Methodists occasionally attended them . 
 = = Location and description = = 
 The Mountain Grove Campground was located approximately halfway between Bloomsburg and Hazleton . It was adjacent to the historical community of Mountain Grove , which had a population of 65 in 1880 , and was located on the Danville , Hazleton and Wilkes @-@ Barre Railroad . Most attenders came by railroad came from stations in Catawissa or Hazleton . The campground had its own railroad station and post office . The campground 's elevation was more than 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) above sea level and it was situated in a wooded grove immediately east of McCauley Mountain and in close proximity to Scotch Valley . McCauley Mountain protected the site from strong west winds . 
 Mountain Grove Campground was designed with a layout similar to a miniaturized version of Washington , D.C. It had a center avenue and five other avenues called A , B , C , D , and E. The center avenue ran from a large tabernacle to a living area for the preachers . There were also a many tents and sites of cottages in the campground and a large administration building on the site housed a number of offices . The campground had outdoor fireplaces , which encouraged picnics . The main hall , which was constructed in 1887 , was 26 by 60 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m × 18 @.@ 3 m ) and had two stories . 
 According to a local atlas , Mountain Grove Campground was semicircular in shape , with avenues radiating out towards the sides . An open space for worshiping was on the camp meeting site , and it was surrounded by more tents . When this area was filled up , more people would set up tents along the avenues that radiated outward from the camp . 
 The location of the Mountain Grove Campground was chosen was selected for several reasons . One of these was its proximity to the communities of Hazleton and Bloomsburg . By road , Bloomsburg and Hazleton were both 17 miles ( 27 km ) miles from the campground . The campground was approachable by road from three directions . 
 = = Establishment and history = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In June 1872 , G.M. Shoop , a businessman from Danville bought 28 acres of land on the site that would become the Mountain Grove Campground . He reported this purchase in a meeting held on June 20 , 1872 in Columbia County with a group of Methodists , including several ministers . In this meeting , an executive committee was appointed to arrange the camp meeting . The executive committee included Reverend S. Creighton , Reverend S. Barnes ( the chairman ) , H.E. Sutherland ( the secretary ) , Reverend B.P. King , Reverend E.T. Schwartz , M. Hartman , J.W. Cleaver , J.W. <unk> , and G.M. Shoop himself . Shoop intended to give the land to a local camp meeting organization once one existed . This idea was well received by the district superintendent of the Methodist Church . A committee consisting of four pastors and five lay leaders was subsequently created for the camp meeting site . Craig Newton , a history professor at what would become the Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania , stated that the site purchased by Shoop would be an ideal location for a camp meeting site . 
 The Danville District 's presiding elder , Reverend S. Barnes , went to the Central Pennsylvania Conference in 1872 to make a report on opening the Mountain Grove Campground . He stated that the managers of the campground intended to " make it , perhaps , the best adapted and most attractive resort of its kind in all our Conference territory . " Camp meeting sites had long been supported by the Central Pennsylvania Conference . The Pennsylvania legislature chartered the campground in 1873 . 
 A professional architect was hired to design the Mountain Grove Campground . Major financial contributors to the campground included a Colonel Jackson from Berwick and the Low family from Lime Ridge . It was under the auspices of the Pennsylvania Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church 's Danville District . The campground was initially laid out hurriedly , being constructed in less than two months . It opened for the first time on August 14 , 1872 . By this point , approximately 70 small and hastily constructed cottages ( referred to as tents ) had been built . Between the 1872 camp meeting season and the 1873 camp meeting season , the buildings of the campground were significantly renovated . Three more acres and a hotel were also added to the campground during this time , on land bought from George W. <unk> . The purpose of the purchase was to stop the sale of alcoholic drinks within two miles of the campground . Between 1873 and 1874 , further additions were made to the campground . In 1875 , a special train started to run past the campground three times a week during the camp meeting season . By 1881 , the special train ran past the campground once per day . In 1884 , the Pennsylvania Railroad and the Philadelphia and Reading Railway began selling special fair excursion tickets for the campground . The campground was extended to 34 acres by 1885 . The Lehigh Valley Railroad began doing so as well in 1887 . 
 In the beginning of the operation of Mountain Grove Campground , the majority of people traveling there were worshipers . In the 1870s and 1880s , the campground was one of the three largest camp meeting sites that residents of Columbia County attended . In 1875 , approximately 2500 people attended the camp meeting . In 1881 , it was decided that all the profit generated from the campground would be dedicated to expansion and improvement of it . In 1891 , the duration of the camp meeting was increased from seven to thirteen days . However , some people traveled there for a vacation . Within 20 years of the campground 's opening , the majority of the people going there were there for a vacation , and trains carried bands and other entertainment @-@ related items to the campground . However , people still continued to go there in large numbers for camp meeting . Local newspapers also began to advertise the campground as a resort instead of a camp meeting site . This began with an advertisement written by John R. Rote , secretary of the Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association , in the Columbia County Republican on July 9 , 1891 . 
 The Mountain Grove Campground was affected relatively little by storms , as compared to other camp meeting sites in the area . However , in 1889 , attendance of the camp meeting was significantly affected by inclement weather . 
 = = = Expansions and renovations = = = 
 Between the 1872 and 1873 camp meeting seasons , the cottages , also known as tents , in the Mountain Grove Campground were renovated . The renovations included enlarging the tents to dimensions of 9 by 18 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m × 5 @.@ 5 m ) . Roofs with singled combs were also installed during this renovation . The stairways on the cottages were also improved during this time . 
 Between the 1873 and the 1874 camp meeting seasons , the Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association added more tents to the campground , increasing their number to almost 200 . They also built a boarding house above the dining hall and a tabernacle was constructed across from the auditorium . 
 Several more expansions and renovations were made to the Mountain Grove Campground in the 1880s . In 1883 , the boarding house was expanded and in 1885 , a number of water pipes were renovated and some buildings were repaired and repainted . The main office of the campground was built in 1887 . More renovations were done in 1889 and 1892 , by which time there were 240 tents . 
 In the 1900 , a final attempt to increase the attendance of the camp meetings at Mountain Grove Campground was made by the Board of Managers . As well as general renovation , this included an addition of a building called the Preacher 's Home , which was situated behind the auditorium . The purpose of this was to attract preachers to attend , thus inspiring locals to attend as well . This plan was not successful . 
 = = = Decline and later history = = = 
 As railroads began to become more common , attendance of the Mountain Grove Campground began to decline . The attendance of the campground dropped severely in 1891 . On July 9 , 1891 , the campground placed an unusually large advertisement in a local newspaper . Attendance continued to drop in 1892 . The decline continued , despite efforts by the campground directors to increase the number of Chautauqua speakers and religious speakers . Attempts were made throughout the 1890s to stave off the impending failure of the campground , but were largely unsuccessful . Later , the Board of Managers decided that they would open the campground specifically for special events , such as the Bloomsburg Methodist Church 's plans for an eleven @-@ car special train to carry picnickers and a band there . By the mid @-@ 1890s , it was permitted for visitors to bring their own supplies , rent multiple tents , and decide whether to stay for one or two weeks . A short branch line of the Danville , Hazleton , and Wilkes @-@ Barre Railroad was then built to allow easier transport of visitors ' baggage to the campground . Baggage carrying was also done for free and the attendance fee was also reduced . Only one of the twenty @-@ five prominent local families who attended the camp meeting in the 1880s still attended it in the 1890s . 
 However , one of the last camp meetings there , in 1900 , was referred to as " interesting and profitable " , although attendance had significantly dropped between 1898 and 1899 . When the campground closed for the season in 1901 , no plans were made to reopen it in 1902 . The campground directors then attempted to sell the land to the Pennsylvania Railroad , but they were unsuccessful . In 1903 , a farmer bought the land and the tents , buildings , and platforms were all purchased by various individuals . These items had all been sold within 18 months of the abandonment of the campground . The last sign of the campground 's existence was its boardwalk , which eventually rotted away . 
 The area where the Mountain Grove Campground used to be currently contains sump holes and scrub . 
 The Mountain Grove Campground was stated in the 1950s by Charles A. Johnson to be a " new @-@ fashioned camp meeting " . The newspaper editor James C. Brown stated that it was " one of the most delightful resorts in Pennsylvania " . 
 = = = Campground visits and attendance = = = 
 Camp meetings at the Mountain Grove Campground was held for seven to ten days each August . Several thousand people would attend the camp each year . By 1878 , campground attendance on Saturdays had reached 4000 to 5000 people . The percentage of attendees who stayed for the whole duration of the camp meeting , as opposed to only part of it , also decreased during the 1890s . 
 = = The camp meetings = = 
 Camp meetings at the Mountain Grove Campground began at 7 : 30 p.m. on a Wednesday night with a bell that summoned the attendees to a welcome sermon . From Thursday through Saturday , days of camp meeting consisted of a prayer period at 8 : 30 a.m. , a sermon at 10 : 30 a.m. , a service for children at 1 : 30 p.m. , and a second sermon at 3 : 30 p.m. A third sermon would be delivered by a minister from another district at 7 : 30 p.m. On Sundays , the day began with an " experience day " at 8 : 20 a.m. Other than that , Sundays were similar to other days , except that an acclaimed visitor would give a sermon at 3 : 00 p.m. The three days after that followed the same schedule as Thursdays through Saturdays . The camp meetings were closed at 12 : 30 p.m. on Thursday . 
 Following the increase in the length of the camp meeting to 13 days , the schedule was adjusted . Thursday was designated as a temperance day . The following days were , in chronological order , designated as a Chautauqua Day , a missionary day , a Sunday School and Epworth League day , and eight days of other religious events . The meetings concluded in the campground 's auditorium . 
 The Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association added a Chautauqua Day to the camp meeting in 1885 , and it became highly popular . It occurred on the first Thursday of the meeting . A number of people , including Lyman Abbot , frequented the Chautauqua Days as a speaker . To keep them from interfering with other camp meeting activities , the day was moved to the Tuesday before the official start of the meeting in 1886 , but in 1889 , it was moved to the first Wednesday . 
 = = Financial information and leadership = = 
 The Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association was formed after a decision by a nine @-@ man committee . It was decided on August 19 , 1872 that the company would be a joint @-@ stock company . Its capital stock in 1873 was $ 14 @,@ 000 . G.M. Shoop was a significant stockholder in the company . He was the manager of the campground and the association secretary during the 1870s . High @-@ ranking members of the Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association during the 1870s included Presiding Elder Barnes , Reverend S. Creighton , and the businessmen and politicians B.G. Welch , Mordecai W. Jackson , and A.J. <unk> . The newspaper editor E.M. <unk> was also prominent within the association . In the early 1880s , the businessmen <unk> Low , <unk> Fowler , and Lloyd T. Sharpless also became prominent in the association . The campground typically grossed approximately $ 4000 per year during the 1880s . 
 In 1885 , the Mountain Grove Camp Meeting Association created a Chautauqua department . W.M. Gearhart was the initial president of this department and S.C. Jayne was the initial secretary . 
 = New Jersey Route 68 = 
 Route 68 is a state highway located in Burlington County in the U.S. state of New Jersey , serving as the main connector between the New Jersey Turnpike and Joint Base McGuire – Dix – Lakehurst ( JB MDL ) . It runs from County Route 616 ( CR 616 ) inside Fort Dix to U.S. Route 206 ( US 206 ) in Mansfield Township , 0 @.@ 34 mi ( 0 @.@ 55 km ) south of the New Jersey Turnpike ; a total route length of 7 @.@ 92 mi ( 12 @.@ 75 km ) . The route passes through Wrightstown and Springfield Township as a two @-@ lane undivided road , crossing CR 537 . It continues through Mansfield Township as a four @-@ lane divided highway , intersecting with CR 543 . Outside of JB MDL , Route 68 passes through mostly agricultural and residential areas . 
 The route was originally designated as Route S39 in 1941 , a spur of Route 39 ( present @-@ day US 206 ) that was to provide improved access to Fort Dix during World War II . In 1953 , Route S39 became Route 68 and it was legislated to extend south of Fort Dix to the Four Mile Circle with Route 70 and Route 72 . A freeway for Route 68 was proposed to run between a planned Route 38 freeway and the Four Mile Circle in 1960 ; however , it was never built . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 68 begins at General Circle ( inaccessible to the general public ) with CR 616 on the grounds of Fort Dix in New Hanover Township , heading to the north as a four @-@ lane divided highway called Fort Dix Road . After passing a security gate to JB MDL , the road continues through public areas of the fort and crosses into Wrightstown , where it narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road before heading into Springfield Township . The route exits JB MDL at its intersection with CR 670 and upon leaving the fort , it heads through a mix of farmland and woodland . Route 68 crosses CR 537 before continuing north into agricultural areas with some homes . 
 The road enters Mansfield Township where it widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it intersects a road that provides access to parallel CR 545 to the east , which heads south to serve as an access road to McGuire Air Force Base . From here , the route turns northwest and crosses CR 543 before heading through a mix of farm fields and suburban residential neighborhoods . Past the intersection with White Pine Road , Route 68 passes in between two large auto auction lots . The route terminates at an intersection with US 206 located a short distance south of that route 's interchange with the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) . Route 68 serves as the main access route between Fort Dix and the New Jersey Turnpike . 
 = = History = = 
 As part of improving road access to the Fort Dix Military Reservation at the onset of World War II , a Works Progress Administration project improved the paved road connecting the fort to Bordentown . In 1941 , this road was legislated as Route S39 , a state highway spur of Route 39 ( now US 206 ) that was to run from the fort to Mansfield Square . Construction on the access road was completed in 1943 at a cost of over $ 2 million . Route S39 became Route 68 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . The same year , an extension of Route 68 was legislated to run south from Fort Dix to the intersection with Route 70 and Route 72 at the Four Mile Circle . In 1961 , a freeway was proposed along the Route 68 corridor , running from a planned Route 38 freeway near Fort Dix south to Route 70 and Route 72 ; however , this was never built . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Burlington County . 
 = Milagro ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Milagro " is the eighteenth episode of the sixth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It originally aired on the Fox network on April 18 , 1999 . The episode 's teleplay was written by Chris Carter from a story by John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Milagro " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 , being watched by 15 @.@ 2 million people upon its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of murders in which the heart has been removed from the victims . A writer who lives next door to Mulder is writing a novel about the murders before they actually happen and soon , Scully finds herself confused and drawn to the writer , who has a romantic interest in her . 
 " Milagro " was inspired by the idea of someone thinking of something so much that it becomes a reality , a topic Shiban later noted was " familiar " to anyone who had written a script . The part of Phillip Padgett had been written specifically for the actor John Hawkes . In addition , the production for " Milagro " was decidedly low @-@ budget due to its " intimate and personality @-@ driven " nature . The episode 's title means " miracle " in Spanish . The episode has been analyzed for its use of symbolism , its exploration of motive , and the role reversal of Mulder and Scully . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Phillip Padgett ( John Hawkes ) , a fledgling author , sits at a desk , suffering from writer 's block . He eventually retires to the bathroom to discard a spent cigarette . Without warning or concern , the man suddenly reaches into his chest and removes a bloody heart . Later , he walks down metal stairs into a cluttered basement , and opens the door of an incinerator . Noticing a beating heart amidst the flames , and unfazed by the vision , he nonchalantly tosses in a paper bag . 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) later encounters the stranger as she walks into an elevator . Both ride in silence up to the fourth floor , with Scully somewhat unsettled by the experience . At Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) apartment , Mulder and Scully begin discussing a case the pair are working on , wherein the heart of the victim had been removed with the absence of any significant physical evidence . Mulder believes the heart was removed with a technique known as psychic surgery . Meanwhile , Padgett , who is Mulder 's neighbor , stands on a chair with his ear to an air vent , listening to the conversation . 
 Later that night , two teenagers get into a fight in the woods . The girl , named Maggie ( Jillian Bach ) , runs into the woods to be alone and Kevin ( Angelo <unk> ) , her boyfriend , gives chase . However , he is attacked and his heart is removed . Meanwhile , the writer intensely transcribes the event on his typewriter . The next day , Mulder and Scully discuss this latest incident via phone . An unmarked envelope is discovered by Scully in the office containing a milagro , a type of pendant . While she examines the pendant , a voice @-@ over from the writer describes Scully 's most intimate feelings as she examines the unsolicited gift . 
 Scully later runs into the author at a church . He admits sending Scully the pendant and discusses with her the Sacred Heart of Jesus . She leaves , visibly shaken . Scully meets Mulder and relays her most recent encounter with the writer to Mulder . Later , Padgett woos Scully into his apartment with more character revelations . Mulder bursts in and arrests him based on accurate descriptions of the case murders in his novel , which he secretly read after discovering it in the mail . While Padgett is in custody , Maggie is murdered in the same fashion as Kevin . This establishes a de facto alibi for the author . Lacking concrete and connective evidence to the murders , and hoping Padgett might lead them to his partner in crime , Mulder releases Padgett from custody . 
 Back at his apartment , Padgett converses with the killer from his book , a deceased Brazilian surgeon named Ken Naciamento ( Nestor Serrano ) . It is revealed that through some sort of psychic connection , Padgett 's Naciamento has come back to life and has been removing hearts from victims . The two discuss motivations for the killings . Realizing that his novel <unk> Scully 's murder , Padgett heads to the incinerator to destroy his novel . Mulder intercepts him , thinking Padgett is instead simply destroying <unk> evidence . Meanwhile , Naciamento accosts Scully . After hearing gunshots , Mulder runs toward his apartment and shockingly finds Scully on the ground , covered in blood but alive . The episode closes with a voice over from the author , explaining his final actions . The stranger lies stricken on the basement floor in front of the incinerator , his beating heart in hand , having " ... given what he could not receive " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 The idea behind the episode occurred during a conversation between John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz . The two were discussing about the particular stress of their jobs . The episode 's theme of someone thinking of something so much that it becomes real was " familiar " to anyone who had written a script , Shiban later explained . Shiban and Spotnitz created a rough draft for the episode and then sent it to series creator Chris Carter , who was busy shooting the pilot for the new television series Harsh Realm . Carter re @-@ wrote portions of the script , including the ending , to show that the writer , although confused , does indeed have love in his heart . 
 Spotnitz later called the episode " personal " . He noted that the cards that hang on Padgett 's wall were put up to emulate the original writing style of The X @-@ Files , saying , " in fact , that the cards that are on the writer ’ s wall are the same format that we wrote The X @-@ Files in . We would use those same cards when figuring out stories for the series . " Later , Spotnitz noted that the cards were also in his handwriting " because the prop guy couldn ’ t do it as well as we could because that ’ s really the way we did it . It ’ s a very emotional love story and it ’ s really about our love for these characters as writers " . The writers eventually settled on the title of " Milagro , " which means miracle in Spanish . 
 The part of Philip Padgett had been written specifically for the actor John Hawkes . Several weeks before the casting for " Milagro " began , Hawkes had auditioned for the part of Pinker Rawls in the episode " Trevor " . Both Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz felt that Hawkes was not right for the part ; however , they believed he possessed a " dignity and simplicity " that would prevent the main character in " Milagro " from becoming a simple caricature . Therefore , the script was written to suit Hawkes ' characterization . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 The production for " Milagro " was decidedly low @-@ budget due to its " intimate and personality @-@ driven " nature . Director Kim Manners sought to film most of the episode " very simply " , because he wanted " the characters to carry it " . Manners wanted to frame the opening scene in a way that told " the story [ … ] in a series of images " , and so , he utilized quick cuts between shots . Many of the scenes , such as the opening pan , were created by means of a crane shot . 
 The sequence wherein Mulder runs was shot on a motorcycle . Manners recalled that , because Duchovny had been able to outrun two horses in the fourth season episode " Tunguska " , he needed something faster to film the scene with . Several locations that were scouted for the episode proved difficult to use . Two churches that had been selected for the episode pulled out just before filming began and replacements had to be found immediately . The scenes in the woods were filmed at Griffith Park in Los Angeles . The location was chosen because it possessed " probably the only pine trees in Los Angeles " . Due to the fact that the actual park is rather sparsely populated by brush , the foliage was all created by the crew of the series . Manners shot several of the forest scenes with a 200 millimeter lens , so that the lights of Los Angeles would be disguised in the distance . Padgett 's furnace was filmed on a set called the red / blue room . It had originally been created for the sixth <unk> opener " The Beginning " . The jail set was constructed in a large warehouse by a different production company . The X @-@ Files rented the space for several days for filming , for five thousand dollars . Finding a graveyard with " old @-@ fashioned vertical tombstones " proved a challenge for locations manager Ilt Jones . Eventually one was found in Altadena , California , east of Los Angeles . The fog in the cemetery was created by burying small " <unk> " that produced water vapor . The vapor was cold so that it would stay low to the group and emulate the properties of actual fog . 
 The sequence in which Hawkes rips his heart out was created by using a rubber heart . The fact that the faux blood begins leaking through his shirt was added to " hide the fact that [ the crew was ] doing a little sleight of hand " . The image of the beating heart in the furnace was created by overlapping a shot of a fake beating heart and a shot of actual fire . The two were then merged in post @-@ production by animator John Wash , because the fire would have melted the actual heart model . The beating of the hearts of Naciamento 's victims was created via a pump that was operated off @-@ screen . The actual milagro prop was crafted several times because , according to Manners , the face was particularly difficult to get right . In fact , the second time the medallion appears in the episode , it is a different prop . 
 = = = Music and cultural references = = = 
 For his score , Mark Snow used the sound of recorded human heartbeats to go along with the conceit of the episode . During the graveyard scene , one of the tombstones is marked " Salinger , " with the names " Nicholas " and " Diana " visible underneath , a reference to the parents of Charlie , Bailey , Julia , Claudia , and Owen in the Fox television series Party of Five . The date on the tombstone reads 1994 , the date the series premiered . P.K. Simonds , writer and executive producer for the show was initially unaware that the tombstone made an appearance . Others , including Spotnitz , believed the tombstone to be a joking reference to famous author J.D. Salinger . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Margaret Kaner , in the book The X @-@ Files and Literature , notes that , instead of merely utilizing symbolism , " Milagro " makes " symbolism as a subject " . Kaner points out that the Christian symbol of the burning human heart is infused into the episode in a variety of different ways — hearts are both removed from human victims , as well as burned in furnaces . The episode 's plot and the Christian symbol are connected when Padgett leaves Scully the milagro charm . 
 The concept of motive is also explored . When confronting Padgett , Mulder asks him why he is murdering his victims . Padgett , in turn , admits that he cannot answer the question . Kaner suggests that Padgett is representative of a version of Mulder , and that there is a direct parallel between being a criminal profiler — who must think like the criminal — and a writer — who must think like his characters . In the end , however , Padgett sacrifices his personal quest — his manuscript — in order to be free . This presents a distinct contrast to Mulder , who will never truly give up his obsession . Michelle Bush , in her book Myth @-@ X , also notes that the episode sheds light on Scully 's motive throughout the series : she wants to gain Mulder 's attention , something she feels she does not have . Padgett eventually realizes this , and sacrifices himself for her love . 
 The episode also presents a temporary role reversal for Mulder and Scully . When discussing the lack of evidence at the crime scenes , Scully points out that " a crime is only as perfect as the man [ … ] Even if he made not one mistake , there still is a motive . If you find his motive , you find the murderer " . Kaner argues that this logic is more in line with what Mulder has subscribed to throughout the series . Furthermore , after Mulder discovers Padgett 's manuscript , he arrests him " without a second thought " . By relying on empirical logic , Mulder is acting in the way Scully normally thinks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Milagro " first aired in the United States on April 18 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 , with a 14 share , meaning that roughly 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 15 @.@ 2 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on June 27 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 85 million viewers , making it the second most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Someone 's trying to steal Scully 's heart ... literally . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Milagro " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files gave the episode a positive review , writing " The power of [ ' Milagro 's ] revelations was stunning . As was the episode . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five , calling it " a study of overwriting with all the mistakes left in " and " one of the most remarkable " episodes of the series . Shearman and Pearson also felt that Anderson 's performance was " revelatory " , and also praised guest star Hawkes as " both sinister and sympathetic " . The Munchkyn Zone reviewer Sarah Stegall rated the episode 6 stars out of 5 , writing " my congratulations to Carter , Shiban and Spotnitz on a daring experiment for commercial television " . The character of Ken Naciamento has been listed as one of the best guest roles of the series , with TV Guide and UGO Networks both listing him amongst the greatest monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week characters in The X @-@ Files . 
 Zack Handlen gave the episode a " B – " and wrote that " works far better than it deserves to " , due largely to the performance of Hawkes and the " bat shit weirdness " of the plot . He was particularly critical of the " self @-@ serious " and " pompous " tone of the episode . Handlen concluded that the episode was " like watching someone 's fan fiction getting brought to life " . He did , however , write that " there is something strangely fascinating about " the premise ; in particular , he was pleased with the conclusion , calling it the moment when " things pick up " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris , despite noting the potential in the episode 's theme of the relationship between writer and their characters , felt that " Milagro " betrayed Scully 's personality and featured her doing things that were out of character . 
 Kim Manners was pleased with the episode ; he noted that he " felt it was a very interesting character study " . He later called it " one of my favorite episodes " . Frank Spotnitz considered " Milagro " to have been an " underappreciated " episode . For this reason , it was later included on the X @-@ Files Essentials DVD compilation , along with seven other episodes . Scully 's portrayal in the episode was given special attention . Stegall noted that " if ' Milagro ' has one message about perception , it is shown in Scully , who is seen through everyone 's eyes ( Mulder , Padgett , even Naciamento ) but her own . Ultimately , we can 't know which ones of these portraits of her character are ' right ' . Maybe none of them are . It 's a bravura performance from Gillian Anderson , well matched by Duchovny 's low @-@ key Mulder , acting on his instincts . " . Handlen argued that the episode reduces Scully " to a victim waiting to find out which handsome man will rescue her . " Elyce Rae Helford , in her book Fantasy Girls : Gender in the New Universe of Science Fiction and Fantasy Television , accused the show of " <unk> [ ing ] the stereotype [ … ] of independent women as lonely , neurotic , and nostalgic for sexual attention from men . " Anderson herself felt that the character needed to " loosen up " . She was once approached by a fan who applauded Scully as the " epitome of womanhood " because she is a character who " not only can kick ass but she [ … ] works with Mulder without jumping him . " Anderson , in return jokingly replied , " So the epitome of womanhood is sexual restraint ? [ … ] I don 't think so . " The episode was particularly analyzed by fans of the show , and the fact that Scully was almost seduced provoked " lively internet discussion " . 
 = = = Work cited = = = 
 = Handel 's lost Hamburg operas = 
 In 1703 the eighteen @-@ year @-@ old composer George Frideric Handel took up residence in Hamburg , Germany , where he remained until 1706 . During this period he composed four operas , only the first of which , Almira , has survived more or less intact . Of the other three , the music for Nero is lost , while only short orchestral excerpts from Florindo and Daphne survive . 
 Handel was born and grew up in the town of Halle , where he received his early musical education and became an accomplished organist . In Hamburg he obtained employment as a violinist at the Oper am Gänsemarkt , the city 's famous opera house . Here , he learned the rudiments of opera composition , mainly under the influences of Reinhard Keiser , the theatre 's music director , and Johann Mattheson , its leading vocalist . The Gänsemarkt was largely dedicated to Keiser 's compositions ; his temporary absence in 1704 gave Handel his chance , and in quick succession he wrote Almira and Nero . The former was successful , the latter less so and was never performed after its initial run of three performances . Handel 's final Hamburg operas , Florindo and Daphne , originally conceived as a giant entity , were not produced at the Gänsemarkt before Handel left Hamburg for Italy in 1706 . 
 No music that can be definitively traced to Nero has been identified , although Handel scholars have speculated that some of it may have been used in later works , particularly Agrippina which has a related storyline and some of the same characters . Fragments of music from Florindo and Daphne have been preserved , although without the vocal parts , and some of these elements have been incorporated into an orchestral suite first recorded in 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Halle = = = 
 George Frideric Handel was born on 23 February 1685 in the German city of Halle . It is unclear what initial musical education he received ; his father , Georg Händel was not a music lover , and did not at first appreciate or encourage his son 's precocious talents . Nevertheless , by the age of ten Handel had become an accomplished organist ; his playing in the royal chapel at Weissenfels , where his half @-@ brother Karl was in the service of the Duke of Saxe @-@ Weissenfels , impressed the duke , who persuaded Händel senior that the boy should have a proper musical education . As a result , Handel began formal study under Friedrich Zachow , the organist of the Lutheran church at Halle . 
 Handel 's biographer Jonathan Keates writes that : " From [ Zachow ] Handel learned not only a great deal about the line and shape of an aria , about strong , adventurous bass lines and solid choral writing , but also about those delicacies of instrumental colouring which he later perfected in his own style " . Handel 's musical development also benefited from an early and lasting friendship with Georg Philipp Telemann , whom he met in 1700 . In February 1702 Handel enrolled at the University of Halle , perhaps intending to study law . In March of the same year he took up the post of organist at Halle 's Calvinist cathedral ( <unk> ) , a prestigious appointment for one so young and indicative of his burgeoning musical reputation in the city . 
 At some time , possibly in late 1702 or early 1703 , Handel visited Berlin , where his father had held an honorary post as physician to the elector who , in 1701 , had become the Prussian king Frederick I. In Berlin Handel first experienced Italian opera , and may have met the Italian composers Giovanni <unk> and Attilio <unk> , who were writing operas for Frederick 's court . The king heard of Handel 's abilities , and wanted him to train as a future court composer , but Handel 's horizons had been broadened by his sojourn in Berlin and he was developing his own ideas for his future . He declined the king 's offer , and returned to Halle to fulfil his year 's contract at the <unk> . With few career prospects available in his home city , Handel would have liked to go to Italy , but this , he realised , was not yet practicable , since he lacked both cash and contacts . Instead in the summer of 1703 he left Halle for Hamburg , a thriving free city which housed the leading opera house in northern Germany . 
 = = = Hamburg = = = 
 = = = = The Oper am Gänsemarkt = = = = 
 The Hamburg Opera , otherwise known as the Oper am Gänsemarkt , was the first public opera house to be established outside Italy . The brainchild of the exiled Duke of Schleswig @-@ <unk> and his Kapellmeister , Johann Theile , it was designed by Girolamo Sartorio , and modelled on the Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paolo in Venice . Its construction was opposed by the clergy and cathedral hierarchy , but enthusiastically supported by the city 's municipal authorities . Built in 1677 on a lavish scale , with a reported capacity of 2 @,@ 000 , it boasted an exceptionally deep stage and was , according to Handel scholars Winton Dean and John Merrill Knapp , one of the best @-@ equipped theatres of its time . 
 Dean and Knapp write that the theatre 's history was " enlivened and <unk> by a maelstrom of controversy , pursued in pamphlets , broadsheets , sermons and prefaces to librettos ... and by financial crises which persisted on and off throughout the sixty years of its existence " . A preponderance of biblically inspired works in the earliest years was soon replaced by a range of more secular subjects , often drawn from Roman history and myth , or from recent events such as the 1683 siege of Vienna . Performances tended to be of considerable length , often extending to six hours . The 18 @-@ year @-@ old Handel entered this hectic environment in the summer of 1703 , to take up a place in the theatre 's orchestra as a <unk> ( ensemble ) second violin . 
 = = = = Keiser and Mattheson = = = = 
 Handel joined the Hamburg opera house when it was experiencing a period of considerable artistic success . This blossoming followed the arrival of Reinhard Keiser , who had become musical director at the Gänsemarkt in about 1697 , and in 1703 succeeded Johann <unk> as the theatre 's manager . Born in 1674 , Keiser had studied under Johann <unk> and probably Johann Kuhnau at the Thomasschule zu Leipzig . In 1694 he was employed as a court composer at Brunswick , where in three years he composed seven operas , at least one of which ( <unk> ) was performed in Hamburg . According to Handel 's biographer Donald Burrows , Keiser was a good judge of popular taste , with a flair for writing Italian @-@ style arias . Between 1697 and 1703 , prior to Handel 's arrival , about a dozen more Keiser operas had been staged at the Gänsemarkt . Despite his on @-@ stage successes , Keiser was an unreliable general manager , with expensive private tastes and little financial acumen , often at odds with his creditors . 
 It is possible that Keiser , who had connections in the Halle area , had heard of Handel and was directly instrumental in securing the latter 's post in the Gänsemarkt orchestra ; certainly he was a considerable influence on the younger man in the three years that Handel spent in Hamburg . Another important Gänsemarkt colleague was the house composer and singer Johann Mattheson , who noted Handel 's rapid progress in the orchestra from back @-@ desk violinist to harpsichord soloist , a role in which , said Mattheson , " he showed himself a man — a thing which no one had before suspected , save I alone " . Mattheson was less complimentary on Handel 's early efforts at composition : " He composed very long , long arias , and really interminable cantatas " , before , it seems , " the lofty schooling of opera ... trimmed him into other fashions " . 
 = = = = Almira = = = = 
 In 1704 , Keiser temporarily left Hamburg , seeking refuge from his creditors in nearby Weissenfels . He took with him his most recent opera composition , Almira , a setting of a libretto by Friedrich Christian Feustking ( 1678 – 1739 ) , thus denying this work to the Gänsemarkt — Keiser produced it in <unk> in July 1704 . In these circumstances the temporary management turned to the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Handel and requested a fresh setting of Feustking 's libretto . Handel complied ; his version was premiered at the Gänsemarkt on 8 January 1705 , and ran for 20 performances — a marked success . 
 The fictional plot appears to have originated from Giuseppe <unk> 's opera , L <unk> , with a libretto by Giulio <unk> , performed in Venice in 1691 . The relatively light @-@ hearted story , typical of 17th @-@ century dramatic conventions , is told in three acts and records the machinations surrounding the newly crowned queen Almira 's secret love for her secretary , Fernando , in opposition to her dead father 's dying wish that she marry someone from the family of her guardian <unk> . Keates writes of the work : " The whole thing belongs very much to its Venetian baroque world ... full of intrigue interlaced with comedy and ballet . " These features , even the mixture of languages between Italian and German , often recur in Handel 's later work . The music , which has been preserved largely through a conducting score prepared by Telemann , reflects Handel 's debt to Keiser and displays a variety of traditions : a French @-@ style overture , German @-@ influenced orchestration , and Italianate vocal writing . Dean and Knapp summarise the score as " very uneven in style , quality and technique , with abundant promise but intermittent fulfilment " . 
 = = Lost works = = 
 = = = Nero = = = 
 = = = = General = = = = 
 The success of Almira prompted the Gänsemarkt management to follow it almost immediately with a second Handel setting , Die durch Blut und Mord <unk> Lieb ; oder , Nero ( " The love obtained through blood and murder ; or , Nero " ) generally known as Nero , again based on a Feustking libretto . The libretto survives intact , but the music is entirely lost . Dean and Knapp record that a copy of Handel 's manuscript score was held in the library of the Hamburg impresario J.C. Westphal until 1830 , when it was sold and thereafter disappeared . The whole work incorporates 20 ensembles and 57 arias . 
 = = = = Libretto = = = = 
 Feustking 's libretto was written entirely in German , its probable sources being the ancient histories of Tacitus and Suetonius . The text has been widely criticised for its low quality ; Friedrich Chrysander wrote of it : " There is no spirit in the verse , and one feels vexation in setting such stuff to music " . A later critic , Paul Henry Lang , cites the " miserable quality " of the libretto as the principal reason for the opera 's failure . Dean and Knapp suggest that the main fault is that Feustking fatally over @-@ complicates the main story by incorporating sub @-@ plots , unnecessary extra characters , and " every stock device known to the operatic repertory " . These intrusions include disguises , mistaken identities , a much @-@ ridiculed philosopher , a comic servant and a play within the play . Many of the characters are historical , including Nero , Octavia , Poppea , Nero 's mother Agrippina , and Seneca the philosopher . Several of these appear in Handel 's later ( 1709 ) opera Agrippina . Another real @-@ life figure who appears in Nero is Anicetus , who historically is held to have murdered Agrippina on Nero 's behalf . Described in the libretto as des <unk> Mignon oder <unk> ( " The emperor 's little one , or darling " ) , Anicetus is Handel 's only openly gay operatic character . 
 = = = = Characters = = = = 
 As listed and described in Burrows et al . : George Frideric Handel : Volume 1 , 1609 – 1725 : Collected Documents ( 2011 ) . 
 Nero , Roman emperor 
 Agrippina , the emperor 's mother 
 Octavia , the emperor 's wife , subsequently repudiated 
 Sabina Poppea , a Roman noblewoman , Nero 's mistress 
 Tiridates , Armenian crown prince 
 Cassandra , crown princess of Media , in love with Tiridates 
 Seneca , Imperial privy counsellor 
 Anicetus , Nero 's " mignon " or favourite 
 <unk> , the late emperor Claudius 's freedman 
 A <unk> or priest 
 Choruses of priests , Roman people 
 Dances of combatants , arsonists , Harlequins and <unk> , knights and ladies 
 = = = = Plot = = = = 
 The main story , told over three acts , follows generally that of Busenello 's libretto for Monteverdi 's 1642 opera L 'incoronazione di Poppea . It recounts Nero 's various schemes to replace his current queen Octavia with his mistress Poppea , against the urgings of his mother Agrippina and the philosopher Seneca . A sub @-@ plot introduces Tiridates , crown prince of Armenia , another historical figure who , in the opera , is betrothed to the fictional Cassandra but is secretly pursuing Poppea in rivalry with the emperor . Octavia and Cassandra provide each other with mutual support in their trials , while Agrippina allies with Octavia and narrowly escapes death from a piece of falling masonry . In turn , she tries unsuccessfully to persuade Seneca to kill Nero . As a stratagem to secure Tiridates 's love , Cassandra disguises herself and informs him of her death , which news temporarily <unk> him . Anicetus further complicates matters by falling in love with Octavia . As these events develop , the servant <unk> provides a mocking , ironic commentary . Nero 's play , " The Judgement of Paris " , and a representation of the burning of Rome occupy much of Act III . After these many digressions the opera concludes with the banishment of Octavia , the incarceration of Agrippina , the return of his senses to Tiridates when he learns that Cassandra is alive , and a joyful and triumphant double coronation : Nero and Poppea , and Tiridates and Cassandra . 
 = = = = Performance history = = = = 
 Nero opened on 25 February 1705 , with Mattheson in the title role . Its staging so closely after Almira 's run indicates that it was probably composed , in part or in whole , during 1704 . There are no surviving accounts of its public reception , but it clearly proved less successful than its predecessor , running for just three performances before the theatre closed for the Lenten season . When the Gänsemarkt reopened the opera was not revived , and was never performed again . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 Although there is no extant music that can be positively identified with Nero , there is a possibility that some of it may have been used in later works . John E. Sawyer , in his analysis of Agrippina , reveals that this work , composed five years after Nero with similar characters , " contains the highest proportion of borrowed material of any of the composer 's major dramatic works " , and Dean and Knapp speculate as to whether it also incorporates borrowings from Nero . According to the Handel scholar Charles Cudworth , the suite of dances that follows the overture to Handel 's 1707 opera Rodrigo ( his first after leaving Hamburg ) , could very well have begun as ballet music in Nero or another of the lost Hamburg operas . The musicologist Bernd Baselt has raised the possibility that Handel 's Harpsichord Suite in G Minor , HWV 453 , is an arrangement of the overture to Nero . A version of this suite , reconstructed for orchestra by Peter Holman , is included in a selection of Handel 's Hamburg music , issued by Hyperion Records in January 2012 . 
 = = = Florindo and Daphne = = = 
 = = = = General = = = = 
 Following its closure at the start of the 1705 Lenten season , the Gänsemarkt did not reopen until August , by which time Keiser had returned from Weissenfels to produce his opera Octavia . From this point , Handel 's regular connection with the theatre appears to have diminished . Although he remained in Hamburg for a further year , his main source of income was from private lessons , as he saved for his long @-@ desired visit to Italy . He nevertheless accepted a commission from the Gänsemarkt to compose a setting for a large @-@ scale opera based on the Greek myth of Apollo and Daphne . With its rambling plot and an assortment of dances and other set pieces — almost 100 musical numbers in all — the work was eventually divided into two separate operas , for performance on successive nights . The two sections were given the formal names Der <unk> Florindo ( " Florindo made happy " ) and Die <unk> Daphne ( " Daphne metamorphosed " ) , but are generally known as Florindo and Daphne . It is not known when Handel wrote the music . He may have completed it in 1705 – 06 while still in Hamburg , or it may have been composed in Italy after arriving there in the latter part of 1706 . 
 = = = = Libretto = = = = 
 The text is by Heinrich ( sometimes rendered as " Hinrich " ) Hinsch , an established Gänsemarkt librettist whose stated intention was adapting stories to provide " a pleasurable poetic experience " , to " [ titillate ] the senses of its audience without attempting to address their reason or understanding " . In this case he took as his base material the episode of Phoebus ( Apollo ) and Daphne as told in Book 1 of Ovid 's Metamorphoses , but added a plethora of new characters and incidents which move the story significantly away from the Ovidian original . The main language is German , but the presence of several ensembles and arias in Italian leads Dean and Knapp to speculate that Hinsch may have used an Italian libretto as his source . The Florindo and Daphne libretti were published in the Händel @-@ Jahrbuch , in 1984 and 1985 respectively , and in facsimile form in 1989 as part of a 13 @-@ volume edited by Ellen T. Harris . 
 The preface to the Florinda libretto explains Hinsch 's choice of titles : " The first of [ the two parts ] presents the <unk> festival , instituted in honour of Phoebus ( Apollo ) , and the betrothal of Florinda and Daphne which took place on the same day , so it receives the title ' Florindo made happy ' . The other part represents Daphne 's stubborn resistance to Phoebus 's love , also the abhorrence she feels for all love , and finally her metamorphosis into a laurel tree , from which it receives the title ' Daphne metamorphosed ' " . 
 = = = = Characters = = = = 
 As listed and described in Burrows et al . : George Frideric Handel : Volume 1 , 1609 – 1725 : Collected Documents ( 2011 ) . 
 Phoebus ( Apollo ) , in love with Daphne 
 Daphne , daughter of the river @-@ god Peneus . Loved by Phoebus , betrothed to Florindo 
 Florindo , son of the river @-@ god <unk> . Betrothed to Daphne , secretly loved by <unk> 
 Lycoris , a Thessalian nymph , in love with Florindo 
 Damon , a Thessalian shepherd in love with Lycoris 
 Galathea , an aged nymph , Daphne 's confidante 
 <unk> , daughter of the river @-@ god <unk> , secretly in love with Florindo 
 Thyrsis , a noble Arcadian shepherd , Damon 's friend 
 Cupid , Vulcan , Peneus , <unk> : gods 
 Chorus : Thessalian shepherds / shepherdesses , Cyclops , Tritons , Naiads 
 = = = = Plot = = = = 
 Florindo opens with celebrations to mark Apollo 's victory over the dragon Python . Apollo boasts that he is more proficient with the bow than Cupid . This offends the latter , who mischievously wounds Apollo with a drugged arrow which causes him to fall in love with Daphne . She , however , has pledged her love for Florindo , who is at the centre of a complex tangle of infatuations : he is secretly loved by Alfirena and more openly by the scheming shepherdess Lycoris , who in turn is the object of the shepherd Damon 's desires . The various would @-@ be lovers are consoled or advised by Damon 's friend Thyrsis , and by the ageing nymph Galathea , who has herself not quite given up on love , though her advances to Thyrsis are rejected . Daphne and Florindo prepare to marry , but Apollo remains hopeful and continues his suit . Lycoris is prepared to await the outcome of events , but Damon , Galathea and Alfirena are in despair , as the opera ends with another spectacular celebration in honour of Apollo . 
 The second opera , Daphne , begins as the wedding of Florindo and Daphne gets under way . Cupid , bent on more mischief , wounds Daphne with a special arrow , forged by the god Vulcan , that causes her to renounce all love . She abandons the wedding and announces that she will join the goddess Diana and become a huntress . This sparks a series of schemes and counter @-@ schemes as both Apollo and Florindo continue to pursue Daphne while the other would @-@ be lovers manoeuvre for position . Lycoris assures Apollo that Daphne 's abandonment of the wedding was a signal that she favours him . Lycoris also steals Daphne 's cloak and , wearing it as a disguise , makes advances to Damon , having first ensured that Florindo overhears . Florindo is enraged by what he believes is Daphne 's duplicity , and denounces her . Damon confirms the story . Daphne , bewildered , pleads with her father Peneus to prove her innocence ; he responds by transforming her into a laurel tree . Cupid blames Apollo 's pride for the fiasco , but gives him the laurel as his " special tree " . Florindo now accepts Alfirena , and Lycoris , having confessed her scheming , is united with Damon . Only the guiltless Daphne ends up losing everything . 
 = = = = Performance history = = = = 
 Dean and Knapp record that in the spring of 1707 Keiser surrendered the lease of the Gänsemarkt to Johann Heinrich <unk> , who thus became responsible for the staging of the double opera . It may by this time have been in rehearsal , and the difficulties involved in such a complex and elaborate work may have necessitated several postponements . The consensus among experts is that the two parts were first performed on consecutive evenings in January 1708 , as they are the first works in Mattheson 's opera list for 1708 . There are no surviving records of the public 's reception , the length of the original run , or of any revivals . Whether Handel was present at any time during rehearsals or performance is uncertain ; he may have returned from Italy , fresh from the opening of Rodrigo in Florence , to supervise the production of Florindo and Daphne in Hamburg . Dean and Knapp suggest the works may have been directed from the harpsichord by Christoph Graupner , although Anthony Hicks in his Grove Handel biography , says that so unusual a project would not have been attempted without the composer 's presence . 
 The theatre 's management was clearly concerned that the public might find the double opera too heavy in undiluted form . Accordingly , a comic intermezzo in Low German dialect ( <unk> @-@ deutsch ) was devised by <unk> to precede the performance of Daphne . The critic and essayist Romain Rolland , in his life of Handel , termed this a " mutilation " , carried out " for fear that the music may tire the hearers " . 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 A few fragments of music from the twin operas survive . The Newman Flower collection at Manchester Central Library holds three arias and a chorus , in full orchestral score but with the vocal parts missing . A blank stave with a soprano clef suggests that the three arias were written for soprano voice . The chorus has been identified by Baselt with " <unk> , O <unk> " , from Act 1 of Daphne . Two of the arias are tentatively associated with " Mie speranza , <unk> " from Act 1 of Florindo , and " <unk> più <unk> " from the third act of Daphne . The third aria has not been identified . 
 The Royal Music Collection at the British Library houses the manuscripts of instrumental pieces , mainly dances , that belong to Florindo and Daphne . A group of eight short pieces have been catalogued as two four @-@ movement suites , <unk> and <unk> . The British Library collection includes a further group of four movements , scored for string orchestra , which has been catalogued as <unk> . 
 As with Nero , it is possible that music from Florindo or Daphne was recycled by Handel for use in later works . The overture to the opera Rodrigo consists of eight French @-@ style dances , which Cudworth believes might have begun life as ballet music in one or other of the lost Hamburg operas . In 1709 – 10 Handel composed the cantata Apollo e Dafne , which has common ground with the earlier operas . Harris makes the point that when writing the cantata , Handel would have recalled his earlier setting , and perhaps borrowed from it . Dean and Knapp provide further example of works in which the Florinda and Daphne music may have re @-@ emerged : the oratorio Il trionfo del Tempo e del <unk> ( 1707 ) ; the opera Radamisto ( 1720 ) ; and the overture in B flat , <unk> , which Baselt conjectures might have been written as the overture to Florindo . This last @-@ named has been combined with <unk> – 354 and <unk> to form the Suite from the operas Florindo and Daphne , which in 2012 was adapted and recorded by The Parley of Instruments under Peter Holman . 
 = = Afterwards = = 
 Handel 's Hamburg years provided him with a composing apprenticeship , particularly although not exclusively as a writer of opera . The influence of Keiser , which began during this period , was significant throughout Handel 's career . Apart from his lifelong habit of " borrowing " fragments from Keiser 's operas for use in his own works , he adopted and retained many of his mentor 's compositional characteristics ; according to Hicks , " [ Handel ] never relinquished French forms for overtures and dance music , and his use of orchestral colour , particularly the occasional instrumental doubling of the voice colla parte , was derived from German models " . 
 The loss of much of Handel 's early work was first noted by his earliest biographer , Mainwaring ( 1760 ) , who refers to " a great quantity of music " from Hamburg and Italy , adding that it was not known how much of it still existed . On departing from Hamburg , Handel spent a further three years in Italy before settling in London , where he remained the dominant composer of Italianate opera for the following thirty years . After his Hamburg initiation , Handel composed more than forty operas , beginning with Rodrigo in 1707 , and ending in 1740 with <unk> . These works were quickly forgotten after Handel 's death ; modern revivals did not begin until the 1920s . Dean and Knapp believe that , despite the years of relative neglect , Handel 's achievements as a composer of opera entitle him to rank alongside Monteverdi , Mozart , Verdi , and Richard Wagner as one of the supreme masters of the genre . 
 = Ontario Highway 400A = 
 King 's Highway 400A , once known as the Highway 400 Extension , is an unsigned 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The short 1 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 7 mi ) freeway stub connects Highway 400 with Highway 11 and Simcoe County Road 93 , formerly Highway 93 . The highway was created in late 1959 by the opening of Highway 400 to Coldwater , although it has always featured Highway 400 signage along the southbound lanes and Highway 11 signage northbound . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 400A is a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 7 mi ) 400 @-@ series highway located in the Canadian province of Ontario . The <unk> freeway includes a narrow grass median for the majority of its length , and features a speed limit of 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 mph ) . On average , the highway is used by approximately 11 , 900 vehicles daily . The route begins as Highway 400 exits on the right , with the northbound lanes rising up on an embankment and crossing Highway 400A . After the bridge , the highway ascends , with grasslands to the east and an embankment to the west , then gently curves to the northeast . As it crosses Simcoe County Road 93 ( Penetanguishene Road ) , formerly Highway 93 , the divided highway becomes Highway 11 . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 400A formed the original routing of Highway 400 from 1950 to 1959 . In 1950 , the freeway was extended north through the city of Barrie to the junction of Highway 11 and Highway 93 in Crown Hill , and deemed fittingly the Highway 400 Extension . In the late @-@ 1950s , the construction of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway prompted the Department of Highways to extend the route north to Highway 12 and Highway 103 in Coldwater . This section opened as a super two on December 24 , 1959 , redirecting Highway 400 southwest of the Crown Hill junction . To remedy this situation , the 1 @.@ 1 km ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) gap was internally designated as Highway 400A . 
 The highway has never been publicly signed as Highway 400A . Instead , northbound it is indicated as Highway 11 and southbound as Highway 400 . Restructuring of the provincial highway system resulted Highway 11 south of the Crown Hill interchange being transferred , or downloaded , to local municipalities on April 1 , 1997 . As a result , Highway 11 begins as Highway 400A ends ; crossing over Penetanguishene Road . 
 Unusually , traffic to and from the Highway 400 extension enters and exits at the right of the roadway , while traffic to and from Highway 400A / 11 simply continues on the same roadway . The interchange is also incomplete ; drivers must either use the Forbes Road and Penetanguishene Road interchanges , or continue southbound into Barrie and switch direction at Duckworth Street in order to travel from southbound Highway 400A to northbound Highway 400 or from southbound Highway 400 to northbound Highway 400A . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 There are only two interchanges along Highway 400A ; the start and end termini . The entirety of the highway is located within Simcoe County . 
 = 7 Subway Extension = 
 The 7 Subway Extension is a subway extension of the New York City Subway 's IRT Flushing Line . The extension stretches 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) southwest from its previous terminus at Times Square , at Seventh Avenue and 41st Street , to one new station at 34th Street and Eleventh Avenue . A second station at 10th Avenue and 41st Street was dropped from the plans in October 2007 . The entirety of the extension is located within the New York City borough of Manhattan and is served by the 7 local and < 7 > express services . The extension , a key part of the Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project , is expected to bring business and entertainment into the area , as well as aid redevelopment of nearby Chelsea and Hell 's Kitchen , located around the Long Island Rail Road 's West Side Yard . The extension also serves the nearby Jacob K. Javits Convention Center . 
 The project was originally proposed in 2005 as part of the Hudson Yards project , which included the failed attempt to build the West Side Stadium for the New York Jets and the city 's bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics . Although the stadium plan was rejected by the state legislature , the rest of the Hudson Yards , including the 7 subway extension plan went forward . Construction on the extension started in 2007 . 
 The extension 's opening was pushed back multiple times from its original target of December 2013 . The delays were attributed to a variety of problems , mostly involving the 170 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 52 m ) incline elevators that were custom @-@ designed for the new station . The extension finally opened to the public on September 13 , 2015 . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Proposals to extend the transit system to the Far West Side to support massive redevelopment were floated as early as 1969 , when the New York City Planning Commission 's ( CPC 's ) master plan proposed to expand midtown westward along a 48th Street transit line to replace what the plan described as " blocks of antiquated and deteriorating structures of every sort " between Eighth and Twelfth avenues . That proposal for the West 40s and 50s failed after voters rejected a state bond issue that would have financed the proposed new east @-@ west transit line or " people mover . " Subsequently , attention shifted to the West 30s and the IRT Flushing Line . 
 In response to the CPC 's 1993 proposal to improve access to the Manhattan Central Business District , the Metropolitan Transportation Authority ( MTA ) began exploring the possibility of a 7 extension to New Jersey . In 2001 , a business and civic group convened by Senator Charles Schumer argued that a westward extension of the Midtown office district could not be accomplished without a subway extension , saying : 
 The long blocks along the avenues make the walk as long as 20 minutes to the westernmost parts of the area . In addition , there is no convenient link from Grand Central Station or elsewhere on the east side of Manhattan , making the Far West Side a difficult commute for workers from parts of Manhattan , Queens , Westchester and Connecticut . 
 An extension of the Flushing Line was then proposed as part of the New York City bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics . The City wanted to get funding before July 2005 , at which time the International Olympic Committee would vote on funding . However , due to shortfalls in the MTA 's Capital Program , as well as preexisting funding for the Second Avenue Subway and East Side Access , the MTA could not pay to fund the extension . After a proposal for the West Side Stadium , an Olympic stadium to be located above the nearby West Side Yard , was rejected in 2005 , New York City quickly lost their Olympic bid . However , in a report entitled No. 7 Subway Extension – Hudson Yards Rezoning and Development Program , the government of New York City , devised a rezoning plan for the Hudson Yards area and proposed two new subway stations to serve that area . The subway extension was approved following the successful rezoning of about 60 blocks from 28th to 43rd Streets , which became the Hudson Yards neighborhood . 
 Mayor Michael Bloomberg 's December 12 , 2006 , address to the New York League of Conservation Voters noted that in November 2006 , the government began issuing bonds to fund the extension of the 7 subway to Eleventh Avenue and 34th Street . The $ 2 @.@ 4 billion extension was funded with New York City funds from municipal Tax Increment Financing ( TIF ) bond sales that are expected to be repaid with property tax revenues from future developments in areas served by the extension . 
 = = Construction progress = = 
 In October 2007 , the Metropolitan Transportation Authority ( MTA ) awarded a $ 1 @.@ 145 billion contract to build 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) of twin @-@ tube tunnel from the 7 train 's then @-@ terminus at Times Square to the then @-@ planned shell of the 34th Street – Hudson Yards station . The contract was awarded to S3 , a joint venture of J.F. Shea , Skanska USA Civil , and Schiavone . The extension 's construction was overseen by the MTA 's Capital Construction division . Dattner Architects , designed the 34th Street station . After excavating the new terminal 's shell and creating the first 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of tunnel using the drill @-@ and @-@ blast method , S3 placed two tunnel @-@ boring machines ( TBMs ) in the ground to dig the remaining 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) ; as it dug , each TBM placed precast concrete liner segments to create the tunnel interior . 
 Early on in the project , it was announced that the new stations would feature platform screen doors . The stations ( along with the new South Ferry station on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line and the three Phase 1 Second Avenue Subway stations in the Upper East Side ) would include special air @-@ cooling systems to reduce the temperature along platforms . Due to its depth , the extension has ventilation towers , rather than the ventilation grates ubiquitous in the rest of the subway system . 
 However , in October 2007 , soon after the announcement of the new extension , the 10th Avenue station was canceled due to an overrun of the $ 2 @.@ 4 billion budget , and the MTA did not have an extra $ 500 million to build the 10th Avenue station . On December 3 , 2007 , the MTA conducted a ceremony at the Times Square subway station marking the launch of construction of the 7 train extension . The contractor began excavating the station cavern adjacent to the Javits Convention Center . One physical hindrance to the construction of the extension was the lower @-@ level platform at 42nd Street – Port Authority Bus Terminal on the IND Eighth Avenue Line . The abandoned platform was partially razed to allow the 7 train extension to be built . 
 In June 2008 , construction on the tunnels began along Eleventh Avenue in Manhattan . In February 2009 , S3 lowered the first of two tunnel @-@ boring machines into a giant shaft at the corner of 25th Street and Eleventh Avenue . The two boring machines dug parallel 7 @,@ 100 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 200 m ) long tunnels north along Eleventh Avenue to the current terminus of the 7 service at 41st Street and Times Square . The MTA posted a construction update with photographs on its website in November 2008 , showing substantial progress . 
 The MTA completed excavation of a 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) long cavern in June 2009 . The cavern was dug below the bus entrance ramp to the lower level of the Port Authority Bus Terminal and formed part of the eastern end of the new extension and connected it to the Times Square station . At the same time , tunnels were being dug northward from the machine shaft at 26th Street ; soft ground at 27th and 28th Street required 300 feet ( 91 m ) of ground to be frozen so that the tunnel @-@ boring machines could easily dig through the soil . On December 21 , 2009 , it was announced that a tunnel @-@ boring machine broke through the 34th Street station cavern wall . Both tunnel @-@ boring machines were scheduled to finish the required tunneling in the spring of 2010 . 
 In June 2010 , one of the TBMs completed its tunnel at the cavern . The second TBM broke through the wall of the cavern on July 15 , 2010 , completing its tunneling operation . The TBMs were partially disassembled and backed up to the 25th Street shaft , where they were lifted out . In April 2011 , the MTA announced that the contract covering the tunnels , the 34th Street station mezzanine and passenger platform was 85 % complete , and that the systems contract , covering mechanical and electrical systems , electric power , lighting and train tracks would be awarded by July 2011 . A second entrance to the station is planned . In May 2012 , the MTA announced that the extension , now 65 % complete , had received the installation of the first set of rails . 
 On August 21 , 2013 , the MTA announced that the 7 Subway Extension was 90 % complete . On December 20 , 2013 , Mayor Michael Bloomberg took a ceremonial ride on a train to the new terminal , celebrating a part of his legacy as Mayor ; at the time , the proposed opening date was June 2014 . 
 = = = Delays = = = 
 Soon after Bloomberg 's ceremonial ride , the opening date of the subway extension was pushed back from June to early fall 2014 , then to November 2014 , then to February 2015 , and then to May 2015 . Most of the problems were attributed to the incline elevators being installed in the station , and to the ventilation fans along the tunnel . 
 On October 1 , 2014 , the MTA told the New York Daily News that the agency had signed a new agreement with the prime contractor , offering up to $ 4 @.@ 75 million in incentive payments if the new station was finished and ready to open to the public by February 24 , 2015 . 
 Just two and a half months later , though , the MTA stated that it was unable to open the subway extension for service until April to July 2015 , due to the failure to get the inclined elevators to work properly . Problems with the security and fire alarm systems were also blamed for the delays . A December 2014 New York Post article attributed the delay to Hudson Yards ' developer , The Related Companies ' , need to dig caissons for the foundations , just above the subway station , and the foundation work needed to be complete before the MTA could open the station . Continuing trouble with the fire and security alarms in March 2015 would delay the opening until summer . 
 The use of inclined elevators was intended to provide wheelchair @-@ bound patrons with a shorter , easier path to the train platform , as well as to reduce tunneling costs . The two elevators were manufactured by Maspero Elevatori , in <unk> Gentile , Italy , using a controller made on Long Island , speed governors made in Ohio , and buttons and other parts in Queens . The software for the elevator was written in the United States . Maspero Elevatori assembled the elevators in Italy , and they failed an operational test there , prior to being shipped to the United States . The MTA said the manufacturer chose to use American subcontractors in place of local Italian suppliers after reading the specifications the transit agency submitted . The MTA has been working with the manufacturer to try to resolve the problems caused by a very high level of customization . 
 On June 1 , 2015 , a representative for the MTA described the extension as " 99 % complete " . That day , test runs of 7 trains started running to 34th Street – Hudson Yards in preparation for the summer 2015 opening of the extension . However , on June 15 , the extension was pushed back again to " before the end of the third quarter " . On July 20 , 2015 , it was reported that the MTA planned to open the extension to the public on September 13 , 2015 . The opening date was confirmed on August 28 , 2015 . The station was opened at a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony on September 13 at about 1 p.m. 
 = = = Gallery = = = 
 = = Construction areas = = 
 = = = 34th Street – Hudson Yards station = = = 
 The 34th Street – Hudson Yards station is at the intersection of 11th Avenue and 34th Street . It is the only station on the extension , and it opened on September 13 , 2015 . The MTA says that the new station will " make it possible for new housing , restaurants and entertainment to grow " in the surrounding neighborhoods , including Hell 's Kitchen and Chelsea . The station is also close to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center . 
 Passenger access to the station includes a pair of incline elevators . The project has been plagued by delays because of the mishaps involved in the installation of the custom @-@ made elevators . In June 2012 , the extension 's opening was delayed to June 2014 , with the rest of the 34th Street – Hudson Yards station to open at the end of 2015 ; As of December 15 , 2014 , the opening date was changed to mid @-@ 2015 . In April 2014 , the first of the 170 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 52 m ) incline elevators was installed in the station . The 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) high incline elevators are the first of their kind in the system . 
 = = = Above @-@ ground structures = = = 
 The extension contains five street @-@ level structures : 
 Site A , a ventilation building at 11th Avenue between 25th and 26th Streets 
 Site J , a ventilation building at 11th Avenue between 33rd and 34th Streets next to the main entrance and elevator entrance 
 Site K , a ventilation building at 11th Avenue between 35th and 37th Streets 
 Site L , a ventilation building at 41st Street and Dyer Avenue 
 Site P , the secondary station entrance between 11th Avenue between 34th and 35th Streets 
 = = Proposals = = 
 = = = 10th Avenue station = = = 
 Although a new station at 10th Avenue and 41st Street was part of the original plan , the intermediate station was eliminated in October 2007 due to cost overruns , leaving the terminal station at Eleventh Avenue and 34th Street as the only new station on the extension . The MTA indicated that the 10th Avenue station could be included in the project if funding were found . The station was not included in the original ( 2007 ) contract award , but was listed as a $ 450 million option . In late December 2007 , reports indicated that the postponed station might be partially built if the City of New York and the MTA agreed on the additional financing for the station shell . In February 2009 , the MTA announced that it would build the station if the agency received sufficient funds from the federal economic stimulus package . In June 2010 , the city announced it was seeking funding to assess the feasibility of constructing the station at a later date using a two @-@ platform , two @-@ entrance model without an underground connecting passage . 
 = = = Proposed New Jersey extension = = = 
 Seventeen years after a 1993 MTA study on extending the 7 service across the Hudson River , The New York Times reported that Mayor Michael Bloomberg 's administration had been considering an extension to Hoboken and to Secaucus Junction in New Jersey , where it would connect with most New Jersey Transit commuter lines . It would offer New Jersey commuters a direct route to Grand Central Terminal on the East Side of Manhattan and connections to most other New York City subway routes . 
 If opened , the extension would take the New York City Subway outside the state 's borders for the first time . The plan would replace the Access to the Region 's Core ( ARC ) tunnel , which was canceled by New Jersey Governor Chris Christie in October 2010 . 
 On February 2 , 2011 , the city 's Economic Development Corporation voted to budget up to $ 250 @,@ 000 for a feasibility study of a tunnel for the subway line extension . The engineering firm Parsons Brinckerhoff carried out the study . The report was released in April 2013 . The proposal includes the construction of the in @-@ fill station at 10th Avenue , tunnels running along the path of the ARC tunnel , and a multi @-@ level multi @-@ modal addition to Secaucus Junction . A widening of the right @-@ of way of the Northeast Corridor was considered . 
 The New York Post has reported that the Flushing line extension to Union City and Secaucus will have a formal proposal made by Mayor Bloomberg around the end of 2012 . New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and the Port Authority are on record as supporting the plan , along with splitting the estimated US $ 10 billion cost if it is officially approved . 
 A subway extension would cost less than the ARC tunnel , as it would start at the planned station at Eleventh Avenue and go west , avoiding the expensive tunnel boring work east to Herald Square and the complex station deep underground there . However , travel times into Manhattan might be longer than under the original ARC proposal , because riders would need to transfer to the subway from New Jersey Transit trains at Secaucus . Additionally , because NJT trains would continue to or from Penn Station , the key goal of reduced tunnel congestion between New Jersey and New York would not be achieved . On the other hand , as Governor Christie said " It would actually connect us to the east side of Manhattan , like we always wanted to ... " Bloomberg had yet to meet with New York Governor @-@ elect Andrew Cuomo and the project , which could require five additional years to develop , would not be automatically entitled to the federal funding allotted to the ARC tunnel . 
 Amtrak 's February 2011 announcement of the Gateway Project includes a proposal to extend the 7 service three blocks east of Eleventh Avenue to New York Penn Station , instead of five miles west to Secaucus . Gateway , under auspices of Amtrak , would include a high @-@ speed rail right @-@ of way from Newark Penn to New York Penn and provide more capacity on New Jersey Transit rail operations . US Congress allocated $ 15 million for studies for the project in November 2011 . It is likely the two projects , Gateway and the subway extension , will be in competition for funding . 
 In April 2012 , citing budget considerations , the director of the MTA , Joe <unk> , said that it was doubtful the extension would be built in the foreseeable future , suggesting that the Gateway Project was a much more likely solution to congestion at Hudson River crossings . However , a feasibility study commissioned by the city and released in April 2013 revived hope for the project , with Mayor Bloomberg saying " Extending the 7 train to Secaucus is a promising potential solution ... and is deserving of serious consideration . " 
 In a November 2013 Daily News opinion article , the president of the Real Estate Board of New York and the chairman of Edison Properties called for the line to be extended to Secaucus in tunnels to be shared with the Gateway Project . Later in November 2013 the New Jersey Assembly passed a Resolution 168 supporting the extension of the line to Hoboken and Secaucus . 
 = = Awards and innovations = = 
 The New York State Society of Professional Engineers awarded the first construction phase , " Running Tunnels and Underground Structures , " its 2013 Construction Project of the Year . According to the society , the project team won the award " for outstanding professional engineering efforts in developing creative solutions and innovative technologies in construction of an infrastructure project . The No. 7 project used the first double @-@ shielded tunnel boring machines ( TBMs ) to tunnel under New York City while placing precast concrete segments to form the tunnels ’ walls . For the first time in the world , a ground freezing method was used to harden soil to act as rock to allow TBMs to maintain proper course while boring and placing the tunnel liners . " While the extension extends 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , the tunnels are actually 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long . 
 = Microscopium = 
 Microscopium / <unk> / is a minor constellation in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere , one of twelve created in the 18th century by French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille and one of several depicting scientific instruments . Its name is a Latinised form of the Greek word for microscope . Its stars are faint and hardly visible from most of the non @-@ tropical Northern Hemisphere . 
 The constellation 's brightest star is Gamma Microscopii of apparent magnitude 4 @.@ 68 , a yellow giant located around 381 light @-@ years distant . Two star systems — WASP @-@ 7 and HD 205739 — have planets , while two others — the young red dwarf star AU Microscopii and the sunlike HD <unk> — have debris disks . AU Microscopii and the binary red dwarf system AT Microscopii are probably a wide triple system and members of the Beta Pictoris moving group . Nicknamed " Speedy Mic " , BO Microscopii is a star with an extremely fast rotation period of 9 hours 7 minutes . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Microscopium is a small constellation bordered by Capricornus to the north , Piscis Austrinus and Grus to the west , Sagittarius to the east , and Indus to the south , touching on Telescopium to the southeast . The recommended three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is ' Mic ' . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of four segments ( illustrated in infobox ) . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between <unk> <unk> and 21h <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between − 27 @.@ 45 ° and − 45 @.@ 09 ° . The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 45 ° N. Given that its brightest stars are of fifth magnitude , the constellation is invisible to the naked eye in areas with polluted skies . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted and designated ten stars with the Bayer designations Alpha through to Iota in 1756 . A star in neighbouring Indus that Lacaille had labelled Nu Indi turned out to be in Microscopium , so Gould renamed it Nu Microscopii . Francis Baily considered Gamma and Epsilon Microscopii to belong to the neighbouring constellation Piscis Austrinus , but subsequent cartographers did not follow this . In his 1725 Catalogus Britannicus , John Flamsteed labelled the stars 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 Piscis <unk> , which became Gamma Microscopii , HR <unk> , HR <unk> and Epsilon Microscopii respectively . Within the constellation 's borders , there are 43 stars brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6 @.@ 5 . 
 Depicting the eyepiece of the microscope is Gamma Microscopii , which — at magnitude of 4 @.@ 68 — is the brightest star in the constellation . Having spent much of its 620 @-@ million @-@ year lifespan as a blue @-@ white main sequence star , it has swollen and cooled to become a yellow giant of spectral type <unk> , with a diameter ten times that of the Sun . Measurement of its parallax yields a distance of 229 ± 4 light years from Earth . Alpha Microscopii is also an ageing yellow giant star of spectral type G7III with an apparent magnitude of 4 @.@ 90 . Located 380 ± 30 light @-@ years away from Earth , it has swollen to 17 @.@ 5 times the diameter of the Sun . Alpha has a 10th magnitude companion , visible in 7 @.@ 5 cm telescopes , though this is a coincidental closeness rather than a true binary system . Epsilon Microscopii lies 182 ± 2 light years away , and is a white star of apparent magnitude 4 @.@ 7 , and spectral type A1V . Theta1 and <unk> Microscopii make up a wide double whose components are <unk> to the naked eye . Both are white A @-@ class magnetic spectrum variable stars with strong metallic lines , similar to Cor Caroli . They mark the constellation 's specimen slide . 
 Many notable objects are too faint to be seen with the naked eye . AX Microscopii , better known as Lacaille <unk> , is a red dwarf which lies only 12 @.@ 9 light @-@ years from the Solar System . At magnitude 6 @.@ 68 , it is the brightest red dwarf in the sky . BO Microscopii is a rapidly rotating star that has 80 % the diameter of the Sun . Nicknamed " Speedy Mic " , it has a rotation period of 9 hours 7 minutes . An active star , it has prominent stellar flares that average 100 times stronger than those of the Sun , and are emitting energy mainly in the X @-@ ray and ultraviolet bands of the spectrum . AT Microscopii is a binary star system , both members of which are flare star red dwarfs . The system lies close to and may form a very wide triple system with AU Microscopii , a young star which appears to be a planetary system in the making with a debris disk . The three stars are candidate members of the Beta Pictoris moving group , one of the nearest associations of stars that share a common motion through space . 
 The Astronomical Society of Southern Africa in 2003 reported that observations of four of the Mira variables in Microscopium were very urgently needed as data on their light curves was incomplete . Two of them — R and S Microscopii — are challenging stars for novice amateur astronomers , and the other two U and RY Microscopii are more difficult still . Another red giant , T Microscopii , is a semiregular variable that ranges between magnitudes 7 @.@ 7 and 9 @.@ 6 over 344 days . Of apparent magnitude 11 , DD Microscopii is a symbiotic star system composed of an orange giant of spectral type K2III and white dwarf in close orbit , with the smaller star ionizing the stellar wind of the larger star . The system has a low metallicity . Combined with its high galactic latitude , this indicates that the star system has its origin in the galactic halo of the Milky Way . 
 HD 205739 is a yellow @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type <unk> that is around 1 @.@ 22 times as massive and 2 @.@ 3 times as luminous as the Sun . It has a Jupiter @-@ sized planet with an orbital period of 280 days that was discovered by the radial velocity method . WASP @-@ 7 is a star of spectral type F5V with an apparent magnitude of 9 @.@ 54 , about 1 @.@ 28 times as massive as the Sun . Its hot Jupiter planet — WASP @-@ 7b — was discovered by transit method and found to orbit the star every 4 @.@ 95 days . HD <unk> is a sunlike star of spectral type G2V with a debris disk that ranges from 158 to 220 AU distant . Its inner edge is sharply defined , indicating a probable planet orbiting between 86 and 158 AU from the star . 
 = = = Deep sky objects = = = 
 Describing Microscopium as " totally unremarkable " , astronomer Patrick Moore concluded there was nothing of interest for amateur observers . NGC 6925 is a barred spiral galaxy of apparent magnitude 11 @.@ 3 which is lens @-@ shaped , as it lies almost edge @-@ on to observers on Earth , 3 @.@ 7 degrees west @-@ northwest of Alpha Microscopii . SN <unk> , a Type II Supernova in NGC 6925 , was discovered by Stu Parker in New Zealand in July 2011 . NGC <unk> lies nearby and is a magnitude fainter still . The Microscopium Void is a roughly rectangular region of relatively empty space , bounded by incomplete sheets of galaxies from other voids . The Microscopium Supercluster is an overdensity of galaxy clusters that was first noticed in the early 1990s . The component Abell clusters <unk> and <unk> are likely to be gravitationally bound , while the relations of Abell clusters <unk> and <unk> in the same field are unclear . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 The <unk> are a minor meteor shower that appear from June to mid @-@ July . 
 = = History = = 
 The stars that comprise Microscopium are in a region previously considered the hind feet of Sagittarius , a neighbouring constellation . John <unk> Gore wrote that al @-@ Sufi seems to have reported that Ptolemy had seen the stars but he ( Al Sufi ) did not pinpoint their positions . Microscopium itself was introduced in 1751 – 52 by Lacaille with the French name le Microscope , after he had observed and catalogued 10 @,@ 000 southern stars during a two @-@ year stay at the Cape of Good Hope . He devised fourteen new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe . All but one honoured instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment . Commemorating the compound microscope , the Microscope 's name had been Latinised by Lacaille to Microscopium by 1763 . 
 = Edward Soriano = 
 Lieutenant General Edward Soriano ( born 12 November 1946 ) is an American retired military officer . He is the highest @-@ ranking Filipino American officer to have served in the United States military , and the first promoted to a general officer . Born in the Philippines , Soriano moved with his family to the United States and graduated from Salinas High School before being commissioned as an officer through Army ROTC at San Jose State University . 
 Soriano served with infantry units throughout the United States , Korea , and in Germany . Later Soriano was a liaison officer during operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm , and deployed during Operation Joint Endeavor ; he retired in March 2005 . Since retiring from the Army , Soriano has worked for the aerospace and defense technology company Northrop Grumman and has sat on various boards of directors . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Born on 12 November 1946 in Pangasinan to Ilocos Sur natives , Soriano came to the United States in the early 1950s when his father , Fred Soriano , a soldier in the United States Army , was assigned to Fort Benning , Georgia ; he was six when he left the Philippines . Soriano 's mother 's name was Encarnacion . Soriano 's father was a corporal in the 57th Infantry ( Philippine Scouts ) during World War II . After the surrender of American forces on Bataan to the Japanese , the elder Soriano became a prisoner of war and was subjected to the Bataan Death March . The elder Soriano later served in the Korean War , and again became a prisoner of war . During the Korean War , young Edward and the rest of his family moved from Guam back to the Philippines . His father later retired from the army as a major . In the 1960s , his family moved to Salinas , California , and Soriano later graduated from Salinas High School . His father 's service inspired Edward Soriano to join the military . 
 Soriano graduated from San Jose State University ( SJSU ) in 1970 , and later earned a Master of Public Administration from the University of Missouri . Soriano is married to Vivian Guillermo , who was born in the United States to Laoag natives . The couple have two children , Melissa and Keith . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Soriano was commissioned as an infantry officer through the Army Reserve Officers ' Training Corps at SJSU , in 1970 . Soriano 's first assignment was at the <unk> School at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , which was followed by command of an anti @-@ tank platoon in the 508th Infantry . Soriano was then sent to Korea where he commanded Combat Support Company , 1st Battalion , 23d Infantry , 2nd Infantry Division , before he was transferred to command Company A , 3d Battalion , 47th Infantry , 3d Brigade , 9th Infantry Division at Fort Lewis , Washington . After attending the United States Army Infantry School at Fort Benning , Soriano served with the United States Army Recruiting Command in Albany , New York , before commanding Company C , 1st Battalion , 39th Infantry Regiment , 8th Infantry Division in Germany . Following his service in Europe , Soriano attended the United States Army Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth and University of Missouri , Kansas City , before serving in the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Plans and in the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel at The Pentagon . After his service in The Pentagon , he commanded 2nd Battalion , 41st Infantry , 2nd Armored Division at Fort Hood , Texas , before attending the United States Army War College and returning to The Pentagon . 
 During operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm , Soriano served as the chief of the liaison team to the 1st Marine Expeditionary Force . After the conflict ended , Soriano contributed to the Secretary of Defense 's Gulf War Report as the chief of the army section while serving in the Office of the Chief of Staff . In 1992 , Soriano received his first assignment at Fort Carson , Colorado , as the commander of the 1st Brigade , 4th Infantry Division . Following this command , Soriano returned to Germany to serve with the 3d and 1st Infantry Divisions , which included deployments to Bosnia for peacekeeping during Operation Joint Endeavor . Returning to the United States , he undertook various positions in Virginia and The Pentagon , including service as Director , Officer Personnel Management , within the Total Army Personnel Command . From 1999 to 2001 , Soriano commanded the 7th Infantry Division and Fort Carson . Soriano served as Director of Homeland Security for United States Joint Forces Command from October 2001 to August 2002 , which laid the foundations for what has become the Northern Command . 
 Soriano 's final assignment was command of I Corps and Fort Lewis , beginning in August 2002 . Under his leadership , Fort Lewis became a force provider for Operation Iraqi Freedom , including the first deployment of the Stryker with the 2nd Infantry Division . In June 2004 , as the commander of Fort Lewis , Soriano ordered the court @-@ martial of Ryan G. Anderson , who was convicted of providing aid to al @-@ Qaeda and was sentenced in September 2004 to life in prison with the possibility of parole after Soriano removed the death penalty as a possible sentencing option . In September 2004 , Soriano met with Philippine President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo at <unk> , who he had met before during Arroyo 's state visit in May 2003 , after being invited by General Narciso Abaya , Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines . In November 2004 , Soriano turned over command of I Corps and Fort Lewis to Lieutenant General James M. <unk> , and finally retired from active duty on 1 March 2005 . 
 = = Post @-@ military career = = 
 Since his retirement , Soriano has worked for Northrop Grumman as the Director of Training and Exercises for Homeland Security and Joint Forces Support . He has also sat on numerous boards of directors including Home Front Cares and Goodwill Industries of Colorado Springs . Additionally , Soriano is the current president of the board of directors of the Mountain Post Historical Center at Fort Carson , and the vice @-@ chairman of the Colorado Springs Chamber of Commerce 's military affairs committee . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Soriano received the following awards and decorations : 
 = Friend or Foe ( SpongeBob SquarePants ) = 
 " Friend or Foe " is the first episode of the fifth season and the 81st overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It was written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Mike Mitchell , Steven Banks and Tim Hill , and was directed by Alan Smart and Tom Yasumi . Alexander , Cervas and Mitchell also function as storyboard directors . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on April 13 , 2007 . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , Mr. Krabs reveals to SpongeBob that he and his business rival Plankton were actually best friends during their childhood . Through a series of flashbacks , Mr. Krabs tells the story of how that friendship deteriorated , the cause of their rivalry , and how the Krabby Patty sandwich was created in the process . The episode became available on DVD on April 17 , 2007 . " Friend or Foe " received positive reviews upon release . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 After yet another attack at the Krusty Krab by Plankton , SpongeBob asks Mr. Krabs why they hate each other . Mr. Krabs tells his side of the story , in a series of flashbacks . In the flashback , Mr. Krabs and Plankton were best friends from birth , and did everything together . One day , they get enough money to buy a burger from Stinky 's Burgers , which , despite having horrible food and being located in a landfill , is very popular among the local children due to being the only place in town to get a burger . Plankton and Krabs decide to go into the burger business themselves , and create their own burger , but no one wants to try it . When Stinky 's is closed by the local health department , the two open " <unk> Burgers " on his former site , which the children are now forced to eat at , despite it being even worse than Stinky 's . Plankton says that they are now ruling the children . Mr. Krabs argues that it should be about satisfying the customers , rather than power . Soon they get into an argument , and Krabs is ejected into a dump pile and tells Plankton that he will one day regret this . 
 Back to the Krusty Krab , Plankton comes in and disagrees with Mr. Krabs ' story and tells SpongeBob his own version . His story is the same as Mr. Krabs ' , except that their roles during the fight at the end are reversed , with Krabs wanting to rule the money of the children and when they disagreed shot Plankton out of a straw into the dump . Plankton and Krabs begin arguing about the story , until Karen arrives and tells the real story . In the story , the restaurant initially has no customers , and Old Man Jenkins , an elderly resident and an old friend of Krab 's family , is the first to try their burger , but collapses , having been poisoned by the patty . Krabs and Plankton become angry and accuse each other of tainting the patty . They begin fighting over the recipe , eventually tearing it in two . Their friendship over , Plankton storms out to pursue his own career in food . However , during the struggle , a shelf was knocked down , dumping various ingredients into the patty batter , creating the Krabby Patty recipe , which Krabs is left with . The two go their separate ways , each trying to open their own establishment . Mr. Krabs ' " Krabby Patty " became a success , while Plankton 's Chum Burger is horrible . 
 After hearing the story , Plankton and Krabs begin to make up , until Plankton takes the formula from his pocket . The two start chasing after each other , and the episode ends . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Friend or Foe " is a special episode written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas , Mike Mitchell , Steven Banks and Tim Hill , with Alan Smart and Tom Yasumi serving as animation directors . Alexander , Cervas and Mitchell also function as storyboard directors . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on April 13 , 2007 , with a TV @-@ Y7 parental rating . On April 2 , 2008 , Nickelodeon released a preview clip of the episode on TurboNick . Immediately following the episode 's on @-@ air premiere , " Friend or Foe " was streamed on TurboNick . On April 5 , Nick.com launched an online game themed to the special episode called " Friend or Foe Trash Bash . " 
 Tom Ascheim , executive vice president and general manager for Nickelodeon Television , said " We are always looking for new ways to tell stories and go beyond the traditional platforms of presenting them to our audience [ ... ] " ' Friend or Foe ? ' reveals the great back story of the long @-@ standing feud between Mr. Krabs vs. Plankton and we 're offering kids an interactive opportunity to get involved in the story and spirited contest by rooting for one or the other . " As part of the special programming event , Nickelodeon held " The Friend or Foe @-@ Down " , a convergent contest where two teams of children meet a series of challenges before the episode 's premiere . Team Krabs and Team Plankton each consisted of three children led by team captains and hosts Alexandra Gizela and Jordan Carlos . Each team was infiltrated by a " foe " who is secretly working for the other team , as they partake in a series of " funny and messy " physical group challenges refereed by Tom Kenny as Patchy the Pirate . 
 The episode was later released on the DVD of the same name on April 17 , 2007 . The DVD featured six other episodes , including " The Original Fry Cook " , " Night Light " , " Rise and Shine " , " Waiting " , " Fungus Among Us " and " Spy Buddies " , and the original uncut animatic for " Friend or Foe " and special Plankton and Mr. Krabs photo gallery as bonus features . It was also released on the SpongeBob SquarePants : Season 5 , Vol . 1 DVD on September 4 , 2007 . On September 22 , 2009 , " Friend or Foe " was released in the SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 In 2007 , Nickelodeon partnered with Stride Rite Corporation to co @-@ sponsor the SpongeBob SquarePants Friend or Foe ? network event on Nickelodeon on Friday , April 13 . Stride Rite utilized Nickelodeon as the exclusive marketing platform for its <unk> footwear line , in support of the SpongeBob event . Stride Rite vice president Phil <unk> said " SpongeBob SquarePants Friend or Foe ? not only gives the stride rite brand exposure during the highest rated kids ' television show , but creates awareness for <unk> with kids during our peak spring season . " 
 Nickelodeon announced a strategic partnership with Kajeet . Advertising and promotional elements of the partnership include sponsorship of a number of Nickelodeon 's big television events , starting with this episode . To support the SpongeBob SquarePants Friend or Foe ? television event , Kajeet and Nickelodeon launched exclusive mobile content related to the episode . Kajeet was also the exclusive sponsor of " Trash Bash " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Friend or Foe " received mostly positive reviews . Paul Mavis of DVD Talk was positive towards the episode specifically on the live action scenes , writing " Patchy and Potty are always funny , so it 's great to see them slinging hamburgers in honor of their idol , SpongeBob . I particularly liked the gorilla at the end , whipping burgers at Patchy ( ' You got me right in the buns ! ' ) . " Mavis also praised the episode calling it " brilliant " because " [ Mr. ] Krabs and Plankton are strong enough characters , with their own mythology , that they can sustain their very own episode with only a cameo from SpongeBob . " He also said the episode is " [ ... ] hilarious ( I love the fact that it 's a barely disguised version of Rashomon ) , with an especially funny look at Krabs , Plankton , and even SpongeBob , as babies . " 
 David Packard of DVD Verdict said that the live action scenes " add to the silliness . " He also said " It 's a nice change of pace to see Plankton and Krabs as chums pre @-@ Chum Bucket and finding out what led to their friendship 's eventual demise . Viewers also get to see Mr. Krabs introduced to ' the love of his life ' as he develops the secret formula to the Krabby Patty that Bikini Bottom 's residents know and love today . " On the DVD , Patrick <unk> of Blogcritics said " Children and adults will laugh out loud at the crazy slapstick antics of the one who lives under the sea . " He added that " This release is sure to be huge hit for Spongebob fans everywhere . " Lesley Aeschliman of Yahoo ! Voices was negative on the episode saying " ' Friend of Foe ? ' just felt like a regular episode that really had no reason to be hyped a special . " 
 = Joe Delaney = 
 Joe Alton Delaney ( / <unk> / ; October 30 , 1958 – June 29 , 1983 ) was an American football running back who played two seasons in the National Football League ( NFL ) . In his two seasons with the Kansas City Chiefs , Delaney set four franchise records that would stand for more than twenty years . 
 He was a two @-@ time All @-@ American athlete for the Northwestern State Demons football team , as well as a track and field star . Delaney played two seasons with the Chiefs and was chosen as the AFC Rookie of the Year in 1981 by United Press International . 
 Delaney died on June 29 , 1983 while attempting to rescue three children from drowning in a pond in Monroe in northeastern Louisiana . He was posthumously awarded the Presidential Citizen 's Medal from U.S. President Ronald W. Reagan . While not officially retired , his jersey number while playing for the Chiefs , # 37 , has not been worn since his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The third of Woodrow and Eunice Delaney 's eight children , Delaney was born in Henderson , on October 30 , 1958 , and attended Haughton High School in Bossier Parish in northwestern Louisiana . Discouraged by his father from pursuing his dreams of playing football , Delaney became the starting wide receiver by his junior year at Haughton . Major Division I schools that scouted him included Grambling State , Texas , Oklahoma and Louisiana State . 
 Delaney played for Division I @-@ AA 's Northwestern State Demons from 1977 to 1980 . After telling his coach of his willingness to play football at the collegiate level , Delaney switched to the running back position . He went on to be an All @-@ American selection in 1979 and 1980 . While at Northwestern State , Delaney met his future wife , Carolyn , and they had two children by his senior year . 
 On October 28 , 1978 , Delaney carried the ball 28 times and gained 299 yards for Northwestern State against Nicholls State University with 263 of the yards coming in the game 's second half . Delaney 's rushing stats in the second half of the game are an NCAA record . In the same game , he scored four touchdowns , one of which was on a 90 @-@ yard run , as he led his team to a 28 – 18 victory . 
 Delaney finished his career at Northwestern State with 3 @,@ 047 yards rushing , 31 touchdowns , and 188 points . In 1980 , his senior season , he was ranked eighth in the nation in all @-@ purpose rushing yards . On November 22 , 1980 he played his last game at Northwestern State and the school retired his jersey , number 44 , at halftime . Delaney was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1997 . 
 At Northwestern State , Delaney also starred in track . In high school , he ran the 100 yard dash in 9 @.@ 4 seconds and was on the Northwestern State track and field team , which won the NCAA 400 @-@ meter relay in 1981 . He holds the school 200 meter dash record with a time of 20 @.@ 64 seconds . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Delaney was selected in the second round of the 1981 NFL Draft by the Kansas City Chiefs . United Press International named him Rookie of the Year of the American Football Conference for the 1981 NFL season after he rushed for 1 @,@ 121 yards , set four club records , and averaged 80 @.@ 9 yards a game . Delaney 's effort helped propel the Chiefs to a 9 – 7 record , the team 's first winning season since 1973 . In his rookie season , he was selected to the Pro Bowl after setting Chiefs records for most yards in a season ( 1 @,@ 121 ) , most yards in a game ( 193 vs. Houston ) , most consecutive 100 @-@ yard @-@ plus games ( three ) and most 100 @-@ yard games in a season ( five ) . 
 After coming off the bench to record 101 rushing yards in his initial NFL action at New England , he ran for 106 yards and registered 104 receiving yards in his first professional start against Oakland . In the Chiefs ' October 18 , 1981 game against the Denver Broncos , Delaney broke loose for a 75 @-@ yard touchdown run , but an offside penalty caused the play to be restarted from five yards back . On the second play after the penalty , Delaney scored an 82 @-@ yard touchdown , the longest rushing play from scrimmage in the 1981 NFL season . 
 Following Delaney 's record @-@ setting 196 @-@ yard rushing performance against the Houston Oilers on November 15 , 1981 , Oilers defensive end ( and future Pro Football Hall of Famer ) Elvin Bethea was quoted in saying : 
 A strike by NFL players and an eye injury limited Delaney ’ s playing time in the 1982 NFL season . He underwent surgery to repair a detached retina , and only registered 380 rushing yards in the eight @-@ game shortened season , which the Chiefs finished with a 3 – 6 record . Delaney averaged 4 @.@ 6 yards per carry , 9 @.@ 1 yards per reception , and registered 1 @,@ 811 all @-@ purpose yards during his career with three touchdowns . 
 = = = Professional statistics = = = 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Delaney had a lifelong history of helping others , and once paid for the funeral of a former teacher whose family could not afford a proper service . On June 29 , 1983 , Delaney , who was living in nearby Ruston , went with friends to Critter 's Creek , an amusement center at Chennault Park in Monroe , Louisiana . While reportedly discouraging swimming children from venturing too far out in a pond , Delaney dove in to save three children who were screaming for help , floundering in a water hole left by recent construction work . The water hole , which covered two acres and was 6 foot deep , was not intended for swimming but to add to the park 's aesthetics . Despite his inability to swim , Delaney nevertheless tried to rescue the children . One child managed to get out of the water without harm and another was taken to an emergency room where he later died ; police recovered the body of Delaney and the remaining child . The amusement park has since been closed to the public . 
 Three thousand people attended Delaney 's burial and memorial service on July 4 which was held in the sweltering heat of the Haughton High School gymnasium . President Ronald Reagan honored Delaney with the Presidential Citizens Medal on July 15 , and it was presented to Delaney 's family by Vice President George H. W. Bush . Reagan 's words were : 
 For the 1983 NFL season , the Chiefs honored Delaney by wearing a circular patch bearing a gold eagle and the number 37 on the upper @-@ left chest of their uniforms . Haughton High School also made a park , Joe Delaney Park , in his memory . The NCAA posthumously awarded Delaney the NCAA Award of Valor in 1984 . Louisiana Governor Dave <unk> presented the Louisiana State Civilian Bravery Award to Delaney 's family following his death . 
 Delaney 's heroism is honored through an award for one of the NFL 's best running backs who also demonstrates admirable character and unselfishness , traits that were embodied by Delaney . The award is given annually by <unk> 
 Northwestern State ’ s football permanent team captains award , the Joe Delaney Memorial Leadership award , is named in his honor , as is the annual spring football game ( " Delaney Bowl " ) and a golf tournament that generates support for the athletic program . A permanent shrine honoring him sits under the home stands at Northwestern State 's Turpin Stadium and his number 44 jersey hangs in the football offices . In Virginia , the Delaney Athletic Conference took its name to honor his memory in the fall of 1983 , and today 13 Virginia private high schools comprise the DAC . 
 A group of Chiefs fans in Kansas City formed the " <unk> Foundation , " which works with the American Red Cross to provide swimming lessons for underprivileged children . The Kansas City Chiefs unofficially retired Delaney 's jersey number 37 following his death , and he was elected to the team 's Hall of Fame in 2004 . His name is included in the Chiefs ' ring of honor at Arrowhead Stadium . 
 = Let Yourself Go ( Green Day song ) = 
 " Let Yourself Go " is a song by American punk rock band Green Day . Written by Billie Joe Armstrong and produced by Rob Cavallo and the band for their ninth studio album , ¡ Uno ! , the song was released as the third single from the album on September 5 , 2012 . However , the " official live video " of the song was revealed on August 1 , 2012 . 
 The song was described to be " more punk " than that of the band 's previous two singles " Oh Love " and " Kill the DJ " , and was compared to their 1990 's material , such as Dookie and Insomniac . Its theme was described as " the kind of pop @-@ smart here 's @-@ my @-@ fucking @-@ problem miniatures " . It received positive critical reception and charted at # 2 at UK Rock Chart and # 19 at US Alternative Rock . " Let Yourself Go " was played at secret shows of the band and at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 After " Let Yourself Go " was played at a ' secret New York Halloween show ' of the band on October 27 , 2011 , Green Day began recording new material for ¡ Uno ! on February 14 , 2012 , and the song was confirmed with the revelation of the track listing of ¡ Uno ! on June 26 , 2012 . 
 Followed by the release of the " official live video " for " Let Yourself Go " on August 1 , 2012 , recorded during their performance at Austin , <unk> it was released as a single on September 5 , 2012 . The song was written by Billie Joe Armstrong and produced by the band along with their long time collaborator Rob Cavallo . 
 The song debuted on the US Rock Songs and US Alternative Songs at # 36 and # 34 respectively , peaking # 29 at the US Rock and # 17 at US Alternative Songs . " Let Yourself Go " reached # 2 at UK Rock Charts , and peaked # 99 at Netherlands Single Top 100 and # 49 at South Korea Gaon Chart . 
 = = Theme and composition = = 
 " Let Yourself Go " was described as a return to punk rock and pop punk in contrast to the band 's previous two singles " Oh Love " and " Kill the DJ " by VH1 's Zara Golden . The song was stylistically compared to their 1990 's roots with a tone and style that imitates the band 's work from Dookie and Insomniac . Slant Magazine had said that it also reflects the style of Van Halen from the 1980s . 
 David Fricke of the Rolling Stone in a review of ¡ Uno ! compared the theme of the song with " Stay the Night " , another song on the album , stating ; " ' Stay the Night ' and ' Let Yourself Go ' are the kind of pop @-@ smart here 's @-@ my @-@ fucking @-@ problem miniatures Armstrong was writing like second nature when he , Dirnt and Cool were too young to drink ( legally ) where they gigged . But Armstrong is 40 now , married and a dad , and a lot of this ruckus sounds designed to drown out the time bombs ticking in his head and the maddening static outside " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received positive reception from the critics , mainly focusing on the song 's references to Green Day 's stylistic origins . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone praised the song , describing it as a " blistering [ and ] Ramones @-@ tinged [ song ] . " Katie Hasty of HitFix added to the song 's familiarity , stating " It 's back to the melodic , snotty sound of early Green Day , with some spit shine and a few f @-@ bombs . " At The Reporter , Stephen Moore described that the song was a " rant and snarl encouragingly " in which " [ Cool 's ] rapid @-@ fire drumming [ was ] conjuring up some of the Dookie magic " . 
 Greg Kot of Chicago Tribune stated that the song was " undeniably sharp , [ and ] catchy " which was " hurtling on a wave of harmony vocals " . Yorgo <unk> at Slant Magazine noted it as an " occasional guitar solo " and further added that the song " steers a straightforward punk anthem toward early- ' 80s Van Halen territory . " Randall Roberts from Los Angeles Times described the song to be an " obvious chart @-@ buster " and added that it would " no doubt be used to back NFL highlight reels for years to come . " Scott Heisel from Alternative Press cited the song to be the fastest on the album by observing with " breaking 200 bpms and creating an instant sing @-@ along with perfectly placed profanity . It 's destined to become a live staple . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Green Day played a secret @-@ show in Costa Mesa , California on August 11 , 2011 , where they performed various songs from the upcoming album , including " Let Yourself Go " . Later on , the song was also played at few other secret shows of the band . A recording of the band performing the song live at Red 7 in Austin , Texas on November 17 , 2011 was released online on July 30 , 2012 as the " official live video " for the song . 
 The band was touring in Italy five days prior to their performance at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards . Lead singer Billie Joe Armstrong was hospitalized due to dehydration and influenza . This caused the band to cancel their show at Bologna which was scheduled three days before their performance at the VMAs . However , Armstrong recovered and the band performed " Let Yourself Go " at the VMAs . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Jesus for President = 
 Jesus for President : Politics for Ordinary Radicals is a 2008 book co @-@ written by Evangelical authors Shane Claiborne and Chris Haw , two important figures in New Monasticism . The book asserts that the countercultural themes in the ministry of Jesus , such as those of self @-@ denial , are ignored by American Christians because they have become accustomed to exercising Christian privilege and are unwilling to give it up . 
 Jesus for President received generally positive reviews from critics in both secular and Christian media . David Swanson wrote a three @-@ part review of Jesus for President in Christianity Today , in which he argues that " Claiborne and Haw make a compelling case that the church in America has become much too cozy with the state " . Mark Tooley of the Institute on Religion and Democracy was heavily critical of the book , calling the book 's pacifism both utopian and anti @-@ American . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jesus for President was first published in March 2008 and had sold more than 300 @,@ 000 copies by that December . 
 Claiborne and Haw first met in the 2000s , when they were both living in different Christian intentional communities in the United States . Claiborne wrote The Irresistible Revolution : Living as an Ordinary Radical , his debut book , in 2006 . Haw was a theology graduate student at Villanova University when Jesus for President was released . Claiborne said that the title of the book is not to be taken literally , and that " Jesus ' political manifesto is a terrible plan for running a superpower " . 
 Jesus for President became a bestseller . All proceeds from sales of the book went towards the Jubilee Fund , a nonprofit organization founded by Claiborne and others in support of international community projects . An audiobook edition of Jesus for President was released in 2009 . 
 = = Content = = 
 Jesus for President is structured as a series of loosely interrelated narratives . The book combines practical theology , Biblical theology , Church history , contemporary stories , political manifesto , and Bible stories . The book draws on both the Old and New Testaments , and includes frequent quotations from Church Fathers , such as Justin Martyr and Tertullian . 
 The book is intended to present an accessible account of scholarly findings regarding the New Testament 's teachings on the subject of empire . Likening Jesus to an American political candidate , Jesus for President identifies Luke 4 : 18 @-@ 19 as the commencement speech of Jesus ' campaign , " Jubilee " as his campaign slogan , and the revival of ancient Jubilee economics as his platform . The book asserts that the countercultural themes in the ministry of Jesus , such as those of self @-@ denial , are ignored by the church because the Church is more interested in conforming its members to the state than to the Kingdom of God . The book warns against the lures of political and financial power . While the book suggests that Christians should live <unk> in accordance with Jesus ' teachings , the authors do not prescribe how Christians should accomplish this task . Neither do they advocate restructuring the economic or political systems of the United States . The book promotes pacifism , criticizes the 2003 invasion of Iraq , and expounds liberation theology . 
 Jesus for President is divided into four chapters , the first two of which summarize the Bible from a New Monastic perspective . The summary of the Old Testament argues that the Israelites had a unique political philosophy , but that they failed to live up to its implications . The New Testament summary considers Jesus ' politics and the qualities of the Christian Church . The third chapter suggests implications of this narrative for citizens of the United States , who the authors describe as members of an empire similar to that of the Romans . This chapter argues that the Book of Revelation has more to do with living faithfully in an evil empire than with eschatology . The chapter also asserts that <unk> had generally negative consequences for the Church . The fourth chapter tells of Christians living in countercultural ways that model divine redemption towards others . Other stories involve heterodox economics , defending the homeless , Amish forgiveness , dumpster diving , <unk> robotics , Martin Luther King Jr . , anti @-@ war protests , and The Simple Way . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Claiborne and Haw promoted Jesus for President by going on a U.S. speaking tour of 30 cities . The tour led up to the 2008 United States presidential election , and the book tour was suggestive of a third party candidate campaign for Jesus . The authors ' speeches did not attempt to sway their audiences towards or away from any particular candidates , but rather encouraged them to endorse whichever candidates supported Christian values . 
 CNN 's senior political analyst Bill Schneider predicted that Claiborne 's and Haw 's " impact is likely to be that they will dilute the Evangelical support for the Republican Party and the Evangelical vote will be more up for grabs than it has in many years " . 
 After reading and being impressed by Jesus for President , Ben Cohen of the ice cream company Ben & Jerry 's met with Claiborne . They decided to launch a variety show in September 2011 called Jesus , Bombs , & Ice Cream . Coinciding with the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks , the show called for the military budget of the United States to be decreased . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Secular media = = = 
 Publishers Weekly called Jesus for President " the must @-@ read election @-@ year book for Christian Americans " and an " entertaining yet provocative tour of the Bible 's social and economic order [ that ] makes even the most abstruse <unk> laws come alive for our era . " In a Library Journal review , George Westerlund recommends that large libraries purchase Jesus for President , writing that the book is a good read even for readers who theologically or philosophically differ from Claiborne and Haw . Susan Campbell wrote about the book and the tour in the Hartford Courant , calling the book " bare @-@ knuckle " and " deceptively deep " . 
 = = = Christian media = = = 
 British Baptist minister Steve Chalke called it " a radical manifesto to awaken the Christian political imagination [ to ] what the Church could look like if it placed its faith in Jesus instead of Caesar . " Chalke argues that the book transcends questions of voting and explores more fundamental issues , such as allegiance and faith . 
 American activist David Swanson wrote a three @-@ part review of Jesus for President in Christianity Today , in which he writes that the popularity of the book is due to its " prophetic zeal and prankster 's wit " . Swanson argues that " Claiborne and Haw make a compelling case that the church in America has become much too cozy with the state " , a case that Swanson finds to align with his own personal observations . While agreeing that the gospel should take precedence over secular affairs , Jordan Hylden of Christianity Today writes that Claiborne and Haw advocate for too great a withdrawal from secular politics . Hylden writes that he favors the arguments of Paul the Apostle and Martin Luther , who Hylden claims all reason that Christians should engage with government because God works through such institutions <unk> . 
 Joan <unk> of America , a Jesuit magazine , writes that Jesus for President implicitly supports Christian anarchism . 
 In December 2008 , Mark Tooley , then director of the Institute on Religion and Democracy 's ( IRD ) United Methodist committee , wrote an opinion piece about Jesus for President in the conservative magazine The Weekly Standard . Tooley is heavily critical of the book and of Claiborne , writing , " On so many different levels , Claiborne lacks moral and spiritual perspective . " Tooley argues that Jesus for President is selective in its quotations from Church Fathers and instead relies heavily on the teachings of heterodox theologians , naming specifically Walter <unk> , John Dominic Crossan , and Walter Wink , people that Tooley writes would not " inspire confidence in orthodox Christians . " While praising Claiborne 's story of nonviolence in response to personally being trapped with a friend in an alley by criminals who hit them with sticks , Tooley criticizes Claiborne for not explaining what he would have done in the case of encountering a pregnant woman who was being similarly treated . Christopher Hitchens , an Anglo @-@ American critic of religion , wrote an article in British tabloid newspaper the Sunday Express in response to Tooley 's review . He calls Jesus for President " a terrible @-@ sounding book " and Claiborne " a terrible @-@ sounding person . " Hitchens argues that Claiborne and Tooley are attempting to justify their own views by ascribing them to Jesus , with Claiborne arguing that a Jesus would have supported liberation theology and Tooley arguing that Jesus would have supported neoconservatism . 
 In 2012 , David P. <unk> , director of Mercer University 's Center for Theology and Public Life , named Jesus for President one of the five best books about patriotism , the others being Bonhoeffer 's Ethics ; Bruce Lincoln 's Religion , Empire and Torture ; Reinhold Niebuhr 's Moral Man and Immoral Society ; and A Testament of Hope , a collection of Martin Luther King Jr . ' s speeches and writings . 
 = Kingsley Plantation = 
 Kingsley Plantation ( also known as the Zephaniah Kingsley Plantation Home and Buildings ) is the site of a former estate in Jacksonville , Florida , that was named for an early owner , Zephaniah Kingsley , who spent 25 years there . It is located at the northern tip of Fort George Island at Fort George Inlet , and is part of the Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve managed by the U.S. National Park Service . 
 The plantation was originally 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) , most of which has been taken over by forest ; the structures and grounds of the park now comprise approximately 60 acres ( 242 @,@ 811 @.@ 385 m2 ) . Evidence of Pre @-@ Columbian Timucua life is on the island , as are the remains of a Spanish mission named San Juan del Puerto . Under British rule in 1765 , a plantation was established that cycled through several owners while Florida was transferred back to Spain and then the United States . The longest span of ownership was under Kingsley and his family , a polygamous and multiracial household controlled by and resistant to the issues of race and slavery . 
 Free blacks and several private owners lived at the plantation until it was transferred to the State of Florida in 1955 . It was acquired by the National Park Service in 1991 . The most prominent features of Kingsley Plantation are the owner 's house — a structure of architectural significance built probably between 1797 and 1798 that is cited as being the oldest surviving plantation house in the state — and an attached kitchen house , barn , and remains of 25 <unk> valuable slave cabins that endured beyond the U.S. Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) . The foundations of the house , kitchen , barn and the slave quarters were constructed of cement tabby , making them notably durable . Archeological evidence found in and around the slave cabins has given researchers insight into African traditions among slaves who had recently arrived in North America . 
 Zephaniah Kingsley wrote a defense of slavery and the three @-@ tier social system that acknowledged the rights of free people of color that existed in Florida under Spanish rule . Kingsley briefly served on the Florida Territorial Council , planning the transition when Florida was annexed by the United States . During his time on the council , he attempted to influence Florida lawmakers to recognize free people of color and allow mixed @-@ race children to inherit property . In addition to the architectural qualities , the site is significant as his home and that of his unique family . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Columbian settlement and colonization = = = 
 Fort George Island is located in Duval County , several miles northeast of downtown Jacksonville . It is a marsh island at the mouth of the St. Johns River , surrounded by tidal estuaries , Little Talbot Island , and the Nassau River . The north Atlantic coast of Florida had been inhabited for approximately 12 @,@ 000 years when Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León landed near Cape Canaveral in 1513 . The Spanish met the <unk> , a Timucua tribe , who were the largest group of indigenous people in the region , numbering about 14 @,@ 000 . Bands of Timucua extended into central Florida and south Georgia . An estimated 35 chiefdoms existed in the territory , and their societies were complex with large villages sustained by fishing , hunting , and agriculture , but they frequently warred with each other and unrelated groups of Native Americans . The Spanish concentrated their efforts of exploration and settlement on the Gulf Coast of Florida . By 1562 , Jean Ribault led French explorers to the mouth of the St. Johns River where they built a garrison in 1564 , calling it Fort Caroline . Within 200 years the population of the indigenous people of Florida was decimated by disease and constant fighting . They left behind evidence of their existence in massive middens or shell mounds filled with discarded food byproducts . On Fort George Island , the shells were primarily oysters . 
 Ownership of Florida transferred to the United Kingdom in 1763 . Spanish settlers had established missions — including one on Fort George Island named San Juan del Puerto that eventually gave the nearby St. Johns River its name — but their frequent battles with the Timucua and a decline in mission activity curbed development . When the British controlled Florida , they established several plantations in the region . Richard Hazard owned the first plantation on Fort George Island in 1765 , harvesting indigo with several dozen enslaved Africans . Spain regained ownership of Florida in 1783 after the American Revolution and recruited new Americans with promises of free land . 
 In 1793 , American Revolution veteran John " Lightning " McQueen ( 1751 – 1807 ) was lured to Fort George Island from South Carolina by the Spanish government , which rewarded McQueen with the island . McQueen settled with 300 slaves and constructed a large house in a unique architectural style exhibiting four corner pavilions surrounding a great room . McQueen was soon bankrupt due to misfortunes , and the possession of the plantation turned over to John McIntosh ( 1773 – 1836 ) from Georgia who revived it in 1804 . McIntosh , however , took a leading role in the Patriot Rebellion , an insurgency by Americans to hasten the annexation of Florida to the United States . The rebellion was unsuccessful , and McIntosh fled back into Georgia to escape punishment from the Spanish . 
 = = = Kingsley 's family = = = 
 Born in Bristol , England and educated in London after his family moved to colonial South Carolina , Zephaniah Kingsley ( 1765 – 1843 ) established his career as a slave trader and shipping magnate , which allowed him to travel widely . He settled on Fort George Island in 1814 after leasing it from McIntosh . He purchased the land and buildings for $ 7 @,@ 000 in 1817 ( $ 94 @,@ 019 in 2009 ) . Kingsley owned several plantations around the lower St. Johns River in what is today Jacksonville , and Drayton Island in central Florida ; two of them may have been managed part @-@ time by his wife , a former slave named Anna Madgigine Jai ( 1793 – 1870 ) . Kingsley married Anna in 1806 when she was 13 years old , recently arrived in Cuba from West Africa . He freed her in 1811 and charged her with running his Laurel Grove plantation at Doctors Lake in modern @-@ day Orange Park . His legal emancipation submitted to the Spanish colonial government read 
 Let is be known that I ... possessed as a slave a black woman called Anna , around eighteen years of age , bought as a <unk> [ newly imported African ] in the port of Havana from a slave cargo , who with the permission of the government was introduced here ; the said black woman has given birth to three mulatto children : George , about 3 years 9 months , Martha , 20 months old , an Mary , one month old . And regarding the good qualities shown by the said black woman , the nicety and fidelity which she has shown me , and for other reasons , I have resolved to set her free ... and the same to her three children . 
 Marriages between white plantation owners and African women were common in East Florida . The Spanish government provided for a separate class of free people of color , and encouraged slaves to purchase their freedom . Slavery under Spain in Florida was not considered a lifelong condition , and free blacks were involved in the economic development of the region , many of them owning their own slaves . Anna oversaw 60 slaves at Fort George Island which grew sea island cotton , citrus , corn , sugarcane , beans , and potatoes . John Maxwell , the fourth child , was born in 1824 when Kingsley and Anna lived on Fort George Island . Kingsley also maintained relationships with three other African women who acted as co @-@ wives or concubines : Flora H. , Sarah M. ; and <unk> <unk> . Anna Jai remained the matriarch in the polygamous family . Historian Daniel Schafer posits that Anna Jai would have been familiar with the concepts of polygamy and marrying a slave master to acquire one 's freedom . Visitors to the plantation were invited to a dinner table where Kingsley displayed his multi @-@ racial children with pride . He provided them with the best education he could afford , and considered them a shield from any potential racial uprising . 
 Authors of an ethnological study of slavery at Kingsley Plantation characterized Kingsley as a man of complex paradoxes , defiantly proud of his success as a slaveholder , yet dedicated to his multiracial family . Kingsley published a defense of slavery in 1828 , identifying himself only as " An Inhabitant of Florida " . He rationalized the institution as a necessary condition for any society , beneficial to owner and slave alike , and to the overall economy . He did not consider race the only factor that should determine servitude status , writing , " Few , I think will deny that color and condition , if properly considered , are two very separate qualities ... our legislators ... have mistaken the shadow for the substance , and confounded together two very different things ; thereby substantiating by law a dangerous and inconvenient antipathy , which can have no better foundation than prejudice . " In 1823 President James Monroe appointed Kingsley to Florida 's Territorial Council , where he tried to persuade them to define the rights of free people of color . When it became apparent to him that they could not , he resigned . The council passed laws that increasingly restricted the rights which free blacks enjoyed under Spanish control . The treatise was Kingsley 's response to these restrictions ; he favored the Spanish three @-@ tier system of white landowners , black slaves , and freed blacks . The pamphlet was reprinted again in 1834 , and Southerners used its arguments to defend slavery in debates leading to the Civil War . 
 The Florida Territorial Council passed laws forbidding interracial marriage and the right of free blacks or mixed race descendants to inherit property . To avoid difficulties with the new government in what he termed its " spirit of intolerant prejudice " , Kingsley sent his wives , children , and a few slaves to Haiti , by that time free black republic . His two daughters had already each married white planters and remained in Florida . He sold the plantation to his nephew , Kingsley Beatty Gibbs in 1839 , and transferred some of the slaves to his plantation in San Jose , now a neighborhood in Jacksonville . Kingsley started a plantation in Haiti that was worked by former Fort George Island slaves , who had become indentured servants ; slavery was not allowed in Haiti . They were to earn their freedom in nine years . In 1842 Kingsley gave an interview to the abolitionist Lydia Child . When she asked him if he was aware that his occupation as a slave trader might be perceived as being akin to piracy , he responded " Yes ; and I am glad of it . They will look upon a slaveholder just so , by and by . Slave trading was a very respectable business when I was young . The first merchants in England and America were engaged in it . Some people hide things which they think other people don ’ t like . I never conceal anything . " 
 He went on to exhibit considerable pride in the Haitian plantation built with the help of his sons : 
 I wish you would go there . [ Anna ] would give you the best in the house . You ought to go , to see how happy the human race can be . It is a fine , rich valley , about thirty miles from Port Platte ; heavily timbered with mahogany all round ; well watered ; flowers so beautiful ; fruits in abundance , so delicious that you could not refrain from stopping to eat , till you could eat no more . My sons have laid out good roads , and built bridges and mills ; the people are improving , and everything is prosperous . 
 Kingsley died in the next year , while en route to New York City to work on a land deal . Anna returned to Florida in 1846 to settle an inheritance dispute with some of her husband 's white relatives ; because the will had been made under Spanish law , when inheritance by free blacks was legal , the court ruled in her favor and control of the Kingsley 's holdings in Florida remained with her and her children for several years . Kingsley Beatty Gibbs sold the Fort George Island plantation in 1852 and moved to St Augustine . 
 = = = Post @-@ Kingsley inhabitants = = = 
 Anna Jai moved with about 70 former slaves to the Arlington neighborhood of Jacksonville to live out her remaining years . The ownership of the island and farms immediately following its sale by Gibbs is unknown , but after the American Civil War , the Freedmen 's Bureau managed the island and recently emancipated freedmen lived in the former slave quarters and farmed the land . A New Hampshire farmer named John Rollins purchased the island in 1869 and , finding agriculture in Florida not as successful as he wished , transitioned the island into a tourist resort , building a large luxury hotel and attracting celebrities such as banker William Astor and writer Harriet Beecher Stowe . The slave quarters were displayed as tourist attractions . After the hotel burned down in 1888 , the Rollins family successfully cultivated citrus until a freeze in 1894 destroyed their crop . Rollins ' daughter 's family was the last to live in the main house ; she sold the island to private investors in 1923 . 
 Two clubs were constructed on the island for wealthy Jacksonville residents . One used the plantation house as a headquarters until they constructed their own building . Private clubs were popular until the Great Depression and they subsequently went out of fashion during World War II . The Florida Park Service acquired most of Fort George Island in 1955 , including the plantation houses , barn , and slave quarters , calling it the Kingsley Plantation State Historic Site . An effort to restore the property to its appearance while the Kingsley family was in residence began in 1967 . The Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve was created by the National Park Service and established under President Ronald Reagan in 1988 . Several sites , including Fort Caroline and other ecologically significant properties in Jacksonville , are under the management of the Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve . Kingsley Plantation was transferred to the National Park Service in 1991 . 
 = = Slavery on Fort George Island = = 
 Labor at Kingsley Plantation was carried out by the task system : each slave was given an assigned set of tasks for the day , such as processing 20 – 30 lb ( 9 – 14 kg ) of cotton or constructing three barrels for a slave who was a cooper . When the day 's jobs were completed , slaves were free to do as they chose . Kingsley Beatty Gibbs described the task system in his journal : 
 October 5 , 1841 — No work was done today , as all the people have it to gather their own crop — It is a rule which we have , to give all the negroes one day in the spring to plant , and one day in the fall to reap , and as there is a rule on Sea Island plantations fixing the tasks required each day to be done , it occurs , during the long days of summer , that the hand is generally done his task by 2 p.m. , often sooner , so they have abundance of time to work their own crop , fish , etc . , etc . 
 This task system of slavery was common among sea island plantations in the Southeastern United States . In contrast , cotton and tobacco plantations in Virginia and other parts of the South practiced the gang system , where an overseer who was also a slave drove slaves to work the entire day . 
 Slaves on Fort George Island were African or first generation African @-@ American . Records and archeological information show they were Igbo and <unk> from Nigeria , and others from the area around what is today Guinea , and a few from Zanzibar . Archeologist Charles H. Fairbanks received a Florida Park Service grant to study artifacts found at the slave quarters . His findings , published in 1968 , initiated further interest and research in African @-@ American archeology in the U.S. Concentrating on two particular cabins bordering on Palmetto Avenue , Fairbanks found cooking pots used in fireplaces , animal bones — fish , pigs , raccoons , and turtles — discarded as food byproducts , and musket balls and fishing weights . 
 Fairbanks described Kingsley as " an unusually permissive slave owner " who wrote about the physical superiority of Africans to Europeans , armed his slaves for protection , and gave them padlocks for their cabins . Historian Daniel Stowell suggests that the cabins and Kingsley 's hands @-@ off approach to slave management was intended to prevent the slaves from running away . Kingsley himself wrote about not interfering in his slaves ' family lives and " encouraged as much as possible dancing , merriment and dress , for which Saturday afternoon and night , and Sunday morning were dedicated ... they were perfectly honest and obedient , and appeared quite happy , having no fear but that of offending me ; and I hardly ever had occasion to apply other correction than shaming them . " 
 Kingsley used the plantation as his slave trading headquarters , training slaves for specific tasks to increase their value at sale . He developed them as skilled artisans and educated them about agriculture and planting . Those who had been trained by Kingsley fetched a much higher price at sale , on average 50 percent higher than market price . A 2006 excavation sponsored by the University of Florida uncovered artifacts from the slave cabins , such as the tools the slaves used . In one cabin an intact sacrificed chicken on top of an egg was unearthed , adding evidence to the hypothesis that African slaves kept many of their traditions alive in North America . Archeologists also discovered evidence of an added @-@ on porch to one of the cabins facing away from the main house , an atypical feature for a slave cabin , as owners and overseers constructed quarters to be within their view at all times . 
 The slave houses were constructed out of tabby and built by the slaves probably in the 1820s or 1830s , although evidence exists that indicates two of them were inhabited by 1814 . Tabby was constructed of shells left over from Timucua middens , burned by the barrel @-@ full in open pits or kilns , then pounded into lime particles , mixed with water , sand , and whole oyster or clam shells , then poured into wooden foundations about 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) high , and set to dry . The process was repeated and stacked until the desired height of the wall was reached . The floors of the kitchen house and the basement of the owner 's house were also constructed of tabby . The material made the houses remarkably durable , resistant to weather and insects , better insulated than wood , and the ingredients were accessible and cheap , although labor @-@ intensive . The slave quarters at Kingsley Plantation are widely considered some of the best surviving examples of the use of this building material . 
 Each cabin consisted of a room , fireplace , and sleeping loft . The arrangement of the quarters is distinctive : there were originally 32 cabins laid out in a semicircular arc interrupted by the main thoroughfare to the plantation , Palmetto Avenue . This formation is unique in plantations in the antebellum U.S. The historian Daniel Stowell surmises that it may have given slave families a modicum of privacy , although he also suggests overseers and slave managers may have arranged the quarters to be able to watch all the slaves from the owner 's house at the same time . Author Daniel Schafer , however , suggests that Anna Jai may have been responsible for this layout . West African villages were commonly constructed in a circular pattern with the king or ruling family living in the center . 
 In the 1890s John Rollins deconstructed several of the slave cabins to build a boat house and dock . The archeological significance of the site is considerable as the majority of slave quarters in the Southern United States were not built with quality materials , and most quarters were destroyed after emancipation . Six graves thought to contain slaves were unearthed in 2011 by archeologists from the University of Florida . The bodies ranged in age from infants to an elderly woman ; three were adults who were probably born in West Africa . 
 = = Kingsley 's house and other structures = = 
 The main residence of the Fort George plantation is a unique two @-@ story house that was probably constructed between 1797 and 1798 by John McQueen , who indicated in a letter at the time that he had built a comfortable house for himself . The house — resembling 17th century British gentry homes — has a large center room and four one @-@ story pavilions at each corner that allowed air to circulate through them to keep them cooler in the summer ; each was a bedroom that had a fireplace to heat more efficiently in the winter . The second story of the house has two large rooms . On the roof is a deck and the house faces Fort George Inlet and features two porches on the front and rear of the house . A brick walkway joined the back porch to a wharf on the inlet while Kingsley was in residence . The Florida Division of Historical Resources indicates it may be the oldest plantation house in the state . 
 The main house protected John McQueen 's family and neighbors during attacks from invading Creeks in 1802 ; he wrote that at one time 26 people took refuge there . Following raids from Americans during the Patriot Rebellion in 1813 , the house was gutted and vandalized . Plantations as far south as New Smyrna were destroyed by rebels fleeing into Georgia . When Kingsley arrived , there were no metal fixtures in the doors and the wooden slave quarters had been burned down . John Rollins added sections to the east and west sides of the house in between the pavilions in the 1890s and removed at least three of the fireplace chimneys from the pavilions . One of the clubs that owned the island in the 1920s added electricity . 
 Next to the main house was a two @-@ story kitchen house that was called " Ma 'am Anna House " while Anna Jai was on Fort George Island . It was probably built in the 1820s and doubled as a center for food preparation on the ground floor and Anna Jai 's residence with her children on the second . In West Africa , polygamy was not uncommon , and wives often lived in separate quarters from their husbands . Kingsley 's nephew and his wife also lived on the grounds and Gibbs probably used a part of the second floor for an office . The main house and Ma 'am Anna House were surrounded by a grove of orange , lemon , and banana trees with occasional ornamental crepe <unk> . Between 1869 and 1877 Rollins built a roof over the walkway between the kitchen house and the main house . 
 A barn constructed of tabby sits 150 feet ( 46 m ) from the owner 's house . Two wells have survived since Kingsley 's ownership and two tombs of unknown origin constructed of tabby before Kingsley came to own the island are also located near the plantation . Ruins of another tabby house sits near the entrance of Palmetto Avenue . Its origins are unclear . It has been called the <unk> <unk> House for Kingsley 's fourth wife , as oral history related that it was left to her and her daughter Fatima in Kingsley 's will . More recently it has been referred to as Thomson Tabby House named for a planter who died perhaps while constructing it . 
 = = Activities and restoration = = 
 Kingsley Plantation currently showcases the remains of 23 slave houses out of 32 original cabins , located approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) south of the main owner 's house . One of the slave houses has been restored to appear as it did in the early 19th century ; others are in various states of repair or ruin . The kitchen house features a display about slavery on the island , and the barn and garden are also on display . The planter 's house is unfurnished and currently closed for structural rehabilitation . Maintenance of the historical structures is the most significant work being done at Kingsley Plantation . The kitchen and owner 's house were closed in 2005 due to severe structural damage caused by termites and humidity . The kitchen building was restored in 2006 , but work is ongoing for the owner 's house . Despite the durability of the slave quarters , they are vulnerable to vandalism , and each cabin shows evidence of damage . While there is no slated completion date for the rehabilitation of the owner 's house , one room of the kitchen house is open and contains exhibits . 
 Since 1998 Kingsley Plantation has hosted an annual one @-@ day event in October called the Kingsley Heritage Celebration that coincides with the Kingsley family reunion . Several relatives of Kingsley and Anna Jai are notable . Kingsley 's youngest sister 's daughter , Anna McNeill , participated with her mother in attempting to block Anna Jai from inheriting Kingsley 's property . McNeill served as the model for her son , the artist James Whistler , in his Arrangement in Grey and Black : The Artist 's Mother , popularly known as Whistler 's Mother . Kingsley Beatty Gibbs ' brother was George Couper Gibbs , a planter in St. Johns County , south of Fort George Island near St. Augustine . Former governor of South Carolina Duncan Clinch Heyward is descended from him . 
 Another branch of Kingsley descendants lives in the Dominican Republic near where John Maxwell Kingsley lived in Haiti . Kingsley and Anna Jai are the great grandparents of Mary Kingsley Sammis , who married Abraham Lincoln Lewis , one of Florida 's first black millionaires and an original investor in the all @-@ black American Beach . The Kingsley @-@ Sammis @-@ Lewis @-@ Betsch family has been active in Jacksonville 's black community for decades . Spelman College 's first black female president , <unk> Betsch Cole , is descended from Lewis and Sammis . The Heritage Celebration was moved to Black History Month in February 2008 ; Cole was the keynote speaker of the 2009 Kingsley Heritage Celebration . Interpretive events such as music , storytelling , and ranger @-@ led talks about history and archeology regularly occur during the Heritage Celebration . 
 = Harriet Jones = 
 Harriet Jones is a fictional character played by Penelope Wilton in the long @-@ running British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Having worked previously with lead writer and executive producer Russell T Davies , Wilton was keen to involve herself with his 2005 revival of Doctor Who after he sought to cast her . Jones is introduced in the two @-@ part story " Aliens of London " and " World War Three " as a Member of Parliament who aids the Ninth Doctor against an alien invasion of London . The episode introduces a running joke associated with the character which would see her frequently introduce herself by holding up her ID and stating her name and rank ; in subsequent episodes this was usually met with the response " Yes , I / we know who you are , " even occurring with The Daleks and The Sycorax . 
 Wilton returned for the series ' 2005 Christmas special as Davies wanted to include a familiar character whose presence would ease the transition following a change in the series ' lead actor . Despite her character having been introduced as fair minded and hard working , Harriet is depicted as an uncompromising Prime Minister , which led to comparisons to real life politicians . Response to the character 's political decisions prompted mixed commentary from the media ; some reviewers felt that the character had acted unreasonably whilst others sympathised with her actions and felt her scripted political demise was unjust . 
 Wilton 's last appearance in 2008 coincided with producer Phil Collinson 's final episodes ; she was keen to make a final return as she had been there for Collinson 's first episodes as producer . Harriet is killed off in the penultimate episode of the show 's fourth series in which she sacrifices her own life to help prevent a Dalek takeover of Earth . Harriet 's final scenes were designed to complete a tripartite story arc and to give the character redemption . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Harriet Jones is introduced in the 2005 episode " Aliens of London " as an MP for the fictional constituency of <unk> North . Her political party is not stated , although she describes herself as not one of the " babes " , " just a faithful backbencher . " She is caught up in events investigated by the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) and his companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) in London when an alien spacecraft crash @-@ lands and the Cabinet is infiltrated by aliens named the Slitheen . She finds herself trapped with the Doctor and Rose inside 10 Downing Street and as the only elected representative present gives the Doctor the order to launch a Harpoon missile , destroying the building but killing the Slitheen who were about to trigger nuclear war . The Doctor tells Rose that Jones is destined to be elected as Prime Minister for three successive terms and be the architect of a period known as Britain 's ' Golden Age ' . 
 Harriet returns in 2005 Christmas special " The Christmas Invasion " , set several months later when the character is now Prime Minister . Jones oversees the launch of the Guinevere Space Probe which is captured by an invading Sycorax spaceship . Although the invasion is averted by the Doctor ( now David Tennant ) Jones orders the covert Torchwood organisation to destroy the retreating Sycorax ship , arguing that there will come a time when the Doctor cannot protect Earth and so she must do what she can to defend it . The Doctor reacts furiously to what he perceives as cold blooded murder and tells her that he can bring her down with just six words : " Don 't you think she looks tired ? " In the episode 's dénouement , Jones faces rumours of ill @-@ health and a vote of no confidence . In the 2007 episode " The Sound of Drums " it is stated that the Master , running for Prime Minister under the alias Mr Saxon , appeared right after Harriet Jones ' downfall . 
 The character makes a final appearance in the 2008 episode " The Stolen Earth " where it is revealed she has continued to work in defence of Earth , maintaining that she was correct in not abdicating responsibility for Earth 's protection to the Doctor . As the Earth surrenders to an invading army of Dalek warships , Jones uses a sentient " subwave " network to connect with other allies of the Doctor . The network was created for a time when — as Jones had predicted — the Doctor would fail to protect the Earth in a time of crisis . With the aid of Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) and Sarah Jane Smith ( Elisabeth Sladen ) Jones amplifies the sub @-@ wave signal broadcast from her own home , allowing the Doctor to return to Earth at the expense of her own location becoming visible to the Daleks . As a trio of Daleks approach her she proclaims defiantly that they will fail as they know nothing of humanity , before they exterminate her . Rose informs the Doctor of Jones ' sacrifice in the following episode , " Journey 's End " . 
 = = Casting and character development = = 
 The role of Harriet Jones was written specially for Penelope Wilton by the series ' lead writer and executive producer Russell T Davies . Wilton was drawn to the role after working with Davies on his show Bob and Rose and being impressed by his writing . Commenting on Jones ' role in the two part " Aliens of London " / " World War Three " Wilton characterised her as " straight as a die " and " the kind of caring politician that anyone would like to have . " When faced with the deadly Slitheen , Wilton remarks that she demonstrates " tremendous resilience and courage . " . At the end of the episode the Doctor remembers that Harriet will one day become Prime Minister . Speaking in April 2005 , Wilton expressed interest in returning to the series to explore the character further . 
 After Christopher Eccleston 's departure from the series ' lead role , Davies was eager to include elements of the 2005 season in David Tennant 's Christmas Day introductory episode to reassure viewers discomforted by the change of lead actor . To this end he and producer Phil Collinson secured the return of Wilton 's character in her capacity as Prime Minister . In the dénouement of " The Christmas Invasion " the character 's government is brought down by the new Doctor after she orders Torchwood to shoot down a fleeing alien ship . Davies remarks that as Prime Minister Jones is " out of her depth " and " does the wrong thing " ; he intended her downfall to reflect the episode 's anti @-@ war message . Producer Julie Gardner felt the end sequence " added so much of another layer " to the episode . Collinson mentioned on the DVD commentary for the episode that he " tried so hard " to get Davies to change the ending ; he felt the Doctor would forgive her because " he would understand " her decision . Collinson also felt that Harriet 's downfall could be seen as a " hark to Thatcher " as one of Thatcher 's aides had reportedly stated her looking tired ; Davies acknowledged a parallel with events in Whitehall and felt the script underlined the power of rumours . He also " [ loved ] the fact that I feel sad " because of the character 's political demise . In his column in Doctor Who Magazine Davies explains his intention that by the Doctor ending Jones ' career early , a " gap " was created in history that the Master ( John Simm ) was then able to exploit and become Prime Minister . He had originally planned to allude to this in the script , but it was cut when he realised that the Doctor was already burdened by enough guilt . 
 Davies wrote Harriet Jones into the script for the fourth series finale episode " The Stolen Earth " before Wilton was approached about reprising the role because Julie Gardner and Phil Collinson wished for the character to have a satisfying and redemptive conclusion . Harriet Jones ' story arc thus formed a tripartite storyline which consisted of an introduction , animosity towards the Doctor , and redemption . Davies was aware that Wilton was " very hard to book " and restricted her appearance to one scene to make negotiations easier ; had Wilton declined , Davies planned to replace her with either Donna , Mr Copper ( Clive Swift ) from " Voyage of the Damned " , or Elton from " Love & Monsters " . Wilton accepted unconditionally because she " would do anything for ... Davies " and she wished to act in Phil Collinson 's last filming block as producer as her first appearance in " Aliens of London " was filmed in the first production block of the first series . Wilton 's scenes in her final episode were filmed in a single day from a cottage in Dinas Powys . Recalling her final episode , Wilton described the filming experience as " fabulous fun " remarking that " I got to sacrifice myself to save the world . " Collinson and Davies lamented the character 's death : Collinson stated " I can 't bear the thought she 's dead " and argued that she somehow survived , whilst Davies stated in Doctor Who Magazine issue 397 that " when [ significant characters a writer creates ] have to die , it 's a genuinely emotional time " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern likened the character to Brigitte Nyborg ( <unk> <unk> Knudsen ) in the Danish series Borgen , explaining that the two " form a very small club of politicians in TV drama who are hugely sympathetic , female and enjoy a rapid rise to PM " . Mulkern felt that Wilton was " a major saving grace " in the " disappointing " " Aliens of London " / " World War Three " . The Daily Telegraph 's Hugh Davies commented on a number of political allusions made through Jones ' characterisation as Prime Minister in " The Christmas Invasion " . He felt that her rebuttal of aid from the US president after aliens invade is a " swipe at Blair and Bush over the invasion of Iraq " . He also compared Jones ' destruction of the fleeing Sycorax — a decision heavily criticised by the Doctor — to Margaret Thatcher 's decision to sink the Argentine warship General Belgrano during the Falklands war . Russell T Davies responded to observations of political commentary by stating that there is " absolutely an anti @-@ war message " present in the episode due to Christmas being " a day of peace " . In their unauthorised guide to Doctor Who , Graeme Burk and Robert Smith felt that Wilton delivered the " standout performance " of the Christmas special " stating that , whilst the character remained recognisable , it was " fascinating watching her harder edge emerge from the woman we know and love " . Of Harriet Jones ' development , Stuart <unk> of DVD Talk felt that she begins as a " charming neophyte minister " but becomes " suddenly much less charming at the end of " Christmas Invasion , " when she becomes just another politician " . However , Cliff Chapman of Den of Geek felt that the episode 's denouement was flawed by trying to " make out that Harriet Jones is awful for doing something perfectly reasonable . " Similarly , io9 's Chris Cummins commented that the character had " noble intentions " and that she was proved right upon her return in the fourth series . 
 Charlie Jane Anders of io9 placed the " glowing nobility " of Jones ' sacrifice in " The Stolen Earth " as the most prominent of the " super @-@ heroics " displayed by the returning characters in the episode . Though tired of a running joke throughout the series where Jones would introduce herself only to be told " I know who you are , " Anders remarks that in the face of her demise " she was able to turn her usual schtick into a moving speech of defiance . " The Daily Telegraph 's Chris Hastings felt that by the time she is killed off , Harriet was " one of the show ’ s most popular characters " . SFX placed the character of Harriet Jones at number 12 in a 2009 article listing the 27 things they loved best about the revival of Doctor Who , citing the running joke associated with the character . In March 2015 Dan Wilson of Metro listed Harriet as one of the ten best original characters introduced to Doctor Who since 2005 , describing her as a " complex woman " who " came good in the end " . 
 = 1926 Louisiana hurricane = 
 The 1926 Louisiana hurricane caused widespread devastation to the United States Gulf Coast , particularly in Louisiana . The third tropical cyclone and hurricane of the 1926 Atlantic hurricane season , it formed from a broad area of low pressure in the central Caribbean Sea on August 20 . Moving to the northwest , the storm slowly intensified , reaching tropical storm strength on August 21 and subsequently attaining hurricane strength after passing through the Yucatán Channel . The hurricane steadily intensified as it recurved northwards in the Gulf of Mexico , before reaching peak intensity just prior to landfall near Houma , Louisiana on August 25 with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . After moving inland , the tropical cyclone moved to the west and quickly weakened , before dissipating on August 27 . 
 The hurricane 's strong storm surge at landfall caused extensive damage to coastal regions , especially lighthouses . Strong winds caused severe infrastructural and crop damage , destroying homes and disrupting communications . Heavy rainfall , peaking at 14 @.@ 5 in ( 370 mm ) in Donaldsonville , Louisiana , also helped to damage crops . Widespread power outages also occurred in areas along the Gulf Coast . 25 deaths were reported as a result of the hurricane , with damages estimates totaling $ 6 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical depression first formed on August 20 in the central Caribbean Sea from a broad area of low pressure , based on weather reports from weather stations and ships in the vicinity . Moving steadily to the west @-@ northwest towards the western Caribbean , the disturbance slowly intensified , attaining tropical storm strength by 1200 UTC the next day . Prior to the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project , however , the system was analyzed to be an open trough up until August 22 . The tropical storm began to move more towards the west in the Gulf of Mexico after clipping the Guanahacabibes Peninsula — the westernmost region of Cuba — late on August 22 . 
 Once in the Gulf of Mexico on August 22 , the tropical storm continued to intensify , reaching hurricane strength early the next day north of the Yucatán Peninsula . A ship in the hurricane 's vicinity reported a barometric pressure of 994 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 36 inHg ) , and other ships also reported similarly low pressures . Beginning on August 24 , the system began to curve northwards towards the Louisiana coast in response to a nearby cold front . The hurricane continued to intensify as it moved northwards , reaching Category 2 hurricane intensity the same day and subsequently the equivalent of a Category 3 hurricane on August 25 . A ship reported an eye associated with the system , observing 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) winds with a pressure of 959 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 32 inHg ) at 2100 UTC that day . 
 The major hurricane intensified up until making landfall near Houma , Louisiana at 2300 UTC late on August 25 , with winds estimated at 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and an estimated minimum barometric pressure of 955 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 20 inHg ) , based on a pressure report of 959 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 32 inHg ) in Houma . Maximum sustained winds extended 23 mi ( 37 km ) from the hurricane 's center . Once over land , however , the hurricane rapidly weakened . By 1200 UTC on August 26 , the system had already degenerated to a tropical storm , while still located over Louisiana near Baton Rouge . The next day , the storm weakened further to tropical depression strength as it moved towards the west , before degenerating into an open trough of low pressure near Hillsboro , Texas by 1800 UTC on August 27 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In preparation for the oncoming hurricane , the weather forecast office in New Orleans began to issue tropical cyclone warnings and watches and advisories for the storm on August 23 . The first storm warnings were issued for areas of the United States Gulf Coast between New Orleans and Matagorda , Texas at 10 : 30 p.m CDT ( 0430 UTC ) that day , indicating an approaching system with considerable intensity . As the hurricane unexpectedly recurved to the north the next day , the previously issued storm warning was shifted eastward to include areas from Morgan City , Louisiana to Galveston , Texas , while a hurricane warning was issued by the weather forecast office for areas between Morgan City and Mobile , Alabama at 10 : 00 p.m. CDT ( 0400 UTC ) . A storm warning was also placed for areas east of Mobile to Apalachicola , Florida . After the hurricane rapidly weakened over land , warnings and advisories from the New Orleans weather office related to the storm were discontinued by 9 : 00 p.m. ( 0500 UTC ) on August 25 . The warnings were communicated to potentially affected areas via mail , telegraph , and other forms of communication . During the time that the hurricane was approaching the coast , the United States Weather Bureau also began experimentally transmitting surface weather analysis maps to ships by radio . Small craft offshore of Mobile were recalled to the Port of Mobile , while floating dock property was removed in New Orleans . Due to the potential affects of the hurricane on the cotton industry , cotton stock markets reported gains of eight to fifteen points from the first trades , with stock prices closing with a net gain as high as 24 points . 
 = = Impact = = 
 A storm surge of 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) was reported in Terrebonne Parish , Louisiana . At Timbalier Bay , tides were 10 ft ( 3 m ) above average . The New Canal Light was damaged by the strong wind and waves . Previously damaged by the 1915 New Orleans hurricane , the new damage instigated a project to raise the lighthouse by 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) . The third Timbalier Bay lighthouse was also damaged by the hurricane . Several small fishing schooners were lost during the storm after failing to evacuate to ports prior to the storm . Upstream of the Mississippi River near Donaldsonville , Louisiana , a boat sank . 
 Strong hurricane force winds were reported along the Louisiana coast at landfall . Grand Isle reported sustained winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , while gusts in Thibodaux and <unk> were estimated at 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Three churches , a warehouse , and ten stores were destroyed in Thibodaux . A weather station in New Orleans observed a peak wind gust of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) . Severe damage was reported between New Orleans and Baton Rouge , which included uprooted trees and displaced barns . Roads were also blocked by debris . Window damage caused by strong winds was reported in New Orleans . Baton Rouge was affected by a power outage , resulting in $ 20 @,@ 000 in losses to the local electric company . Communication wires were downed in Morgan City , preventing communication with other cities . Houses were also unroofed in the city by strong winds . A ferry was also wrecked by the hurricane offshore of Morgan Point . In Houma , an estimated 90 % of sugar cane was lost due to the hurricane . The city 's <unk> was also destroyed , along with an Episcopal church . Three passenger trains along the Southern Pacific Railroad were detained in Avondale , Louisiana after winds were determined to be too unsafe for rail operations . The strong winds and rain also caused a mail plane to crash . In Tulane University , a chemistry building was destroyed by a fire during the hurricane . Several other fires were reported in various areas of New Orleans . 
 The hurricane also dropped heavy rains along the coast , which were increased by atmospheric instability in the region just prior to the storm 's landfall . Rainfall peaked in Donaldsonville , Louisiana , where 14 @.@ 5 in ( 370 mm ) of rain was reported in a 24 – hour period from August 25 to the 26th . 24 – hour rainfall records were set in 11 locations , including Donaldsonville . The rains destroyed a pecan orchard in Schriever , Louisiana , and damaged crops in Crowley , Louisiana . Other rainfall amounts of at least 3 in ( 76 mm ) were widespread across the coast . Outside of Louisiana , rainfall peaked at 10 in ( 250 mm ) in the Florida Panhandle , with localized rainfall measurements of at least 5 in ( 130 mm ) The hurricane caused 25 deaths and an estimated $ 6 million in damages , of which $ 4 million were attributed to infrastructural damage . After the storm , the American Red Cross sent relief to Houma , Louisiana and other affected regions to assist in rehabilitation work . 
 = Tessa Ludwick = 
 Tessa Ludwick ( born October 5 , 1988 ) is a Korean American actress from Apollo Beach , Florida . She began acting at age five , when she held a lead role in Allegra 's Window , a Nick Jr. children 's television program show taped at Universal Studios in Orlando , Florida . When filming on Allegra 's Window ended in May 1996 , seven @-@ year @-@ old Ludwick went from Allegra 's Window to a lead role in Big Bag , a live action television puppet program for preschoolers on the Cartoon Network . At 8 , she landed the role of Kate , an orphan girl in the touring Broadway musical Annie , the 20th Anniversary . For the next eight months , she toured the United States and Canada with the musical , during which time Ludwick gave eight performances per week . 
 In 2003 , Ludwick appeared as the character Yumi in thirteen , an autobiographical drama film based on American film actress Nikki Reed 's experiences as a 12 and 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl . In 2004 , Ludwick appeared on Movie Surfers , a Disney Channel mini @-@ show where four teenagers go behind the scenes to report on Walt Disney @-@ related films . Three years later in June 2007 , Ludwick began work on Teen Witch the Musical , a stage musical based on the 1989 fantasy @-@ comedy film Teen Witch . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Tessa Ludwick was born October 5 , 1988 in Seoul , South Korea . Ludwick 's career began at age two and a half when Ludwick saw a television advertisement about modeling and begged her mother to call the number . Her modeling led to acting roles . 
 In the summer of 1994 at age five , Ludwick spent time reading books but took time off to go to Six Flags Over Georgia , a 230 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 93 km2 ) theme park located west of Atlanta , in Austell . In September of that year , Ludwick attended the first grade at Apollo Beach Elementary . While attending Apollo Beach Elementary , Ludwick held a lead role in Allegra 's Window , a children 's television program shown taped at Universal Studios in Orlando , Florida and shown on U.S. television programming block Nick Jr . 
 When filming on Allegra 's Window ended in May 1996 , seven @-@ year @-@ old Ludwick began a lead role in Big Bag , a live action television puppet program for preschoolers that was produced by Sesame Workshop and aired from 1996 to 1998 on the Cartoon Network . 
 = = Television , Broadway , and film = = 
 Ludwick was drawn away in 1997 from Big Bag to act in the role of Kate in Annie , the 20th Anniversary , the Broadway musical on tour revival of the 1977 Broadway theatre production of Annie . The Annie , the 20th Anniversary tour spanned the United States and Canada from October 1997 through June 1998 , during which time Ludwick gave eight performances per week . The Buffalo News noted that her November 1997 performance as the orphan girl Kate at Buffalo , New York 's Shea 's Performing Arts Center crafted a personality for the character whose " naturalness [ far exceeded ] that of the original Broadway cast . " Characterized at that time as " bright , bubbly and [ bringing ] a sparkle wherever she goes , " Ludwick additionally made the honor roll in Hillsborough County 's program for gifted students in 1998 . A year later , Ludwick became a spokesperson for Kids with a Cause , a youth organization based in California dedicated to improving the quality of life of children who suffer from poverty , lack of education , or health @-@ related issues . 
 When she was 13 , Ludwick played the character Yumi in thirteen , a 2003 autobiographical drama film based on American film actress Nikki Reed 's experiences as a 12 and 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl . About a year later , Ludwick appeared on Movie Surfers , a Disney Channel mini @-@ show where four teenagers go behind the scenes to report on Walt Disney @-@ related films . After this successful career , she starred in Ned 's Declassified School Survival Guide as Jennifer Tu . Tessa has also appeared on a special " Seventh <unk> edition " of the game show The Weakest Link . Where she made it to the final round and won $ 77 @,@ 000 , beating Jill . 
 = Jean @-@ François Champollion = 
 Jean @-@ François Champollion ( Champollion le jeune ; 23 December 1790 – 4 March 1832 ) was a French scholar , philologist and orientalist , known primarily as the decipherer of the Egyptian hieroglyphs and a founding figure in the field of <unk> . A child prodigy in philology , he gave his first public paper on the decipherment of Demotic in 1806 , and already as a young man held many posts of honor in scientific circles , and spoke Coptic and Arabic fluently . During the early 19th @-@ century French culture experienced a period of ' Egyptomania ' , brought on by Napoleon 's discoveries in Egypt during his campaign there ( 1797 – 1801 ) which also brought to light the trilingual Rosetta Stone . Scholars debated the age of the Egyptian civilization and the function and nature of the hieroglyphic script , which language if any it recorded , and the degree to which the signs were phonetic ( representing speech sounds ) or ideographic ( recording semantic concepts directly ) . Many thought that the script was only used for sacred and ritual functions , and that as such it was unlikely to be decipherable since it was tied to esoteric and philosophical ideas , and did not record historical information . The significance of Champollion 's decipherment was that he showed these assumptions to be wrong , and made it possible to begin to retrieve the many kinds of information recorded by the ancient Egyptians . 
 Champollion , a liberal and progressive minded man , lived in a period of political turmoil in France which continuously threatened to disrupt his research in various ways . During the Napoleonic wars he was able to avoid conscription , but his Napoleonic allegiances meant that he was considered suspect by the subsequent Royalist regime . His own actions , sometimes brash and reckless , did not help his case . His relations with important political and scientific figures of the time , such as Joseph Fourier and Silvestre de Sacy helped him , although in some periods he lived exiled from the scientific community . 
 In 1820 Champollion embarked in earnest on the project of decipherment of the hieroglyphic script , soon overshadowing the achievements of British polymath Thomas Young who had made the first advances in decipherment before 1819 . In 1822 Champollion published his first breakthrough in the decipherment of the Rosetta hieroglyphs , showing that the Egyptian writing system was a combination of phonetic and ideographic signs – the first such script discovered . In 1824 he published a Précis in which he detailed the decipherment of the hieroglyphic script demonstrating the values of the phonetic and ideographic signs . In 1829 he traveled to Egypt where he was able to read many hieroglyphic texts that had never before been studied , and brought home a large body of new drawings of hieroglyphic inscriptions . Home again he was given a professorship in <unk> , but only lectured a few times before his health , ruined by the hardships of the Egyptian journey , forced him to give up teaching . He died in Paris in 1832 , 41 years old . His grammar of Ancient Egyptian was published posthumously . 
 During his life as well as long after his death intense discussions over the merits of his decipherment were carried out among Egyptologists . Some faulted him for not having given sufficient credit to the early discoveries of Young , accusing him of plagiarism , and others long disputed the accuracy of his decipherments . But with subsequent findings and confirmations of his readings by scholars building on his work , gradually led to general acceptance of his work . Although some still argue that he should have acknowledged the contributions of Young , his decipherment is now universally accepted and has been the basis for all further developments in the field . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Upbringing and education = = = 
 Jean @-@ François Champollion was the last of seven children ( two of whom died before he was born ) . He was raised in humble circumstances ; his father Jacques Champollion was a book trader from <unk> near Grenoble who had settled in the small town of Figeac ( <unk> ) in the Department of Lot . His father was a notorious drunk , and his mother seems to have been mostly an absent figure in the life of young Champollion , who was mostly raised by his older brother Jacques @-@ Joseph . One biographer even speculated that Champollion was not in fact the son of Jacques Champollion 's wife Jeanne @-@ Françoise <unk> , but the result of an extramarital affair . It was Jacques @-@ Joseph who taught his brother to read , and supported his education . His brother also may have been part of the source of Champollion 's interest in Egypt , since as a young man he wanted to join Napoleon 's Egyptian expedition , and often regretted not being able to go . Often known as the younger brother of better known Jacques @-@ Joseph , Jean @-@ François was often called Champollion le Jeune ( the young ) . Later when his brother became the more famous of the two , Jacques added the town of his birth as a second surname and hence is often referred to as Champollion @-@ Figeac , in contrast to his brother Champollion . Although studious and largely self @-@ educated , Jacques did not have Jean @-@ François ' genius for language ; however , he was talented at earning a living , and supported Jean @-@ François for most of his life . 
 In 1802 Champollion began studies at the school of Abbé <unk> , where his gift for languages first became evident . He started out learning Latin and Greek , but quickly progressed to Hebrew and other Semitic languages such as Arabic , Syriac and Chaldean . It was while a student here that he took up interest in Ancient Egypt . At age 11 he came to the attention to the prefect of Grenoble , Joseph Fourier , who had accompanied Napoleon Bonaparte on the Egyptian expedition which had discovered the Rosetta Stone . An accomplished scholar in addition to a well known mathematical physicist , Fourier had been entrusted by Napoleon with the publication of the results of the expedition in the monumental series of publications titled Description de l 'Égypte . One biographer has stated that Fourier invited the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Champollion to his home and showed him his collection of Ancient Egyptian artefacts and documents . Champollion was enthralled , and upon seeing the hieroglyphs and hearing that they were unintelligible , he declared that he would be the one to succeed in reading them . Whether or not the report of this visit is true , Fourier did go on to become one of Champollion 's most important allies and supporters , and surely had an important role in instilling his interest in Ancient Egypt . 
 From 1804 he studied at a lycée in Grenoble , but he hated its strict curriculum which only allowed him to study oriental languages one day per week , and he begged his brother to move him to a different school . Nonetheless at the lycée he took up the study of Coptic , which would become his main linguistic interest for years to come and prove crucial in his approach to decipherment of the hieroglyphs . He had a chance to practice his Coptic when he met Dom Raphaël de <unk> , a former Coptic Christian monk and Arabic translator to Napoleon , who visited Grenoble in 1805 . By 1806 Jean @-@ Jacques was making preparations to bring his younger brother to Paris to study at the University . Before leaving however Champollion presented his Essay on the Geographical Description of Egypt before the Conquest of Cambyses before the Academy of Grenoble whose members were so impressed that they admitted him to the Academy . 
 From 1807 to 1809 Champollion studied in Paris , under Silvestre de Sacy , the first Frenchman to attempt to read the Rosetta stone , and with orientalist Louis @-@ Mathieu <unk> , and with Raphaël de <unk> who was now in Paris . Here he perfected his Arabic and Persian , in addition to the languages that he had already acquired . He was so immersed in his studies that he took up the habit of dressing in Arab clothing and calling himself Al <unk> , the Arab translation of le jeune . He divided his time between the College of France , the Special School of Oriental Languages , the National Library where his brother was a librarian and the Commission of Egypt , the institution in charge of publishing the findings of the Egyptian expedition . In 1808 he first began studying the Rosetta stone , working from a copy made by the Abbé de <unk> . Working independently he was able to confirm some of the readings of the demotic previously made by Johan David Åkerblad in 1802 . 
 In 1810 , he returned to Grenoble to take up a seat as joint professor of Ancient History at the newly reopened Grenoble University . His salary as an assistant professor at Grenoble was fixed at 750 francs , a quarter of the salary received by full professors . 
 Never well off and struggling to make ends meet , he also suffered since his youth from chronically bad health , including gout and tinnitus . His health first began to deteriorate during his time in Paris , where the dank climate and unsanitary environment did not agree with him . 
 = = = Political trouble during the Napoleonic Wars = = = 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , Champollion was a young bachelor and thus liable to compulsory <unk> service , which would have put him in great danger due to the extremely high mortality of soldiers in Napoleon 's armies . Through the assistance of his brother and the prefect of Grenoble Joseph Fourier , who was also an egyptologist , he successfully avoided the draft by arguing that his work on deciphering the Egyptian script was too important to interrupt . First skeptical of the Napoleonic regime , after the fall of Napoleon in 1813 and the institution of the royalist regime under Louis XVIII , Champollion came to consider the Napoleonic state the lesser of two evils . <unk> he composed and circulated songs ridiculing and criticizing the royal regime – songs that became highly popular among the people of Grenoble . In 1815 Napoleon Bonaparte escaped from his exile on Elba and landed with an army at the Côte d 'Azur and marched directly on Grenoble where he was received as a liberator . Here he met with Champollion , whose many requests for exemption from the draft he remembered , and he asked him how his important work was progressing . Champollion replied , that he had just finished his Coptic grammar and dictionary . Napoleon requested that he send the manuscripts to Paris for publication . His brother Jacques joined the Napoleonic cause , putting both of the brothers in danger at the end of the Hundred Days when Napoleon was finally defeated , Grenoble being the last city to resist the royalist advances . In spite of the risk to themselves , having been put under Royalist surveillance , the Champollion brothers nonetheless aided the Napoleonic general Drouet d 'Erlon who had been sentenced to death for his participation in the Battle of Waterloo , giving him shelter and helping him escape to Munich . The brothers were condemned to internal exile in Figeac , and Champollion was removed from his university post in Grenoble and the faculty closed . 
 Under the new Royalist regime , the Champollion brothers invested much of their time and efforts in establishing Lancaster schools , in an effort to provide the general population with education . This was considered a revolutionary undertaking by the Ultra @-@ royalists , who did not believe that education should be made accessible for the lower classes . In 1821 Champollion even led an uprising , in which he and a band of <unk> stormed the citadel and hoisted the tricolore instead of the Bourbon Royalist flag . He was charged with treason and went into hiding , but was eventually pardoned . 
 = = = Family life and later career = = = 
 Champollion married Rosine Blanc ( 1794 – 1871 ) in 1818 after four years of engagement , they had one daughter , <unk> Champollion ( 1824 – 89 ) . Rosine was the daughter of a well @-@ to @-@ do family of <unk> <unk> . At first her father did not approve of the match , since Champollion was a mere assistant professor when they first met , but with his increasing reputation he eventually agreed . Originally Jacques @-@ Joseph did not approve of his brother 's marriage either , finding Rosine too dull @-@ witted , and he did not attend the wedding , but later he grew fond of his sister in @-@ law . Although a happy family man , especially adoring his daughter , Champollion was frequently away from his family for months or even years at a time , while traveling to Paris , to Italy , and to Egypt . While in Livorno Champollion developed an infatuation with an Italian poet , Angelica Palli . She presented an ode to Champollion 's work at a celebration in his honor , and the two exchanged letters for a while , but an affair never developed . 
 After his groundbreaking discoveries in 1822 he made the acquaintance of the Duc de Blacas , an antiquary who became his patron and managed to gain him the favor of the king , who entrusted him with managing the royal oriental collections at the Louvre . He traveled to Turin to inspect a collection of Egyptian materials assembled by Bernardino Drovetti , which King Charles X had purchased , cataloguing it . In Turin and Rome he realized the necessity of seeing Egyptian monuments first hand began to make plans for an expedition to Egypt collaborating with Tuscan scholars and the Archduke Leopold . Returning from Egypt in 1830 , Champollion was made Professor of Egyptology at the Collège de France , but he only gave three lectures before his illness forced him to give up teaching . In 1824 he became a correspondent of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands . 
 = = Deciphering the Egyptian hieroglyphs = = 
 The Egyptian hieroglyphs had been well known to scholars of the ancient world for centuries , but few had made any attempts to understand them . Many based their speculations about the script in the writings of <unk> who considered the symbols to be ideographic , not representing any specific spoken language . Athanasius Kircher for example had stated that the hieroglyphs were symbols that " cannot be translated by words , but expressed only by marks , characters and figures " , meaning that the script was in essence impossible to ever decipher . Others considered that the use of the hieroglyphs in Egyptian society was limited to the religious sphere and that they represented esoteric concepts within a universe of religious meaning that was now lost . But Kircher had been the first to suggest that modern Coptic was a degenerate form of the language found in the Egyptian demotic script , and he had correctly suggested the phonetic value of one hieroglyph – that of mu the Coptic word for water . With the onslaught of Egyptomania in France in the early 19th century , scholars began approaching the question of the hieroglyphs with renewed interest , but still without a basic idea about whether the script was phonetic or ideographic , and whether the texts represented profane topics or sacred mysticism . This early work was mostly speculative , with no methodology for how to corroborate suggested readings . The first methodological advances were Joseph de <unk> ' discovery that cartouches identified the names of rulers , and George Zoëga 's compilation of a catalogue of hieroglyphs , and discovery that the direction of reading depended on the direction in which the glyphs were facing . 
 = = = Early studies = = = 
 Champollion 's interest in Egyptian history and the hieroglyphic script developed at an early age . At 16 he gave a paper before the Grenoble Academy in which he argued that the language spoken by the ancient Egyptians in which they wrote the Hieroglyphic texts , was closely related to Coptic . This view proved crucial in becoming able to read the texts , and the correctness of his proposed relation between Coptic and Ancient Egyptian has been confirmed by history . This enabled him to propose that the demotic script represented the Coptic language . 
 Already in 1806 he wrote to his brother about his decision to become the one to decipher the Egyptian script : 
 " I want to conduct deep continuing studies into this ancient nation . The enthusiasm which the descriptions of their enormous monuments ignited in me , the admiration which their power and knowledge filled me with , will grow with the new things that I will acquire . Of all the peoples that I love the most , I will confess that no one equals the Egyptians in my heart . " 
 In 1808 Champollion received a scare when French Archeologist Alexandre Lenoir published the first of his four volumes on Nouvelles <unk> des <unk> making the young scholar fear that his budding work had already been surpassed . But he was relieved to find that Lenoir still operated under the assumption that the hieroglyphs were mystic symbols and not a literary system expressing language . This experience made him even more determined to be the first to decipher the language and he began dedicating himself even more to the study of Coptic , writing in 1809 to his brother : " I give myself up entirely to Coptic ... I wish to know Egyptian like my French , because on that language will be based my great work on the Egyptian papyri . " 
 In 1811 Champollion was embroiled in controversy , as Étienne Marc Quatremère , like Champollion a student of Silvestre de Sacy , published his Mémoires <unk> et historiques sur l 'Égypte … sur quelques <unk> <unk> . Champollion saw himself forced to publish as a stand @-@ alone paper the " Introduction " to his work in progress L 'Egypte sous les <unk> ou <unk> sur la géographie , la langue , les <unk> et l 'histoire de l 'Egypte avant l <unk> de <unk> ( 1814 ) . Because of the similarities in the topic matter , and the fact that Champollion 's work was published after Quatremère 's , allegations arose that Champollion had plagiarized the work of Quatremère . Even Silvestre de Sacy , the mentor of both authors , considered the possibility , to Champollion 's great chagrin . 
 = = = Rivalry with Thomas Young = = = 
 British polymath Thomas Young was one of the first to attempt decipherment of the Egyptian hieroglyphs , basing his own work on the investigations of Swedish diplomat Johan David Åkerblad . Young and Champollion first became aware of each other 's work in 1814 when Champollion wrote to the Royal Society of which Young was the secretary , requesting better transcriptions of the Rosetta stone , to Young 's irritation arrogantly implying that he would be able to quickly decipher the script if he only had better copies . Young had at that time spent several months working unsuccessfully on the Rosetta text using Åkerblad 's decipherments . In 1815 Young replied in the negative , arguing that the French transcriptions were equally good as the British ones , and added that " I do not doubt that the collective efforts of savants , such as M. <unk> and yourself , Monsieur , who have so much deepened the study of the Coptic language , might have already succeeded in giving a more perfect translation than my own , which is drawn almost entirely from a very laborious comparison of its different parts and with the Greek translation " This was the first Champollion had heard of Young 's research , and realizing that he also had a competitor in London was not to Champollion 's liking . 
 Young proceeded mathematically without identifying the language of the text . For example , comparing the number of times a word appeared in the Greek text with the Egyptian text , he was able to point out which glyphs spelled the word " king " , but he was unable to read the word . Using Åkerblad 's decipherment of the demotic letters p and t , he realized that there were phonetic elements in the writing of the name Ptolemy . He correctly read the signs for p , t , m , i , and s , but rejected several other signs as " inessential " and misread others , due to the lack of a systematic approach . Young called the Demotic script " <unk> " , and resented Champollion 's term " demotic " considering it bad form that he had invented a new name for it instead of using Young 's . In order not to be superseded by the young Champollion , Young corresponded with Sacy , now no longer Champollion 's mentor but his rival , who advised Young not to share his work with Champollion and described Champollion as a charlatan . Consequently , for several years Young kept several key texts from Champollion and shared little of his data and notes . 
 When Champollion submitted his Coptic grammar and dictionary for publication in 1815 , it was blocked by Silvestre de Sacy , who in addition to his personal animosity and envy towards Champollion also resented his Napoleonic affinities . During his exile in Figeac , Champollion spent his time revising the grammar and doing local archeological work , being for a time cut off from being able to continue his research . 
 In 1817 Champollion read a review of his " <unk> sous les <unk> " , published by an anonymous Englishman , which was largely favorable and encouraged Champollion to return to his former research . Champollion 's biographers have suggested that the review was written by Young , who often published anonymously , but Robinson , who wrote biographies of both Young and Champollion , considers it unlikely , since Young elsewhere had been highly critical of that particular work . Soon Champollion returned to Grenoble to seek employment again at the university , which was in the process of reopening the faculty of Philosophy and Letters . He succeeded , but nonetheless most of his time in the following years was consumed by his teaching work . 
 Meanwhile , Young kept working on the Rosetta stone , and in 1819 he published a major article on " Egypt " in the Encyclopædia Britannica claiming that he had discovered the principle behind the script . He had correctly identified only a small number of phonetic values for glyphs , but also made some eighty approximations of correspondences between Hieroglyphic and demotic . Young had also correctly identified several logographs , and the grammatical principle of <unk> , distinguishing correctly between the singular , dual and plural forms of nouns . Young nonetheless considered the hieroglyphic , <unk> or cursive hieroglyphs ( which he called hieratic ) and a third script which he called <unk> or <unk> , to belong to different historical periods and to represent different evolutionary stages of the script with increasing <unk> . He failed to distinguish between hieratic and demotic , considering them a single script . Young was also able to identify correctly the hieroglyphic form of the name of Ptolemy V , whose name had been identified by Åkerblad in the demotic script only . Nonetheless , he only assigned the correct phonetic values to some of the signs in the name , incorrectly dismissing one glyph , the one for o , as unnecessary , and assigning partially correct values to the signs for m , l , and s . He also read the name of Berenice , but here only managed to correctly identify the letter n . Young was furthermore convinced that only in the late period had some foreign names been written entirely in phonetic signs , whereas he believed that native Egyptian names and all texts from the earlier period were written in ideographic signs . Several scholars have suggested that Young 's true contribution to Egyptology was his decipherment of the Demotic script , in which he made the first major advances , correctly identifying it as being composed of both ideographic and phonetic signs . But for some reason Young never considered that the same might be the case with the hieroglyphs . 
 Later the British Egyptologist Sir Peter Le Page <unk> summed up Young 's method : ' He worked mechanically , like the schoolboy who finding in a translation that Arma <unk> means ' Arms and the man , " reads Arma " arms , " <unk> " and " , que " the man . " He is sometimes right , but very much oftener wrong , and no one is able to distinguish between his right and his wrong results until the right method has been discovered . ' Nonetheless , at the time it was clear that Young 's work superseded everything Champollion had by then published on the script . 
 = = = Breakthrough = = = 
 Although dismissive of Young 's work even before he had read it , Champollion obtained a copy of the Encyclopedia article . Even though he was suffering from a failing health , and the chicanery of the Ultras kept him struggling to maintain his job , it motivated him to return in earnest to the study of the hieroglyphs . When he was eventually removed from his professorship by the Royalist faction , he finally had the time to work on it exclusively . While he awaited trial for treason he produced a short manuscript , De l <unk> <unk> des anciens Égyptiens , in which he argued that the hieratic script was simply a modified form of hieroglyphic writing . Young had already anonymously published an argument to the same effect several years earlier in an obscure journal , but Champollion having been cut off from academia for several years had probably not read it . In addition Champollion made the fatal error of claiming that the hieratic script was entirely ideographic . Champollion himself was never proud of this work and reportedly actively tried to suppress it by buying the copies and destroying them . 
 These errors were finally corrected later that year when Champollion correctly identified the hieratic script as being based on the hieroglyphic script , but used exclusively on papyrus , whereas the hieroglyphic script was used on stone , and demotic used by the people . Previously it had been questioned whether the three scripts even represented the same language , and hieroglyphic had been considered a purely ideographic script whereas hieratic and demotic were considered alphabetic . Young , in 1815 , had been the first to suggest that the demotic was not alphabetic but rather a mixture of " imitations of hieroglyphics " and " alphabetic " signs . Champollion on the other hand correctly considered the scripts to coincide almost entirely , being in essence different formal versions of the same script . 
 In the same year he identified the hieroglyphic script on the Rosetta stone as being written in a mixture of ideograms and phonetic signs , just as Young had argued for Demotic . He reasoned that if the script was entirely ideographic the hieroglyphic text would require as many separate signs as there were separate words in the Greek text . But there were in fact fewer , suggesting that the script mixed ideographic and phonetic signs . This realization finally made it possible for him to detach himself from the idea that the different scripts had to be either fully ideographic or fully phonetic , and he recognized it as being much more complex mixture of sign types . This realization gave him a distinct advantage . 
 = = = = Names of rulers = = = = 
 Using the fact that it was known that names of rulers appeared in cartouches , he focused on reading names of rulers as Young had initially tried . Champollion managed to isolate a number of sound values for signs , by comparing the Greek and Hieroglyphic versions of the names of Ptolemy and Cleopatra – correcting Young 's readings in several instances . 
 In 1822 Champollion received transcriptions of the text on the recently discovered Philae obelisk , which enabled him to double check his readings of the names Ptolemy and Cleopatra from the Rosetta stone . The name " Cleopatra " had already been identified on the Philae obelisk by Bankes who scribbled the identification in the margin of the plate though without any actual reading of the individual glyphs . Young and others would later use the fact that the Cleopatra cartouche had been identified by Bankes to claim that Champollion had plagiarized his work . It remains unknown whether Champollion saw Bankes ' margin note identifying the cartouche or whether he identified it by himself . All in all using this method he managed to determine the phonetic value of 12 signs ( A , AI , E , K , L , M , O , P , R , S , and T ) . By applying these to the decipherment of further sounds he soon read dozens of other names . 
 Astronomer Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> published proposed decipherment of the controversial Dendera zodiac , in arguing that the small stars following certain signs referred to constellations . Champollion published a response in the Revue encyclopédique , demonstrating that they were in fact grammatical signs , which he called " signs of the type " , today called determinatives . Young had identified the first determinative " divine female " , but Champollion now identified several others . He presented the progress before the academy where it was well received , and even his former mentor @-@ turned @-@ archenemy , de Sacy , praised it warmly , leading to a reconciliation between the two . 
 The main breakthrough in his decipherment was when he was also able to read the verb MIS related to birth , by comparing the Coptic verb for birth with the phonetic signs MS and the appearance of references to birthday celebrations in the Greek text . It was on September 14 , 1822 , while comparing his readings to a set of new texts from Abu Simbel that he made the realization . Running down the street to find his brother he yelled " Je <unk> mon affaire ! " ( I 've got it ! ) but collapsed from the excitement . 
 While the name <unk> had also been identified ( but not read ) by Young who realized that the first syllable was spelled with a depiction of an ibis representing Thoth , Champollion was able to read the phonetic spelling of the second part of the word , and check it against the mentioning of births in the Rosetta stone . This finally confirmed to Champollion that the ancient texts as well as the recent ones used the same writing system , and that it was a system that mixed logographic and phonetic principles . 
 = = = = Letter to Dacier = = = = 
 A week later on 27 September 1822 , he published some of his findings in his Lettre à M. Dacier , addressed to Bon @-@ Joseph Dacier , secretary of the Paris Académie des Inscriptions et Belles @-@ Lettres . Champollion read the letter before the assembled Académie . All his main rivals and supporters were present at the reading , including Young who happened to be visiting Paris . This was the first meeting between the two . The presentation did not go into details regarding the script and in fact was surprisingly cautious in its suggestions . Although he must have been already certain of this , Champollion merely suggested that the script was phonetic already from the earliest available texts , which would mean that the Egyptians had developed writing independently of the other civilizations around the Mediterranean . The paper also still contained confusions regarding the relative role of ideographic and phonetic signs , still arguing that also hieratic and demotic were primarily ideographic . 
 Scholars have speculated that there had simply not been sufficient time between his breakthrough and collapse to fully incorporate the discovery into his thinking . But the paper presented many new phonetic readings of names of rulers , demonstrating clearly that he had made a major advance in deciphering the phonetic script . And it finally settled the question of the dating of the Dendera zodiac , by reading the cartouche that had been erroneously read as <unk> by Young , in its correct reading " <unk> " ( Emperor in Greek ) . 
 He was congratulated by the amazed audience including de Sacy and Young . Young and Champollion became acquainted over the next days , Champollion sharing many of his notes with Young and inviting him to visit at his house , and the two parted on friendly terms . 
 = = = Reactions to the decipherment = = = 
 At first Young was appreciative of Champollion 's success , writing in a letter to his friend that " If he [ Champollion ] did borrow an English key . The lock was so dreadfully <unk> that no common arm would have had strength enough to turn it .. ... You will easily believe that were I ever so much the victim of the bad passions , I should feel nothing but exultation at Mr. Champollion 's success : my life seems indeed to be lengthened by the accession of a junior coadjutor in my researches , and of a person too , who is so much more versed in the different dialects of the Egyptian language than myself . " 
 Nonetheless the relation between them quickly deteriorated , as Young began to feel that he was being denied due credit for his own " first steps " in the decipherment . Also , due to the tense political climate between England and France in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars , there was little inclination to accept Champollion 's decipherments as valid among the English . When Young later read the published copy of the lettre he was offended by the fact that he himself was mentioned only twice , and one of those times being harshly critiqued for his failure in deciphering the name " Berenice " . Young was further disheartened by the fact that Champollion at no point recognized his work as having provided the platform from which decipherment had finally been reached . He grew increasingly angry with Champollion , and shared his feelings with his friends who encouraged him to rebut with a new publication . When by a stroke of luck a Greek translation of a well @-@ known demotic papyrus came into his possession later that year , he did not share that important finding with Champollion . In an anonymous review of the lettre Young attributed the discovery of the hieratic as a form of hieroglyphs to de Sacy and described Champollion 's decipherments merely as an extension of Åkerblad and Young 's work . Champollion recognized that Young was the author , and sent him a rebuttal of the review , while maintaining the charade of the anonymous review . Furthermore , Young , in his 1823 An Account of Some Recent Discoveries in <unk> Literature and Egyptian Antiquities , including the author 's original alphabet , as extended by Mr. Champollion , he complained that " however Mr Champollion may have arrived at his conclusions , I admit them , with the greatest pleasure and gratitude , not by any means as superseding my system , but as fully confirming and extending it . " ( p . 146 ) . 
 In France Champollion 's success also produced enemies . Edmé @-@ Francois Jomard was chief among them , and he spared no occasion to belittle Champollion 's achievements behind his back , pointing out that Champollion had never been to Egypt and suggesting that really his lettre represented no major progress from Young 's work . Jomard had been insulted by Champollion 's demonstration of the young age of the Dendera zodiac , which he had himself proposed was as old as 15 @,@ 000 years . This exact finding had also brought Champollion in the good graces of the Catholic Church which had been antagonized by the claims that Egyptian civilization might be older than the church @-@ sanctioned chronology according to which the earth was only 6 @,@ 000 years old . 
 = = = The Précis = = = 
 Young 's claims that the new decipherments were merely a corroboration of his own method , meant that Champollion would have to publish more of his data to make clear the degree to which his own progress built on a systematicity that was not found in Young 's work . He realized that he would have to make it apparent to all that his was a total system of decipherment , whereas Young had merely deciphered a few words . Over the next year he published a series of booklets about the Egyptian gods , including some decipherments of their names . 
 Building on his progress , Champollion now began to study other texts in addition to the Rosetta stone , studying a series of much older inscriptions from Abu Simbel . During 1823 , he succeeded in identifying the names of pharaohs Ramesses and Thutmose written in cartouches in these ancient texts . With the help of a new acquaintance the Duke de Blacas in 1824 , Champollion finally published the Précis du système hiéroglyphique des anciens Égyptiens dedicated to and funded by King Louis XVIII . Here he presented the first correct translation of the hieroglyphs and the key to the Egyptian grammatical system . 
 In the Précis , Champollion referred to Young 's 1819 claim of having deciphered the script when he wrote that : 
 " A real discovery would have been to have really read the hieroglyphic name , that is , to have fixed the proper value to each of the characters it is composed of , and in such a manner , that these values were applicable everywhere that these characters appear 
 This task was exactly what Champollion set out to accomplish in the Précis , and the entire framing of the argument was as a rebuttal to M. le docteur Young , and the translation in his 1819 article which Champollion brushed off as " a conjectural translation " . 
 In the introduction Champollion described his argument in points : 
 That his " alphabet " ( in the sense of phonetic readings ) could be employed to read inscriptions from all of the periods of Egyptian history . 
 That the discovery of the phonetic alphabet is the true key to understanding the entire hieroglyphic system . 
 That the ancient Egyptians used the system in all of the periods of Egyptian history to represent the sounds of their spoken language phonetically . 
 That all of the hieroglyphic texts are composed almost entirely of the phonetic signs that he had discovered . 
 Champollion never admitted any debt to Young 's work , although in 1828 , a year before his death , Young was appointed to the French Academy of Sciences , with Champollion 's support . 
 The Précis cemented Champollion as having the main claim to the decipherment of the hieroglyphs . In 1825 his former teacher and enemy Silvestre de Sacy reviewed his work positively stating that it was already well " beyond the need for confirmation " . In the same year , Henry Salt put Champollion 's decipherment to the test , successfully using it to read further inscriptions , he published a corroboration of Champollion 's system , in which he also criticized Champollion for not acknowledging his dependence on Young 's work . 
 With his work on the Précis Champollion realized that in order to advance further he needed more texts , and transcriptions of better quality . This caused him to spend the next years visiting collections and monuments in Italy , which convinced him of the fact that many of the transcriptions from which he had been working had been inaccurate – hindering the decipherment , and he made a point of making his own copies of as many texts as possible . During his time in Italy he met the Pope who congratulated him on having done a " great service to the Church " , by which he was referring to the counter arguments he had provided against the challengers to the biblical chronology . Champollion was ambivalent , but the Pope 's support helped him in his efforts to secure funds for an expedition . 
 = = Franco @-@ Tuscan Expedition = = 
 In 1827 Ippolito Rosellini , who had first met Champollion during his 1826 stay in Florence , went to Paris for a year in order to improve his knowledge of the method of Champollion 's system of decipherment . The two philologists decided to organize an expedition to Egypt to confirm the validity of the discovery . Headed by Champollion and assisted by Rosellini , his first disciple and great friend , the mission was known as the Franco @-@ Tuscan Expedition , and was made possible by the support of the grand @-@ duke of Tuscany , Leopold II , and the King of France , Charles X. Champollion and his second @-@ in @-@ command Rossellini were joined on the expedition by Charles <unk> , representing the French government , and a team of eleven Frenchmen including the egyptologist and artist Nestor L <unk> and Italians including the artist Giuseppe <unk> . 
 In preparation for the expedition Champollion wrote the French Consul General Bernardino Drovetti for advice on how to secure permission from the Egyptian Khedive and Ottoman Viceroy Muhammad Ali of Egypt . Drovetti had initiated his own business of exporting plundered Egyptian antiques and did not want Champollion meddling in his affairs . He sent a letter discouraging the expedition stating that the political situation was too unstable for the expedition to be advisable . The letter reached Jacques Joseph Champollion a few weeks before the expedition was scheduled to leave , but he conveniently delayed in sending it on to his brother until after the expedition had left . 
 On 21 July 1828 , the expedition boarded the ship <unk> at Toulon and set sail for Egypt and they arrived in Alexandria on August 18 . Here Champollion met with Drovetti who continued to warn about the political situation but assured Champollion that the Pasha would give his permission for the expedition to proceed . Champollion , <unk> and <unk> met with the Pasha on August 24 , and he immediately gave his permission . However , after more than a week of waiting for the permissions Champollion suspected that Drovetti was working against him and took a complaint to the French consulate . The complaint worked and soon the pasha provided the expedition with a large river boat . The expedition bought a small boat for five persons . Champollion named them the Isis and the <unk> after Egyptian goddesses . On September 19 they arrived in Cairo , where they stayed until October 1 when they left for the desert sites of Memphis , Saqqara and Giza . 
 While examining texts in the tombs at Saqqara in October , Champollion realized that the hieroglyphic word for " hour " included the hieroglyph representing a star , which served no phonetic function in the word . He wrote in his journal that the star glyph was " the determinative of all divisions of time " . <unk> are an important part of the hieroglyphic writing system . Champollion probably struck upon the concept while in Egypt , as it had not appeared in the 1828 edition of the Précis . Champollion also saw the sphinx and lamented that the inscription on its chest was covered by more sand than they would be able to remove in a week . Arriving in Dendera on November 16 , Champollion was excited to see the Zodiac that he had deciphered in Paris . Here he realized that the glyph that he had deciphered as <unk> and which convinced him that the inscription was of recent date was in fact not found on the monument itself – it had seemingly been invented by Jomard 's copyist . Champollion nonetheless , realized that the late date was still correct , based on other evidence . After a day at Dendera the expedition continued on to Thebes . 
 Champollion was particularly captured by the array of important monuments and inscriptions at Thebes , and decided to spend as much time there as possible on the way back north . South of Thebes the Isis sprang leak and nearly sank , having lost many provisions and spent several days repairing the boat they continued south to Aswan where the boats had to be left , since they could not make it across the first Cataract . They traveled by small boats and camelback to Elephantine and Philae . At Philae Champollion spent several days recovering from an attack of gout brought on by the hard trip , and he also received letters from his wife and brother , both sent many months earlier . Champollion attributed their delay to Drovetti 's ill will . They arrived at Abu Simbel on November 26 , the site had been visited by Bankes and Belzoni in 1815 and 1817 respectively , but the sand that they had cleared from the entrance had now returned . On January 1 , 1829 they reached Wadi Halfa and returned north . That day Champollion composed a letter to M. Dacier stating that " I am proud now , having followed the course of the Nile from its mouth to the second cataract , to have the right to announce to you that there is nothing to modify in our " Letter on the Alphabet of the Hieroglyphs . " Our Alphabet is good . " 
 Even though Champollion was appalled by the rampant looting of ancient artefacts and destruction of monuments , the expedition also contributed to the destruction . Most notably , while studying the Valley of the Kings , he damaged KV17 , the tomb of Seti I , by removing a wall panel of 2 @.@ 26 x 1 @.@ 05 m in a corridor . English explorers attempted to dissuade the destruction of the tomb , but Champollion persisted , stating that he had the permission of the Muhammad Ali Pasha . Champollion also carved his name into a pillar at Karnak . Champollion himself noted and lamented the widespread looting and destruction of monuments , and in a letter to the Pasha recommended that tourism , excavation and trafficking of artefacts be strictly controlled . Champollion 's suggestions may have led to Muhammad Ali 's 1835 ordinance prohibiting all exports of antiquities and ordering the construction of a museum in which to house the ancient artifacts . 
 On the way back they stayed again at Thebes from March to September , making many new drawing and paintings of the monuments there . Here , at the Valley of the Kings the expedition moved into the tomb of Ramesses the 4th ( of the 20th dynasty ) , where the air was cooler . They also located the tomb of Ramesses the Great , but it was badly looted . It was here that Champollion first received news of Young 's campaign to vindicate himself as the decipherer of the hieroglyphs and to discredit Champollion 's decipherments . He received this news only a few days after Young 's death in London . 
 The expedition arrived in back in Cairo in late September 1829 where the expedition bought 10 @,@ 000 francs worth of antiquities , a budget extended to them by minister Rochefoucauld . Arriving in Alexandria they were notified that the French boat that would take them back was delayed , and they had to stay here two months until the sixth of December . On their return to Alexandria , the Khedive Muhammad Ali Pasha , offered the two obelisks standing at the entrance of Luxor Temple to France in 1829 , but only one was transported to Paris , where it now stands on the Place de la Concorde . Champollion and the Pasha spoke often and on the Pasha 's request Champollion wrote an outline of the history of Egypt . Here Champollion had no choice but to challenge the short Biblical chronology arguing that Egyptian civilization had its origins at least 6000 years before Islam . The two also spoke about social reforms , Champollion championing education of the lower classes – a point on which the two did not agree . 
 Returning to Marseille , the members of the expedition had to spend a month in quarantine on the ship before being able to continue on towards Paris . 
 The expedition led to a posthumously published extensive Monuments de l 'Égypte et de la <unk> ( 1845 ) . 
 = = Death = = 
 Exhausted by his labors during and after his scientific expedition to Egypt , Champollion died of an apoplectic attack ( stroke ) in Paris in 1832 at the age of 41 . He is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery . On his tomb is a simple obelisk erected by his wife , and a stone slab stating simply : Ici repose Jean @-@ François Champollion , né à Figeac <unk> du Lot le 23 <unk> 1790 , <unk> à Paris le 4 mars 1832 ( Here rests Jean @-@ François Champollion , born at Figeac , Department of the Lot , on 23 December 1790 , died at Paris on 4 March 1832 ) . 
 Certain portions of Champollion 's works were edited by Jacques and published posthumously . His Grammar and Dictionary of Ancient Egyptian had been left almost finished and was published posthumously in 1838 . Before his death he had told his brother " Hold it carefully , I hope that it will be my calling card for posterity " . It contained his entire theory and method , including classifications of signs and their decipherments , and also a grammar including how to write and conjugate nouns and verbs . But it was marred by the still tentative nature of many readings , and Champollion 's conviction that the hieroglyphs could be read directly in Coptic , whereas in fact they represented a much older stage of the language which differs in many ways from Coptic . 
 Jacques 's son , Aimé @-@ Louis ( 1812 – 94 ) , wrote a biography of the two brothers , and he and his sister Zoë Champollion , were both interviewed by Hermine <unk> whose major biography of Champollion was published in 1906 . 
 Champollion 's decipherment remained controversial even after his death . The brothers Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt famously championed his decipherment , as did Silvestre de Sacy , but others , such as Gustav <unk> , Julius Klaproth and Edmé @-@ François Jomard sided with Young and refused to consider Champollion to be more than a talented imitator of Young even after the posthumous publication of his grammar . In England , Sir George Lewis still maintained 40 years after the decipherment , that since the Egyptian language was extinct it was a priori impossible to decipher the Hieroglyphs . In a reply to Lewis ' scathing critique , Reginald Poole , an egyptologist , defended Champollion 's method describing it as " the method of interpreting Hieroglyphics originated by Dr. Young and developed by Champollion " . Also Sir Peter Le Page <unk> defended Champollion 's method , although he was less deferential to Young . 
 Building on Champollion 's grammar his student Karl Richard Lepsius continued to develop the decipherment , realizing in contrast to Champollion that vowels were not written . Lepsius became the most important champion of Champollion 's work . In 1866 , the Decree of Canopus , discovered by Lepsius , was successfully deciphered using Champollion 's method , cementing his reputation as the true decipherer of the hieroglyphs . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Figeac honors him with La place des <unk> , a monumental reproduction of the Rosetta Stone by American artist Joseph <unk> ( pictured to the right ) . And a museum devoted to Jean @-@ François Champollion was created in his birthplace at Figeac in Lot . It was inaugurated on 19 December 1986 in the presence of President François Mitterrand and Jean <unk> , Permanent Secretary of the Academy of Inscriptions and Letters . After two years of building work and extension , the museum re @-@ opened in 2007 . Besides Champollion 's life and discoveries , the museum also recounts the history of writing . The whole façade is covered in pictograms , from the original ideograms of the whole world . 
 In <unk> in Isère , The " Musée Champollion " is located at the former abode of Jean @-@ François 's brother . 
 Champollion has also been portrayed in many films and documentaries : For example , he was portrayed by Elliot Cowan in the 2005 BBC docudrama Egypt . In David <unk> 's thriller involving the CIA , Simple Genius , the character named " Champ <unk> " was derived from Champollion . 
 In Cairo , a street carries his name , leading to the Tahrir Square where the Egyptian Museum is located . 
 Also named after him is the Champollion crater , a lunar crater on the far side of the Moon . 
 = = Works = = 
 Le <unk> , ed . ( 1819 ) . Annales des <unk> , ou <unk> des <unk> <unk> d 'Égypte <unk> d <unk> le Grand . Paris . 
 Lettre à M. Dacier relative à l <unk> des <unk> <unk> . 1822 . 
 Panthéon <unk> , collection des <unk> <unk> de l <unk> <unk> , d 'après les monuments ( explanatory text to illustrations by Léon @-@ Jean @-@ Joseph Dubois ) . 1823 . 
 Précis du système hiéroglyphique des anciens Égyptiens . 1824 . ; 
 Lettres à M. le Duc de Blacas d <unk> . 1826 . ; 
 Notice descriptive des monuments <unk> du musée Charles X. 1827 . ; 
 Précis du système hiéroglyphique des anciens Égyptiens ou Recherches sur les <unk> premiers de cette écriture sacrée , sur leurs <unk> <unk> , et sur les rapports de ce système avec les autres <unk> graphiques <unk> . 1828 . 
 Lettres <unk> d 'Égypte et de <unk> . 1828 – 1829 . ; 
 <unk> <unk> . 1836 . ; 
 Dictionnaire <unk> en écriture hiéroglyphique . 1841 . 
 Others – Principes généraux de l <unk> sacrée , new edition with a preface by Christiane Ziegler , Institut d 'Orient , 1984 . 
 = Rosie Napravnik = 
 Anna Rose " Rosie " Napravnik ( born February 9 , 1988 ) is an American Thoroughbred horse racing jockey and two @-@ time winner of the Kentucky Oaks . Beginning her career in 2005 , she was regularly ranked among the top jockeys in North America in both earnings and total races won . By 2014 she had been in the top 10 by earnings three years in a row and was the highest @-@ ranked woman jockey in North America . In 2011 she won the Louisiana Derby for her first time and was ninth in the 2011 Kentucky Derby with the horse Pants On Fire . In 2012 , she broke the total wins and earnings record for a woman jockey previously held by Julie Krone , in the process becoming the first woman rider to win the Kentucky Oaks , riding Believe You Can , winning the race for a second time in 2014 on Untapable . She is only the second woman jockey to win a Breeders ' Cup race and the first to win more than one , having won the 2012 Breeders ' Cup Juvenile on Shanghai Bobby and the 2014 Breeders ' Cup Distaff on Untapable . Napravnik 's fifth @-@ place finish in the 2013 Kentucky Derby and third in the 2013 Preakness Stakes on Mylute are the best finishes for a woman jockey in those two Triple Crown races to date , and she is the only woman to have ridden in all three Triple Crown races . 
 A native of New Jersey , she and her horse trainer husband , Joe Sharp , have homes in Louisville , Kentucky and New Orleans , Louisiana . She was the leading rider at the Fair Grounds Race Course every year from 2011 through 2014 and leading rider at Keeneland Race Course in 2013 and 2014 . After her win in the 2014 Breeders ' Cup Distaff , Napravnik announced she was seven weeks pregnant and taking a " retirement " of " indefinite " duration from race riding following the 2014 Breeders ' Cup . She continues to assist Sharp in training race horses . 
 = = Background = = 
 Napravnik was born in her grandmother 's home in Mendham , New Jersey , on February 9 , 1988 . Shortly after she was born , she was sent to a hospital in Morristown , New Jersey , which is often mistakenly listed as her location of birth . Her father Charles is a farrier and her mother Cindy ran a boarding and training stable , plus trained event horses . She has one older sister , Jasmine ( known as " Jazz " ) , and a brother , Colt . Napravnik began working with horses at a very young age . Her first horse @-@ related injury was a broken arm that occurred when she fell off a pony at age four . By the age of seven , she began to ride in pony races , and , inspired by the documentary Jewels of the Triple Crown , she decided that year to become a jockey who rode Triple Crown races . She spent most of her childhood in New Jersey , but lived briefly in Vermont with her mother after the divorce of her parents , though she spent summers with her sister Jazz , who was living in Maryland and Pennsylvania . 
 In early adolescence , Napravnik , along with her sister , went to work for trainers Lilith Boucher , Bruce Miller and Jack Fisher . By age 13 , she worked for steeplechase trainer Jonathan Sheppard . At 15 , she decided to take a year off from employment in the horse industry to spend time with friends and to be an ordinary teen . But at 16 , Napravnik went to live with her sister at the farm of trainer Holly Robinson in Maryland , and Robinson sent her to work for trainer Richard " Dickie " Small . Small had a good reputation for mentoring young riders and had helped several other women jockeys get started in their careers . Napravnik began exercising Small 's race horses in 2004 . That year , she attended both Hereford High School and night school , but left school before her senior year to begin racing as a professional jockey . She later passed her high school equivalency GED test . 
 Napravnik is a natural redhead , 5 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 57 m ) tall , and as a jockey rode at about 113 pounds ( 51 kg ) . In addition to racing , she is very active in efforts to <unk> and provide aftercare to retired race horses . In 2014 she began to show her own off @-@ track Thoroughbred Old Ironsides , nicknamed Sugar , in Eventing . Interviewed for Vogue magazine , she explained how she felt about riding in the American classic horse races , “ When you ’ re riding in the Derby , you see all those iconic silks in the same race and it gives it a special feel , like you ’ re part of history . ” 
 = = = Joe Sharp and family = = = 
 Napravnik married Joe Sharp in October 2011 . He is three years older than Napravnik , and has a daughter , <unk> , born in 2005 , whose mother is jockey <unk> Goodwin . Napravnik and Sharp have a son , Carson , born June 1 , 2015 . 
 Horse owner Ken Ramsey , who knows Napravnik and Sharp well , says the couple are likable and well @-@ respected , saying " They go together like ham and eggs . " Sharp had Napravnik ride a horse for him at Penn National in 2009 , and they began dating a few months later , becoming engaged in 2011 . Sharp , a horse trainer , was born in Martinsburg , West Virginia . He is an only child and grew up around horses . His father , Marc Sharp , is a trainer who also owns a horse farm near Harpers Ferry , West Virginia . His mother , Sara Escudero , was an exercise rider . The pair divorced and Sharp split his time between them , growing up in Kentucky and West Virginia . 
 Sharp was a jockey from 2004 @-@ 2005 , riding mostly at Canterbury Downs in Minnesota , but also in West Virginia and Maryland . Sharp was an assistant trainer to Mike Stidham for four years , and then for three years an assistant to Mike Maker , where he ran Maker 's operations in New York , Kentucky and New Orleans . Napravnik and Sharp sometimes competed against each other when a horse Sharp trained was running against one Napravnik was riding , but the two were a trainer @-@ rider team for Ramsey 's three @-@ year @-@ old colt , Vicar 's In Trouble , who won the Louisiana Derby and contested the 2014 Kentucky Derby . In August 2014 , Sharp left Maker 's barn to begin an independent horse training stable , with the full support of both Maker and Napravnik . He scored his first graded stakes win on May 16 , 2015 on the Preakness undercard with the Ramsey 's horse Sandbar in the Grade III Maryland Sprint Handicap . Of the couple 's relationship , Sharp has stated , " Some guys might think being married to someone as famous as Rosie is a tough position , but I don ’ t , I ’ m very proud of her . " Sharp and Napravnik split their time between homes in Louisville and New Orleans . Besides working with horses , the pair also provide foster care to rescue dogs . 
 = = Career = = 
 Napravnik obtained her jockey license in 2005 at Pimlico Race Course . She won her first race as a licensed jockey on June 9 of that year , riding Small 's horse , <unk> . She initially rode under the name " A.R. Napravnik " to conceal her gender . In November 2005 , she broke her left collarbone and was sidelined for almost six weeks. when the horse in front of her fell and her horse was unable to avoid a collision , creating a four @-@ horse chain reaction that sent Napravnik and one of the other riders to the hospital . At the time of the accident she was the leading jockey at Laurel Park Racecourse . 
 Napravnik established herself as a top @-@ ranked jockey in 2006 when she finished 30th in national earnings and fifth in total wins with 300 victories on 1 @,@ 465 mounts and purse winnings of $ 6 @,@ 395 @,@ 075 . That year at Laurel Park , she won her first stakes race . One of her highest profile wins was in a race that was on the undercard for the 2006 Preakness . She won riding titles in 2006 at all four meets at the major Maryland tracks , one at the annual meet at Pimlico , and the other three at Laurel Park . Napravnik was runner @-@ up to Julien <unk> for the Eclipse Award for Outstanding Apprentice Jockey that year . 
 When a horse fell with her in a January 2007 race at Laurel Park , Napravnik suffered three compression fractures of her thoracic vertebrae and was out for several weeks to recuperate . In July , after recovering from the Laurel Park injuries , she had another fall that resulted in a major break to her wrist , subsequently repaired with a plate . In spite of her injuries and layoff , she still rode 507 races with 89 winners in 2007 . In 2008 , Napravnik was the most successful rider in Maryland with 101 wins . Riding a total of 893 races with 176 wins , she finished 62nd in earnings for the year , even though she broke her tibia and fibula in a racing accident at Delaware Park Racetrack in August , resulting in a three @-@ month layoff . She moved to Aqueduct Racetrack in New York in November 2008 , and in 2009 finished 38th in national earnings with 184 victories out of 1 @,@ 109 mounts and with earnings of $ 5 @,@ 176 @,@ 563 . 
 In 2010 , Napravnik began riding at Fair Grounds Race Course in New Orleans , Louisiana . Initially , she faced some of the most significant problems in her career with intimidation by the male jockeys , but overcame the challenge by refusing to give ground . Eventually she earned the respect of her male colleagues , and that year , she won her first graded stakes race , the Grade III Cicada Stakes at Aqueduct . By 2013 Napravnik was viewed as one of the most popular jockeys at the Fair Grounds . She finished the year with no major injuries and was ranked 30th in earnings . 
 Napravnik began 2011 with a win in the Louisiana Derby , riding Pants on Fire , becoming the first woman to win that race . When she was named the leading rider at that track in 2011 , with 110 wins , she was also the first woman rider to win the title . She then became only the sixth woman to ride in the Kentucky <unk> riding Pants on Fire to a 9th place finish , the best placing for a woman rider in the history of the Derby to that date . She also was second in the 2011 Kentucky Oaks , riding a longshot filly named St. John ’ s River . In July of that year , Napravnik fractured her arm again when the horse she was riding broke down on the track and fell . This time the fracture was just above the plate in her wrist that had repaired her first break , an injury that required a three @-@ hour surgery and replacement of the wrist plate with a larger one . 
 In 2012 Napravnik became the first woman jockey to win the Kentucky Oaks , riding Believe You Can . The race was also her first Grade I win . She then rode in the Belmont Stakes for the first time , finishing fifth aboard Five Sixteen . Later that year , she won the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile aboard Shanghai Bobby , becoming only the second woman jockey to win a Breeder 's Cup race . Her injury for 2012 was relatively minor : a non @-@ displaced fracture of her toe , obtained when her horse hit the side of the starting gate at Saratoga . She finished the race and returned to ride the next day . She ended the year ranked 8th in national earnings , winning $ 12 @,@ 451 @,@ 713 , which surpassed the earnings and national placing record for a female jockey previously held by Julie Krone . As a result , sports analysts viewed her as the most successful woman jockey since Krone . 
 Early in 2013 , Napravnik once again won the leading rider title at the Fair Grounds , making it three years in a row that she had won the award . She had hopes of riding Shanghai Bobby , who was undefeated in five races , in the 2013 Kentucky Derby , but he suffered a pelvic fracture at the Florida Derby and missed the Triple Crown races . She was able to pick up another horse for the Derby , Mylute , with whom she broke her previous Kentucky Derby finish record , taking fifth . Napravnik rode in the Preakness Stakes for the first time in 2013 , finishing third , again on Mylute . In doing so , she was only the third woman to ever ride in the Preakness , the first since 1994 , and had the highest @-@ placed finish for any woman jockey in that race . Adding the Preakness to her 2011 Kentucky Derby and 2012 Belmont races , she also became the first woman ever to have ridden in all three Triple Crown races . She then rode the filly Unlimited Budget to a 6th place finish in the 2013 Belmont , becoming the first woman to ride all three Triple Crown races in the same year . Napravnik also broke a record previously held by Donna Barton Brothers when she rode 45 winners at Churchill Downs ' spring meet . 
 That summer , Napravnik also was named captain of the three member " Girls ' Team " for the <unk> Cup jockey competition at Ascot Racecourse in the United Kingdom where she was the leading female rider of the team . In October , she became the first woman to win the leading rider title at Keeneland Race Course . She rode the two @-@ year @-@ old filly Untapable to a win in the Pocahontas Stakes , and then competed in the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile Fillies , but finished eighth , having to check the filly to avoid another horse that fell during the race . She finished the year eighth in earnings at $ 13 @,@ 242 @,@ 202 , breaking her own record from 2012 , and was fifth in total wins . 
 She began 2014 being named the leading rider at the Fair Grounds Race Course for the fourth consecutive year . She won the 2014 Lecomte Stakes and the Louisiana Derby on the three @-@ year @-@ old colt Vicar 's In Trouble , trained by Sharp while he was an assistant to Maker , and owned by Ken and Sarah Ramsey . Of Napravnik 's ride in the Louisiana Derby , veteran hall of fame jockey Mike Smith , who rode the favorite but finished second , said , " She rode a great race . A brilliant race actually . " Napravnik also teamed up again with Untapable , now a three @-@ year @-@ old , first winning the Rachel Alexandra Stakes and the Fair Grounds Oaks , and then to the jockey 's second victory in the Kentucky Oaks , winning the 2014 race by 4 @-@ 1 / 2 lengths . Prior to the Oaks , Napravnik told reporters , " I own this race . " Napravnik 's win on Untapable and a victory in the Humana Distaff Handicap , on the undercard on Derby day , brought her ranking up to second in the nation for jockey earnings and wins during the early weeks of May 2014 . With mounts on Vicar 's In Trouble in the Derby , Bayern in the 2014 Preakness Stakes , and General a Rod in the Belmont , for the second year in a row , she rode horses in all three Triple Crown races . She was in contention for leading jockey at Churchill Downs ' spring meet , in second place with 31 winners , including a single day where she won five races , setting yet another record for a woman rider . But on June 15 , the day after she had a major win on <unk> , she had another significant injury : a separation of her clavicle and left shoulder joint that occurred when a horse she was working in the morning broke its leg and fell . While Napravnik did not require surgery , she was sidelined for a few weeks . Even though she missed the end of the Churchill meet , she still tied for second place in leading rider standings at that track . By July 5 she was working horses . She returned to racing on July 18 for the opening day of the Saratoga meet . In October , she repeated as leading rider at <unk> 's fall meet . 
 After her win in the 2014 Breeders ' Cup Distaff aboard Untapable , Napravnik announced that she was seven weeks pregnant and announced a " retirement " from race riding . When asked if her retirement was " permanent " , she replied , " It 's indefinite — I mean , I 'm not thinking about a comeback in 10 months , but I can 't promise to stay off a horse forever . " She further explained that she intended to assist Sharp with his training business and intended to remain " very much involved with racing . " At the time of her announcement , she ranked sixth in the nation for 2014 in earnings and fifth by number of wins . In spite of losing time due to injury and retiring with two months left in the year , Napravnik closed out 2014 seventh in the nation for earnings , bringing her lifetime total to $ 71 @,@ 396 @,@ 717 . 
 Following her retirement announcement , Napravnik became Sharp 's assistant trainer , continuing to ride regularly . After initially exercising the stable 's race horses in the early months of her pregnancy , she moved over to <unk> and other activities . As of 2015 , she and Sharp currently hope to have two children fairly close together , and after that , Napravnik has not ruled out a return to race riding but has not made any firm decisions . As she explained in February 2015 , " I 'm satisfied with the accomplishments that I 've made . If I feel like I really want to come back in a few years then I can do it . The greatest thing is I don 't have to . " 
 = = On being a woman jockey = = 
 Napravnik 's success has come in a sport where only 10 % of all jockeys are women , even though they have been licensed as jockeys in pari @-@ <unk> races since 1969 . She initially was uncomfortable finding herself viewed as a role model for girls , preferring to simply be noticed as a top jockey . She became aware that she could have a positive impact on others and that helped her be more comfortable with her prominence . She still prefers to emphasize her riding prowess , and stated in 2014 , “ If you show your work ethic and professionalism and obvious skill and ability , that is what is going to win somebody over . ” 
 Like many other women jockeys , she views the primary challenge to be the difficulty of horse racing itself . She describes races as " every man for himself ( sic ) . " She does not ask for any breaks from male jockeys , and has explained that horse racing is a sport where women simply have to be just as good as men . She speaks well of other successful women jockeys , and expresses a lot of respect in particular for Julie Krone , to whom she is often compared . But she also said in a 2011 interview , " a lot of young female riders are just girls who love horses , but they just don 't have the strength and toughness , and they 're not cut out to be jockeys . You 've got to deliver the goods to get over that hump . " 
 She acknowledges the struggles for equality that women riders in earlier generations had to face were greater than her own , but notes that women jockeys still " fight a battle . " In her early career , she simply tried to " blend in " with the male riders , but nonetheless encountered some owners and trainers who refused to hire a female jockey . She later said , " I was very conscious when I raced against their horses — and when I beat them . " Napravnik has encountered harassment from male jockeys on the track when other riders would deliberately bump her or pen in her horse from all sides . In a 2013 interview with 60 Minutes , Napravnik said that she has heard hecklers at the track yell at her to “ go home and have a baby , " or " go home and stay in the kitchen . ” She repeatedly has chosen to make her mark on the track instead of getting into post @-@ race fights . Trainer Larry Jones , having witnessed other jockeys deliberately bumping into her on the track , commented , “ Don ’ t do Rosie that way , because she will run over you . The girl has no fear . ” 
 She summed up her views in a 2014 interview for Elle , stating , “ We are beyond the days of being boycotted . We are beyond the days before Civil Rights . So it has to do with the woman . It has to do with the individual and being able to compete as smart , as sharp as any man . ” 
 = = Year @-@ end charts = = 
 = Gordon Brown = 
 James Gordon Brown ( born 20 February 1951 ) is a British politician who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the Leader of the Labour Party from 2007 to 2010 . He previously served as Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Blair Government from 1997 to 2007 . Brown was a Member of Parliament ( MP ) from 1983 to 2015 , first for Dunfermline East and later for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath . 
 A doctoral graduate of the University of Edinburgh , Brown spent his early career working as both a lecturer at a further education college and a television journalist . He entered Parliament in 1983 as the MP for Dunfermline East . He joined the Shadow Cabinet in 1989 as Shadow Secretary of State for Trade , and was later promoted to become Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1992 . After Labour 's victory in 1997 , he was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer , becoming the longest @-@ serving holder of that office in modern history . 
 Brown 's time as Chancellor was marked by major reform of Britain 's monetary and fiscal policy architecture , transferring interest rate setting powers to the Bank of England , by a wide extension of the powers of the Treasury to cover much domestic policy and by transferring responsibility for banking supervision to the Financial Services Authority . Controversial moves included the abolition of advance corporation tax ( ACT ) relief in his first budget , and the removal in his final budget of the 10 % " starting rate " of personal income tax which he had introduced in 1999 . In 2007 , Tony Blair resigned as Prime Minister and Labour Leader and Brown was chosen to replace him in an uncontested election . 
 After initial rises in opinion polls following Brown becoming Prime Minister , Labour 's popularity declined with the onset of a recession in 2008 , leading to poor results in the local and European elections in 2009 . A year later , Labour lost 91 seats in the House of Commons at the 2010 general election , the party 's biggest loss of seats in a single general election since 1931 , making the Conservatives the largest party in a hung parliament . Brown remained in office as Labour negotiated to form a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats . On 10 May 2010 , Brown announced he would stand down as leader of the Labour Party , and instructed the party to put into motion the processes to elect a new leader . Labour 's attempts to retain power failed and on 11 May , he officially resigned as Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party . He was succeeded as Prime Minister by David Cameron , and as Leader of the Labour Party by Ed Miliband . 
 Later , Brown played a prominent role in the campaign surrounding the Scottish independence referendum of 2014 , galvanising support behind maintaining the union . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brown was born at the Orchard Maternity Nursing Home in Giffnock , Renfrewshire , Scotland . His father was John Ebenezer Brown , a minister of the Church of Scotland and a strong influence on Brown . He died in December 1998 , aged 84 . His mother , Jessie Elizabeth Brown ( née Souter ) , known as Bunty , died on 19 September 2004 , aged 86 . She was the daughter of John Souter , a timber merchant . The family moved to Kirkcaldy – then the largest town in Fife , across the Firth of Forth from Edinburgh – when Gordon was three . Brown was brought up there with his elder brother John and younger brother Andrew Brown in a manse . In common with many other notable Scots , he is therefore often referred to as a " son of the manse " . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Brown was educated first at Kirkcaldy West Primary School where he was selected for an experimental fast stream education programme , which took him two years early to Kirkcaldy High School for an academic hothouse education taught in separate classes . At age sixteen he wrote that he loathed and resented this " ludicrous " experiment on young lives . 
 He was accepted by the University of Edinburgh to study history at the same early age of sixteen . During an end @-@ of @-@ term rugby union match at his old school , he received a kick to the head and suffered a retinal detachment . This left him blind in his left eye , despite treatment including several operations and weeks spent lying in a darkened room . Later at Edinburgh , while playing tennis , he noticed the same symptoms in his right eye . Brown underwent experimental surgery at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and his right eye was saved . Brown graduated from Edinburgh with First @-@ Class Honours MA degree in history in 1972 , and stayed on to obtain his PhD degree in history ( which he gained ten years later in 1982 ) , titled The Labour Party and Political Change in Scotland 1918 – 29 . 
 In his youth at the University of Edinburgh , Brown was involved in a romantic relationship with Margarita , Crown Princess of Romania . Margarita said about it : " It was a very solid and romantic story . I never stopped loving him but one day it didn 't seem right any more , it was politics , politics , politics , and I needed nurturing . " An unnamed friend of those years is quoted by Paul Routledge in his biography of Brown as recalling : " She was sweet and gentle and obviously cut out to make somebody a very good wife . She was bright , too , though not like him , but they seemed made for each other . " 
 In 1972 , while still a student , Brown was elected Rector of the University of Edinburgh , the convener of the University Court . He served as Rector until 1975 , and also edited the document The Red Paper on Scotland . 
 = = = Career before Parliament = = = 
 From 1976 to 1980 Brown was employed as a lecturer in politics at Glasgow College of Technology . He also worked as a tutor for the Open University . In the 1979 general election , Brown stood for the Edinburgh South constituency , losing to the Conservative candidate , Michael <unk> . 
 From 1980 , he worked as a journalist at Scottish Television , later serving as current affairs editor until his election to Parliament in 1983 . 
 = = Election to Parliament and opposition = = 
 Brown was elected to Parliament on his second attempt as a Labour MP for Dunfermline East in 1983 general election . His first Westminster office mate was a newly elected MP from the Sedgefield constituency , Tony Blair . Brown became an opposition spokesman on Trade and Industry in 1985 . In 1986 , he published a biography of the Independent Labour Party politician James Maxton , the subject of his doctoral thesis . Brown was Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury from 1987 to 1989 and then Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry , before becoming Shadow Chancellor in 1992 . Having led the Labour Movement Yes campaign , refusing to join the cross @-@ party Yes for Scotland campaign , during the 1979 Scottish devolution referendum , while other senior Labour politicians – including Robin Cook , Tam Dalyell and Brian Wilson – campaigned for a No vote , Brown was subsequently a key participant in the Scottish Constitutional Convention , signing the Claim of Right for Scotland in 1989 . 
 After the sudden death of Labour leader John Smith in May 1994 , Brown did not contest the leadership after Tony Blair became favourite , deciding to make way for Blair to avoiding splitting the pro @-@ modernising vote in the leadership ballot . 
 It has long been rumoured a deal was struck between Blair and Brown at the former Granita restaurant in Islington , in which Blair promised to give Brown control of economic policy in return for Brown not standing against him in the leadership election . Whether this is true or not , the relationship between Blair and Brown was central to the fortunes of New Labour , and they mostly remained united in public , despite reported serious private rifts . 
 As Shadow Chancellor , Brown as Chancellor @-@ in @-@ waiting was seen as a good choice by business and the middle class . While he was Chancellor inflation sometimes exceeded the 2 % target causing the Governor of the Bank of England to write several letters to the Chancellor , each time inflation exceeded three per cent . In 2005 following a reorganisation of Westminster constituencies in Scotland , Brown became MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath at the general election . 
 = = Chancellor of the Exchequer ( 1997 – 2007 ) = = 
 In the 1997 general election , Labour defeated the Conservatives by a landslide to end their 18 @-@ year exile from government , and when Tony Blair , the new Prime Minister , announced his ministerial team on 2 May 1997 , he appointed Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer . Brown would remain in this role for 10 years and two months , making him the longest @-@ serving Chancellor in modern history . The Prime Minister 's website highlights some achievements from Brown 's decade as Chancellor : making the Bank of England independent and delivering an agreement on poverty and climate change at the G8 summit in 2005 . 
