 Another approach starts with the canonical quantization procedures of quantum theory . Using the initial @-@ value @-@ formulation of general relativity ( cf. evolution equations above ) , the result is the Wheeler – <unk> equation ( an analogue of the Schrödinger equation ) which , regrettably , turns out to be ill @-@ defined without a proper ultraviolet ( lattice ) cutoff . However , with the introduction of what are now known as <unk> variables , this leads to a promising model known as loop quantum gravity . Space is represented by a web @-@ like structure called a spin network , evolving over time in discrete steps . 
 Depending on which features of general relativity and quantum theory are accepted unchanged , and on what level changes are introduced , there are numerous other attempts to arrive at a viable theory of quantum gravity , some examples being the lattice theory of gravity based on the Feynman Path Integral approach and <unk> Calculus , dynamical triangulations , causal sets , <unk> models or the path @-@ integral based models of quantum cosmology . 
 All candidate theories still have major formal and conceptual problems to overcome . They also face the common problem that , as yet , there is no way to put quantum gravity predictions to experimental tests ( and thus to decide between the candidates where their predictions vary ) , although there is hope for this to change as future data from cosmological observations and particle physics experiments becomes available . 
 = = Current status = = 
 General relativity has emerged as a highly successful model of gravitation and cosmology , which has so far passed many unambiguous observational and experimental tests . However , there are strong indications the theory is incomplete . The problem of quantum gravity and the question of the reality of spacetime singularities remain open . Observational data that is taken as evidence for dark energy and dark matter could indicate the need for new physics . Even taken as is , general relativity is rich with possibilities for further exploration . Mathematical relativists seek to understand the nature of singularities and the fundamental properties of Einstein 's equations , and increasingly powerful computer simulations ( such as those describing merging black holes ) are run . In February 2016 , it was announced that the existence of gravitational waves was directly detected by the Advanced LIGO team on September 14 , 2015 . A century after its publication , general relativity remains a highly active area of research . 
 = Michigan State Spartans = 
 The Michigan State Spartans are the athletic teams that represent Michigan State University . The school 's athletic program includes 25 varsity sports teams . Their mascot is a Spartan warrior named Sparty , and the school colors are green and white . The university participates in the NCAA 's Division I and the Football Bowl Subdivision for football . The Spartans participate as members of the Big Ten Conference in all varsity sports . Michigan State offers 12 varsity sports for men and 13 for women . 
 The university 's athletic director is Mark Hollis , who was promoted to the position on January 1 , 2008 . Hollis replaced Ron Mason , who also served as head hockey coach from 1979 to 2002 , retiring with a 608 – 261 – 68 record at MSU . 
 MSU 's football team has won or shared six national championships in 1951 , 1952 , 1955 , 1957 , 1965 and 1966 , and has won the Rose Bowl in 1954 , 1956 , 1988 and 2014 . Its men 's basketball team won the NCAA National Championship in 1979 and 2000 . The MSU men 's ice hockey team won national titles in 1966 , 1986 and 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1925 , the institution changed its name to Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science , and , as an agricultural school , its teams were referred to as the Aggies . Looking to move beyond its agricultural roots , Michigan State held a contest to find a new nickname . They had decided to call the teams the " Michigan Staters " or the " Michigan State Sport Ons " . MSU officials headed up by George S. Alderton and local sports writers for the Lansing State Journal and the Capital News went through the entries as well as met with longtime Michigan State University supporters to find a better and more heroic name . They decided on the " Spartans " , which had been suggested by Stephen G. Scofes and his two brothers Pete and Nick , all natives of Sparta , Greece . The three brothers met with MSU officials at their Lansing restaurant , The Coffee Cup then renamed the Famous Grill , when they told them the story of the Spartan war at Thermopylae , Greece in 480 B.C. , where 300 Spartan warriors held back thousands of Persian warriors led by Persia King , Xerxes . Today the Scofes family still honors the Michigan State men 's Basketball and Football teams with trophies awarded to MSU players and faculty , since the banquets began in the Scofes families Coffee Cup and Famous Grill restaurants . This story was also highlighted in the popular book entitled , " The Tradition Continues " authored by Constantine and Steven Demos , page 56 . By coincidence , Justin Morrill had once compared the Land Grant colleges to the schools of ancient Sparta . With a heroic name and a historic precedent , the " Spartans " quickly caught on as the teams ' new nickname . They later changed the lyrics of the Fight Song to reflect the name change of the College and its sports teams . 
 As the college grew in size , it looked to join a major collegiate conference . When the University of Chicago eliminated varsity football and withdrew from the Western Conference ( now the Big Ten ) in 1946 , Michigan State president John A. Hannah lobbied hard to take its place . Despite opposition from the University of Michigan , the Big Ten finally admitted M.S.C. on May 20 , 1949 . After joining the conference , head football coach Clarence L. " Biggie " Munn led the Spartan football team to the Rose Bowl in the 1953 – 54 season , beating UCLA 28 – 20 . Successor coach Hugh " Duffy " Daugherty carried the football team to a second Rose Bowl where it again defeated UCLA , 17 – 14 . 
 = = Varsity sports = = 
 Michigan State has 23 NCAA Division I @-@ A varsity teams : 11 varsity sports for men and 12 for women . They participate in the Big Ten Conference except fencing , where until 1997 , from the University founding , MSU featured fencing as a varsity sport . During that time , MSU was coached by the first American recognized as a master of fencing , Charles <unk> , for 45 years , from 1939 to 1984 . Upon his retirement , his student , Fred Freiheit , coached from 1984 until fencing was demoted from varsity status in 1997 . The Michigan State University Fencing Club is a competing member of the Midwest Fencing Conference , which consists of sixteen ( 16 ) schools with varsity or club programs . 
 = = = Basketball = = = 
 = = = = Men 's Basketball = = = = 
 Michigan State 's men 's basketball team has won the National Championship two times : in 1979 and 2000 . In 1979 , Earvin " Magic " Johnson , along with Greg Kelser , Jay Vincent and Mike Brkovich , carried the MSU team to a 75 – 64 win against the Larry Bird @-@ led Indiana State Sycamores . In 2000 , three players from Flint , Michigan , Morris Peterson , Charlie Bell and Mateen Cleaves , carried the team to its second national title . Dubbed the " Flintstones " , they were the key to the Spartans ' win against Florida 89 – 76 . In addition to the two Championships , the 2008 – 09 team reached the NCAA Championship game , but lost to North Carolina 89 – 72 . 
 Since 1995 , Michigan State has been coached by Tom Izzo , who has a 524 – 205 record . Izzo 's coaching helped the team make six of twelve NCAA Final Fours from 1999 to 2010 , winning the title in 2000 and leading ESPN to define MSU as the best team in that decade . Michigan State basketball has been selected for 19 consecutive NCAA tournament bids under Izzo . The Spartans have won one NCAA Championship , seven Big Ten Regular Season Championships , and five Big Ten Tournament Championships ( the most of any team in the Big Ten ) under Izzo . The team has made two NCAA Championship games and advanced to seven Final Fours , nine Elite Eights , and 13 Sweet Sixteens under Izzo . 
 Overall , Michigan State has won 2 NCAA Championships , 13 Big Ten Regular Season Championships , and 5 Big Ten Tournament Championships . The Spartans have appeared in 3 NCAA Championship games , 9 Final Fours , 13 Elite Eights , 19 Sweet Sixteens , and 29 NCAA Tournament appearances . 
 Spartans formerly or currently in the NBA include Maurice Ager , Alan Anderson , Charlie Bell , Shannon Brown , Mateen Cleaves , Paul Davis , Terry <unk> , Jamie <unk> , Draymond Green , Johnny Green , Gary Harris , Earvin " Magic " Johnson , Greg Kelser , Mike <unk> , Morris Peterson , Zach Randolph , Shawn Respert , Jason Richardson , Scott Skiles , Steve Smith , Eric Snow , Sam Vincent , Jay Vincent , and Kevin Willis . 
 = = = = Women 's Basketball = = = = 
 MSU also has a fairly successful women 's basketball team , with its greatest accomplishment being a national runner @-@ up finish to Baylor in 2005 . MSU 's women 's basketball started in 1972 – 73 under coach Mikki Baile . The women 's team has had five coaches in its history . The Spartans current coach is Suzy Merchant . The Spartans have made one National Championship game , one Final Four , one Elite Eight , three Sweet Sixteens , and appeared in 15 NCAA / AIAW Tournaments . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Football has a long tradition at Michigan State . Starting as a club sport in 1884 , football gained varsity status in 1896 . During that time , the Spartans had a roster of impressive players , including Lynn <unk> , Dorne Dibble , Meredith <unk> , and Don <unk> . In 1951 , the Spartans finished the season undefeated , and performed the same feat the following year in addition to the nation 's longest winning streak of 24 games . The team was named the " undisputed national champions by every official poll " . 
 After waiting for several years , the team was finally admitted into the Big Ten Conference as a regular member in 1953 . They promptly went on to capture the league championship ( losing only one game during the season ) and beating UCLA in their first Rose Bowl game . After the 1953 season Biggie Munn , the legendary Spartan coach , turned the team over to his protégé and future legend Duffy Daugherty . <unk> went on to win the 1956 Rose Bowl . George <unk> was the head coach when the Spartans defeated USC in the 1988 Rose Bowl . 
 The current coach is Mark Dantonio , who was hired on November 27 , 2006 . Dantonio has a 63 – 29 record in his coaching tenure as of the end of the 2013 season . 
 Under Dantonio , MSU has won three Conference Championships , 2010 , 2013 , and 2015 . The Spartans have won three Big Ten Divisional championships and two Big Ten Championship games during that period . In 2015 , MSU was selected for the College Football Playoff as the No. 3 seed , but lost to Alabama in the Cotton Bowl . He also led the Spartans to a victory in the 2014 Rose Bowl , the 100th edition of the " Grandaddy of them all . " 
 All told , Michigan State has won six national championships and nine Big Ten championships . 
 Today , the football team competes in Spartan Stadium , a renovated 75 @,@ 005 @-@ person football stadium in the center of campus . 
 MSU 's traditional archrival is the Michigan , against whom they compete for the Paul Bunyan Trophy ; MSU has a 23 – 34 – 1 record in the annual trophy game . The Spartans have won the trophy seven of the past eight years , as of 2015 season . 
 Michigan State 's rivalry game against Notre Dame , with whom they compete for the <unk> Trophy was played every year until 2013 . MSU 's record in the trophy series against the Fighting Irish is 26 – 34 – 1 . 
 Notable MSU alumni who have played in the National Football League include Morten Andersen , Plaxico Burress , Andre Rison , Derrick Mason , Muhsin Muhammad , T. J. Duckett , <unk> Adams , Julian Peterson , Herb Haygood , Charles Rogers , Jim Miller , Earl Morrall , Wayne Fontes , Bubba Smith , Tony Banks , Percy Snow , Rob Fredrickson , Jeff Smoker , Tony <unk> , Lorenzo White , Hank Bullough , Drew Stanton , Devin Thomas , <unk> Peko , <unk> Peko , Chris Morris , Javon Ringer , Chris L. Rucker , Greg Jones , and Kirk Cousins . 
 = = = Ice hockey = = = 
 Michigan State has two varsity hockey teams : a men 's ice hockey team and a women 's field hockey team . Helen <unk> is the head coach of the women 's field hockey team . 
 The men 's ice hockey team plays at the Munn Ice Arena . The head coach was Rick <unk> , who had a 116 – 73 – 19 record at MSU . The current head coach is Tom <unk> . In the 2013 @-@ 2014 campaign , the Big Ten Conference debuted Division I ice hockey , ( Michigan State formerly competed in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association with Big Ten sister schools University of Michigan ( U @-@ M ) and the Ohio State University ) . 
 On October 6 , 2001 , the team was involved in what was then the most @-@ attended hockey game in history : The Cold War . The Spartans set up a hockey rink in the middle of their football stadium , Spartan Stadium and played U @-@ M before a crowd of 74 @,@ 554 . The game ended in a 3 – 3 tie . A decade later , the same two teams were involved again in the most @-@ attended ice hockey game in history . This time , Michigan hosted the rivalry game at its own Michigan Stadium . The Big Chill at the Big House set the current record with an officially certified crowd of 104 @,@ 173 . 
 The MSU ice hockey program has seven CCHA regular season championships and 11 CCHA Tournament titles . MSU has also won 11 Great Lakes Invitational titles . The Spartans have been in the NCAA tournament 23 times , with nine Frozen Four appearances and three national titles ( 1966 , 1986 and 2007 ) . On April 7 , 2007 , the Michigan State Spartans won their third Collegiate Championship by beating the Boston College Eagles 3 – 1 . 
 Former Michigan State players in the National Hockey League include Rod Brind 'Amour , Anson Carter , Duncan Keith , Donald McSween , Adam Hall , John @-@ Michael Liles , <unk> Krug , Shawn Horcoff , Justin Abdelkader , Jim Slater , brothers Kelly Miller and Kip Miller , as well as their cousins , brothers Ryan Miller and Drew Miller . Two players for MSU have won the Hobey Baker Award : Kip Miller in 1990 and Ryan Miller in 2001 . Few other players also excelling in other leagues including forward Brock Radunske and defenseman Brad Fast . 
 = = = Cross country = = = 
 Historically , the Michigan State Cross Country men 's team has been one of the school 's most successful programs . Between World War I and World War II , Michigan State College competed in the Central Collegiate Conference , winning titles in 1926 @-@ 1929 , 1932 , 1933 and 1935 . Michigan State also experienced success in the <unk> , at New York ’ s Van Cortlandt Park , winning 15 team titles ( 1933 – 1937 , 1949 , 1953 , 1956 – 1960 , 1962 , 1963 and 1968 ) . Since entering the Big Ten in 1950 , Michigan State has won 14 men ’ s titles ( 1951 – 1953 , 1955 – 1960 , 1962 , 1963 , 1968 , 1970 and 1971 ) . Michigan State hosted the inaugural NCAA cross country championships in 1938 and every year thereafter through 1964 ( except a one @-@ year vacation in 1943 due to war ) . The Spartans won eight NCAA championships from 1930 to 1959 , including 1939 , 1948 , 1949 , 1952 , and 1955 @-@ 1959 ( minus 1957 ) . Walt Drenth is the current director of both the men 's and women 's cross country and track and field programs . After joining MSU in 2004 , Drenth led the men 's cross country team to a NCAA Championship bid during the 2004 season . The women 's cross country team also advanced to the NCAA Championship Meet after winning the Great Lakes Regional race . 
 = = = Wrestling = = = 
 Wrestling was one of the earliest sports formed at the Michigan Agricultural College . While the sport was dropped in 1906 , it was reformed by the college 16 years later in 1922 . The school 's wrestling team has won the NCAA Division I championship once , in 1967 . Its current coach , Tom Minkel , has produced 33 All @-@ Americans , 11 Big Ten Champions and one NCAA Champion currently in his 23rd season as the Spartans Head coach , and 25th as a coach . The Spartan wrestling team competes on campus at the Jenison Field House which has a capacity of 5 @,@ 017 people . Alumni and standout Spartan Wrestlers Gray Maynard & Rashad Evans are former UFC champions and currently ranked in the top @-@ ten in their weight classes respectively . 
 Starting in the mid @-@ <unk> the Spartan wrestling team started to decline . From 2004 – 2016 , the team had one season better than .500 and finished in the bottom half of the Big Ten , including last on four occasions . During the 2015 championship tournament , the team finished dead last with negative team points ( <unk> ) thanks to only one qualifier and an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty . Minkel announced that he would retire after the 2015 @-@ 16 season . 
 Michigan State University Spartan Wrestling team accomplishments : 
 8 Big Ten Titles ( 1961 , 1966 , 1967 , 1968 , 1969 , 1970 , 1971 , 1972 ) 
 57 individual Big Ten Conference Champions 
 finished in the top @-@ five at the NCAA Championships 9 times 
 24 individual NCAA Champions dating back to 1936 
 100 + All @-@ Americans dating back to 1931 
 = = = Other varsity sports = = = 
 MSU has a number of other team sports . As in many other NCAA institutions , Michigan State has a baseball team for men and a softball team for women . Jake Boss Jr. is head coach of the MSU baseball team . Former Michigan State players in Major League Baseball include Kirk Gibson , Steve Garvey , Robin Roberts and Mark Mulder . Since 2007 , the baseball team plays a popular annual exhibition game against the nearby minor @-@ league Lansing Lugnuts . 
 The MSU women 's fastpitch softball team won the 1976 Women 's College World Series to take the AIAW national title , the only team east of the Mississippi River to win the <unk> until Michigan did it in 2005 . The team has appeared in six Women 's College World Series , in 1973 , 1974 , 1975 , 1976 , 1977 and 1981 . Its coach , Jacquie Joseph , has headed the program since 1994 . Since taking over the program , Joseph has helped bring MSU to a record of 445 – 372 – 1 and four NCAA Regional appearances . 
 The Spartans also have a men 's soccer team , which won two back @-@ to @-@ back championships in 1967 and 1968 . They shared the 1968 title with the University of Maryland , College Park . The men 's coach is Damon Rensing , who is in his 6th year as head coach at Michigan State . The men 's soccer team battles Michigan annually in the Big Bear Trophy game , a series in which the Spartans lead 10 @-@ 3 @-@ 1 against their in @-@ state rival . Coaching the women 's team is Tom Saxton . 
 There is also a volleyball team ; Cathy George has been the head coach of the women 's volleyball team since 2005 . During her first year at Michigan State , she led her team to a 12 – 18 record , including a 5 – 15 , ninth @-@ place finish in the conference standings . 
 There are a number of contact sports at MSU , including boxing and wrestling . MSU 's boxing team won national titles in 1951 and 1955 , although it is no longer an NCAA varsity sport . 
 Water sports at MSU include rowing and swimming . MSU 's women 's rowing coach is Matt Weise , who is in his tenth year as the Spartan crew coach . In his third year as MSU head coach , Weise coached the Spartans to a program @-@ best sixth @-@ place team finish at the NCAA Championship . Matt <unk> is the head coach of both men and women 's swimming and diving . In his four years as head coach , Spartan swimmers and divers have broken 14 varsity records . 
 Other sports at MSU include golf , gymnastics and tennis . Golf has had a long tradition at MSU . Hall of Fame Coach Bruce Fossum helped carry MSU to its first Big Ten title in 1969 . The Big Ten title would elude the Spartans until 2005 , when arguably , the best team ever assembled , took home the rings in stellar fashion . Not only did the Spartans win the Big Ten Championship in 2005 , but they captured two other titles along the way and rose all the way to # 5 in the U.S. Casey <unk> coaches the men 's golf team . A former assistant coach at Stanford University , this is his fourth year as a head coach . Stacy <unk> @-@ Stoll coaches the women 's team . In the last ten seasons , she has brought the Spartans to nine straight NCAA regional appearances . 
 The men 's gymnastics team at MSU won one national title , which they shared with the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign in 1958 . In 2001 , the MSU Board of Trustees disbanded the team in order to comply with Title IX regulations . The women 's team retained its varsity status . Its coach is Kathie Klages , who has had 16 winning seasons in a row . In 2008 , the team ranked 17th in the nation in the final season standings , the highest placement in program history . 
 Gene Orlando is the coach of the men 's tennis team . In his 17 years as MSU head coach , Orlando has taken the Spartan men to four NCAA Championship singles qualifiers . Coaching the women 's team is Erica Perkins , a second @-@ year head coach who , in her first year , led the Spartan women to a 12 – 11 record ( 2 – 8 , Big Ten . ) 
 = = Notable non @-@ varsity sports = = 
 = = = Rugby = = = 
 The Michigan State University Rugby Football Club was founded in 1964 . Michigan State rugby has been steadily improving in college rugby in recent years . During the 2010 – 11 season , the Spartans played in Division 2 , finishing with a 10 – 3 record and qualifying for the playoffs . The Spartans ' success led to them moving up to Division 1 – AA for the 2011 – 12 season . For the 2012 – 13 season , the Spartans once again moved to a higher level of competition — the Big Ten Universities D1 – A conference , against traditional Big Ten rivals such as the University of Michigan and Ohio State University . The success of Spartan Rugby is greatly attributed to former head coach Dave <unk> , who had been coaching at Michigan State since 1992 and retired in 2013 . 
 = = MSU Athletics Hall of Fame = = 
 In 1992 , thirty former Spartan athletes , coaches , and administrators were inducted into the MSU Athletics Hall of Fame as its charter class . On October 1 , 1999 , the University opened its new Athletics Hall of Fame , in the Clara Bell Smith Student @-@ Athlete Academic Center . 
 = = Awards = = 
 See footnote 
 = = Academic All @-@ Americans = = 
 See footnote 
 = = Championships = = 
 = = = National team championships = = = 
 As of July 2 , 2015 , Michigan State has 20 NCAA national team titles . 
 Men 's ( 19 ) 
 Basketball ( 2 ) : 1979 , 2000 
 Boxing ( 2 ) : 1951 , 1955 
 Cross Country ( 8 ) : 1939 , 1948 , 1949 , 1952 , 1955 , 1956 , 1958 , 1959 
 Gymnastics ( 1 ) : 1958 
 Ice Hockey ( 3 ) : 1966 , 1986 , 2007 
 Soccer ( 2 ) : 1967 , 1968 
 Wrestling ( 1 ) : 1967 
 Women 's ( 1 ) 
 Cross Country ( 1 ) : 2014 
 See also : 
 List of Big Ten Conference National Championships 
 List of NCAA schools with the most NCAA Division I championships 
 List of NCAA schools with the most Division I national championships 
 Big Ten Conference NCAA national team championships 
 Below are 10 national team titles that were not bestowed by the NCAA . 
 Men ’ s : 
 Football ( 6 ) : 1951 , 1952 , 1955 , 1957 , 1965 , 1966 
 Rifle ( 3 ) : 1914 , 1916 , 1917 
 Women ’ s : 
 Softball ( 1 ) : 1976 
 = = Spartan sports almanac = = 
 See footnote 
 = = Spartan traditions = = 
 See footnote 
 = = NCAA Division I Director 's Cup = = 
 See footnote and NACDA Directors ' Cup 
 = Conan the Barbarian ( 1982 film ) = 
 Conan the Barbarian is a 1982 American fantasy film co @-@ written and directed by John Milius . It is based on stories by Robert E. Howard , a pulp fiction writer of the 1930s , about the adventures of the eponymous character in a fictional pre @-@ historic world of dark magic and savagery . The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger and James Earl Jones , and tells the story of a young barbarian ( Schwarzenegger ) who seeks vengeance for the death of his parents at the hands of Thulsa Doom ( Jones ) , the leader of a snake cult . Buzz Feitshans and Raffaella De Laurentiis produced the film for her father Dino De Laurentiis . Basil Poledouris composed the music . 
 Ideas for a Conan film were proposed as early as 1970 . A concerted effort by executive producer Edward R. Pressman and associate producer Edward Summer to produce the film started in 1975 . It took them two years to obtain the film rights , after which they recruited Schwarzenegger for the lead role and Oliver Stone to draft a script . Pressman lacked capital for the endeavor , and in 1979 , after having his proposals for investments rejected by the major studios , he sold the project to Dino De Laurentiis . Milius was appointed as director and he rewrote Stone 's script . The final screenplay integrated scenes from Howard 's stories and from films such as Kwaidan and Seven Samurai . 
 Filming took place in Spain over five months , in the regions around Madrid and Almería . The sets , designed by Ron Cobb , were based on Dark Age cultures and Frank Frazetta 's paintings of Conan . Milius eschewed optical effects , preferring to realize his ideas with mechanical constructs and optical illusions . Schwarzenegger performed most of his own stunts , and two types of swords , costing $ 10 @,@ 000 each , were forged for his character . The editing process took over a year and several violent scenes were cut . 
 Conan was a commercial success for its backers , grossing more than $ 100 million at box @-@ offices around the world , although the revenue fell short of the level that would qualify the film as a blockbuster . Academics and critics interpreted the film as advancing the themes of fascism or individualism , and the fascist angle featured in most of the criticisms of the film . Critics also negatively reviewed Schwarzenegger 's acting and the film 's violent scenes . Despite the criticisms , Conan was popular with young males . The film earned Schwarzenegger worldwide recognition . Conan has been frequently released on home media , the sales of which had increased the film 's gross to more than $ 300 million by 2007 . The film 's popularity led to the 1984 sequel Conan the Destroyer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Conan the Barbarian is a film about a young barbarian 's quest to avenge his parents ' deaths . The story is set in the fictional Hyborian Age , thousands of years before the rise of modern civilization . The film opens with the words , " That which does not kill us makes us stronger " , a paraphrasing of Friedrich Nietzsche , on a black screen followed by a voice @-@ over that establishes the film as the story of Conan 's origin . " A burst of drums and trumpets " accompanies the forging of a sword , after which the scene shifts to a mountain top , where the swordsmith tells his young son Conan about the Riddle of Steel , an aphorism on the importance of the metal to their people , the Cimmerians . 
 The Cimmerians are massacred by a band of warriors led by Thulsa Doom . Conan 's father is killed by dogs , and his sword is taken by Doom to decapitate Conan 's mother . The children are taken into slavery ; Conan is chained to a large mill , the Wheel of Pain . Years of pushing the huge grindstone build up his muscles . His master trains him to be a gladiator , and after winning many pit fights , Conan is freed . As he wanders the world , he encounters a witch and befriends Subotai , a thief and archer . 
 Following the witch 's advice , Conan and Subotai go to Shadizar , in the land of Zamora , to seek out Doom . They meet Valeria , a female brigand , who becomes Conan 's lover . They burgle the Tower of Serpents , stealing a large jewel — the Eye of the Serpent — and other valuables from Doom 's snake cult . After escaping with their loot , the thieves celebrate and end up in a drunken stupor . The city guards capture them and bring them to King Osric . He requests they rescue his daughter , who has joined Doom 's cult . Subotai and Valeria do not want to take up the quest ; Conan , motivated by his hatred for Doom , sets off alone to the villain 's Temple of Set . 
 Disguised as a priest , Conan infiltrates the temple , but he is discovered , captured , and tortured . Doom lectures him on the power of flesh , which he demonstrates by compelling a girl to leap to her death . He then orders Conan crucified on the Tree of Woe . The barbarian is on the verge of death when he is discovered by Subotai and brought to the Wizard of the Mounds , who lives on a burial site for warriors and kings . The wizard summons spirits to heal Conan and warns that they will " extract a heavy toll " , which Valeria is willing to pay . These spirits also try to abduct Conan , but he is restored to health after Valeria and Subotai fend them off . 
 Subotai and Valeria agree to complete Osric 's quest with Conan and they infiltrate the Temple of Set . As the cult indulges in a cannibalistic orgy , the thieves attack and flee with the princess . Valeria is mortally wounded by Doom after he shoots a stiffened snake at her . She dies in Conan 's arms and is cremated at the Mounds , where Conan prepares with Subotai and the wizard to battle Doom . By using booby @-@ traps and exploiting the terrain , they manage to kill Doom 's cavalrymen . Valeria reappears for a brief moment as a Valkyrie to save Conan from a mortal blow . Conan recovers his father 's sword during the fight , although its blade is broken . After losing his men , Doom shoots a stiffened snake at the princess . Subotai blocks the shot and the villain flees to his temple . 
 Conan sneaks back into the temple where Doom stands at the top of a long stairway , addressing the members of his cult . Conan confronts Doom , who attempts to <unk> him , but the barbarian resists and uses his father 's sword to behead his nemesis . After throwing Doom 's head down the stairs , Conan burns down the temple . He returns the princess , and the final scene shows him as an old king ; the narration says his road to the throne is another tale . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The character , Conan , and the world of Hyboria were based on the creations of pulp @-@ fiction writer Robert E. Howard from the 1930s . Published in Weird Tales , his series about the barbarian was popular with the readership ; the barbarian 's adventures in a savage and mystical world , replete with gore and brutal slayings , satisfied the reader 's fantasies of being a " powerful giant who lives by no rules but his own " . From the 1960s , Conan gained a wider audience as novels about him , written in imitation of Howard 's style by L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter , were published . Frank Frazetta 's cover art for these novels cemented Conan 's image as a " virile , axe @-@ wielding , fur @-@ bearing , cranium @-@ smashing barbarian " . John Milius , the film 's director , intended the film 's Conan to be " a Northern European mythic hero " . Danny Peary described Conan as " muscular , majestic , brainy , yet with ambivalent scruples " . Don Herron , a scholar on Howard and his stories , disagreed , noting that the personality of Conan in the film differs greatly from that of the literature . The Conan in the books detests restrictions to his freedom and would have resisted slavery in a violent fashion , whereas the film version accepts his fate and has to be freed . Robert Garcia 's review of the film in his American Fantasy magazine states that " this Conan is less powerful , less talkative , and less educated than Howard 's " . 
 The female lead , Valeria , has her roots in two strong female characters from Howard 's Conan stories . Her namesake was Conan 's companion in " Red Nails " , while her personality and fate were based on those of Bêlit , the pirate queen in " Queen of the Black Coast " . According to Kristina Passman , an assistant professor of classical languages and literature , the film 's Valeria is a perfect archetype of the " good " Amazon character , a fierce but domesticated female warrior , in cinema . <unk> Schubart , a film scholar , said Valeria is a " good " Amazon because she is tamed by love and not because of any altruistic tendencies . Valeria 's prowess in battle matches that of Conan and she is also depicted as his equal in behavior and status . The loyalty and love she displays for Conan makes her more than a dear companion to him ; she represents his " possibilities of human happiness " . Her sacrifice for Conan and her brief return from death act out the heroic code , illustrating that self @-@ sacrificing heroism brings " undying fame " . Valeria 's name is not spoken in the film ; the only scene where she was named , her self @-@ introduction , was cut . 
 Milius based Conan 's other companion , Subotai , on Genghis Khan 's main general , Subotai , rather than on any of Howard 's characters . According to film critic Roger Ebert , Subotai fulfills the role of a " classic literary type — the Best Pal . " He helps the barbarian to kill a giant snake and cuts him down from crucifixion ; the thief also cries for his companion during Valeria 's cremation , with the explanation that " ( h ) e is Conan , a Cimmerian . He won 't cry , so I cry for him . " 
 Conan 's enemy , Thulsa Doom , is an amalgamation of two of Howard 's creations . He takes his name from the villain in Howard 's Kull of Atlantis series of stories , but is closer in character to Thoth @-@ Amon , a Stygian sorcerer in " The Phoenix on the Sword " . The Doom in the film reminded critics of Jim Jones , a cult leader whose hold on his followers was such that hundreds of them obeyed his orders to commit suicide . Milius said his research on the ancient orders of the <unk> and the Thuggee was the inspiration for Doom 's snake cult . 
 = = Production = = 
 From the 1970s , licensing issues had stood in the way of producing film versions of the Conan stories . Lancer Books , which had acquired the rights in 1966 , went into receivership , and there were legal disputes over their disposition of the publishing rights , which ultimately led to them being frozen under injunction . Edward Summer suggested Conan as a potential project to executive producer Edward R. Pressman in 1975 , and after being shown the comics and Frazetta 's artwork , Pressman was convinced . It took two years to secure the film rights . The two main parties involved in the lawsuit , Glenn Lord and de Camp , formed Conan Properties Incorporated to handle all licensing of Conan @-@ related material , and Pressman was awarded the film rights shortly afterwards . He spent more than $ 100 @,@ 000 in legal fees to help resolve the lawsuit , and the rights cost him another $ 7 @,@ 500 . 
 The success of Star Wars in 1977 increased Hollywood 's interest in producing films that portray " heroic adventures in supernatural lands of fables " . The film industry 's attention was drawn to the popularity of Conan among young male Americans , who were buying reprints of the stories with Frazetta 's art and adaptations by Marvel Comics . John Milius first expressed interest in directing a film about Conan in 1978 after completing the filming of Big Wednesday , according to Buzz Feitshans , a producer who frequently worked with Milius . ( Milius had long been an admirer of films like The Vikings ( 1958 ) ) . Milius and Feitshans approached Pressman , but differences over several issues stopped discussions from going further . 
 Oliver Stone joined the Conan project after Paramount Pictures offered to fund the film 's initial $ 2 @.@ 5 million budget if a " name screenwriter " was on the team . After securing Stone 's services , Pressman approached Frank Frazetta to be a " visual consultant " but they failed to come to terms . The producer then engaged Ron Cobb , who had just completed a set design job on Alien ( 1979 ) . Cobb made a series of paintings and drawings for Pressman before leaving to join Milius on another project . 
 The estimates to realize Stone 's finished script ran to $ 40 million ; Pressman , Summer , and Stone could not convince a studio to finance their project . Pressman 's production company was in financial difficulties and to keep it afloat , he borrowed money from the bank . The failure to find a suitable director was also a problem for the project . Stone and Joe Alves , who was the second unit director on Jaws 2 , were considered as possible co @-@ directors , but Pressman said it " was a pretty crazy idea and [ they ] didn 't get anywhere with it " . Stone also said that he asked Ridley Scott , who had finished directing Alien , to take up the task but was rejected . 
 Cobb showed Milius his work for Conan and Stone 's script which , according to him , re @-@ ignited Milius 's interest ; the director contacted Pressman , and they came to an agreement : Milius would direct the film if he was allowed to modify the script . Milius was known in the film industry for his macho screenplays for Dirty Harry ( 1971 ) and Magnum Force ( 1973 ) . He was , however , contracted to direct his next film for Dino De Laurentiis , an influential producer in the fantasy film industry . Milius raised the idea of taking on Conan with De Laurentiis , and , after a year of negotiations , Pressman and De Laurentiis agreed to co @-@ produce . De Laurentiis took over the financing and production and Pressman gave up all claims to the film 's profits , though he retained approval over changes to the script , cast and director . Dino De Laurentiis assigned the responsibility for production to his daughter , Raffaella , and Feitshans . Milius was formally appointed as director in early 1979 , and Cobb was named as the production designer . De Laurentiis convinced Universal Pictures to become the film 's distributor for the United States . The studio also contributed to the production budget of $ 17 @.@ 5 million and prepared $ 12 million to advertise the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 While they were working to secure the film rights , Pressman and Summer were also contemplating the lead role . Summer said they considered Charles Bronson , Sylvester Stallone , and William Smith — all of whom had played tough figures , but in 1976 , the two producers watched a rough cut of the bodybuilding film Pumping Iron , and agreed Arnold Schwarzenegger was perfect for the role of Conan . According to Schwarzenegger , Pressman 's " low @-@ key " approach and " great inner strength " convinced him to join the project . Paul Sammon , writer for Cinefantastique , said that the former champion bodybuilder was practically the " living incarnation of one of Frazetta 's paperback illustrations " . Schwarzenegger was paid $ 250 @,@ 000 and placed on retainer ; the terms of the contract restricted him from starring in other sword and sorcery films . Schwarzenegger said Conan was his biggest opportunity to establish himself in the entertainment industry . 
 Thanks to Pressman 's firm belief in him , Schwarzenegger retained the role of Conan even after the project was effectively sold to De Laurentiis . Milius wanted a more athletic look on his lead actor , so Schwarzenegger undertook an 18 @-@ month training regime before shooting began ; aside from running and lifting weights , his routines included rope climbing , horseback riding , and swimming . He slimmed down from 240 to 210 pounds ( 109 to 95 kg ) . Aside from Conan , two other substantial roles were also played by novice actors . Subotai was Gerry Lopez , a champion surfer , whose only major acting experience was playing himself in Milius 's Big Wednesday . Schwarzenegger stayed at Lopez 's home for over a month before the start of filming so they could rehearse their roles and build a rapport . Sandahl Bergman , a dancer who had bit parts in several theater productions and films , played Valeria . She was recommended to Milius by Bob Fosse , who had directed her in All That Jazz ( 1979 ) , and was accepted after reading for the part . 
 Milius said the actors were chosen because their appearances and personae fitted their roles . He wanted actors who would not have any preconceived notions to project into their roles . Although Milius had reservations when he witnessed the first few takes of the novices at work , he put faith in them improving their skills on the job and altered the script to fit their abilities . Schwarzenegger had studied for weeks in 1980 under Robert Easton , a voice coach for several Hollywood stars , to improve his speech . His first line in the film was a paraphrasing of Mongol emperor Genghis Khan 's speech about the good things in life and the actor delivered it with a heavy Austrian accent ; critics later described what they heard as " to crush your enemies — see dem [ them ] driven before you , and to hear the lamentations of <unk> <unk> [ their women ] " . Subsequently , Schwarzenegger underwent intensive speech training with Milius . Each of his later longer speeches was rehearsed at least forty times . Lopez 's lines were also an issue : although Milius was satisfied with Lopez 's work , the surfer 's lines were redubbed by stage actor Sab Shimono for the final cut . A source close to the production said this was done because Lopez failed to " [ maintain ] a certain quality to his voice . " 
 Sean Connery and John Huston were considered for the other roles . James Earl Jones and Max von Sydow were , according to Milius , hired with the hope that they would inspire Schwarzenegger , Bergman , and Lopez . Jones was an award @-@ winning veteran of numerous theater and cinema productions . Von Sydow was a Swedish actor of international renown . The role of Thulsa Doom was offered to Jones while he was considering applying for the role of Grendel in an upcoming feature based on John Gardner 's eponymous novel ; after learning it was an animation , Jones read Conan 's script and accepted the part of Doom . When filming started , Jones was also starring in a Broadway play - Athol Fugard 's A Lesson to <unk> . He and the film crew coordinated their schedules to allow him to join the play 's remaining performances . Jones took an interest in Schwarzenegger 's acting , often giving him pointers on how to deliver his lines . 
 The Japanese actor Mako Iwamatsu , known professionally as " Mako " , was brought onto the project by Milius for his experience ; he had played roles in many plays and films and had been nominated for an Academy and a Tony Award . In Conan , Mako played the Wizard of the Mounds and voiced the film 's opening speech . William Smith , although passed over for the lead role , was hired to play the barbarian 's father . Doom 's two lieutenants <unk> and <unk> were respectively played by Sven @-@ Ole Thorsen , a Danish bodybuilder and karate master , and Ben Davidson , a former American @-@ football player with the Oakland Raiders . Cassandra <unk> played the witch . Milius hired more than 1 @,@ 500 extras in Spain . Professional actors from the European film industry were also hired : Valerie <unk> was chosen to play Osric 's daughter , Jorge Sanz acted as the nine @-@ year @-@ old version of Conan , and <unk> played his mother . 
 = = = Script writing = = = 
 The drafting of a story for a Conan film started in 1976 ; Summer conceived a script with the help of Roy Thomas , a comic book writer and Conan expert who had been writing the character 's adventures for years for Marvel Comics . Summer and Thomas 's tale , in which Conan would be employed by a " dodgy priest to kill an evil wizard " , was largely based on Howard 's " Rogues in the House " . Their script was abandoned when Oliver Stone joined the project . Stone was , at this time , going through a period of addiction to cocaine and depressants . His screenplay was written under the influence of the drugs and the result was what Milius called a " total drug fever dream " , albeit an inspired one . According to Schwarzenegger , Stone completed a draft by early 1978 . Taking inspiration from Howard 's " Black Colossus " and " A Witch Shall be Born " , Stone proposed a story , four hours long , in which the hero champions the defense of a princess 's kingdom . Instead of taking place in the distant past , Stone 's story is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic future where Conan leads an army in a massive battle against a horde of 10 @,@ 000 mutants . 
 When Milius was appointed as director , he took over the task of writing the screenplay . Although listed as a co @-@ writer , Stone said Milius did not incorporate any of his suggestions into the final story . Milius discarded the latter half of Stone 's story . He retained several scenes from the first half , such as Conan 's crucifixion ordeal , which was taken straight out of " A Witch Shall be Born " , and the climbing of the Tower of Serpents , which was derived from " The Tower of the Elephant " . One of Milius ' original changes was to extend Stone 's brief exposition of Conan 's youth — the raid on the Cimmerian village — into his teens with the barbarian 's enslavement at the Wheel of Pain and training as a gladiator . Milius also added ideas gleaned from other films . The Japanese supernatural tale of " <unk> the <unk> " , as portrayed in Masaki Kobayashi 's Kwaidan ( 1965 ) , inspired the painting of symbols on Conan 's body and the swarm of ghosts during the barbarian 's resurrection , and Akira Kurosawa 's Seven Samurai ( 1954 ) influenced Milius 's vision of Conan 's final battle against Doom 's men . Milius also included scenes from post @-@ Howard stories about Conan ; the barbarian 's discovery of a tomb during his initial wanderings and acquisition of a sword within were based on de Camp and Carter 's " The Thing in the Crypt " . According to Derek Elley , Variety 's resident film critic , Milius 's script , with its original ideas and references to the pulp stories , was faithful to Howard 's ideals of Conan . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming started at England 's Shepperton Studios in October 1980 , with Schwarzenegger , made up to look like Conan as a king in his old age , reading an excerpt from " The <unk> Chronicles " , which Howard had penned to introduce his Conan stories . This footage was initially intended to be a trailer but Milius decided to use it as the opening sequence of the film instead . According to Cobb , Laurentiis and Universal Pictures were concerned about Schwarzenegger 's accent , so Milius compromised by moving the sequence to the end . 
 The initial location for principal photography was Yugoslavia , but because of concerns over the country 's stability after the death of its head of state , Josip Broz Tito , and the fact that the Yugoslavian film industry proved ill @-@ equipped for large @-@ scale film production , the producers elected to move the project to Spain , which was cheaper and where resources were more easily available . It took several months to relocate ; the crew and equipment arrived in September , and filming started on January 7 , 1981 . The producers allocated $ 11 million for production in Spain , of which approximately $ 3 million was spent on building 49 sets . The construction workforce numbered from 50 to 200 ; artists from England , Italy , and Spain were also recruited . 
 A large warehouse 20 miles ( 32 km ) outside Madrid served as the production 's headquarters , and it also housed most of the interior sets for the Tower of Serpents and Doom 's temple ; a smaller warehouse was leased for other interior sets . The remaining interiors for the Tower of Serpents were constructed in an abandoned hangar at Torrejón Air Base . A full @-@ scale , 40 feet ( 12 m ) version of the tower was built in the hangar ; this model was used to film Conan and his companion 's climb up the structure . 
 The crew filmed several exterior scenes in the countryside near Madrid ; the Cimmerian village was built in a forest near the <unk> ski resort , south of Segovia . Approximately one million pesetas ( $ 12 @,@ 084 ) worth of marble shavings were scattered on the ground to simulate snow . The Wheel of Pain scene took place in the province of Ávila . Conan 's encounter with the witch and Subotai was shot among the Ciudad Encantada rock formations in the province of Cuenca . Most outdoor scenes were shot in the province of Almería , which offered a semi @-@ arid climate , diverse terrain ( deserts , beaches , mountains ) , and Roman and Moorish structures that could be adapted for many settings . 
 Conan 's crucifixion was filmed in March 1981 among the sand dunes on the southeastern coast of Almería . The Tree of Woe was layers of plaster and Styrofoam applied onto a skeleton of wood and steel . It was mounted on a turntable , allowing it to be rotated to ensure the angle of the shadows remained consistent throughout three days of filming . Schwarzenegger sat on a bicycle seat mounted in the tree while fake nails were affixed to his wrists and feet . The scene in which Valeria and Subotai fought off ghosts to save Conan and the final battle with Doom 's forces were filmed in the salt marshes of <unk> . " Stonehenge @-@ like ruins " were erected and sand piled into mounds that reached 9 meters ( 30 ft ) . The changes to the landscape attracted protests from environmentalists and the producers promised to restore the site after filming was completed . 
 The Temple of Set was built in the mountains , about 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) west of the city of Almería . The structure was 50 meters ( 160 ft ) long and 22 meters ( 72 ft ) high . It was the most expensive of the sets , costing $ 350 @,@ 000 , and built out of various woods , lacquers , and tons of concrete . Its stairway had 120 steps . Milius and his crew also filmed at historical sites and on sets from previous films . Scenes of a bazaar were filmed at the Moorish Alcazaba of Almería , which was dressed to give it a fictional Hyborian look . Shadizar was realized at a pre @-@ existing film set in the <unk> desert ; the fort used for the filming of El Condor ( 1970 ) refurbished as an ancient city . 
 It was expensive to build large sets , and Milius did not want to rely on optical effects and matte paintings ( painted landscapes ) . The crew instead adopted miniature effect techniques ( playing on perspective ) to achieve the illusion of size and grandeur for several scenes . Scale models of structures were constructed by Emilio Ruiz and positioned in front of the cameras so that they appeared as full @-@ sized structures on film ; using this technique the Shadizar set was extended to appear more than double its size . Ruiz built eight major miniature models , including a 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) high palace and a representation of the entire city of Shadizar that spanned 120 square feet ( 11 m2 ) . 
 Cobb 's direction for the sets was to " undo history " , " to invent [ their ] own fantasy history " , and yet maintain a " realistic , historical look " . Eschewing the Greco @-@ Roman imagery used heavily in the sword @-@ and @-@ sandal films of the 1960s , he realized a world that was an amalgamation of Dark Age cultures , such as the Mongols and the Vikings . Several scenarios paid homage to Frazetta 's paintings of Conan , such as the " half @-@ naked slave girl chained to a pillar , with a snarling leopard at her feet , " at the snake cult 's orgy . David Huckvale , a lecturer at the Open University and broadcaster for BBC Radio , said the designs of the Tree of Woe and the costumes appeared very similar to those used in Richard Wagner 's Ring of the Nibelung operas at the Bayreuth Festspielhaus in 1876 . Principal photography was completed in the middle of May 1981 . The film crews burned down the Cimmerian village and the Temple of Set after completing filming on each set . 
 = = = = Stunts and swords = = = = 
 Several action scenes in Conan were filmed with a " mini @-@ jib " ( a remote @-@ controlled electronic camera mounted on a motorized lightweight crane ) that Nick Allder , the special effects supervisor , had devised when he worked on Dragonslayer ( 1981 ) . The stunts were co @-@ ordinated by Terry Leonard , who had worked on many films , including Milius ' previous projects and Steven Spielberg 's Raiders of the Lost Ark ( 1981 ) . Leonard said that Schwarzenegger , Bergman , and Lopez performed most of their own stunts , including the fights . 
 The three actors were given martial arts training ahead of filming . From August 1980 , they were tutored by Kiyoshi Yamazaki , a karate black belt and master swordsman , who drilled them in sword @-@ fighting styles that were meant to make them look proficient in using their weapons . They practiced each move in a fight at least 15 times before filming . Yamazaki advised Leonard on the choreography of the sword fights and had a cameo role as one of Conan 's instructors . 
 Tim Huchthausen , the prop maker , worked with swordsmith Jody Samson to create the sturdy weapons Milius thought necessary . Particular attention was paid to two swords wielded by Conan : his father 's sword ( " Master 's sword " ) and the blade he finds in a tomb ( " Atlantean sword " ) . Both weapons were realized from Cobb 's drawings . Their blades were hand ground from carbon steel and heat treated and left <unk> . The hilts and <unk> were sculpted and cast through the lost @-@ wax process ; inscriptions were added to the blades via electrical discharge machining . Samson and Huchthausen made four Master 's and four Atlantean swords , at a cost of $ 10 @,@ 000 per weapon . Copies of the Atlantean sword were struck and given to members of the production . 
 Samson and Huchthausen agreed the weapons were heavy and unbalanced , and thus unsuitable for actual combat ; Lighter versions made of aluminum , fiberglass , and steel were struck in Madrid ; these 3 pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) copies were used in the fight scenes . According to Schwarzenegger , the heavy swords were used in close @-@ up shots . The other weapons used in the film were not as elaborate ; Valeria 's <unk> was ground out from an aluminum sheet . 
 The copious amounts of blood spilled in the fight scenes came from bags of fake blood strapped to the performers ' bodies . Animal blood gathered from slaughterhouses was poured onto the floor to simulate puddles of human blood . Most of the times trick swords made from fiberglass were used when the scene called for a killing blow . Designed by Allder , these swords could also retract their blades , and several sprayed blood from their tips . Although the swords were intended to be safer alternatives to metal weapons , they could still be dangerous : in one of the fights , Bergman sparred with an extra who failed to follow the choreography and sliced open her finger . 
 Accidents also happened in stunts that did not involve weapons . A stuntman smashed his face into a camera while riding a horse at full gallop , and Schwarzenegger was attacked by one of the trained dogs . The use of live animals also raised concerns about cruelty ; the American Humane Association placed the film on its " unacceptable list " . The transgressions listed by the association included the kicking of a dog , the striking of a camel , and the tripping of horses . 
 = = = = Mechanical effects = = = = 
 Carlo De <unk> , the special make @-@ up effects supervisor , and Colin Arthur , former Studio Head of Madame Tussaud 's , were responsible for the human dummies and fake body parts used in the film . The dummies inflated crowd numbers and stood in as dead bodies , while the body parts were used in scenes showing the aftermath of fights and the cult 's cannibalistic feast . In Thulsa Doom 's beheading scene Schwarzenegger hacked at a dummy and pulled a concealed chain to detach its head . The decapitation of Conan 's mother was more complex : a Plexiglas shield between Jones and <unk> stopped his sword as he swung at her and an artificial head then dropped into the camera 's view . A more elaborate head was used for the close @-@ up shots ; this prop spurted blood and the movements of its eyes , mouth , and tongue were controlled by cables hidden beneath the snow . 
 Allder created a $ 20 @,@ 000 36 feet ( 11 m ) mechanical snake for the fight scene in the Tower of Serpents . The snake 's body had a diameter of 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) , and its head was 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) long and 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) wide . Its skeleton was made from duralumin ( an alloy used in aircraft frames ) and its skin was vulcanized foam rubber . Controlled by steel cables and hydraulics , the snake could exert a force between 3 @.@ 5 and 9 tons . Another two snakes of the same dimensions were made : one for stationary shots and one for decapitation by Schwarzenegger . To create the scene at the Tree of Woe the crew tethered live vultures to the branches , and created a mechanical bird for Schwarzenegger to bite . The dummy bird 's feathers and wings were from a dead vulture , and its control mechanisms were routed inside the false tree . 
 According to Sammon , " one of the greatest special effects in the film [ was ] Thulsa Doom 's onscreen transformation into a giant snake " . It involved footage of fake body parts , live and dummy snakes , miniatures , and other camera tricks combined into a flowing sequence with lap dissolve . After Jones was filmed in position , he was replaced by a hollow framework with a rubber mask that was pushed from behind by a snake head @-@ shaped puppet to give the illusion of Doom 's facial bones changing . The head was then replaced with a 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) mechanical snake ; as it moved outwards , a crew member pressed a foot pedal to collapse the framework . For the final part of the sequence , a real snake was filmed on a miniature set . 
 = = = = Optical effects = = = = 
 There were few optical effects in Conan the Barbarian . Milius professed ambivalence to fantasy elements , preferring a story that showcases accomplishments realized through one 's own efforts without reliance on the supernatural . He also said that he followed the advice of Cobb and other production members on the matters of special effects . Peter Kuran 's Visual Concepts Engineering ( VCE ) effects company was engaged in October 1981 to handle post @-@ production optical effects for Conan . VCE had previously worked on films such as Raiders of the Lost Ark and Dragonslayer . Among their tasks for Conan were adding glint and sparkle to The Eye of the Serpent and Valeria 's Valkyrie armor . Not all of VCE 's work made it to the final print : the flames of Valeria 's funeral pyre were originally enhanced by the company but were later restored to the original version . 
 For the scene in which Valeria and Subotai had to fend off ghosts to save Conan 's life , the " boiling clouds " were created by George Lucas 's Industrial Light and Magic , while VCE was given the task of creating the ghosts . Their first attempt — filming strips of film emulsion suspended in a vat of a viscous solution — elicited complaints from the producers who thought the resulting spirits looked too much like those in a scene from Raiders of the Lost Ark , so VCE turned to animation to complete the task . First , they drew muscular warriors in ghostly forms onto cels and printed the images onto film with an Oxberry animation stand and contact printer . The Oxberry was fitted with a used lens that introduced lens flares to the prints ; VCE 's intention with using the old lens was to make the resultant images of the ghosts seem as if they were of real @-@ life objects filmed with a camera . The final composite was produced by passing the reels of film for the effects and the live @-@ action sequences through a two @-@ headed optical printer and capturing the results with a camera . 
 = = Music = = 
 Milius recruited his friend , Basil Poledouris , to produce the score for Conan ; they had a successful collaboration on Big Wednesday . The film industry 's usual practice was to contract a composer to start work after the main scenes had been filmed , but Milius hired Poledouris before principal photography had started ; the composer was given the opportunity to compose the film 's music based on the initial storyboards and to modify it throughout filming before recording the score near the end of production . Poledouris made extensive use of <unk> — a music and tempo editing hardware and software system invented by Robert Randles ( subsequently nominated for an Oscar for Scientific Achievement ) , to modify the tempo of his compositions and synchronize them with the action in the film . The system helped make his job easier and faster ; it could automatically adjust tempos when the user changed the positioning of beats . In the montage where Conan grows up , for example , Poledouris had Randles prepare , over the phone , a long accelerando that landed on precise moments in the picture along the way . Poledouris would , otherwise , have had to conduct the orchestra and adjust his compositions on the fly . Conan is the first film to list <unk> in its credits . 
 Milius and Poledouris exchanged ideas throughout production , working out themes and " emotional tones " for each scene . According to Poledouris , Milius envisioned Conan as an opera with little or no dialog ; Poledouris composed enough musical pieces for most ( approximately two hours ) of the film . This was his first large @-@ scale orchestral score , and a characteristic of his work here was that he frequently slowed down the tempo of the last two bars ( segments of beats ) before switching to the next piece of music . Poledouris said the score uses a lot of fifths as its most primitive interval ; thirds and sixths are introduced as the story progresses . The composer visited the film sets several times during filming to see the imagery his music would accompany . After principal photography was completed , Milius sent him two copies of the edited film : one without music , and the other with its scenes set to works by Richard Wagner , Igor Stravinsky , and Sergei Prokofiev , to illustrate the emotional overtones he wanted . 
 Poledouris said he started working on the score by developing the melodic line — a pattern of musical ideas supported by rhythms . The first draft was a poem sung to the strumming of a guitar , composed as if Poledouris was a bard for the barbarian . This draft became the " Riddle of Steel " , a composition played with " massive brass , strings , and percussion " , which also serves as Conan 's personal theme . The music is first played when Conan 's father explains the riddle to him . Laurence E. MacDonald , Professor of Music at Mott Community College , said the theme stirs up the appropriate emotions when it is repeated during Conan 's vow to avenge his parents . The film 's main musical theme , the " Anvil of Crom " , which opens the film with " the brassy sound of twenty @-@ four French horns in a dramatic intonation of the melody , while pounding drums add an incessantly driven rhythmic propulsion " is played again in several later scenes . 
 Poledouris completed the music that accompanies the attack on Conan 's village at the beginning of the film in October 1981 . Milius initially wanted a chorus based on Carl Orff 's Carmina Burana to herald the appearance of Doom and his warriors in this sequence . After learning that Excalibur ( 1981 ) had used Orff 's work , he changed his mind and asked his composer for an original creation . Poledouris ' theme for Doom consists of " energetic choral passages " , chanted by the villain 's followers to salute their leader and their actions in his name . The lyrics were composed in English and roughly translated into Latin ; Poledouris was " more concerned about the way the Latin words sounded than with the sense they actually made . " He set these words to a melody adapted from the 13th @-@ century Gregorian hymn , Dies Irae , which was chosen to " communicate the tragic aspects of the cruelty wrought by Thulsa Doom . " 
 The film 's music mostly conveys a sense of power , energy , and brutality , yet there are tender moments . The sounds of oboes and string instruments accompany Conan and Valeria 's intimate scenes , imbuing them with a sense of lush romance and an emotional intensity . According to MacDonald , Poledouris deviated from the practice of scoring love scenes with tunes reminiscent of Romantic period pieces ; instead , Poledouris made Conan and Valeria 's melancholic love theme unique through his use of " minor @-@ key harmony " . David Morgan , a film journalist , heard Eastern influences in the " lilting romantic melodies " . Page Cook , audio critic for Films in Review , describes Conan the Barbarian 's score as " a large canvas daubed with a colorful yet highly sensitive brush . There is innate intelligence behind Poledouris 's scheme , and the pinnacles reached are often eloquent with haunting intensity . " 
 From late November 1981 , Poledouris spent three weeks recording his score in Rome . He engaged a 90 @-@ instrument orchestra and a 24 @-@ member choir from the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia and the RAI National Symphony Orchestra , and conducted them personally . The pieces of music were orchestrated by Greig <unk> , Poledouris 's frequent collaborator . The chorus and orchestra were recorded separately . The 24 tracks of sound effects , music , and dialog were <unk> into a single @-@ channel , making Conan the Barbarian the last film released by a major studio with a mono soundtrack . According to Poledouris , Raffaella De Laurentiis balked at the cost ( $ 30 @,@ 000 ) of a stereo soundtrack and was worried over the paucity of theaters equipped with stereo sound systems . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The central theme in Conan the Barbarian is the Riddle of Steel . At the start of the film , Conan 's father tells his son to learn the secret of steel and to trust only it . Initially believing in the power of steel , Thulsa Doom raids Conan 's village to steal the Master 's sword . Subsequently , the story centers on Conan 's quest to recover the weapon in which his father has told him to trust . Weaponry fetish is a device long established in literature ; Carl James Grindley , an assistant professor of English , said ancient works such as Homer 's Iliad , the Old English poem Beowulf , and the 14th @-@ century tale of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight pay detailed attention to the arsenal of their heroes . Grindley further said that Conan the Barbarian , like most other contemporary action films , uses weapons as convenient plot devices rather than as symbols that mark the qualities of the hero . James <unk> , an associate professor of English , said the Riddle of Steel makes the film 's emphasis on the swords ironic ; it gives the illusion that the weapons have powers of their own , but later reveals them to be useless and dependent on the strength of their wielders . In the later part of the film , Doom mocks steel , proclaiming the power of flesh to be stronger . When Conan recovers his father 's sword , it is after he has broken it in the hands of Doom 's lieutenant during their duel . According to Grindley , that moment — Conan 's breaking of his father 's sword — " [ fulfills ] a snickering spectrum of Oedipal conjecture " and asserts Homer 's view that " the sword does not make the hero , but the hero makes the sword . " The film , as <unk> says , " offers a fantasy of human power raised beyond mortal limits . " Passman agrees , stating the film suggests that the human mind and emotions are stronger than physical might . 
 Another established literary trope found in the plot of Conan the Barbarian is the concept of death , followed by a journey into the underworld , and rebirth . Donald E. Palumbo , the Language and Humanities Chair at Lorain County Community College , noted that like most other sword and sorcery films , Conan used the motif of underground journeys to reinforce the themes of death and rebirth . According to him , the first scene to involve all three is after Conan 's liberation : his flight from wild dogs sends him tumbling into a tomb where he finds a sword that lets him cut off his chains and stand with newfound power . In the later parts of the film , Conan experiences two underground journeys where death abounds : in the bowels of the Tower of Serpents where he has to fight a giant snake and in the depths of the Temple of Set where the cultists feast on human flesh while Doom transforms himself into a large serpent . Whereas Valeria dies and comes back from the dead ( albeit briefly ) , Conan 's ordeal from his crucifixion was symbolic . Although the barbarian 's crucifixion might evoke Christian imagery , associations of the film with the religion are roundly rejected . Milius stated his film is full of pagan ideas , a sentiment supported by film critics such as Elley and Jack Kroll . George <unk> , Professor Emeritus of Philosophy and Religion at Adrian College , suggested the filmmaker 's intent with the crucifixion scene was pure marketing : to tease the audience with religious connotations . He , however , suggested that Conan 's story can be viewed as an analogy of Christ 's life and vice versa . Nigel Andrews , a film critic , saw any connections to Christianity related more to the making of the film . 
 Milius 's concept of Conan the Barbarian as an opera was picked up by the critics ; Elley and Huckvale saw connections to Wagner 's operas . According to Huckvale , the film 's opening sequence closely mirrors a sword forging scene in Siegfried . Conan 's adventures and ordeals seem to be inspired by the trials of the opera 's titular hero : witnessing his parents ' deaths , growing up as a slave , and slaying a giant serpent — dragon . Furthermore , Schwarzenegger 's appearance in the role of Conan evoked images of Siegfried , the role model of the " Aryan blonde beast " , in the lecturer 's mind . The notion of racial superiority , symbolized by this Aryan hero , was a criticism given by J. Hoberman and James Wolcott ; they highlighted the film 's Nietzschean epigraph and labeled its protagonist as Nietzsche 's übermensch . Ebert was disturbed by the depiction of a " Nordic superman confronting a black " , in which the " muscular blond " slices off the black man 's head and " contemptuously [ throws it ] down the flight of stairs " . His sentiment was shared by Adam Roberts , an Arthurian scholar , who also said Conan was an exemplar of the sword and sorcery films of the early 1980s that were permeated in various degrees with fascist ideology . According to Roberts , the films were following the ideas and aesthetics laid down in Leni Riefenstahl 's directorial efforts for Nazi Germany . Roberts cautioned that any political readings into these sword and sorcery films with regards to fascism is subjective . Film critic Richard Dyer said that such associations with Conan were inaccurate and influenced by misconceptions of Nietzschean philosophies , and scholars of philosophy said that the film industry has often misinterpreted the ideas behind the übermensch . 
 Conan is also seen as a product of its time : The themes of the film reflect the political climate of the United States in the 1980s . Ronald Reagan was the country 's president and the ideals of individualism were promoted during his two terms in office . He emphasized the moral worth of the individual in his speeches , encouraging his fellow Americans to make the country successful and to stand up against the Soviet Union during the Cold War . Dr. Dave Saunders , a film writer and lecturer at South Essex College of Further and Higher Education , linked facets of Conan the Barbarian to aspects of Reaganism — the conservative ideology that surrounded the president 's policies . Saunders likened Conan 's quest against Doom to the Americans ' crusades , his choice of weaponry — swords — to Reagan 's and Milius 's fondness of resisting the Soviets with only spirit and simple weapons , and Doom 's base of operations to the Kremlin . Conan , in Saunder 's interpretation , is portrayed as the American hero who draws strength from his trials and tribulations to slay the evil oppressors — the Soviets — and crush their un @-@ American ways . Douglas Kellner and his fellow academic Michael Ryan proposed another enemy for the American individual : an overly domineering federal government . The film 's association with individualism was not confined to the United States ; Jeffrey Richards , a cultural historian , noticed the film 's popularity among the youths of the United Kingdom . Robin Wood , a film critic , suggests that in most cases , there is only a thin veneer between individualism and fascism ; he also said that Conan is the only film in that era to dispense with the disguise , openly celebrating its fascist ideals in a manner that would delight Riefenstahl . 
 Sexual politics were also examined in thematic studies of the film . The feminist movement experienced a backlash during the opening years of the 1980s and action films then were helping to promote the notions of masculinity . Women in these films were portrayed as whores , handmaidens , or warriors and clad in flesh @-@ revealing outfits . Conan gave its male audience a manly hero that overcame all odds and adversity , delivering them a fantasy that offered escape from the invasion of radical " strong feminist women " in their lives . Renato <unk> 's promotional artwork for the film 's release in the United States presents a sexualized portrayal of the two main characters , Conan and Valeria . <unk> clad in costumes cut in the styles of underwear , they wear long boots and sport their hair loose . While Conan strides forth in the picture with his sword held high , Valeria " squats in an impossible pose with her leather body @-@ suit [ in the shape of a teddy ] forming a dark shape between her thighs " . According to Schubart , critics did not accept Valeria as a strong female figure , but viewed her as a " sexual spectacle " ; to them , she was the traditional male warrior buddy in a sexy female body . 
 = = Release = = 
 In 1980 , the producers began advertising to publicize the film . Teaser posters were put up in theaters across the United States . The posters reused Frazetta 's artwork that was commissioned for the cover of Conan the Adventurer ( 1966 ) . Laurentiis wanted Conan the Barbarian to start playing in cinemas at Christmas , 1981 , but Universal executives requested further editing after they previewed a preliminary version of the film in August . A Hollywood insider said the executives were concerned about the film 's portrayal of violence . The premiere was delayed until the following year so changes could be made . Many scenes were excised from Thulsa Doom 's attack on Conan 's village , including the close @-@ up shots on the decapitated head of Conan 's mother ; the late notice of the changes forced Poledouris to quickly adjust his score before recording music for the sequence . Other scenes of violence that were cut included Subotai 's slaying of a monster at the top of the Tower of Serpents and Conan chopping off a pickpocket 's arm in a bazaar . Milius intended to show a 140 @-@ minute story ; the final release ran 129 minutes . According to Cobb , the total production expenses approached $ 20 million by the time the film was released . 
 The United States ' public were offered a sneak preview on February 19 , 1982 , in Houston , Texas . In the following month , previews were held in 30 cities across the country . In Washington D.C. , the mass of moviegoers formed long lines that spanned streets , causing traffic jams . Tickets were quickly sold out in Denver , and 1 @,@ 000 people had to be turned away in Houston . The majority of those in the lines were male ; a moviegoer in Los Angeles said , " The audience was mostly white , clean @-@ cut and high @-@ school or college age . It was not the punk or heavy @-@ leather crowd , but an awful lot of them had bulging muscles . " On March 16 , Conan the Barbarian had its worldwide premiere at <unk> de Plata , an annual cinema awards ceremony in Madrid , and began its general release in Spain and France a month later . Twentieth Century Fox handled the foreign distribution of the film . Universal originally scheduled Conan 's official release in the United States for the weekend before Memorial Day — the start of the film industry 's summer season when schools close for a month @-@ long holiday . To avoid competition with other big @-@ budget , high @-@ profile films , the studio advanced the release of Conan the Barbarian and on May 14 , 1982 , the film officially opened in 1 @,@ 400 theaters across North America . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Conan the Barbarian has been released in several different versions on home video . As well as the 129 @-@ minute theatrical print , Universal distributed the film in 115 @-@ minute and 123 @-@ minute cuts on VHS in the 1980s . A slightly extended version was created for the film 's special edition DVD release in 2000 ; it features two minutes of additional footage for a 131 @-@ minute running time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The media 's reactions toward Conan were polarized . Aspects of the film heavily criticized by one side were regarded in a positive light by the other ; Professor Gunden stated that " for every positive review the film garnered , it received two negative ones . " The opinions of Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times and Richard Schickel of Time magazine illustrate their colleagues ' divided views . Ebert called Conan the Barbarian " a perfect fantasy for the alienated preadolescent " , whereas Schickel said , " Conan is a sort of psychopathic Star Wars , stupid and stupefying . " Although reviews were mixed at the time of the film 's release , many modern critics review the film more positively , giving the film an aggregate score of 70 % on film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes . 
 At the time Conan was released , the media were inclined to condemn Hollywood 's portrayals of violence ; typical action films showed the hero attaining his goals by killing all who stood in his way . Conan was particularly condemned for its violent scenes , which Newsweek 's Jack Kroll called " cheerless and <unk> " . In one of his articles for the San Francisco Chronicle , Stu <unk> counted 50 people killed in various scenes . Other film critics differed over the film 's portrayal of violence . David Denby wrote in his review for New York magazine that the action scenes were one of the film 's few positive features ; however , exciting as the scenes were , those such as the decapitation of Conan 's mother seemed inane . On the other hand , Vincent Canby , Carlos Clarens , and Pascal <unk> were unanimous in their opinion that the film 's depicted violence failed to meet their expectations : the film 's pacing and Howard 's stories suggested more gory material . According to Paul Sammon , Milius 's cuts to assuage concerns over the violence made the scenes " cartoon @-@ like " . 
 Comparison with the source material also produced varying reactions among the critics . Danny Peary and Schickel expected a film based on pulp stories and comic books to be light @-@ hearted or corny , and Milius 's introduction of Nietzschean themes and ideology did not sit well with them . Others were not impressed with Milius 's handling of his ideas ; James Wolcott called it heavy @-@ handed and Kroll said the material lacked substance in its implementation . The themes of individualism and paganism , however , resonated with many in the audience ; the concept of a warrior who relies only on his own prowess and will to conquer the obstacles in his way found favor with young males . Wolcott wrote in Texas Monthly that these themes appeal to " 98 @-@ pound <unk> who want to kick sand into bullies ' faces and win the panting adoration of a well @-@ oiled beach bunny " . Kroll 's opinion was that the audience loved the violence and carnage but were cynical about the " philosophical bombast . " While popular with audiences , the theatrical treatment of the barbarian was rejected by hardcore fans and scholars of Howard 's stories . A particular point of contention was the film 's version of Conan 's origin , which is at odds with Howard 's hints about the character 's youth . Their point of view is supported by Kerry <unk> , but Derek Elley , Clarens , and Sammon said Milius was faithful to the ideology behind Howard 's work . 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger 's performance was frequently mentioned in the critiques . Clarens , Peary , Gunden and Nigel Andrews were among those who gave positive assessments of the former bodybuilder 's acting : to them , he was physically convincing as the barbarian in his body movements and appearance . Andrews added that Schwarzenegger exuded a certain charm — with his accent mangling his dialog — that made the film appealing to his fans . Fanfare 's Royal S. Brown disagreed and was grateful that the actor 's dialog amounted to " 2 pages of typescript . " Schickel summed up Schwarzenegger 's acting as " flat " , while Knoll was more verbose , characterizing the actor 's portrayal as " a dull clod with a sharp sword , a human collage of pectorals and <unk> who 's got less style and wit than Lassie . " While Sandahl Bergman earned acclaim for injecting grace and dynamism into the film , the film 's more experienced thespians were not spared criticisms . Gunden said von Sydow showed little dedication to his role , and Clarens judged Jones 's portrayal of Thulsa Doom to be worse than camp . <unk> faulted none of the actors for their performances , laying the blame on Milius 's script instead . 
 = = = Box office and other media = = = 
 According to Rentrak Theatrical , a firm of media analysts , Conan debuted at the top spot at the US box office , taking $ 9 @,@ 479 @,@ 373 over the opening weekend . Rentrak 's data on Conan covered 8 weeks after the film 's release ; during that period , Conan grossed $ 38 @,@ 513 @,@ 085 at the box office in the United States . Universal Pictures received $ 22 @.@ 5 million after deducting the amounts due to the cinema owners . This sum — the rental — was more than the money Universal had invested in making the film , thus qualifying Conan as a commercial success ; any further income from the film was pure profit for the studio . Marian Christy , interviewer for the Boston Globe , mentioned that the film was a box office success in Europe and Japan as well . Worldwide , Conan the Barbarian grossed $ 68 @,@ 851 @,@ 475 in ticket sales . 
 David A. Cook , Professor of Film Studies at Emory University , said that Conan 's North American performance fell short of the amount returned by blockbusters ; the rentals of such films from their release in the continent were supposed to be least $ 50 million . Conan 's rental was the thirteenth highest for 1982 and when combined with those for E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial ( the most successful film in that year with a rental of $ 187 million ) , On Golden Pond , and The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas — all distributed by Universal Pictures — constituted 30 percent of the year 's total film rental . According to Arthur D. Murphy , a film @-@ industry analyst , it was the first time that a single distributor captured such a substantial share of the film market . 
 The videocassette version of the film was released on October 2 , 1982 . Sales and rental figures of the videocassette were high ; from its launch , the title was listed in Billboard 's Videocassette Top 40 ( Sales and Rental categories ) for 23 weeks . According to Sammon , sales of the film through frequent home video releases increased the film 's gross earnings to more than $ 300 million by 2007 . Conan the Barbarian was novelized by Lin Carter and the de Camps ( L. Sprague and his wife , Catherine ) . It was also adapted by Marvel in comic form ; scripted by Michael Fleisher and drawn by John Buscema , the comic was one of the rarest paperbacks published by the company . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Conan the Barbarian did not receive any film awards , but the Hollywood Foreign Press Association noted Bergman 's performance as Valeria and awarded her a Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year — Actress . Poledouris 's score was judged by Films in Review 's Page Cook as the second best sound track of the films released in 1982 and nominated by the American Film Institute ( AFI ) for its 100 Years of Film Scores in 2005 . The film was one of the nominees for AFI 's Top 10 Fantasy Films in 2008 and its protagonist similarly nominated for AFI 's 100 Heroes and Villains in 2003 . The film was nominated for a Razzie Award for Worst Actor for Arnold Schwarzenegger . 
 = = Legacy and impact = = 
 Whereas most comic book and pulp adaptations were box office failures in the 1980s , Conan the Barbarian was one of the few that made a profit . According to Sammon , it became the standard against which sword and sorcery films were measured until the debut of Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring in 2001 ; several contemporary films of the same genre were judged by critics to be clones of Conan , such as The Beastmaster ( 1982 ) . Conan 's success inspired low @-@ budget copycats , such as <unk> , the Fighting Eagle ( 1982 ) and <unk> ( 1983 ) . Its sequel , Conan the Destroyer , was produced and released in 1984 ; only a few of those involved in the first film , such as Schwarzenegger , Mako , and Poledouris , returned . Later big- and small @-@ screen adaptations of Robert E. Howard 's stories were considered by Sammon to be inferior to the film that started the trend . A spinoff from Conan was a 20 @-@ minute live @-@ action show , The Adventures of Conan : A Sword and Sorcery Spectacular , that ran from 1983 to 1993 at Universal Studios Hollywood . Produced at a cost of $ 5 million , the show featured action scenes executed to music composed by Poledouris . The show 's highlights were pyrotechnics , lasers , and an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) tall animatronic dragon that breathed fire . 
 Several of those involved in the film reaped short @-@ term benefits . Sandahl Bergman 's Golden Globe for her role as Valeria marks her greatest achievement in the film industry ; her later roles failed to gain her further recognition . Dino De Laurentiis had produced a string of box office failures since the success of King Kong in 1976 ; it appeared Conan the Barbarian might be a turning point in his fortunes . The sequel was also profitable , but many of De Laurentiis ' later big @-@ budget projects did not recoup their production costs and he was forced to declare bankruptcy in 1988 . For John Milius , Conan the Barbarian is his " biggest directorial success " to date ; his subsequent endeavors failed to equal its success and popularity . 
 Pressman did not receive any money from Conan 's box office takings , but he sold the film rights for the Conan franchise to De Laurentiis for $ 4 @.@ 5 million and 10 percent of the gross of any sequel to Conan the Barbarian . The sale more than paid off his company 's debts incurred from producing Old Boyfriends , saving him from financial ruin ; Pressman said this deal " made [ him ] more money by selling out , by not making a movie , than [ he ] ever have made by making one . " He also arranged for Mattel to obtain the rights to produce a range of toys for the film . Although the toy company abandoned the license after its executives decided Conan was " too violent " for children , Pressman convinced them to let him produce a film based on their new Masters of the Universe toy line . The eponymous film cost $ 20 million to produce and grossed $ 17 million at the United States box office in 1987 . 
 Those who benefited most from the project were Basil Poledouris and Arnold Schwarzenegger . Poledouris 's reputation in the film industry increased with the critical acclaim his score received ; MacDonald noted Poledouris 's work on Conan as " one of the most spectacular film music achievements of the decade " , and Page Cook named it as the only reason to watch the film and as the second best film sound track ( after E.T. ' s ) for 1982 . After hearing Conan 's music , Paul Verhoeven engaged Poledouris to score his films , Flesh and Blood ( 1985 ) , RoboCop ( 1987 ) and Starship Troopers ( 1997 ) . The music in Verhoeven 's Total Recall ( 1990 ) also bore the influence of Conan 's score ; its composer , Jerry Goldsmith , used Poledouris 's work as the model for his compositions . 
 Conan brought Schwarzenegger worldwide recognition as an action star and established the model for most of his film roles : " icy , brawny , and inexpressive — yet somehow endearing . " The image of him as the barbarian was an enduring one ; when he campaigned for George H. W. Bush to be president , he was introduced as " Conan the Republican " — a moniker that stuck with him throughout his political career and was often repeated by the media during his term as Governor of California . Schwarzenegger was aware of the benefits the film had brought to him , acknowledging the role of Conan as " God 's gift to [ his ] career . " He embraced the image : when he was Governor of California , he displayed his copy of the Atlantean sword in his office , occasionally flourishing the weapon at visitors and letting them play with it . More than once , he spiced up his speeches with Conan 's " crush your enemies , see them driven before you and hear the lamentations of their women " . 
 The film 's soundtrack , " Riders of Doom " , was used in the commercials for the adventure video game The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time , and its remake . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Conan the Destroyer was released in 1984 , with Schwarzenegger and Mako reprising their roles . 
 In October 2012 , Universal Pictures announced plans for Schwarzenegger to return to the role of Conan for the film The Legend of Conan . The story will be a direct sequel of the original film , " bypassing " Conan the Destroyer and the 2011 film starring Jason Momoa . In June 2013 , Schwarzenegger said he still had plans to make The Legend of Conan , but after Terminator Genisys , which began shooting in 2014 . In October 2013 , Deadline reported that Andrea <unk> was to write the film 's script . In February 2015 , IGN reported that Will Beall was writing the script . On May 24 , 2015 , Chris Morgan told The Arnold Fans website that the film 's script is ready and revealed that at least three characters from the first film will be returning . In early 2016 , Schwarzenegger expressed enthusiasm for the completed script and reaffirmed his interest in starring in the film , saying " Interest is high . . . but we are not rushing . " Fredrik <unk> told Deadline.com in an interview that the sequel could lead to a cinematic universe of Howard 's creations for film and TV . On January 28 , 2016 , Schwarzenegger confirmed that the third sequel will be Conan the Conqueror . He revealed the details about the film at a Q & A event in Scotland . 
 = Bare @-@ faced Messiah = 
 Bare @-@ faced Messiah : The True Story of L. Ron Hubbard is a posthumous biography of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard by British journalist Russell Miller . First published in the United Kingdom on 26 October 1987 , the book takes a critical perspective , challenging the Church of Scientology 's account of Hubbard 's life and work . It quotes extensively from official documents acquired using the Freedom of Information Act and from Hubbard 's personal papers , which were obtained via a defector from the Church . It was also published in Australia , Canada and the United States . 
 The Church of Scientology strongly opposed the book 's publication . The Church was accused of organising a smear and harassment campaign against Miller and his publisher , though it strenuously denied this accusation , and a private investigator involved in the campaign denied that the Church was his client . However , a leak of internal Church documents to the press in 1990 disclosed many details of the campaign . The Church and related corporate entities attempted to prevent the book 's publication in court , resulting in cases that reached the Supreme Court of the United States , the Court of Appeal of England and Wales and the Federal Court of Canada . The U.S. Supreme Court 's decision to let a lower court 's ruling stand , denying fair use protection for the book 's use of unpublished sources , set a precedent favouring copyright protection of unpublished material over biographers ' freedom of speech . Courts in the UK and Canada took an opposite view , allowing publication of Bare @-@ faced Messiah in the public interest . 
 Reviews of the book have been broadly positive — one calling it " the best and most comprehensive biography of L. Ron Hubbard " — and praise the quality and depth of Miller 's research . Some criticise the book for failing to explain Hubbard 's success or clarify whether or not he was a fraud . Reviewers have been divided over whether to interpret the book as a polemical attack on Hubbard or a neutral work that leaves conclusions to the reader . The Church of Scientology has been less complimentary ; the executor of Hubbard 's estate called it " a scumbag book ... full of bullshit " in a court deposition in the U.S. 
 = = Background and synopsis = = 
 Russell Miller had been an investigative journalist for the Sunday Times and had written well @-@ received biographies of Hugh Hefner ( Bunny , published in 1984 ) and J. Paul Getty ( The House of Getty , 1985 ) . These were the first two biographies of a trilogy on sex , money and religion , with the Hubbard book completing the trilogy . He spent two years researching the book , which followed a Sunday Times Magazine investigation of the Church of Scientology published in October 1984 . In 1985 , he suggested that the Sunday Times should try to find Hubbard , who had disappeared from public view several years earlier . If the project succeeded , it would be a worldwide scoop for the newspaper . Even if it did not find the reclusive Scientology leader , the continuing mystery would itself be a good story . Through contacts among ex @-@ Scientologists in the U.S. , Miller narrowed down the area where Hubbard was hiding to the vicinity of San Luis Obispo , California . However , Hubbard died in January 1986 before Miller could finish his project . He decided at this point to use his research as the basis of a full @-@ fledged biography of Hubbard , in addition to writing the previously agreed series of articles for the Sunday Times . 
 Bare @-@ faced Messiah covers a period from 1911 , when Hubbard was born , to his death in 1986 , with some additional background on his family history . It describes his early life , his success as a science fiction writer in the 1930s and 1940s , his military career during the Second World War , the rise of Dianetics and Scientology in the 1950s , his journeys at sea with his followers in the 1960s and early 1970s and his legal problems and period as a recluse from the mid @-@ 1970s to 1986 . The author draws on previously unpublished materials , such as Hubbard 's teenage diaries and personal correspondence to colleagues , employers and the FBI , as well as government documents like Hubbard 's military service record and FBI file . In an " author 's note " , Miller writes that the book would have been impossible without the Freedom of Information Act . Among the private papers quoted in the book are a letter written by Hubbard to the FBI denouncing his wife as a Soviet spy , another in which he tells his daughter Alexis that he is not really her father and an internal letter in which he suggests that Scientology should pursue religious status for business reasons . Other sources used by Miller include news articles and comments from interviews that he conducted with Hubbard 's old acquaintances and family members . 
 Miller 's research was assisted by a set of Hubbard 's personal papers obtained by Gerry Armstrong , a disaffected former employee of the Church of Scientology . Armstrong had been preparing material for an official biography of Hubbard , but left the Church in 1981 after finding that Hubbard 's claims about his life conflicted with independent sources . The Church of Scientology obtained an injunction in California to prevent Armstrong from further distributing the documents . However , English courts refused to enforce this order . 
 In the book 's preface , Miller summarizes his view of Hubbard : 
 The glorification of ' Ron ' , superman and saviour , required a cavalier disregard for facts : thus it is that every biography of Hubbard published by the church is interwoven with lies , half @-@ truths and ludicrous embellishments . The wondrous irony of this deception is that the true story of L. Ron Hubbard is much more bizarre , much more improbable , than any of the lies . 
 The book contrasts Hubbard 's boasts with Miller 's research . For example , Chapter 6 , which is entitled " The Hero Who Never Was , " begins by quoting the official church biography : " Commissioned before the war in 1941 by the US Navy ... serving in all five theaters of World War II and receiving 21 medals and palms ... " And it ends by countering : 
 If his own account of his war experiences is to be believed , he certainly deserved the twenty @-@ one medals and palms he was said to have received . Unfortunately , his US Navy record indicates he was awarded just four routine medals — the American Defense Service Medal , awarded to everyone serving at the time of Pearl Harbor , the American Campaign Medal , the Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal and the World War Two Victory Medal , this last received by everyone serving on V @-@ J Day . 
 For more detail on the debate surrounding Hubbard 's military career , see the main article . 
 = = Reaction from Hubbard 's followers = = 
 = = = Harassment of the author and publishers = = = 
 The Church of Scientology refused all cooperation with Miller and sought to obstruct his research . He wrote in his " author 's note " at the start of the book : 
 [ T ] he Church did its best to dissuade people who knew Hubbard from speaking to me and constantly threatened litigation . Scientology lawyers in New York and Los Angeles made it clear in frequent letters that they expected me to libel and defame L. Ron Hubbard . When I protested that in thirty years as a journalist and writer I had never been accused of libel , I was apparently investigated and a letter was written to my publishers in New York alleging that my claim was ' simply not accurate ' . It was , and is . 
 Miller had been warned before he began his work that he would face difficulties , but was unprepared for the level of harassment that he endured . While researching the book in the U.S. , he was spied upon and was constantly followed . His friends and business associates also received hostile visits from Scientologists and private detectives trying to find " dirt " on him . In October 1987 , Miller commented : " There are teams of private detectives in the U.S. and this country questioning my friends and trying to discredit me . " Attempts were made to implicate him in the murder of a private detective in South London , for a fire in a Wiltshire aircraft factory and for the murder of American singer Dean Reed . Reed had died the day before Miller had arrived in East Berlin to interview him . Miller 's family was approached by private detectives seeking to implicate him in Reed 's death , although they would not say who their client was . Another private investigator interviewed Miller 's friends and associates , claiming to be acting for Reed 's family , though they denied employing him . A former Scientology insider told the Sunday Times that Miller " is kept under constant watch . Every time he goes abroad a two @-@ man mission will be waiting for him at the airport when he arrives . They will monitor where he goes , who he sees , where he stays . This information will be added to his file , which is already more than 100 pages thick . " 
 Senior executives at publishers Michael Joseph and at the Sunday Times , which serialised the book , received threatening phone calls and a visit from private investigator Eugene Ingram , who worked for the Church . Another private investigator , Jarl Grieve Einar Cynewulf , told Sunday Times journalists that he had been offered " large sums of money " to find a link between Miller and the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , as the Church reportedly believed that the CIA was driving investigations into its tax affairs in the U.S. According to Cynewulf , Miller 's mail and phones were intercepted and his home was under constant surveillance . The newspaper reported that Cynewulf had chased its reporter and photographer through the streets of Bristol , armed with a pistol which he fired at them , saying , " You 'd better go now unless you want to end up in a wooden box . Do you want to be another Hungerford martyr ? " 
 In 1990 , nearly three years after the book 's first publication , a defector from the Church of Scientology provided the Sunday Times with internal documents detailing the smear campaign against Miller . These records listed several private investigators who had been hired to keep Miller under surveillance and feed false information about him to neighbours and the police . A Scientology executive had flown from Los Angeles to a flat in London where he and a private detective co @-@ ordinated the campaign . Rubbish from the publisher 's offices was regularly emptied into the flat 's bathtub to be picked through . According to the informant , the investigators used contacts with the British police to try to implicate him in unsolved crimes : " People were brought in from abroad posing as journalists to arrange interviews with Scotland Yard where they would drop innuendoes about Miller . Other investigators were used to smear his name with colleagues , friends and neighbours . They worked hard on the line that he was an undercover British intelligence man . " A Church spokesman dismissed these allegations , saying , " anyone giving you this sort of information must be crazy or on drugs . " 
 = = = Legal disputes = = = 
 The Church of Scientology and related entities sought injunctions against the book 's publication , claiming copyright infringement of Hubbard 's private documents . They threatened to sue in as many as fifty countries , adopting a strategy that the University of Pennsylvania 's Professor Paul K. Saint @-@ Amour has described as " an international parade of litigation " and " whack @-@ a @-@ mole legal proceedings " . Much of the dispute centred on the plaintiffs ' argument that the actions of former Scientology archivist Gerry Armstrong in providing Miller with unpublished materials ( whether directly or indirectly ) were a breach of his duty of confidence to the Church , and that the use of excerpts from this material violated copyrights owned by Hubbard 's estate . Miller later noted that the plaintiffs did not attempt to dispute the facts of the book in court which , he said , was a pity as he had been looking forward to defending his meticulous research . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 The first lawsuit was heard in the UK in October 1987 by Justice Vinelott . The litigants , the Church of Scientology of California , failed to obtain an injunction against the publication of the book . In his decision of 9 October 1987 , the judge said that it was " clear that the public interest far outweighed any duty of confidence that could conceivably be owed to Mr. Hubbard or his church . " The unpublished materials were held to be " essential " if Hubbard 's early career was to be " properly evaluated " , and legal decisions against Armstrong in California could not bind an English court . The judge held that the Church had acted improperly in bringing its suit so late in the day . It had become aware in May of the plans to publish Bare @-@ faced Messiah , but had not brought suit until 29 September , less than a month before publication . The application for an injunction , he said , " was made at a time , whether calculated or not , when the greatest possible damage and inconvenience would be caused to Penguin Books " . No satisfactory explanation had been made for the delay and , in the judge 's view , the application " was oppressive , and was not brought to protect any legitimate interest . " 
 The judgement was upheld by the Court of Appeal on 22 October . The decision by Lord Justice Fox argued that Hubbard 's " cosmic significance " in Scientology – a group which itself had been the subject of a Government report in 1972 – implied a strong public interest in the book 's content . The delay in applying for an injunction was reason in itself to justify dismissing the appeal , but in addition the court ruled that " the public had an interest that assertions of fact [ by the Church ] should be exposed to public criticism . The founder was dead and the material was not alleged to be untrue . " The court noted that the plaintiffs had not argued that publication of the book would damage Hubbard 's or the Church 's reputation or that it was in any way defamatory . The Church was refused leave to appeal to the House of Lords . 
 In advance of the court case , a female Scientologist was found collecting seven copies of the unpublished proofs from a copy shop in East Grinstead , near the Church of Scientology 's UK headquarters at Saint Hill Manor . She was arrested but later released as there was no evidence of theft . 
 = = = = Canada , Australia and South Africa = = = = 
 In Canada , New Era Publications International <unk> of Denmark — an arm of the Church of Scientology — petitioned the Federal Court of Canada to block the publication of Bare @-@ faced Messiah in December 1987 . New Era submitted its request days before publisher Key Porter Books planned to begin its print run . The company argued that its sales of Hubbard 's books would be adversely affected by the damage that Miller 's book would cause to Hubbard 's reputation . It also claimed that copyright had been violated through the unauthorised excerpting of unpublished materials and books written by Hubbard , and that it would interfere with New Era 's own plans to publish an " authorised " biography based on the same materials . New Era 's bid was rejected by Justice Bud Cullen , who said that the evidence presented in favour of an injunction " falls far short of the evidence required " to sustain such a request . He characterised Hubbard as an author of " outlandish , foolish , vicious , racist writings . " Similar bids to block the book failed in Australia and South Africa . 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 A suit was brought in the U.S. by New Era Publications in May 1988 that sought to prevent Bare @-@ faced Messiah being distributed , after it had already been published and shipped . Prior to publication , New Era offered to buy out the publication rights to Bare @-@ faced Messiah but was rebuffed . Publisher Henry Holt had distributed 12 @,@ 500 copies by the time New Era obtained a temporary restraining order to prevent shipment of the remaining copies from the first print run . New Era 's request for an injunction against the distribution of the existing copies was refused . Henry Holt 's president , Bruno <unk> , declared his company 's intention to fight the suit : " This is a case , to say the least , that has serious First Amendment considerations and we are vigorously opposing the Scientologists ' efforts to prevent the publication of this book . " 
 The district court that first heard the case ruled that , although the quotation of private correspondence breached copyright law , an injunction would deny the publisher 's First Amendment rights . By coincidence , the judge who heard the case , Pierre N. Leval , was the same person who had recently heard a case involving the private correspondence of the writer J. D. Salinger , which resulted in a higher court 's setting a controversial precedent that fair use protection could not be accorded to works that quoted unpublished material . His decision was seen as a repudiation of the higher court 's Salinger precedent : " The grant of an injunction would ... suppress an interesting , well researched , provocative study of a figure who , claiming both scientific and religious credentials , has wielded enormous influence over millions of people . " 
 When the case was appealed , the Second Circuit disagreed with Leval 's judgement , arguing that copyright outweighed free speech arguments . Again coincidentally , the author of the decision was Judge Roger Miner , who had been among the authors of the Salinger decision . The court reiterated the Salinger finding that there was a " strong presumption against fair use of unpublished work " and that unpublished primary source materials should " normally enjoy complete protection " from fair use claims . This could not be overridden by the First Amendment . Nonetheless , the court still denied an injunction on the grounds of laches , specifically that New Era had waited two years to bring the case after first learning about the book . By " sleeping on its rights " — waiting too long — New Era had lost any right to equitable relief and had unfairly caused damage to Miller 's publisher by the delay . Judge James L. Oakes agreed with the decision in a concurring opinion but argued that the majority had been wrong to reject the First Amendment as a defence . He argued , " Responsible biographers and historians constantly use primary sources , letters , diaries , and memoranda . Indeed , it would be irresponsible to ignore such sources of information . " 
 Although they had prevailed , Henry Holt and Company asked all of the appeals court 's judges for a rehearing en banc to establish that they had not just won on a technicality . The court denied this request by a 7 – 5 majority . The denial produced an unusual split between the judges ; four who supported a rehearing stated that they believed that " copying some small amounts of unpublished expression to report facts accurately and fairly " was covered by fair use , while five who opposed it rejected that proposition , declaring that " under ordinary circumstances " the use of " more than minimal amounts of unpublished expressive material " should attract an automatic injunction . This argument was widely criticised following the case . David J. Goldberg and Robert J. Bernstein wrote in the New York Law Journal in May 1989 that the central problem with the majority 's view was that : 
 The Second Circuit majority in New Era departed from basic fair use principles that require an accommodation of competing interests and equities . Instead , it elevated one fact — the unpublished status of Hubbard 's writings — to an almost insurmountable obstacle to a successful fair use defense . By handcuffing future considerations of the fair use defense in the context of unpublished writings , the Second Circuit ignored the explicit mandate that the equities must be flexibly balanced case by case . 
 In 1990 , Henry Holt petitioned the Supreme Court , which let the Second Circuit 's judgement stand . The outcome of the case drew a concerned reaction from publishers and journalists , who complained that biographies would become much more legally and financially difficult to publish . A brief for the PEN American Center and the Authors Guild expressed the publishing industry 's " confusion , consternation and concern " at the outcome . The American historian Arthur M. Schlesinger , Jr. called the decision " a great sadness " , arguing that had it been made earlier , he could not have published all three volumes of his history The Age of Roosevelt . 
 In the end , Henry Holt abandoned the litigation , as the ongoing legal costs were becoming unsupportable . The print run of Bare @-@ faced Messiah in the U.S. was ended after only 14 @,@ 000 copies were printed . Many went to public libraries , but , according to Miller , numerous library copies of the book went missing or had inserts pasted into them by Scientologists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of Bare @-@ faced Messiah were overall very positive , though some reviewers criticised what they regarded as omissions on Miller 's part . The Church of Scientology was highly critical of the book . Its view of Miller 's book was summed up by the executor of the Hubbard estate , who called it " a scumbag book ... full of bullshit " , while a Scientology spokesperson in Canada compared it to " a life of Christ [ written ] by Judas Iscariot . " 
 The American science writer Martin Gardner 's review in Nature called Bare @-@ faced Messiah an " admirable , meticulously documented biography " . Gardner had previously written about the start of Scientology in his classic 1952 book <unk> and <unk> in the Name of Science , at which time he regarded Hubbard as a harmless crank , but Miller 's book persuaded Gardner that Hubbard was " a pathological liar who steadily deteriorated from a charming rogue into a paranoid egomaniac " . 
 Sociologist J. Gordon Melton wrote that along with Stewart Lamont 's Religion Inc . , Miller 's book is " by far the best " among the books published by Scientology critics , though he notes that the Church of Scientology has " prepared statements on each [ substantive statement ] indicating factual errors and omissions . " Melton concludes that Miller 's book is compromised by its author 's lack of access to documents charting Hubbard 's life and the early history of the church . Melton contradicts Miller 's assertion that Hubbard was lying about his military career . " Hubbard left the service in February 1946 with twenty @-@ one citations , letters of commendation , and medals on his record . It should be noted that the details of Hubbard 's naval career have been called into question by the critics of Scientology . Critics rely on an alleged copy of Hubbard 's notice of separation deposited in the Veteran 's Administration and accessible through the Freedom of Information Act . " 
 Writing for the Marburg Journal of Religion , the German Protestant theologian and history of religion scholar Marco Frenschkowski called Bare @-@ Faced Messiah the " most important critical biography of Hubbard . Like [ Friedrich @-@ Wilhelm Haack 's Scientology — Magie des 20 . Jahrhunderts ] and [ Bent Corydon 's L. Ron Hubbard : Messiah or Madman ? ] it is extremely polemical and very much tries to pull Hubbard to pieces . " He added that Miller 's book had " definitely exposed some inflated statements about Hubbard 's early achievements , " but the Church of Scientology has been able to counter a number of the points made by Miller : " Hubbard 's assertions about his military career in WWII , e.g. , have been much nearer to the truth than Miller is trying to show ... ( a complete set of the relevant documents is part of my collection ) . " Though Miller strongly implies that Hubbard 's mentor , Snake Thompson , was only a myth , Frenschkowski confirms that Joseph " Snake " Thompson ( 1874 @-@ 1943 ) was an actual Commander in the US Navy Medical Corp and a personal friend of Sigmund Freud , just as Hubbard said . Miller states that Hubbard was a disciple of Aleister Crowley , with the implication that Scientology derives from Crowley 's teachings , but Frenschkowski concludes , " Nevertheless it remains quite obvious that Hubbard did not take much inspiration from Crowley and Parsons . " 
 Writing in Kingdom of the Cults , an overview of new religious movements written from a Christian perspective , Walter Ralston Martin commented that of the various books on Hubbard 's life , " none are so thoroughly damaging to his credentials " than Bare @-@ faced Messiah and Bent Corydon 's book . The British science fiction author and critic David Langford rated Miller 's book as " altogether more even @-@ toned and better @-@ written " and argued that it " deserves to be a standard reference " on the life of Hubbard . Sociologist David G. Bromley described the book as " among the most significant " accounts of Hubbard 's life . Janet Reitman , who documented the history of Scientology in her 2011 book Inside Scientology : The Story of America 's Most Secretive Religion , called Bare @-@ faced Messiah " the best and most comprehensive biography of L. Ron Hubbard . " 
 <unk> Ruthven observed in the Times Literary Supplement that Miller " forces no thesis on his readers , allowing them to draw their own conclusion from the facts he uncovers . " He took this as both a strength and a weakness of the book , in that it leaves open the question of whether Hubbard was a deliberate con @-@ man or sincerely deluded . He also expressed frustration that Miller had not explained how Hubbard had achieved such a following , but complimented the author 's meticulous research in separating fact from fiction . The satirical magazine Private Eye described the book as " meticulously documented " but observed that the author " does not theorise , nor even very often <unk> . The reader must provide his own interjections , laughter and gasps of astonishment . " 
 The Sunday Times described the book as " admirably written , well documented and it must have entailed a great deal of painstaking research . " It praised Miller for standing up to Scientologists ' attempts to discredit him . The New Statesman praised Bare @-@ faced Messiah as accessibly written and diligently researched but , like Private Eye , criticised it for not illuminating why people find Scientology appealing . Patrick Skene Catling 's review in The Spectator recommended the book " unreservedly " , calling it " an <unk> scathing study of money @-@ mad , power @-@ mad megalomania . " Peter Conrad , in The Observer , was generally complimentary about the book , but criticised Miller for omitting " the recognition of Hubbard 's topicality . Miller treats him as a loony and a freak ; in fact he was a morbid symptom of America itself " . The psychologist and TV presenter Anthony Clare listed Bare @-@ faced Messiah in The Times as one of his books of the year for 1987 , commenting that it was " a testament to the gullibility of man in the face of the <unk> of Scientology " , while the film and literary critic Tom Hutchinson complimented Miller for " fascinatingly recount [ ing ] " what he described as Hubbard 's " bizarre career . " 
 In Canada , David Todd of news magazine Maclean 's commended the way that Miller had " <unk> [ ed ] at a portrait of [ Scientology 's ] founder that is by turns hilarious and deeply unsettling " , commenting that " while scathingly critical of Hubbard and his church , Bare @-@ Faced Messiah is , in fact , scrupulously fair . " Michael Harrison of the Toronto Financial Post criticised the book for " lack [ ing ] a critical perspective beyond the requisite snide commentary " and professed himself disappointed by Miller 's avoidance of the question of whether Hubbard was " genuine or just a fraud " , which Harrison considered an important omission " since the questions of selfishness , integrity and motivation are key issues in biographies of people who suffer from the messiah @-@ complex . " . 
 The Sydney Morning Herald 's Judith White called the book " absorbing " and " well documented and graphically told . " Alan Roberts wrote in the Adelaide Advertiser that Bare @-@ faced Messiah was a " minutely researched , densely evidenced account " of the " endless catalogue of deception , distortion and psychopathological mendacity " perpetrated by Hubbard and " almost tediously chronicled " by Miller . The Brisbane Sunday Mail 's reviewer characterised the book as " entertaining reading that packs a mighty punch " , in which the impact was delivered by " Miller 's careful and professional research which is evident in the manner he builds the man up and then knocks him down , fact by fact . " 
 The Oregon Law Review described Bare @-@ faced Messiah as " a revealing , enthralling biography of a controversial public figure . " Charles Platt , writing in the Washington Post , called the book " impressively thorough " though he chided Miller for " miss [ ing ] no opportunity to poke fun at Hubbard . Indeed , he belittles the man so thoroughly , the exercise almost begins to seem pointless . " He noted that in advance of the publication of his review , the Church of Scientology had sent his newspaper " a large package of documents intending to refute many of Miller 's statements . " His review was subsequently disputed by the Church of Scientology International 's Vice President , Brian Anderson , who denounced the book in a letter to the newspaper , claiming that it had been " obviously calculated to make a quick buck capitalizing on L. Ron Hubbard 's name " and was a " fast and shoddy " work . In response , Platt pointed out that " [ Miller ] does not dispute the success of L. Ron Hubbard 's work ; he merely presents evidence that suggests fraud . This is the point of Russell Miller 's book , and I find it significant that Brian Anderson makes no attempt to answer it . " 
 = = Publication history = = 
 1987 , UK , Michael Joseph ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7181 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 ) , First edition , Hardback 
 1987 , Canada , Key Porter ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 027 @-@ 0 ) , Hardback 
 1988 , United States , Henry Holt ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ) , Hardback 
 1988 , UK , Sphere Books ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 ) , Second edition , Paperback 
 1993 , France , <unk> ( ISBN 978 @-@ 2 @-@ 259 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 ) as Ron Hubbard : le <unk> <unk> ( " Ron Hubbard : the guru unmasked " ) , French translation by Sibylle Lang 
 February 2014 , UK , Silvertail Books ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 909 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 ) , Third edition , Hardback 
 Serialisation 
 A summary of the book was published in the Arts & Leisure section of the Sunday Times over the course of three articles . 
 " Science fictions " . ( 1 November 1987 ) 
 " Messiah at the Manor " . ( 8 November 1987 ) 
 " Farce and fear : in Scientology 's private navy " . ( 15 November 1987 ) 
 Extracts also appeared in The Weekend Australian and the Toronto Star . 
 Internet edition 
 An Internet edition was put together in 1997 and widely mirrored , with Miller 's permission and cooperation . Miller released several of his original interview transcripts to go with the release . These transcripts will be included in the 2014 third print edition of the book , intended to be an update to the internet version . 
 = Bad Girl ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Bad Girl " is a song initially recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna and American recording artist Chris Brown for the soundtrack of the film Confessions of a Shopaholic ( 2009 ) . Their version of the song was excluded from the soundtrack , in favor of a version performed by the American girl group The Pussycat Dolls . Rihanna and Brown 's version of the song was leaked on the internet on January 6 , 2009 . The song is about an addiction to shopping , and instead , ore specifically , buying shoes and handbags . Hollywood Records ' decision to not include Rihanna and Brown 's version was criticized by Ryan Brockington for the New York Post , but Michael Quinn for BBC Music was complimentary of The Pussycat Dolls ' version . Rihanna and Brown 's version charted at number 55 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Bad Girl " was written by Chris Brown , Darnell Dalton , Eric Florence , Ester Dean , Jamal Jones and Lamar Raynard Taylor . Production of the song was helmed by Jones under his production name , Polow da Don . It was recorded by Rihanna and Brown for inclusion on the soundtrack album for the film Confessions of a Shopaholic ( 2009 ) . 
 In an interview with Jayson Rodriguez for MTV News , da Don explained how he conceptualized the song , saying " I came from a Jerry Bruckheimer meeting after seeing the movie , and they were telling us all the music they needed for all the scenes and the characters . So that night I went to the studio and I was telling Chris about ( the meeting ) . And he was like , ' Let 's get on it . ' It was crazy , because Jerry Bruckheimer 's dream was to have a song from Rihanna ( for the movie ) , and I delivered Rihanna and Chris Brown in 24 hours . So they were like , ' Wow , that 's crazy . ' " He continued to explain how he , Rihanna and Brown developed the song in the recording studio , saying " When her , Chris and myself were in the room , it 's fun . That 's when the music isn 't work at all . It 's all freestyle . Chris comes up with an idea ; I come up with one . Rihanna will weigh in . And we build . " The song leaked on January 6 , 2009 . Their version of the song was excluded from the soundtrack , in favor of a version performed by the American girl group The Pussycat Dolls . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The lyrics of " Bad Girl " revolve around the protagonist 's addiction to shopping , particularly for shoes and handbags . Rihanna sings the lyric " Need no bargain , need no sale / I want the best , I dress me well , " and is joined by Brown at the end of the song , who raps " She 's a walking <unk> ' , I 'm talking about her clothes / I just pause , I 'm in awe , cause she 's a fashion show . " The song 's producer , Polow da Don , stated in his interview with MTV News that Rihanna 's vocal performance was " unique " , as well as saying how Brown delivers his rap with a high amount of energy and conviction . Ryan Brockington for the New York Post described Brown 's bridge as " bouncy " , and wrote that Rihanna 's vocals " meshed " perfectly with the lyrics . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Ryan Brockington for the New York Post was critical of Hollywood Records decision to not include Rihanna and Brown 's version on the soundtrack , writing " the Pussycat Dolls are listed as the artist , and as much as I wanted to believe it was a typo , I pressed play , and there was Nicole Scherzinger and her kittens singing away . " Brockington continued to express his distaste , writing " Now I have to listen to some overproduced vocals by a pack of hyenas and their booty @-@ slap noises . " 
 He noted that Polow da Don had also produced songs for Brown and The Pussycat Dolls , including the latter 's " Buttons " , and that he might have had a part in deciding who he wanted to record the song which would ultimately be included on the soundtrack . Michael Quinn for BBC Music was complimentary of The Pussycat Dolls cover , writing that their version managed to be " sultry and raucous " at the same time . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Chris Brown , Darnell Dalton , Eric Florence , Ester Dean , Jamal Jones , Lamar Raynard Taylor . 
 Production – Polow da Don 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following the leak of Rihanna and Chris Brown 's version of " Bad Girl " , it debuted at number 55 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on the week of February 28 , 2009 . 
 = Vanadium = 
 Vanadium is a chemical element with symbol V and atomic number 23 . It is a hard , silvery grey , ductile and malleable transition metal . The elemental metal is rarely found in nature , but once isolated artificially , the formation of an oxide layer ( passivation ) stabilizes the free metal somewhat against further oxidation . 
 Andrés Manuel del Río discovered compounds of vanadium in 1801 in Mexico by analyzing a new lead @-@ bearing mineral he called " brown lead " , and presumed its qualities were due to the presence of a new element , which he named erythronium ( derived from Greek for " red " ) since , upon heating , most of the salts turned red . Four years later , however , he was ( erroneously ) convinced by other scientists that erythronium was identical to chromium . <unk> of vanadium were generated in 1830 by Nils Gabriel Sefström who thereby proved that a new element was involved , which he named " vanadium " after the Scandinavian goddess of beauty and fertility , <unk> ( Freyja ) . Both names were attributed to the wide range of colors found in vanadium compounds . Del Rio 's lead mineral was later renamed vanadinite for its vanadium content . In 1867 Henry Enfield Roscoe obtained the pure element . 
 Vanadium occurs naturally in about 65 different minerals and in fossil fuel deposits . It is produced in China and Russia from steel smelter slag ; other countries produce it either from the flue dust of heavy oil , or as a byproduct of uranium mining . It is mainly used to produce specialty steel alloys such as high @-@ speed tool steels . The most important industrial vanadium compound , vanadium pentoxide , is used as a catalyst for the production of sulfuric acid . 
 Large amounts of vanadium ions are found in a few organisms , possibly as a toxin . The oxide and some other salts of vanadium have moderate toxicity . Particularly in the ocean , vanadium is used by some life forms as an active center of enzymes , such as the vanadium bromoperoxidase of some ocean algae . 
 = = History = = 
 Vanadium was discovered by Andrés Manuel del Río , a Spanish @-@ Mexican mineralogist , in 1801 . Del Río extracted the element from a sample of Mexican " brown lead " ore , later named vanadinite . He found that its salts exhibit a wide variety of colors , and as a result he named the element <unk> ( Greek : <unk> " all colors " ) . Later , Del Río renamed the element erythronium ( Greek : <unk> " red " ) because most of the salts turned red upon heating . In 1805 , the French chemist Hippolyte Victor Collet @-@ Descotils , backed by del Río 's friend Baron Alexander von Humboldt , incorrectly declared that del Río 's new element was only an impure sample of chromium . Del Río accepted Collet @-@ Descotils ' statement and retracted his claim . 
 In 1831 , the Swedish chemist Nils Gabriel Sefström rediscovered the element in a new oxide he found while working with iron ores . Later that same year , Friedrich Wöhler confirmed del Río 's earlier work . Sefström chose a name beginning with V , which had not been assigned to any element yet . He called the element vanadium after Old Norse <unk> ( another name for the Norse <unk> goddess Freyja , whose attributes include beauty and fertility ) , because of the many beautifully colored chemical compounds it produces . In 1831 , the geologist George William Featherstonhaugh suggested that vanadium should be renamed " <unk> " after del Río , but this suggestion was not followed . 
 The isolation of vanadium metal proved difficult . In 1831 , Berzelius reported the production of the metal , but Henry Enfield Roscoe showed that Berzelius had in fact produced the nitride , vanadium nitride ( VN ) . Roscoe eventually produced the metal in 1867 by reduction of vanadium ( II ) chloride , <unk> , with hydrogen . In 1927 , pure vanadium was produced by reducing vanadium pentoxide with calcium . 
 The first large @-@ scale industrial use of vanadium was in the steel alloy chassis of the Ford Model T , inspired by French race cars . Vanadium steel allowed for reduced weight while simultaneously increasing tensile strength ( ca . 1905 ) . 
 German chemist Martin Henze discovered vanadium in the blood cells ( or coelomic cells ) of Ascidiacea ( sea squirts ) in 1911 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Vanadium is a medium @-@ hard , ductile , steel @-@ blue metal . Some sources describe vanadium as " soft " , perhaps because it is ductile , malleable and not brittle . Vanadium is harder than most metals and steels ( see <unk> of the elements ( data page ) and iron ) . It has good resistance to corrosion and it is stable against alkalis and sulfuric and hydrochloric acids . It is oxidized in air at about 933 K ( 660 ° C , 1220 ° F ) , although an oxide passivation layer forms even at room temperature . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring vanadium is composed of one stable isotope , 51V , and one radioactive isotope , <unk> . The latter has a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 5 × 1017 years and a natural abundance of 0 @.@ 25 % . 51V has a nuclear spin of 7 / 2 , which is useful for NMR spectroscopy . Twenty @-@ four artificial radioisotopes have been characterized , ranging in mass number from 40 to 65 . The most stable of these isotopes are <unk> with a half @-@ life of 330 days , and <unk> with a half @-@ life of 16 @.@ 0 days . The remaining radioactive isotopes have half @-@ lives shorter than an hour , most below 10 seconds . At least four isotopes have metastable excited states . Electron capture is the main decay mode for isotopes lighter than 51V . For the heavier ones , the most common mode is beta decay . The electron capture reactions lead to the formation of element 22 ( titanium ) isotopes , while beta decay leads to element 24 ( chromium ) isotopes . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The chemistry of vanadium is noteworthy for the accessibility of the four adjacent oxidation states 2 @-@ 5 . In aqueous solution , vanadium forms metal aquo complexes of which the colours are lilac [ V ( H2O ) 6 ] 2 + , green [ V ( H2O ) 6 ] 3 + , blue [ VO ( H2O ) 5 ] 2 + , yellow VO3 − . Vanadium ( II ) compounds are reducing agents , and vanadium ( V ) compounds are oxidizing agents . Vanadium ( IV ) compounds often exist as vanadyl derivatives , which contain the VO2 + center . 
 Ammonium vanadate ( V ) ( <unk> ) can be successively reduced with elemental zinc to obtain the different colors of vanadium in these four oxidation states . Lower oxidation states occur in compounds such as V ( CO ) 6 , [ V ( CO ) 
 6 ] − and substituted derivatives . 
 The most commercially important compound is vanadium pentoxide . It is used as a catalyst for the production of sulfuric acid . This compound oxidizes sulfur dioxide ( SO 
 2 ) to the trioxide ( SO 
 3 ) . In this redox reaction , sulfur is oxidized from + 4 to + 6 , and vanadium is reduced from + 5 to + 4 : 
 V2O5 + SO2 → 2 VO2 + SO3 
 The catalyst is regenerated by oxidation with air : 
 2 VO2 + O2 → V2O5 
 Similar oxidations are used in the production of maleic anhydride , <unk> anhydride , and several other bulk organic compounds . 
 The vanadium redox battery utilizes all four oxidation states ; one electrode uses the + 5 / + 4 couple and the other uses the + 3 / + 2 couple . Conversion of these oxidation states is illustrated by the reduction of a strongly acidic solution of a vanadium ( V ) compound with zinc dust or amalgam . The initial yellow color characteristic of the <unk> ion [ VO2 ( H2O ) 4 ] + is replaced by the blue color of [ VO ( H2O ) 5 ] 2 + , followed by the green color of [ V ( H2O ) 6 ] 3 + and then the violet color of [ V ( H2O ) 6 ] 2 + . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In aqueous solution , vanadium ( V ) forms an extensive family of oxyanions . The interrelationships in this family are described by the predominance diagram , which shows at least 11 species , depending on pH and concentration . The tetrahedral orthovanadate ion , VO3 − 
 4 , is the principal species present at pH 12 @-@ 14 . Similar in size and charge to phosphorus ( V ) , vanadium ( V ) also parallels its chemistry and crystallography . <unk> VO3 − 
 4 is used in protein crystallography to study the biochemistry of phosphate . The <unk> [ <unk> ] 3 − is analogous to the orthovanadate ion . 
 At lower pH 's , the monomer [ <unk> ] 2 − and dimer [ <unk> ] − are formed , with the monomer predominant at vanadium concentration of less than c . 10 − 2M ( pV > 2 , where pV is equal to the minus value of the logarithm of the total vanadium concentration / M ) . The formation of the <unk> ion is analogous to the formation of the dichromate ion . As the pH is reduced , further protonation and condensation to <unk> occur : at pH 4 @-@ 6 [ <unk> ] − is predominant at pV greater than ca . 4 , while at higher concentrations trimers and tetramers are formed . Between pH 2 @-@ 4 <unk> predominates , its formation from orthovanadate is represented by this condensation reaction : 
 10 [ VO4 ] 3 − + 24 H + → [ <unk> ] 6 − + 12 H2O 
 In <unk> , each V ( V ) center is surrounded by six oxide ligands . <unk> acid , <unk> exists only a very low concentrations because protonation of the tetrahedral species [ <unk> ] − results in the preferential formation of the octahedral [ VO2 ( H2O ) 4 ] + species . In strongly acidic solutions , pH < 2 . [ VO2 ( H2O ) 4 ] + is the predominant species , while the oxide V2O5 precipitates from solution at high concentrations . The oxide is formally the inorganic anhydride of <unk> acid . The structures of many vanadate compounds have been determined by X @-@ ray crystallography . 
 The Pourbaix diagram for vanadium in water , which shows the redox potentials between various vanadium species in different oxidation states , is also complex . 
 Vanadium ( V ) forms various <unk> complexes , most notably in the active site of the vanadium @-@ containing bromoperoxidase enzymes . The species VO ( O ) 2 ( H2O ) 4 + is stable in acidic solutions . In alkaline solutions , species with 2 , 3 and 4 peroxide groups are known ; the last forms violet salts with the formula M3V ( O2 ) 4 nH2O ( M = Li , Na , etc . ) , in which the vanadium has an 8 @-@ coordinate dodecahedral structure . 
 = = = <unk> derivatives = = = 
 Twelve binary halides , compounds with the formula <unk> ( n = 2 .. 5 ) , are known . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> do not exist or are extremely unstable . In combination with other reagents , <unk> is used as a catalyst for polymerization of dienes . Like all binary halides , those of vanadium are Lewis acidic , especially those of V ( IV ) and V ( V ) . Many of the halides form octahedral complexes with the formula <unk> − n ( X 
 = halide ; L = 
 other ligand ) . 
 Many vanadium oxyhalides ( formula <unk> ) are known . The <unk> and <unk> ( <unk> and <unk> ) are the most widely studied . Akin to <unk> , they are volatile , adopt tetrahedral structures in the gas phase , and are Lewis acidic . 
 = = = Coordination compounds = = = 
 Complexes of vanadium ( II ) and ( III ) are relatively exchange inert and reducing . Those of V ( IV ) and V ( V ) are oxidants . Vanadium ion is rather large and some complexes achieve coordination numbers greater than 6 , as is the case in [ V ( CN ) 7 ] 4 − . <unk> ( V ) also forms 7 coordinate coordination complexes with <unk> ligands and peroxides and these complexes are used for oxidative <unk> and <unk> oxidations . The coordination chemistry of V4 + is dominated by the vanadyl center , VO2 + , which binds four other ligands strongly and one weakly ( the one trans to the vanadyl center ) . An example is vanadyl acetylacetonate ( V ( O ) ( <unk> ) 2 ) . In this complex , the vanadium is 5 @-@ coordinate , square pyramidal , meaning that a sixth ligand , such as pyridine , may be attached , though the association constant of this process is small . Many 5 @-@ coordinate vanadyl complexes have a trigonal <unk> geometry , such as <unk> ( <unk> ) 2 . The coordination chemistry of V5 + is dominated by the relatively stable <unk> coordination complexes which are often formed by aerial oxidation of the vanadium ( IV ) precursors indicating the stability of the + 5 oxidation state and ease of interconversion between the + 4 and + 5 states . 
 = = = Organometallic compounds = = = 
 Organometallic chemistry of vanadium is well developed , although they are mainly only academic significance . <unk> dichloride is a versatile starting reagent and even finds some applications in organic chemistry . Vanadium carbonyl , V ( CO ) 6 , is a rare example of a paramagnetic metal carbonyl . Reduction yields V ( CO ) − 
 6 ( isoelectronic with Cr ( CO ) 6 ) , which may be further reduced with sodium in liquid ammonia to yield V ( CO ) 3 − 
 5 ( isoelectronic with Fe ( CO ) 5 ) . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 = = = Universe = = = 
 The cosmic abundance of vanadium in the universe is 0 @.@ 0001 % , making the element nearly as common as copper or zinc . Vanadium is detected spectroscopically in light from the Sun and sometimes in the light from other stars . 
 = = = Earth 's crust = = = 
 Vanadium is the 22nd most abundant element in the earth 's crust ; metallic vanadium is rare in nature ( known as the mineral vanadium , native vanadium ) , but vanadium compounds occur naturally in about 65 different minerals . Economically significant examples include <unk> ( <unk> ) , vanadinite ( Pb5 ( VO4 ) 3Cl ) , and carnotite ( K2 ( UO2 ) 2 ( VO4 ) 2 · 3H2O ) . Much of the world 's vanadium production is sourced from vanadium @-@ bearing magnetite found in ultramafic gabbro bodies . Vanadium is mined mostly in South Africa , north @-@ western China , and eastern Russia . In 2013 these three countries mined more than 97 % of the 79 @,@ 000 tonnes of produced vanadium . 
 Vanadium is also present in bauxite and in deposits of crude oil , coal , oil shale and tar sands . In crude oil , concentrations up to 1200 ppm have been reported . When such oil products are burned , traces of vanadium may cause corrosion in engines and boilers . An estimated 110 @,@ 000 tonnes of vanadium per year are released into the atmosphere by burning fossil fuels . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 The vanadyl ion is abundant in seawater , having an average concentration is 30 <unk> . Some mineral water springs also contain the ion in high concentrations . For example , springs near Mount Fuji contain as much as 54 μg per liter . 
 = = Production = = 
 Most vanadium is used as a steel alloy called <unk> . <unk> is produced directly by reducing a mixture of vanadium oxide , iron oxides and iron in an electric furnace . The vanadium ends up in pig iron produced from vanadium @-@ bearing magnetite . Depending on the ore used , the slag contains up to 25 % of vanadium . 
 Vanadium metal is obtained by a multistep process that begins with the roasting of crushed ore with NaCl or Na2CO3 at about 850 ° C to give sodium <unk> ( <unk> ) . An aqueous extract of this solid is acidified to give " red cake " , a <unk> salt , which is reduced with calcium metal . As an alternative for small @-@ scale production , vanadium pentoxide is reduced with hydrogen or magnesium . Many other methods are also in use , in all of which vanadium is produced as a byproduct of other processes . Purification of vanadium is possible by the crystal bar process developed by Anton Eduard van Arkel and Jan Hendrik de Boer in 1925 . It involves the formation of the metal iodide , in this example vanadium ( III ) iodide , and the subsequent decomposition to yield pure metal . 
 2 V + 3 I2 ⇌ 2 <unk> 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Alloys = = = 
 Approximately 85 % of vanadium produced is used as <unk> or as a steel additive . The considerable increase of strength in steel containing small amounts of vanadium was discovered in the early 20th century . Vanadium forms stable nitrides and carbides , resulting in a significant increase in the strength of steel . From that time on , vanadium steel was used for applications in axles , bicycle frames , <unk> , gears , and other critical components . There are two groups of vanadium steel alloys . Vanadium high @-@ carbon steel alloys contain 0 @.@ 15 % to 0 @.@ 25 % vanadium , and high @-@ speed tool steels ( HSS ) have a vanadium content of 1 % to 5 % . For high @-@ speed tool steels , a hardness above HRC 60 can be achieved . HSS steel is used in surgical instruments and tools . Powder @-@ metallurgic alloys contain up to 18 % percent vanadium . The high content of vanadium carbides in those alloys increases wear resistance significantly . One application for those alloys is tools and knives . 
 Vanadium stabilizes the beta form of titanium and increases the strength and temperature stability of titanium . Mixed with aluminium in titanium alloys , it is used in jet engines , high @-@ speed airframes and dental implants . One of the common alloys is Titanium 6AL @-@ 4V , a titanium alloy with 6 % aluminium and 4 % vanadium . 
 Several vanadium alloys show superconducting behavior . The first A15 phase superconductor was a vanadium compound , <unk> , which was discovered in 1952 . Vanadium @-@ gallium tape is used in superconducting magnets ( 17 @.@ 5 teslas or 175 @,@ 000 gauss ) . The structure of the superconducting A15 phase of <unk> is similar to that of the more common <unk> and <unk> . 
 It has been proposed that a small amount , 40 to 270 ppm , of vanadium in Wootz steel and Damascus steel significantly improved the strength of the product , though the source of the vanadium is unclear . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Vanadium foil is used in cladding titanium to steel because it is compatible with both iron and titanium . The moderate thermal neutron @-@ capture cross @-@ section and the short half @-@ life of the isotopes produced by neutron capture makes vanadium a suitable material for the inner structure of a fusion reactor . 
 The most common oxide of vanadium , vanadium pentoxide V2O5 , is used as a catalyst in manufacturing sulfuric acid by the contact process and as an oxidizer in maleic anhydride production . Vanadium pentoxide is used in ceramics . Vanadium is an important component of mixed metal oxide catalysts used in the oxidation of propane and propylene to acrolein , acrylic acid or the <unk> of propylene to acrylonitrile . In service , the oxidation state of vanadium changes dynamically and reversibly with the oxygen and the steam content of the reacting feed mixture . Another oxide of vanadium , vanadium dioxide VO2 , is used in the production of glass coatings , which blocks infrared radiation ( and not visible light ) at a specific temperature . Vanadium oxide can be used to induce color centers in corundum to create simulated <unk> jewelry , although <unk> in nature is a chrysoberyl . 
 The Vanadium redox battery , a type of flow battery , is an electrochemical cell consisting of aqueous vanadium ions in different oxidation states . Batteries of the type were first proposed in the 1930s and developed commercially from the 1980s onwards . Cells use + 5 and + 2 formal <unk> state ions , and ( as of 2016 ) are used commercially for small scale ( c . 0 @.@ 1 - 10 MW , 0 @.@ 1 - 100 GJ ) grid energy storage . 
 <unk> can be used for protecting steel against rust and corrosion by conversion coating . 
 = = = = Proposed = = = = 
 Lithium vanadium oxide has been proposed for use as a high energy density anode for lithium ion batteries , at 745 Wh / L when paired with a lithium cobalt oxide cathode . Vanadium phosphates have been proposed as the cathode in the Lithium Vanadium Phosphate Battery , another type of lithium ion battery . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Vanadium plays a limited role in human biology . It is more important in marine environments than terrestrial . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A number of species of marine algae produce vanadium bromoperoxidase as well as the closely related <unk> ( which may use a heme or vanadium cofactor ) and <unk> . The bromoperoxidase produces an estimated 1 – 2 million tons of <unk> and 56 @,@ 000 tons of <unk> annually . Most naturally occurring organobromine compounds are produced by this enzyme , catalyzing the following reaction ( R @-@ H is hydrocarbon substrate ) : 
 R @-@ H + Br − + H2O2 → R @-@ Br + H2O + OH − 
 A vanadium nitrogenase is used by some nitrogen @-@ fixing micro @-@ organisms , such as Azotobacter . In this role , vanadium replaces more common molybdenum or iron , and gives the nitrogenase slightly different properties . 
 = = = Vanadium accumulation in tunicates and ascidians = = = 
 Vanadium is essential to ascidians and tunicates , where it is stored in the highly acidified vacuoles of certain blood cell types , designated " vanadocytes " . <unk> ( vanadium binding proteins ) have been identified in the cytoplasm of such cells . The concentration of vanadium in the blood of ascidians is as much as ten million times higher than the surrounding seawater , which normally contains 1 to 2 µg / l . The function of this vanadium concentration system and these vanadium @-@ bearing proteins is still unknown , but the vanadocytes are later deposited just under the outer surface of the tunic where they may deter predation . 
 = = = Fungi = = = 
 Amanita muscaria and related species of macrofungi accumulate vanadium ( up to 500 mg / kg in dry weight ) . Vanadium is present in the coordination complex <unk> in fungal fruit @-@ bodies . The biological importance of the accumulation is unknown . Toxic or peroxidase enzyme functions have been suggested . 
 = = = Mammals and birds = = = 
 Deficiencies in vanadium result in reduced growth and impaired reproduction in rats and chickens . Vanadium is a relatively controversial dietary supplement , used primarily for increasing insulin sensitivity and body @-@ building . Whether it works for the latter purpose has not been proven ; some evidence suggests that athletes who take it are merely experiencing a placebo effect . <unk> sulfate may improve glucose control in people with type 2 diabetes . <unk> and <unk> appear to play a role in a variety of biochemical processes , such as those relating to oxidative stress . 
 = = Safety = = 
 All vanadium compounds should be considered toxic . Tetravalent <unk> has been reported to be more than 5 times as toxic than trivalent <unk> . The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set an exposure limit of 0 @.@ 05 mg / m3 for vanadium pentoxide dust and 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 for vanadium pentoxide fumes in workplace air for an 8 @-@ hour workday , 40 @-@ hour work week . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has recommended that 35 mg / m3 of vanadium be considered immediately dangerous to life and health , that is , likely to cause permanent health problems or death . 
 Vanadium compounds are poorly absorbed through the gastrointestinal system . Inhalation of vanadium and vanadium compounds results primarily in adverse effects on the respiratory system . Quantitative data are , however , insufficient to derive a <unk> or chronic inhalation reference dose . Other effects have been reported after oral or inhalation exposures on blood parameters , liver , neurological development , and other organs in rats . 
 There is little evidence that vanadium or vanadium compounds are reproductive toxins or teratogens . Vanadium pentoxide was reported to be carcinogenic in male rats and in male and female mice by inhalation in an <unk> study , although the interpretation of the results has recently been disputed . The carcinogenicity of vanadium has not been determined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency . 
 Vanadium traces in diesel fuels are the main fuel component in high temperature corrosion . During combustion , vanadium oxidizes and reacts with sodium and sulfur , yielding vanadate compounds with melting points as low as 530 ° C , which attack the passivation layer on steel and render it susceptible to corrosion . The solid vanadium compounds also abrade engine components . 
 = Edge ( wrestler ) = 
 Adam Joseph Copeland ( born October 30 , 1973 ) is a Canadian actor and retired professional wrestler . He is best known for his time with the American professional wrestling promotion WWE , where he performed under the ring name Edge . 
 Copeland was trained by professional wrestlers Sweet Daddy Siki and Ron Hutchinson . Throughout the 1990s , he wrestled in various U.S. independent promotions . During his time in these promotions , he competed in singles and tag team competition , the latter with long @-@ time friend Christian . In 1997 , Copeland signed a developmental deal with the WWF and began competing for the company later that year ; he made his televised debut the following June under the ring name Edge . In July 1999 , he won the WWF Intercontinental Championship at a house show in Toronto , making it his first title reign with the company . He and Christian , billed as brothers and later childhood friends in WWF / WWE storylines , went on to win the WWF Tag Team Championship on seven different occasions . During this time , they gained notoriety in the tag team division , partly due to their participation in Tables , Ladders , and Chairs matches . 
 Edge won 31 championships in WWE overall , including 11 world championships ( the WWE Championship four times and the World Heavyweight Championship a record seven times ) , five Intercontinental Championships , one United States Championship , and 14 world tag team championships ( a record 12 World Tag Team Championships and two WWE Tag Team Championships ) , thus making him the 14th Triple Crown and 7th Grand Slam Champion . He won the 2001 King of the Ring tournament , was the first Money in the Bank ladder match winner in 2005 , and won the Royal Rumble match in 2010 , making him the first wrestler in history to achieve all three of those accomplishments . He headlined numerous pay @-@ per @-@ view events for WWE , including WrestleMania XXIV , and was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by Christian in 2012 . Edge is one of the most decorated professional wrestlers of all time . 
 Aside from professional wrestling , Copeland appeared in the fantasy film Highlander : Endgame and WWE Studios ' Bending the Rules . He has made guest appearances on television shows such as Weakest Link , Mind of Mencia , Deal or No Deal , and MADtv . He appeared on the SyFy series Haven as a recurring character Dwight Hendrickson . 
 In March 2016 , Copeland was a panelist on Canada Reads defending the novel Minister Without <unk> by Michael Winter . Minister Without Portfolio was the first book eliminated . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Copeland was born in Orangeville , Ontario , the son of Judy Copeland , a single parent who worked two jobs to support her son . To this day , he has never met his father or seen a picture of him . He became interested in professional wrestling at a young age ; his favorite wrestlers included Mr. Perfect , Randy Savage , Hulk Hogan , Ricky Steamboat , Shawn Michaels , and Bret Hart . When he was 17 , he won an essay contest with his local gym , and his prize was free wrestling training with Sweet Daddy Siki and Ron Hutchinson in Toronto . He put his wrestling aspirations aside to help pay the bills . He held numerous jobs and then attended Humber College , where he graduated with a degree in radio broadcasting . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1992 – 1997 ) = = = 
 During Copeland 's training , he trained one weekday and all weekend . The school 's practice ring was a 12 @-@ by @-@ 14 @-@ foot boxing ring with a harder mat than that of a typical wrestling ring . The ceiling above it was low , with exposed pipes , preventing top @-@ rope moves from being performed . Copeland later credited this environment with forcing him to drill and improve his technical mat @-@ based wrestling . His classmates included Johnny Swinger , Joe E. Legend , and Rob <unk> ( who later became notable for training wrestlers such as Gail Kim , Angelina Love , and Taylor Wilde ) . 
 Throughout the 1990s , Copeland wrestled on the independent circuit in Ontario and the Great Lakes region of the United States under the ring name Sexton Hardcastle . He became a part of the tag team Sex and Violence with Joe E. Legend . In the mid @-@ 1990s , he wrestled as Adam Impact for Tony Condello 's Winnipeg promotion . In 1997 , Sex and Violence became part of a larger stable called Thug Life , joining Christian Cage ( Copeland 's childhood friend ) , Zakk Wyld , Bill <unk> , and Rhino Richards . During his independent career , he won the <unk> Tag Team Championship twice with Legend and the ICW Street Fight Tag Team Championship twice ( once each with Legend and Cage ) . 
 The duo of Hardcastle and Cage were known as Hard Impact before changing their name to The Suicide Blondes . They also worked in Japan under the name The Canadian Rockers . Copeland also wrestled briefly as Damon Striker against Kevin Sullivan and Meng on separate episodes of WCW Pro . In the summer of 1995 , he worked a show in Ajax , Ontario , where Bret Hart 's business manager , Carl De Marco , was watching . Impressed , he suggested Copeland send an audition tape to the WWF . Copeland did not hear back from WWF , but some time later , De Marco was appointed President of WWF Canada and told Copeland that he 'd put in a good word . On May 10 , 1996 , Copeland ( as Sexton Hardcastle ) replaced Bob Holly 's opponent on short notice in the opening match of a WWF house show in Hamilton , Ontario . 
 After a Grand Prix Wrestling tour in the summer of 1997 , De Marco urged Copeland to go to Calgary , where Hart was informally training wrestlers while recovering from knee surgery . He spent his tour earnings on a plane ticket , and landed with no money or place to stay . He called Johnny Smith , whom he 'd met twice , and Smith agreed to give him food and shelter . Smith also drove Copeland to and from the gym and Hart 's house , where he trained alongside Ken Shamrock , Test , Mark Henry , and Kurrgan . Copeland returned to the Maritimes for another Grand Prix tour before going back to Hart 's house , bringing Christian with him . After this camp , Hart was impressed enough to put in a good word for both men at the WWF . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Edge and Christian ( 1996 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 In 1996 , Copeland initially made $ 210 per week while working for WWF without an official contract . The company also paid for his outstanding college debt , which was around $ 40 @,@ 000 . Copeland received a developmental contract with the WWF in 1997 . On Remembrance Day 1997 in Cornwall , Ontario , he ( under his real name ) faced Christian Cage at a Shotgun taping , a match included on WWE Home Video 's 2008 retrospective , Edge : A Decade of Decadence . Upon completing his training , Copeland made his WWF television debut on the June 22 , 1998 episode of Raw as Edge , a loner character who entered the arena through the crowd for his matches . This had been preceded by weeks of vignettes for the character , which included him aimlessly walking around the city streets and assaulting innocent pedestrians . 
 Edge 's first televised match was against Jose Estrada , Jr . , which ended prematurely by countout when Edge performed a somersault senton from the ring to the outside , legitimately injuring Estrada 's neck . In his first pay @-@ per @-@ view match at SummerSlam in August , he served as Sable 's mystery tag team partner against Jacqueline and Marc Mero , and bodyslammed Sable onto Mero in a pinning position to pick up the win . At Breakdown : In Your House , Edge faced Owen Hart in a losing effort . On October 11 , 1998 's edition of Sunday Night Heat , Edge defeated Vader in singles competition and at WWF Capital Carnage , Edge faced Tiger Ali Singh in a losing effort . 
 Edge was then placed in a feud against the vampire wrestler Gangrel . During the feud , Gangrel introduced Christian , Edge 's storyline brother , as his ally . Eventually , Gangrel and Christian convinced Edge to join them , and the three of them formed an alliance known as The Brood . At Rock Bottom : In Your House , The Brood defeated The <unk> Squad in a six @-@ man tag team match . At the Royal Rumble , Edge competed in the 30 @-@ man Royal Rumble match and was eliminated by Road Dogg . The Brood was later abducted and converted into The Undertaker 's Ministry of Darkness . In May 1999 , the Brood broke away from the Ministry after Christian was attacked by Ken Shamrock and forced to reveal the location of the captive Stephanie McMahon . The Undertaker chose to have Christian punished for his trespass , but Edge and Gangrel stood by him and betrayed The Undertaker , leading to a brief feud with the Ministry . At Backlash : In Your House , the Brood faced Ministry members Bradshaw , Faarooq , and Mideon in a losing effort . At King of the Ring , The Hardy Boyz defeated Edge and Christian in a match to determine the number one contender to the WWF Tag Team Championship , after their first match on Sunday Night Heat ended in a no @-@ contest . 
 Edge captured his first singles championship , the WWF Intercontinental Championship , on July 22 , 1999 , defeating Jeff Jarrett at a house show in Toronto , Ontario . He lost the title the next night to Jarrett at Fully Loaded . At SummerSlam , Edge and Christian competed in a Tag team turmoil match where they eliminated 3 teams : The New Brood ( Matt and Jeff ) , Mideon and Viscera and <unk> and Prince Albert before getting eliminated from the match by The Acolytes . At Unforgiven , Edge and Christian faced The New Age Outlaws for the WWF Tag Team Championship but failed to win the titles . 
 Later in the year , he was placed in a storyline angle with The Hardy Boyz ( Matt and Jeff ) . Gangrel soon betrayed both Edge and Christian and formed The New Brood with their enemies , The Hardy Boyz . They feuded with the Hardy Boyz , as they went on to compete in a ladder match at No Mercy in October for the " managerial services " of Terri Runnels and $ 100 @,@ 000 , which the Hardy Boyz won . At Survivor Series , Edge and Christian and The Hardy Boyz faced Too Cool and The <unk> in a four @-@ on @-@ four Survivor Series elimination match where they lost . At Armageddon , Edge and Christian competed in an 8 @-@ team battle royal which was won by The Acolytes . At Royal Rumble , Edge competed in the Royal Rumble match where he was eliminated by Al Snow and Val Venis . At No Way Out , Edge and Christian defeated The Hardy Boyz in a tag team match to determine the number one contenders to the WWF Tag Team Championship . At WrestleMania 2000 on April 2 , Edge and Christian defeated the Hardy Boyz and the Dudley Boyz ( Bubba Ray and D @-@ Von ) to win the WWF Tag Team Championship in a Triangle Ladder match , which ultimately led to the creation of the Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match ( TLC ) . 
 Following this victory , Edge and Christian found success as a villainous duo , winning the WWF Tag Team Title six more times ( for a total of seven ) . During this time , their trademark became the " five second pose " where they performed a pose in the ring for five seconds " for the benefit of those with flash photography " to mock , insult , or otherwise amuse the fans . At Backlash , Edge and Christian defeated D @-@ Generation X ( X @-@ Pac and Road Dogg ) to retain the titles . At Judgment Day , Edge , Christian and Kurt Angle lost a six @-@ man tag team match to Rikishi and Too Cool . Soon after , they lost the tag titles to Too Cool but won them back in a Four corners elimination match at King of the Ring . At Fully Loaded , they defended the titles against The Acolytes Protection Agency ( Faarooq and Bradshaw ) where they got disqualified but retained the titles . After retaining the titles at SummerSlam , at Unforgiven , Edge and Christian defended the titles against The Hardy Boyz in a Steel Cage match where they lost the titles and were not allowed another title shot . At No Mercy , Edge and Christian under , masked as Los Conquistadores , defeated The Hardys for the titles . The next night on Raw , the Hardy Boyz dressed as the Los Conquistadores and defeated Edge in a handicap match after Christian was taken out backstage to regain the WWF Tag Team Championship . 
 At Survivor Series , Edge and Christian teamed with Right to Censor 's Bull Buchanan and The Godfather in a four @-@ on @-@ four Survivor Series elimination match , where they lost to The Dudley 's and The Hardy 's , They regained the tag titles at Armageddon in a Fatal Four @-@ Way match , but lost them 8 days later to The Rock and The Undertaker . They won them back days later on Smackdown ! thanks to special guest referee Kurt Angle . During Edge and Christian 's run as a tag team , they also competed as a team in the first three TLC matches , winning the first two over The Dudley Boyz and The Hardy Boyz , at SummerSlam in 2000 and then again at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven . At the 2001 Royal Rumble , Edge and Christian were defeated by the Dudley Boyz and lost the World Tag Team title . They unsuccessfully attempted to regain the tag team title at No Way Out against the Dudley Boyz and The Brothers of Destruction ( The Undertaker and Kane ) , but they succeeded at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven against the Dudley Boyz and The <unk> in the second TLC match . At Judgment Day , Edge and Christian competed in a Tag Team Turmoil match which was won by Chris Jericho and Chris Benoit . Days later on the May 24 , 2001 Smackdown , Edge and Christian competed in a Fatal 4 @-@ Way Tag Team TLC Match for the WWF Tag Team Championship where Benoit and Jericho retained the titles . 
 = = = = Intercontinental Champion and various feuds ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 Edge went on to solidify himself as an emerging singles competitor by winning the King of the Ring tournament in 2001 and becoming a fan favorite again by siding with the WWF during the Invasion storyline . Christian betrayed Edge shortly afterward , and the two feuded over Edge 's Intercontinental Championship at SummerSlam that he later lost to Christian at Unforgiven , though Edge later captured the title . Following this , Edge lost the Intercontinental title to Test and shortly afterwards won the WCW United States Championship from Kurt Angle . On November 3 at Rebellion , Edge defeated Christian in a Steel cage match to retain the Intercontinental Championship , then Edge defeated Test at Survivor Series to unify the Intercontinental Championship with the U.S. Championship . 
 From there , Edge was placed in a feud with William Regal for the Intercontinental Championship . Edge first defeated Regal at Vengeance to retain the championship : however , he would come up short in the new year , losing the title to Regal at Royal Rumble 2002 and then coming up short in his rematch against Regal at No Way Out in a Brass Knuckles on a Pole match . On the March 3 edition of Sunday Night Heat , Edge defeated Mr. Perfect , and at WrestleMania X8 , Edge found himself in a match with Booker T that was the result of Edge beating out Booker for a fictitious Japanese shampoo endorsement . Shortly after defeating Booker T at WrestleMania , Edge was drafted to the SmackDown ! brand in the first WWF Draft Lottery . 
 Upon arriving there , he began a feud with Kurt Angle . At Backlash , Edge defeated Angle and later culminated in Edge shaving Angle 's head following a hair vs. hair match at Judgment Day in May . On the May 30 episode of SmackDown ! , Edge defeated Angle in a Steel Cage match to end the feud but during the match Edge speared Angle from the top rope . In the process , Edge injured his arm and would be forced out of action for a month . Two months later , he would end up winning the World Tag Team Championship alongside Hollywood Hulk Hogan on July 4 , 2002 . Edge and Hogan lost the titles at Vengeance to Lance Storm and Christian , and at SummerSlam , Edge defeated Eddie Guerrero then lost to Guerrero at Unforgiven . They met one final time days later on SmackDown ! in a No Disqualification match where Edge won , ending the feud . 
 He then formed a tag team with Rey Mysterio , and the two participated in a tournament for the newly created and SmackDown ! <unk> WWE Tag Team Championship . They lost to Kurt Angle and Chris Benoit in the finals of the tournament at No Mercy ; the match was voted Match of the Year by the Wrestling Observer Newsletter . After they failed in winning the title , Mysterio and Edge defeated Los Guerreros in a number one contender 's match on the October 24 episode of SmackDown ! to earn a title shot . At the Rebellion pay @-@ per @-@ view , Edge faced Brock Lesnar and Paul Heyman in a Handicap match for the WWE Championship where Lesnar retained the title after Lesnar pinned Edge . On the November 7 episode of SmackDown ! , they defeated Angle and Benoit in a two out of three falls match to win their first Tag Team Championship . They soon lost the tag titles to Los Guerreros in a Triple Threat Elimination match that also involved former champions Angle and Benoit at Survivor Series . After losing the title , Edge and Mysterio went their separate ways to focus on their singles careers . 
 Edge competed in the 30 @-@ man Royal Rumble match on January 19 , 2003 , where he had three eliminations before getting eliminated by Chris Jericho . Edge then teamed up with Chris Benoit , facing Team Angle ( Kurt Angle , Charlie Haas , and Shelton Benjamin ) in a series of singles and tag team matches . Prior to No Way Out , Edge suffered a legitimate neck injury , rendering him unable to compete in his scheduled match . At the event on February 23 , Edge was written off television through a backstage attack . He then underwent surgery with Dr. Lloyd Youngblood and was sidelined for over a year . 
 = = = = Championship pursuits ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 Edge was placed on the Raw brand in the 2004 WWE draft lottery after WrestleMania XX and returned to in @-@ ring action shortly after the event . At Backlash , Edge defeated Kane , and on the April 19 , 2004 episode of Raw , he and Chris Benoit won the World Tag Team Championship . They continued a close partnership even after losing the title ; at Bad Blood , Edge and Benoit defeated La Résistance in a Tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship by disqualification but didn 't win the titles . The team disbanded when Edge won the Intercontinental Championship at Vengeance from Randy Orton , thus becoming the one @-@ hundredth Intercontinental Champion . At SummerSlam , Edge defeated Chris Jericho and Batista in a Triple threat match to retain the WWE Intercontinental Championship . Following a legitimate groin injury in a non @-@ televised match , Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff stripped Edge of the Intercontinental title . 
 Upon his return , Edge began to show some villainous characteristics centering on his obsession for the World Heavyweight Championship . Edge , Chris Benoit , and Shawn Michaels received a title shot for Triple H 's World Heavyweight Championship at Taboo Tuesday in October 2004 . Michaels won the audience vote to receive the title shot , giving Edge and Benoit a tag team title shot . During the match , Edge abandoned his partner ( although Benoit managed to win the title on his own ) and instead interfered in the main event , costing Michaels the championship . On the November 1 episode of Raw , Edge and Benoit lost the World Tag Team Championship with Edge abandoning Benoit again and sitting in a chair and watching the match . After the conclusion of the match , Edge attacked Benoit , officially turning heel for the first time since 2001 . Edge then adopted a drastically different gimmick and attire , as well as a new theme song , becoming an egotistical and brash villain . At Survivor Series , Edge was part of Team Triple H along with Triple H , Batista and Snitsky . They were defeated by Team Orton ( Randy Orton , Chris Benoit , Chris Jericho and Maven ) . During the match , Edge eliminated both Chris Benoit and Chris Jericho before getting eliminated by Randy Orton . On a November episode of Raw , both Edge and Benoit competed in a number one contender 's battle royal , but they eliminated each other simultaneously at the conclusion of the match , resulting in a draw . As a result , Triple H was forced to defend the title in a triple threat match . In the match , Benoit locked the Crippler Crossface on Edge , who shifted his weight putting Benoit 's shoulders on the mat for a pin . This match also ended in a draw for Benoit and Edge , as Benoit made Edge submit at the same time the referee counted a pinfall for Edge . As a result , the World Heavyweight title was vacated the following week on Raw . 
 In January 2005 , Edge competed in his first Elimination Chamber match at New Year 's Revolution for the vacant World Heavyweight Championship . Shawn Michaels ( acting as special guest referee ) performed a superkick on Edge , in retaliation for an accidental spear by Edge , causing Edge to be the first eliminated . This led to a match at the Royal Rumble later in the month , in which Edge defeated Michaels . 
 = = = = WWE Champion ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 Subsequently , at WrestleMania 21 , Edge won the first ever Money in the Bank ladder match , gaining a contract that gave him a shot at the World Heavyweight championship within one year . According to a podcast interview with Chris Jericho , Copeland said that he did not initially like the idea of the ladder match and even told WWE management not to include him on the Wrestlemania 21 card altogether . However , he was talked into competing by the other participates like Jericho and Glenn Jacobs ( Kane ) who said the match had the potential to be a big success . At Backlash , Edge defeated Chris Benoit in a Last Man Standing match to end the feud . 
 Several weeks after , Edge was then paired with Lita , his real @-@ life girlfriend at the time , in an angle in which she betrayed her storyline husband Kane , by costing him a number @-@ one contender match for the World Heavyweight Championship . Edge faced even more scorn from fans due to this relationship , which lasted over a year . The next week , Edge received his World Heavyweight Championship match against Batista , which he lost . Edge started a feud with Kane leading to several matches between them including one at Vengeance , when Edge lost to Kane . After trading several victories on Raw , the feud ended in a stretcher match on the July 25 episode of Raw that Edge won , but shortly after , Kane performed a tombstone piledriver on Lita . 
 On the July 11 episode of Raw , Edge 's match with Kane was interrupted when Matt Hardy made a surprise appearance . Hardy referred to Edge as " Adam " and issued a threat to Lita as well . When Hardy was officially brought back to Raw , he and Edge continued their feud , including a match at SummerSlam where Edge defeated Hardy , causing Hardy to have excessive blood loss . On the August 29 edition of Raw , Edge and Hardy fought in a Street Fight , which resulted in a no contest when Hardy performed a side effect on Edge off the entrance ramp into the sound speakers and other electrical equipment . They also fought in a Steel cage match at Unforgiven in September in which Hardy defeated Edge . The feud culminated in a " Loser Leaves Raw Ladder Match " at WWE Homecoming on October 3 , which Edge won . After the match , Hardy left the Raw brand to go to the SmackDown ! brand . 
 Shortly after the Homecoming victory , Edge suffered a legit torn pectoralis major muscle that kept him shelved for a couple of months . During his time off , he starred in his own talk show segment on Raw entitled The Cutting Edge , dubbing himself the " Rated @-@ R Superstar " . Edge used his talk show to start a feud with Ric Flair following Flair 's well @-@ publicized arrest in connection with a road rage incident . Edge eventually began using The Cutting Edge as a soapbox to run down Flair until , after weeks of public mockery , Flair eventually showed up and attacked Edge . Edge and Ric Flair formally met at the New Year 's Revolution event in 2006 in a match for Flair 's Intercontinental Championship , which resulted in Flair retaining , after Edge was disqualified . 
 Although Edge had lost his scheduled match at New Year 's Revolution , that would not be his only match that evening . The main event of the pay @-@ per @-@ view saw John Cena , the reigning WWE Champion , defend his title in an Elimination Chamber match . After a bloody Cena won the match , WWE Chairman Vince McMahon revealed that Edge was cashing in his Money in the Bank contract to face Cena for the championship immediately . After two spears , Edge quickly defeated Cena to win the WWE Championship , marking his first World title win . 
 The following night on Raw , Edge decided to celebrate his victory by having " hot , unbridled sex " in the middle of the ring . He and Lita engaged in foreplay until they were interrupted by Flair , who called Edge a disgrace and " that he was horrible in the sack " . Flair , however , ended up on the receiving end of a con @-@ chair @-@ to on the announcers ' table until Cena came out to Flair 's aid and performed an FU on Lita . The " Live Sex Celebration " segment earned Raw a 5 @.@ 2 rating , the highest Raw rating in over a year , leading Edge to call himself the " most watched champion ever " . On the January 16 edition of Raw , Edge defeated Ric Flair in a TLC Match to retain the WWE Championship . Three weeks later , at the Royal Rumble , Edge lost the WWE Championship back to Cena . 
 He then lost a return match on a special Thursday episode of Raw held in February . Edge blamed special guest referee Mick Foley for his loss , claiming biased officiating and attacked him . At Saturday Night 's Main Event , Foley got revenge on Edge by assaulting him with a con @-@ chair @-@ to . They feuded until WrestleMania 22 in April , where Edge defeated Foley in a Hardcore match by spearing him through a flaming table but suffered second degree burns . 
 Following his feud with Foley , Edge once again challenged John Cena for the WWE Championship . Triple H was involved in a feud with Cena at the time , resulting in a triple threat match at Backlash , where Cena pinned Triple H to retain the title . After Backlash , Edge continued his feud with Mick Foley as they entered a triple threat hardcore match . Foley , however , betrayed his friend Tommy Dreamer with Edge 's assistance . Edge and Foley then proclaimed that , because of their brutal match at WrestleMania , they were the true Hardcore Champions . At June 's pay @-@ per @-@ view event One Night Stand , Edge , Foley , and Lita defeated Dreamer , Terry Funk , and Beulah McGillicutty in an Extreme rules tag team match . 
 Later in the event , Edge interfered in the WWE Championship match between John Cena and challenger Rob Van Dam , helping Van Dam win the title after he speared Cena through a table . Edge , who won a number one contender 's match for the WWE title to face Van Dam , but was unable to win the title at Vengeance . 
 Two weeks later on Raw , Edge pinned Van Dam in a triple threat match , after <unk> Cena with the title belt , to become WWE Champion for the second time . This angle re @-@ ignited Edge 's feud with Cena , and he lost by disqualification at Saturday Night 's Main Event in order to retain the title . Subsequently , a match was made for the August event SummerSlam with the stipulation that if Edge disqualified himself , he would lose the title . At the event , Edge retained the title by pinning Cena after he hit him in the back of the head with a pair of brass knuckles when the referee was not looking . The night after SummerSlam , Lita disposed of Cena 's customized " spinner " belt into the Long Island Sound at Edge 's command , who declared it the end of the " Cena era " in his life . Edge later unveiled the new " Rated @-@ R " version of the belt . Cena , however , interfered in Edge 's match with a returning Jeff Hardy later that night , chasing him down to the outside of the building , assaulting him , and tossing Edge into the Long Island Sound . The following week , Cena made a deal with Edge : if Edge could defeat him in a match for the WWE Championship , he would sign a contract to move to SmackDown ! . Edge accepted , on the condition the match be a TLC match held at September 's Unforgiven event in Edge 's home town of Toronto . At the event , he lost the championship after Cena performed the FU on him , sending Edge crashing through two stacked tables from a ladder . At one point during the match , Cena locked in a modified STFU while Edge was in a ladder , who later said he was legitimately choked unconscious , the first time he had been knocked out in a match during his career . 
 = = = = Rated @-@ RKO ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 On the October 2 , 2006 episode of Raw , interference from the newly reformed D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) cost Edge his " final chance " at John Cena 's WWE Championship in a Steel cage match , though their interference was a response to the interference of Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch , led to Edge approaching Randy Orton and asking him to join forces to defeat DX , which Orton accepted and joined an alliance with Edge . The two formed the tag team Rated @-@ RKO . Rated @-@ RKO became the first to defeat DX since their reunion , at Cyber Sunday , Rated @-@ RKO defeated D @-@ Generation X with Eric Bischoff as the special guest referee , at Survivor Series , Rated @-@ RKO teamed with Johnny Nitro , Mike Knox and Gregory Helms to face Team DX ( Triple H , Shawn Michaels , CM Punk and The Hardy Boyz ( Matt and Jeff Hardy ) ) but all members of Team Rated @-@ RKO were eliminated . Rated @-@ RKO quickly dominated the Raw brand 's tag team division to become tag team champions , making Edge a record holder of 11 World Tag Team Championship title reigns in his WWE career . Due to Lita retiring that night , her on @-@ screen relationship with Edge abruptly ended , with no explanation . 
 As part of the storyline angle , Rated @-@ RKO attacked Ric Flair with steel chairs to enrage DX on November 27 . At New Year 's Revolution in January 2007 , Rated @-@ RKO faced DX in a title defense , but the match was declared a no @-@ contest when Triple H suffered a legitimate injury during the match . At Royal Rumble , Edge competed in the 30 @-@ man Royal Rumble match where he lasted the longest in the match with a time of 44 : 02 and eliminated 5 men and made it to the final 4 in the match before getting eliminated by Shawn Michaels , With Triple H out of action , the team continued their on @-@ screen rivalry with remaining DX member Shawn Michaels . Michaels teamed with John Cena to defeat Rated @-@ RKO for the tag team championship on January 29 , 2007 . Edge and Orton suffered a series of losses to Cena and Michaels in the following months , In April 2007 , Edge competed in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 23 . During the match , Matt Hardy threw him onto a ladder and encouraged Jeff Hardy , who was close to the winning briefcase , to finish him off . Hardy then leaped off the 20 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) ladder , and drove him through the ladder with a leg drop , seemingly injuring both Edge & himself . The two were unable to continue the match and were removed from ringside on stretchers . After this Edge and Orton also became rivals in their goals of achieving the WWE Championship . Neither Edge nor Orton won the championship , and they lost their claims as number one contenders after a failed match with Cena at Backlash in April . 
 = = = = La Familia and championship reigns ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 On the May 7 , 2007 episode of Raw , Edge interrupted an in @-@ ring promo by the winner of the 2007 Money in the Bank contract , Mr. Kennedy . Kennedy had said for weeks that he would not cash in the contract until the following WrestleMania , but Edge decided to goad him into a match for his briefcase . Edge attacked Kennedy before the match even started , severely injuring his shoulder , and took advantage of the injury to beat Kennedy and take the briefcase . Edge thus became the first person to gain the Money in the Bank contract twice and the first not to do so in the ladder match . ( This was done to give Kennedy time to recuperate from what was originally thought to be a completely torn triceps tendon , but later turned out to be a much less severe injury . ) 
 It did not take Edge long to take advantage of his newly won opportunity . On the May 11 episode of SmackDown ! , World Heavyweight Champion The Undertaker retained his title against Batista in a steel cage match . Then , Mark Henry attacked the Undertaker . Despite being part of the Raw roster , Edge came out , cashed in his Money in the Bank contract for a title match , and speared Undertaker for the victory and his first World Heavyweight Championship . As a result , Edge became a member of the SmackDown ! roster . Edge then began a feud with Batista and successfully defended his championship title against him at Judgment Day , in a Steel Cage match at One Night Stand , and a third and final time by count out in a last chance match at Vengeance . Edge then began a feud with Kane after SmackDown ! General Manager Theodore Long announced Kane as the new number one contender for the World Heavyweight title . Edge was forced to relinquish the World title due to a legitimately torn left pectoral muscle injury on the July 20 episode of SmackDown ! following an attack by Kane . 
 At November 's pay @-@ per @-@ view event , Survivor Series , Edge made his return , interfering in a World Heavyweight Championship Hell in a Cell match between Batista and The Undertaker . The following SmackDown ! show saw Edge and General Manager Vickie Guerrero make their relationship public , making his official in @-@ ring return in a World title match against Batista on November 30 , a match that ended after The Undertaker interfered . At Armageddon , Edge won the World Heavyweight Championship , after giving The Undertaker two chair shots and pinning the defending champion Batista ( who had been <unk> by Undertaker prior ) in a Triple Threat match . During the match , Edge used two look @-@ a @-@ likes to distract Batista and The Undertaker . It was later revealed that these look @-@ a @-@ likes were the Major Brothers , who were then repackaged as Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder . Edge also formed an alliance with Chavo Guerrero , nephew of Vickie Guerrero , and on the January 22 , 2008 broadcast of ECW , he assisted Chavo in winning the ECW Championship from CM Punk , even though Chavo previously rebuffed Edge and allied himself with Rey Mysterio , Edge 's scheduled opponent at the Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view . The group eventually came under the name of La Familia . On the Valentine 's Day episode of SmackDown , Edge proposed to Vickie , to which she accepted . 
 At WrestleMania XXIV , Edge lost the World Heavyweight championship to the Undertaker when he tapped out to the Hell 's Gate . In a WrestleMania rematch , The Undertaker defeated Edge once again at Backlash to retain the World Heavyweight championship . Following Backlash , The Undertaker was stripped of the World title by Vickie Guerrero and faced Edge for the title at Judgment Day in May and then again at One Night Stand in a TLC match in June . The first match ended with a countout victory for The Undertaker but no champion was crowned due to the circumstances . The second match at One Night Stand saw Edge walk away champion , which also meant Undertaker was forced to leave the company . 
 On June 29 , 2008 , Edge faced Batista in a match for his title at Night of Champions . Due to interference from La Familia and a belt shot from Edge , he was able to defeat Batista . The next night on Raw , which happened a week after that year 's draft lottery , Edge came out to gloat about his victory as well as the fact that , thanks to the draft , both the WWE Championship and the World Heavyweight Championship were both SmackDown property ( Triple H , who was the reigning WWE Champion at the time , was drafted to SmackDown and had retained his title at Night of Champions as well ) . As Edge was leaving the ring , an angry Batista ( who had been drafted back to Raw after three years as a SmackDown wrestler ) came out and chased Edge back to the ring . He proceeded to assault Edge , finishing with a Batista Bomb in the ring . Just as Batista was leaving , CM Punk ran to the ring carrying the Money in the Bank briefcase he had won at WrestleMania XXIV , with referee Mike Chioda tagging along with him . Since Edge was still out of it from the attack , he did not see Punk come into the ring and therefore was unaware that Punk was cashing in his contract . Once the bell rang , Punk simply hit Edge with a Go To Sleep and pinned him to win the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 On the July 4 , 2008 episode of SmackDown , Edge took his frustrations out on Vickie because he lost the title and told her the wedding was off . The following week , however , after Guerrero saved Edge from a con @-@ chair @-@ to by The Big Show , Edge re @-@ proposed , and the wedding was back on . On July 18 , 2008 at the wedding reception , Triple H came out and showed a video of Edge cheating on Guerrero the day before with the wedding planner , Alicia Fox . The angle continued at The Great American Bash in July , when Fox attempted to hand Edge the WWE Championship belt to use as a weapon against Triple H , but was stopped by Guerrero . Edge attempted to spear Triple H but hit Guerrero instead , with the distraction , Triple H performed a Pedigree on Edge to retain the WWE title . Edge attempted to apologize to Guerrero , even though he was seen talking to Fox , but she revealed to him that she had rehired The Undertaker and that Edge would face him in a Hell in a Cell match at SummerSlam . Edge then turned on La Familia during the August 8 episode of SmackDown , performing a one @-@ man con @-@ chair @-@ to on Chavo in the ring , and tossed Guerrero out of her wheelchair , effectively disbanding the faction . The following week , Edge verbally assaulted Guerrero , before he forced her to apologize to The Undertaker for what she did to him . He also mentioned to Guerrero , that it was because of her that La Familia suffered . At SummerSlam , The Undertaker defeated Edge , and after the match , Undertaker chokeslammed Edge off the top of a ladder and through the ring canvas , with flames rising from the hole . 
 On November 23 , 2008 at Survivor Series , Edge returned to WWE after an introduction by SmackDown General Manager and his on @-@ screen wife Vickie Guerrero , replacing Jeff Hardy in the Triple Threat match for the WWE Championship involving champion Triple H and Vladimir Kozlov . He pinned Triple H to become the WWE Champion for the third time in his career . The following month , Edge lost the title to Hardy at Armageddon in a Triple Threat match , which also featured Triple H. At the Royal Rumble , however , Edge regained the title in a no disqualification match , following Matt Hardy 's interference . At the February event No Way Out , Edge lost the WWE title in an Elimination Chamber after being pinned by Jeff Hardy , being the first to be eliminated , with the title eventually being won by Triple H. Later that night , Edge inserted himself into the World Championship Elimination Chamber match after attacking Kofi Kingston and barricading himself inside one of the Chamber 's pods , proceeding to win his eighth World Championship , last eliminating Rey Mysterio and taking the title over to SmackDown . At WrestleMania XXV in April , Edge lost the championship to John Cena in a Triple Threat match , which also included The Big Show . Three weeks later he regained the championship at Backlash , when he defeated Cena in a Last Man Standing match , after interference by The Big Show . After a successful defense against Jeff Hardy at Judgment Day , he lost the title to Hardy at Extreme Rules in a ladder match , and afterwards said some disparaging things to his on @-@ screen wife , Vickie Guerrero . While Hardy was celebrating , CM Punk cashed in his money in the bank and defeated Hardy to win the World Heavyweight Championship . The following night , Guerrero resigned as the Raw General Manager due to being humiliated , and Edge came out to apologize . Instead , however , he claimed he married Guerrero because she had authoritative powers as the General Manager , and sought a divorce . 
 = = = = Record World Heavyweight Champion and Retirement ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 In June , Edge won the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship ( the unified version of the World Tag Team Championship from the Raw brand and the WWE Tag Team Championship from the SmackDown brand ) with Chris Jericho at The Bash after he and Jericho were inserted into what was originally a match between reigning champions The Colóns and Legacy . The win made Edge a record setting 12 time World Tag Team Champion . On July 3 , Edge suffered a torn Achilles tendon while competing at a live event in San Diego in a match against Jeff Hardy , and later underwent surgery . It was reported that he could be out of action for up to a year . During Edge 's absence , Jericho replaced him with Big Show ( forming Jeri @-@ Show ) and Jericho began to speak badly of Edge , mocking him for his injury . This resulted in Edge beginning an early face turn for the first time since 2004 . 
 At the Royal Rumble event on January 31 , 2010 , Edge returned from injury by entering the Royal Rumble match as the twenty ninth surprise entrant . He quickly eliminated Jericho who had been the 28th . Ultimately , he won the Royal Rumble for the first time in his career after last eliminating John Cena . After Jericho won the Heavyweight Championship from the Undertaker during Elimination Chamber , Edge cemented his face turn after he challenged Chris Jericho for the World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania XXVI after a surprise attack on Jericho . However , Edge lost to Jericho in the match . The following month , Edge beat Jericho in a Steel Cage match at Extreme Rules . 
 The following night at the 2010 WWE Draft , Edge was drafted back to the Raw brand , also costing Randy Orton a title shot against John Cena by spearing him in a Triple Threat match against Batista and Sheamus hinting at a possible Heel turn . On the April 30 episode of SmackDown , Edge had said goodbye to the SmackDown fans . However , Edge turned on the fans by calling them " puppets " for saying ' Spear ! Spear ! Spear ! ' and later tried a sneak attack on his former tag team partner Christian , thus becoming a villain once again . Next , Edge began a feud with his former Rated @-@ RKO tag team partner Randy Orton , with both Edge and Orton gaining the upper hand over one another . Much of the antagonism stemmed of Randy 's refusal to re @-@ form Rated @-@ RKO with Edge , as Edge wanted to pursue the tag team titles he had been stripped of . Edge beat Christian in a match on the May 17 episode of Raw held in Toronto . Edge and Orton met in a match at May 's Over the Limit pay @-@ per @-@ view , with the match resulting in a double countout . At Fatal 4 @-@ Way , Edge participated in a fatal four @-@ way match that included Orton , Sheamus , and John Cena for the WWE Championship , though Edge failed to win the title . 
 The following month , Edge participated in the Raw Money in the Bank ladder match at the Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view , but failed to win the briefcase . Edge then went on to participate in the main event of SummerSlam in which he and six teammates were victorious in a seven @-@ on @-@ seven elimination tag team match against The Nexus . On the 900th episode of Raw , he disqualified himself , in the main event in a five @-@ on @-@ five elimination match against The Nexus . This saw him enter into a feud with the anonymous GM of Raw , during which the GM cost him several matches . At Night of Champions , Edge participated in a six pack elimination challenge for Sheamus ' WWE Championship but once again failed to win the title . 
 At WWE 's Hell in a Cell PPV event , Edge defeated Jack Swagger . The next night on Raw , he was traded to the Smackdown brand for SmackDown 's CM Punk due to him destroying the Raw GM computer turning him face and ending the feud between the two . On his SmackDown return , he defeated Jack Swagger in his first match . On the October 15 , 2010 episode of SmackDown , he defeated Dolph Ziggler to become part of Team SmackDown at WWE 's Bragging Rights PPV event . At the event , Edge won the cup for Team SmackDown alongside Rey Mysterio eliminating R @-@ Truth , John Morrison and Team Raw 's captain Miz . 
 Soon after that , he entered a feud with World Heavyweight Champion Kane . He defeated Mysterio and Alberto Del Rio to become the number one contender for Kane 's World Championship at WWE 's Survivor Series PPV event , which ended in a draw . On December 19 , 2010 Edge defeated Kane , Rey Mysterio , and Alberto Del Rio in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match at the TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs PPV event to win the World Heavyweight Championship for a record sixth time and making him a ten time World Champion . Edge then defended the World Championship against Kane in a winning effort in a Last Man Standing match , thus ending their feud . 
 Edge then feuded with Dolph Ziggler and Vickie Guerrero until the Royal Rumble . Afterwards , Rumble winner Alberto Del Rio challenged for the World Heavyweight Championship , held by Edge at that time . On the 600th episode of SmackDown on February 18 , acting General Manager Guerrero fired Edge in storyline , and awarded the World Championship to her on @-@ screen boyfriend Ziggler . SmackDown General Manager Teddy Long returned later that night , and rehired Edge . Edge then defeated Ziggler to become the World Heavyweight Champion for the seventh time , his 11th World Championship overall . After the match , Teddy Long fired Ziggler , and Guerrero followed the next week after losing a tag team match with Drew McIntyre against Edge and Kelly Kelly . 
 At the Elimination Chamber pay @-@ per @-@ view , Edge successfully defended his World Heavyweight Championship in an Elimination Chamber match by finally pinning Rey Mysterio . After he defended his championship , he was attacked by Alberto Del Rio , but was saved by the returning Christian . Edge and Christian briefly reunited to defeat Alberto and his NXT bodyguard Brodus Clay . At WrestleMania XXVII , in his last WWE in @-@ ring match , Edge successfully defended the World Title against Alberto Del Rio in the main event . 
 On the April 11 , 2011 episode of Raw , Edge gave a speech about his career and the realities of wrestling . He said he took further tests to his basic strength tests , and an MRI result forced him to retire . Leading up to this announcement , he had reflected upon his previous neck injury and cervical vertebral fusion , and felt numbness in his arms . This was diagnosed as cervical spinal stenosis , and doctors would not clear him to compete , for risk of neck @-@ down paralysis or death . Later that same week on the April 15 episode of SmackDown , Edge officially relinquished the World Heavyweight Championship , retiring as the World Champion . 
 = = = = Hall of Famer and part @-@ time appearances ( 2011 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 On the April 22 , 2011 episode of SmackDown , Edge interrupted Alberto Del Rio 's mock retirement party for him . At Extreme Rules , Edge made an appearance watching his friend Christian winning the vacant World Heavyweight Championship . At SummerSlam , Christian had Edge return to be in his corner for his World Heavyweight Championship defense against Randy Orton . However , Edge , disappointed by the cowardly tactics Christian used to win his second World Heavyweight Championship , berated him and walked out on him . Christian then lost the title to Orton for a second time . On the September 16 , 2011 episode of SmackDown , in his hometown of Toronto , Edge hosted The Cutting Edge between Mark Henry and the World Heavyweight Champion , Randy Orton . After the show went off the air , they held Edge Appreciation Night to celebrate his career . 
 On March 31 , 2012 , Edge ( with his usual long hair cut short ) was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by Christian , during WrestleMania XXVIII weekend . Edge made a surprise appearance on the April 23 , 2012 episode of Raw , confronting his long @-@ time rival John Cena about Brock Lesnar . He mentioned that despite sharing the biggest rivalry of their careers , they always shared mutual admiration for professional wrestling . In an act of motivation , he told Cena to ' wake up ' and beat Brock Lesnar . He also mentioned beforehand that he was not supposed to be on the show that night , also declaring that he would no longer be under contract with WWE in a couple of days . After this , his contract with the WWE had legitimately expired . On the September 20 , 2012 episode of SmackDown , Edge made an appearance addressing Team Hell No . 
 Edge returned on the September 9 , 2013 episode of Raw in his hometown of Toronto where he hosted his talk show The Cutting Edge having Daniel Bryan as his special guest after Randy Orton was scheduled to be his original guest . Edge insulted Triple H in the segment , who retaliated by labeling Edge 's main event push as a complete failure and sending The Shield to attack Edge 's friend Christian . When Edge went to confront Triple H , he was escorted from the building . Edge hosted The Cutting Edge on the September 13 episode of SmackDown , where he mocked Randy Orton and watched as Orton 's attack on Bryan backfired . 
 Edge and Christian hosted the December 29 , 2014 episode of Raw , where they held the first ever Cutting Edge Peep Show interviewing Seth Rollins , who , along with Big Show , attacked them . Rollins held Edge hostage , thus forcing John Cena to reinstate the Authority . When Rollins tried to break Edge 's neck anyway , Cena ended up making the save . 
 On the September 7 , 2015 edition of Raw , he and Christian made a backstage appearance with Seth Rollins , The New Day , and The Dudley Boyz . Edge also appeared with Christian on a podcast with Stone Cold Steve Austin later that same night on the WWE Network . 
 = = = = Edge and Christian Show ( 2016 – present ) = = = = 
 On January 24 , 2016 , it was announced during the Royal Rumble that Edge and Christian will star in their new comedy series The Edge and Christian Show That Totally Reeks of <unk> premiering on February 21 , 2016 after WWE Fastlane on the WWE Network . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 In 2000 , Edge had a cameo appearance as a road bandit in the fantasy movie Highlander : Endgame . In March 2002 , he appeared with other wrestlers on the quiz show Weakest Link . He was voted out in the first round , and the eventual winner was Kane . On the August 6 , 2006 episode of Mind of Mencia , he appeared as Edge as a commentator for " The Royal Religious Rumble " . He punched out an actor playing L. Ron Hubbard to stop Scientology from ruling the world and then speared another actor playing Tom Cruise . 
 In March 2007 , Edge appeared alongside Randy Orton , John Cena , and Bobby Lashley on Deal or No Deal . Weeks later , he appeared on the sketch comedy show MADtv . He appeared in a Slim Jim commercial , in which his " spicy side " caused chaos in a DMV , a restaurant , and a hotel . Edge : a Decade of Decadence , a DVD documentary of Copeland 's life , was released in December 2008 . The DVD illustrates his wrestling career dating from when he entered the WWF to 2008 . 
 In June 2011 , Edge appeared as <unk> , an Abnormal , in the Sanctuary episode " Into the Black " . In September 2011 , he held an " <unk> " Essay Scholarship Contest , as an echo back to how he himself got a start in the wrestling business . The scholarship went to one of the students at Squared Circle Wrestling in Toronto , <unk> <unk> , who has since gone on to work as Leah von Dutch . 
 He appeared regularly in the Syfy series Haven , which started in July 2011 , as Dwight Hendrickson , a troubled man whose affliction is revealed to be attracting bullets and who works as a cleaner , cleaning up after the troubles . He is later appointed the Chief of Police . He was part of the cast until the show 's series finale in December 2015 . 
 WWE Studios released Bending the Rules , in which Copeland starred , in 2012 . WWE released the official trailer of the film on the February 28 , 2012 edition of Raw . The 2012 documentary , You Think You Know Me – The Story of Edge , includes a look at Copeland 's life and career in pro wrestling . 
 In December 2014 , Copeland made a cameo appearance in the music video for the In @-@ Flight Safety song " Destroy " as his Dwight Hendrickson character . 
 On July 16 , 2015 , it was announced that Copeland would be set to portray Atom @-@ Smasher on the second season opener of The Flash . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = WWE Network = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Copeland used to play hockey with retired National Hockey League ( NHL ) player Aaron Downey . He is a fan of the NHL 's New Jersey Devils . As a teenager , Copeland attended WrestleMania VI sitting in the eleventh row at ringside . He was cheering on WWF World Heavyweight Champion Hulk Hogan against The Ultimate Warrior , and he credits this match with making him realize he wanted to be a wrestler . Twelve years later Edge returned to the SkyDome as a competitor at WrestleMania X8 . He is close friends with fellow wrestler Jason Reso , otherwise known as Christian . Copeland 's favorite band is the Foo Fighters , as he revealed during his Hall of Fame induction . Edge resides in Asheville , North Carolina . 
 His autobiography , Adam Copeland on Edge , was published on November 4 , 2004 . Unlike most wrestlers who used " ghostwriters " to write their biographies , Copeland wrote the entire book himself , in longhand . Mick Foley , who also wrote his wrestling autobiography himself in longhand , wrote the foreword to his book . Copeland does not smoke . He claims he had his first cigarette when he was sixteen , hated it , and has not smoked since . 
 Copeland has several tattoos : a red and black sun on his left upper biceps , which covers a tattoo of a muscular shark which resembled the Street Sharks ; a star on his right upper biceps with several smaller stars and two skulls wearing bandanas , adorned with flowers and hearts , below said star tattoo ; a tattoo of a cross on his left forearm ; and another tattoo of a scroll like piece of paper adorned with the words " Rise Above " . All of Copeland 's tattoos represent a stage in his career . His sun , which Copeland got while recovering from his neck injury , represents " looking towards brighter days . " The cross tattoo represents his time with the Brood , and his star and skull tattoos represent his Rated @-@ R Superstar persona and his self @-@ proclaimed status as the " Guns N ' Roses of wrestling " . 
 In March 2007 , Copeland became a key figure in an alleged steroid ring and drug investigation . On March 19 , Sports Illustrated posted an article on its website in its continuing series investigating a steroid and HGH ring used by a number of professional athletes in several sports . That article mentioned several current and former WWE wrestlers , including Copeland , who was alleged to have obtained HGH . Copeland has previously admitted to using steroids in April 2004 after neck surgery as an experiment on TSN 's Off The Record with Michael Landsberg in January 2005 . He said , he felt it slowed him down , so he quickly got off the substance . According to Copeland , he took HGH after returning from a spinal fusion neck surgery . He was told by doctors that it would help the bones grow back around the screws and plate that were inserted into his neck . He claims to have taken blood tests , consulted doctors , studied the drug , and got prescriptions before deciding to take them . 
 According to a Sports Illustrated article rotated on August 30 , 2007 , Copeland was named one of ten superstars found to have purchased steroids and other drugs from an online pharmacy , a violation of the WWE Talent Wellness program . Copeland was said to have received somatropin , <unk> , and stanozolol between September 2004 and February 2007 . 
 Copeland married Alannah Morley , the sister of Sean Morley , on November 8 , 2001 . They divorced after two years on March 10 , 2004 . His second marriage was to Lisa Ortiz on October 21 , 2004 . The couple divorced on November 17 , 2005 . On December 12 , 2013 , Copeland and former WWE wrestler Beth Phoenix had a daughter , and named her Lyric Rose Copeland . On May 31 , 2016 , their second daughter was born , they named her Ruby Ever Copeland . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 <unk> / <unk> / Impaler DDT ( Lifting DDT , sometimes from an elevated position ) – 1998 – 2002 ; used as a signature move thereafter 
 Downward Spiral ( Reverse STO ) – 1998 – 2000 
 <unk> ( Kneeling inverted sharpshooter ) – innovated 
 Killswitch ( Inverted double underhook facebuster ) – 2011 ; adopted from Christian 
 One @-@ man con @-@ chair @-@ to – innovated and used rarely 
 Spear , with theatrics 
 Signature moves 
 Diving crossbody 
 Edge @-@ O @-@ Matic ( Sitout rear mat slam ) 
 Electric chair transitioned into either a drop or a facebuster 
 Flapjack 
 Flying forearm smash 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Big boot 
 Missile drop 
 Spinning heel 
 Northern Lights suplex 
 Russian legsweep 
 Sharpshooter – 2009 
 Sitout powerbomb 
 Somersault plancha 
 Winning Edge ( Half nelson bulldog ) 
 With Christian 
 Double @-@ team finishing moves 
 Con @-@ chair @-@ to – innovated 
 Double team signature moves 
 Simultaneous Sidewalk slam ( Edge ) / Falling inverted DDT ( Christian ) combination 
 With Rey Mysterio 
 Double team finishing moves 
 619 ( Mysterio ) followed by a spear or an <unk> ( Edge ) 
 Double team signature moves 
 Simultaneous powerbomb ( Edge ) / springboard seated senton ( Mysterio ) combination 
 Catapult ( Edge ) into a diving hurricanrana ( Mysterio ) 
 Double missile dropkick 
 Hurricanrana ( Mysterio ) transitioned into a spear ( Edge ) 
 Powerbomb lift by Edge to Mysterio , Mysterio then <unk> on to the opponent ( opponent ( s ) usually at ringside ) 
 With Randy Orton 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Double RKO ( Double jumping cutter ) 
 Con @-@ chair @-@ to 
 Double team signature moves 
 Double dropkick 
 Managers 
 Gangrel 
 Terri Runnels 
 Shane McMahon 
 Lita 
 Vickie Guerrero 
 Stephanie McMahon 
 Nicknames 
 " The Rated @-@ R Superstar " 
 " The Master Manipulator " 
 " Mr. Money in the Bank " 
 " The Ultimate <unk> " 
 " King Edge the Awesome " 
 Entrance themes 
 " You Think You Know Me " by Jim Johnston ( June 22 , 1998 ) 
 " Blood " by Jim Johnston ( October 26 , 1998 – August 1999 ; used while a part of The Brood ) 
 " On the Edge " by Jim Johnston ( October 2 , 1999 – September 2001 ; October 26 , 2002 ; April 18 , 2004 – October 18 , 2004 ) 
 " Never Gonna Stop ( The Red Red <unk> ) " by Rob Zombie ( September 2001 – March 22 , 2004 ) 
 " <unk> " by Alter Bridge ( November 1 , 2004 – present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Canadian Wrestling Association 
 CWA North American Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Insane Championship Wrestling 
 ICW Street Fight Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Christian Cage ( 1 ) and Joe E. Legend ( 1 ) 
 ICW / <unk> Mid @-@ West Unified Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Joe E. Legend 
 George Tragos / Lou Thesz International Wrestling Institute 
 Lou Thesz Award ( 2013 ) 
 Outlaw Championship Wrestling 
 OCW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Joe E. Legend 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Comeback of the Year ( 2004 ) 
 Feud of the Year ( 2005 ) with Lita vs. Matt Hardy 
 Feud of the Year ( 2006 ) vs. John Cena 
 Match of the Year ( 2000 ) with Christian vs. The Dudley Boyz vs. The Hardy Boyz in a Triangle Ladder match at WrestleMania 2000 
 Match of the Year ( 2001 ) with Christian vs. The Dudley Boyz vs. The Hardy Boyz in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2006 ) 
 Most Improved Wrestler of the Year ( 2001 ) 
 PWI ranked him 2 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2007 
 World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 WWE Championship ( 4 times ) 
 Gold Rush Tournament ( 2005 ) 
 World Heavyweight Championship ( 7 times ) 
 WWF / E Intercontinental Championship ( 5 times ) 
 Championship Chase Tournament 
 WCW United States Championship ( 1 time ) 1 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 12 times ) – with Christian ( 7 ) , Hollywood Hulk Hogan ( 1 ) , Chris Benoit ( 2 ) , Randy Orton ( 1 ) and Chris Jericho ( 1 ) 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Rey Mysterio ( 1 ) and Chris Jericho ( 1 ) 
 King of the Ring ( 2001 ) 
 Money in the Bank ( 2005 ) 
 Royal Rumble ( 2010 ) 
 Bragging Rights Trophy ( 2010 ) – with Team SmackDown ( Big Show , Rey Mysterio , Jack Swagger , Alberto Del Rio , Tyler Reks , and Kofi Kingston ) 
 Fourteenth Triple Crown Champion 
 Seventh Grand Slam Champion 
 WWE Hall of Fame ( Class of 2012 ) 
 Slammy Awards ( 2 times ) 
 Couple of the Year ( 2008 ) – with Vickie Guerrero 
 " Oh Snap " Meltdown of the Year ( 2010 ) Destroying the Anonymous Raw General Manager 's computer 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Match of the Year ( 2002 ) with Rey Mysterio vs. Kurt Angle and Chris Benoit at No Mercy 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2000 ) with Christian 
 Worst Feud of the Year ( 2010 ) vs. Kane 
 Worst Worked Match of the Year ( 2008 ) vs. Vladimir Kozlov and Triple H at Survivor Series 
 1 ^ Won during the The Invasion storyline . 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Texas Recreational Road 255 = 
 Recreational Road 255 ( RE 255 ) is a Recreational Road located in Tyler , Jasper , and Newton counties , in the southeastern region of the U.S. state of Texas . The highway is approximately 56 @.@ 6 miles ( 91 @.@ 1 km ) long , and travels through mainly rural areas in the northern portion of the three counties . RE 255 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 69 ( US 69 ) , in Tyler County , near the city of <unk> . The route travels through rural farmland in northern Tyler County , and crosses the Neches River into Jasper County . The roadway intersects State Highway 63 ( TX 63 ) and US 96 , and helps form part of the Sam Rayburn Dam . The route continues into Newton County , intersecting TX 87 , before terminating at an intersection with Farm to Market Road 692 ( FM 692 ) , near the Louisiana border . RE 255 helps provide access to Angelina National Forest , the Sam Rayburn Reservoir , and the Toledo Bend Reservoir , which give the highway its Recreational Road designation . 
 Recreational Road 255 began as Farm to Market Road 255 , with the first section of the route being designated in 1945 . Throughout the 1950s and the 1960s , FM 255 was extended several times , with the final extension being made in early 1970 . The first stretch of RE 255 was designated in 1970 by Minute Order <unk> , creating the first Recreational Road . The highway was extended three more times in the 1970s , completely replacing FM 255 . FM 255 had a short spur that was designated in 1970 , and was transferred over to RE 255 in 1974 when the main route was replaced . RE 255 Spur was cancelled in 1979 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Tyler County = = = 
 Recreational Road 255 begins at its western terminus at an intersection with U.S. Route 69 as a two @-@ lane , paved road . The highway proceeds eastward through mainly rural areas , passing several small farms . The roadway continues , intersecting County Route <unk> ( CR <unk> ) and turning northeast . The road proceeds northeast before slowly bending east again and continuing . It proceeds through the small community of Oak Grove and turns northeasterly . RE 255 continues , passing several homes and the small Gregory Cemetery as well as intersecting several county roads and slowly bending east . The route continues easterly , passing through a large forest and intersecting CR <unk> before crossing the Neches River and exiting Tyler County . 
 = = = Jasper County = = = 
 After crossing the Neches River , RE 255 enters Jasper County and proceeds easterly . After a short distance , it crosses over a small relief creek for the Neches River and continues through heavily forested rural areas before turning slightly southeast . The route proceeds over a small creek before slowly bending northeastward . The roadway turns northerly and passes the small community of Beans . While traveling through Beans , the road passes several small farms and houses . It also intersects several county roads , including the former RE 255 Spur , which is now CR 32 . The highway then enters Angelina National Forest . 
 Recreational Road 255 continues slightly northeasterly , passing through mainly farmland before reaching its junction with SH 63 . RE 255 continues northward , entering the community of Ebenezer and intersecting a few local roads in the community . The roadway proceeds east and passes the McGee Cemetery . RE 255 proceeds to the Angelina River at the Sam Rayburn Dam . The road bends northeastward , passing through the small Overlook Park and continuing northeast along the dam . It turns southeast and continues along the dam . The dam ends after approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) and the highway exits Angelina National Forest and enters Twin Dikes Park . The roadway continues , taking a large bend southeast and intersecting several local roads that lead to the reservoir . The highway proceeds southeasterly , passing several small homes and businesses that make up a portion of the community of Sam Rayburn . RE 255 proceeds northeast for a short distance before shifting eastward through Rayburn Country and intersecting FM 1007 . Turning southeast , the route passes the southern edge of the Rayburn Country golf resort before exiting the community of Sam Rayburn and reentering rural areas . RE 255 shifts southeast and proceeds to an intersection with U.S. Route 96 , a divided highway . The route bends northeasterly , intersecting CR 232 before proceeding out of Jasper County . 
 = = = Newton County = = = 
 RE 255 enters Newton County traveling eastward . The highway proceeds eastward before bending northeasterly and entering dense forest . Continuing eastward , the road reaches an intersection with SH 87 . The route continues east , passing the Mitchell Cemetery . The highway intersects a couple of county routes and turns east before crossing over a small cove on the Toledo Bend Reservoir . RE 255 the enters the community of South Toledo Bend . It travels parallel to the reservoir , passing several small neighborhoods before shifting eastward . RE 255 passes the Shady Oaks Marina and the Sam <unk> Collins Recreational Area before reaching its eastern terminus at an at @-@ grade intersection with FM 692 . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 The Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) publishes yearly reports of the highway 's annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , with counts usually taken near intersections . In 2010 , RE 255 's highest traveled point was at the intersection with FM 1007 , with a daily county of approximately 2 @,@ 800 vehicles . The lowest traveled point along the highway is just east of the intersection with SH 87 , with a daily county of approximately 550 vehicles . The most traveled point in Tyler County is at the intersection with US 69 , with a daily count of 1 @,@ 100 vehicles . The intersection with FM 1007 has the highest AADT counts in Jasper County , while the most densely traveled point in Newton County is near the intersection with FM 692 , at a count of 880 vehicles . These counts are somewhat higher than those of 2008 , when the highest taken count , which was also at the FM 1007 intersection , was at just 2 @,@ 200 vehicles . The least traveled point had a count of 510 vehicles . At 56 @.@ 596 miles ( 91 @.@ 082 km ) long , RE 255 is the longest highway in the TxDOT 's Recreational Road system . No portion of the highway is listed as part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The first portion of what would become RE 255 was designated on June 12 , 1945 as the first stretch of Farm to Market Road 255 ( FM 255 ) . This route traveled from an intersection with SH 63 to Ferguson at a length of approximately 2 @.@ 8 miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) . On September 27 , 1960 , FM 255 was extended 4 @.@ 4 miles ( 7 @.@ 1 km ) northeastward to the McGee Bend Dam on Lake Sam Rayburn . FM 255 was extended on June 15 , 1961 along a road that traveled along the McGee Bend Dam to an intersection with US 96 . This extension added approximately 8 @.@ 3 miles ( 13 @.@ 4 km ) to the route . In 1962 , three small bridges were constructed in western Jasper County . These bridges still function along the modern route . On October 1 , 1963 , FM 255 was extended approximately 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) southeastward from SH 63 . In 1965 , the current bridge over the Angelina River was constructed . FM <unk> from US 69 east 4 @.@ 4 miles and FM 3125 from SH 87 to FM 692 were combined with the route on February 15 , 1970 , adding 4 @.@ 4 miles ( 7 @.@ 1 km ) and 11 @.@ 3 miles ( 18 @.@ 2 km ) respectively to FM 255 . 
 On April 1 , 1970 , Recreational Road 255 was officially designated by TxDOT Minute Order <unk> . The route was approved by the TxDOT 's Administration Circle on April 15 , 1970 . RE 255 was the first route to be designated by the TxDOT as a Recreational Road . RE 255 began as the portions of FM 255 traveling from approximately 4 @.@ 8 miles ( 7 @.@ 7 km ) east of US 69 to Beans Place 2 @.@ 7 miles west of SH 63 and from US 96 to SH 87 . In 1971 , the modern bridge crossing over the small Indian Creek , located in western Jasper County , was constructed . In March 15 , 1974 , RE 255 was extended eastward approximately 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) from Beans Place to SH 63 , giving the highway a total length of approximately 29 @.@ 3 miles ( 47 @.@ 2 km ) . In 1976 , the current bridge crossing the small Rocky Creek in western Newton County was constructed . In 1977 , three of the route 's current bridges were constructed . Two of the bridges cross over the Neches River and the other is a small bridge located in Newton County . The final portions of FM 255 was transferred to RE 255 on September 15 , 1978 , adding approximately 27 @.@ 9 miles ( 44 @.@ 9 km ) to RE 255 . In 1981 , the last two current bridges along the route were constructed . Both are small bridges located in western Newton County . Twelve years after being cancelled , FM 255 was redesignated to a short road in Webb County . This route has since been cancelled and redesignated as Urban Road 255 , which was cancelled and added to SH 255 . 
 = = Future = = 
 Recreational Road 255 is located within the study area of the proposed Interstate 14 , the Gulf Coast Strategic Highway . The current proposed routing of the Interstate would run along State Highway 63 , to the south of RE 255 , but no official routing has decided on . A possible alternative routing of the highway would replace RE 255 as part of the interstate . 
 = = Major junctions = = 
 = = Spur route = = 
 Recreational Road 255 Spur ( RE 255 Spur ) was a short spur connection of FM 255 and later RE 255 that connected the small Beans community in Jasper County to RE 255 . The spur was 0 @.@ 700 miles ( 1 @.@ 127 km ) long . 
 RE 255 Spur began at an intersection with RE 255 near Beans Community , inside the southern edge of Angelina National Forest . The highway proceeded southeastward through rural areas , passing several small fields and houses . The roadway continued to its eastern terminus , a dead end point . 
 RE 255 Spur was originally designated on February 15 , 1970 , as FM 255 Spur , on its present location . The spur was redesignated as RE 255 on March 15 , 1974 . The spur was cancelled and turned back to local maintenance on December 18 , 1979 . The route has since been added to CR 1002 . 
 Major junctions 
 The entire highway was in Beans , Jasper County . 
 = Adrift ( Lost ) = 
 " Adrift " is the second episode of the second season of Lost and the 27th episode overall . The episode was directed by Stephen Williams and written by Steven Maeda and Leonard Dick . It first aired on September 28 , 2005 , on the American Broadcasting Company . In the episode , flashbacks depict Michael Dawson 's struggles for the custody of his son Walt Lloyd . The realtime events show Michael and Sawyer , who have just had their raft destroyed , becoming hostile towards each other as they drift back to shore , while Kate Austen and John Locke enter the mysterious hatch and encounter Desmond Hume . 
 The storyline picks up the raft storyline which was left hanging after season one 's finale , " Exodus " , and also revisits the events seen in the previous episode , " Man of Science , Man of Faith " . Originally envisioned as a Sawyer episode , the episode was rewritten to focus on Michael . The sea scenes were shot on the Hawaiian shoreline . " Adrift " had 23 @.@ 17 million American viewers and stands as the second largest audience on the series ' run , but received negative reviews , which focused criticism on the flashbacks , the raft scenes , and the lack of plot advancement . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the flashbacks , Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) struggles with his ex @-@ girlfriend Susan Lloyd ( Tamara Taylor ) , who has asked Michael to sign away his paternal rights to their son , Walt . Though Michael initially resists , suing in order to keep his custody , he eventually relents as Susan persuades him to doubt his own motivations and whether he is pursuing his own desires or Walt 's best interests . 
 After the raft was attacked and destroyed by the Others , Sawyer ( Josh Holloway ) surfaces in the ocean . Michael is heard screaming for Walt repeatedly , and Sawyer screams for Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) . Sawyer decides to rescue Michael first , and swims over to him , dragging him onto a piece of flotsam and performing CPR . Michael then wakes up , and blames Sawyer for making him fire the flare , drawing their attackers to them . Shortly after , the two notice a shark is encircling them ; Michael believes the shark was attracted to Sawyer 's bleeding wound , and the two have continuous arguments . 
 Back at camp , after Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) disappears into the hatch , John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) descends as well , and finds her unconscious in the computer room . An armed Desmond ( Henry Ian Cusick ) walks up behind them , and asks Locke if he is " him " . Locke at first claims to be the person whom Desmond is seeking , but fails to correctly answer a riddle he poses . This failure prompts Desmond to round up the two and orders Kate to tie up Locke . However , Locke convinces Desmond that Kate be tied up instead . Desmond agrees , and Locke slides her a knife before locking her in a dark room . Kate frees herself and finds she is in a large pantry filled with foodstuffs , all in boxes bearing a strange marking . Kate then climbs into a ventilation shaft . 
 The plotline converges to the same point at the end of the previous episode , " Man of Science , Man of Faith " . An alarm klaxon begins to sound . Desmond walks Locke at gunpoint to the computer terminal , and forces him to enter " the numbers " into the computer , which resets a 108 minute timer . Soon after , Desmond detects Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , and after channeling him to the computer room , forces Locke to greet Jack as seen in the previous episode . 
 Back at the raft , Michael and Sawyer see one of the raft 's pontoons , and they decide to board it . Sawyer swims to the pontoon , giving Michael his gun in case the shark appears . When it does , Michael fires several times , apparently injuring the shark . Michael then joins Sawyer on the pontoon , and when the morning breaks , he cries , realizing that he should not have brought Walt with him on the raft , and blames himself for his son 's kidnapping . At this point , Sawyer notices that they are back near the island . When they wash ashore , they meet Jin running toward them , hands tied behind his back , shouting the word " Others " , and fleeing a group holding him captive . 
 = = Production = = 
 Season one 's final episode finishes with two cliffhangers , the opening of the hatch and the attack of the Others on Michael 's boat . When production of season 2 started , the writers decided that season premiere " Man of Science , Man of Faith " would focus on the hatch , leaving the raft for the second episode . To avoid bloating the first episode , some of the hatch storylines , such as Locke 's incursion , were left to be revealed in " Adrift " . The episode was originally going to be Sawyer centric , and was to feature actress Jolene Blalock as a guest , but this was rewritten " at the proverbial last minute " and changed to a Michael @-@ centric episode . 
 Director Stephen Williams described filming at the sea as challenging , since the waves caused cameras , lighting and the scenery where the actors were standing to be " moving out of sync with one another " . Williams however thought that the scenes became more realistic due to the location . The aquatic scenes took three nights to complete , and Harold Perrineau received swimming lessons in preparation . When Sawyer is getting ready to swim to the other platform , a shark swims past , and in an underwater shot a DHARMA Initiative insignia can briefly be seen near its back fin . This was an inside joke or " easter egg , " which turned out to be more visible than had been intended . While a mechanical shark which required three puppeteers was built , the shot of Michael being attacked was done with a shark fin being held by an underwater crew member . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 23 @.@ 17 million American viewers tuned into " Adrift " , making it the second most @-@ watched episode in the show 's history , behind the season opener . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reviews were mostly negative . Mac Slocum of Filmfodder.com said the flashback storyline " wasn 't all that interesting " . Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Jensen called the flashbacks " among the poorest and most clumsily integrated flashbacks we 've seen so far " , as he felt nothing new was learned , and also disliked Michael 's on @-@ Island storyline , noting he " got the sense that the actors and directors weren 't quite sure what to make of these scenes " . Jensen however complimented the Hatch scenes , considering that Terry O 'Quinn 's performance and his interaction with Henry Ian Cusick were " salvaging the first mediocre episode of the season " . Ryan Mcgee of Zap2it thought that revealing the Hatch events through different perspectives a " fresh narrative approach " , but complained about the lack of plot advancement , and considered the raft storyline " three times as long as needed , with a really fake shark attack to boot " . IGN 's Chris Carabott gave the episode an 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 , praising Perrineau 's performance and the flashback , but the website later ranked " Adrift " 80th out of the 115 Lost episodes , jokingly saying that the shark should have eaten Michael " and save us a lot of ' <unk> ! ' and ' They took him . From my hands ! ' shout fests " . A similar list by Los Angeles Times ranked the episode as the fourth worst of the series , describing it as " boring " . New York magazine listed " Adrift " in its " Twenty Most Pointless Episodes of Lost " , complaining about " grinding the story to a halt " and the " plodding " flashback , and saying that the episode would have been improved if Sawyer and Michael reached land faster . 
 = Ben Carlin = 
 Frederick Benjamin " Ben " Carlin ( 27 July 1912 – 7 March 1981 ) was an Australian adventurer who was the first and only person to circumnavigate the world in an amphibious vehicle . Born in Northam , Western Australia , Carlin attended Guildford Grammar School in Perth , and later studied mining engineering at the Kalgoorlie School of Mines . After qualifying as an engineer , he worked on the Goldfields before in 1939 emigrating to China to work in a British coal mine . In the Second World War , Carlin was posted to the Indian Army Corps of Engineers , serving in India , Italy , and throughout the Middle East . After his discharge from service in 1946 , he emigrated to the United States with his American wife , Elinore ( née <unk> ) . 
 Sparked by an idea he had had whilst in the military , Carlin proposed that the couple honeymoon by crossing the Atlantic Ocean in a modified Ford GPA ( an amphibious version of the Ford <unk> Jeep ) , which they named the Half @-@ Safe . Beginning their trip in Montreal , Canada , the Carlins finally completed the transatlantic crossing in 1951 , after unsuccessful attempts . From there , they travelled to Europe , temporarily settling in Birmingham to raise more money . They resumed their journey in 1954 , travelling overland through the Middle East before arriving in Calcutta . After a short fundraising trip to Australia , Carlin 's wife left to return to the United States . He resumed the journey with new partners , travelling through South @-@ East Asia and the Far East to the northern tip of Japan , and then to Alaska . After an extended tour through the United States and Canada , he and Half @-@ Safe finally returned to Montreal , having travelled over 17 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 11 @,@ 000 mi ) by sea and 62 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 39 @,@ 000 mi ) by land during a ten @-@ year journey . Following Carlin 's death in 1981 , Half @-@ Safe was acquired by Guildford Grammar , his old school , where it remains on display . 
 = = Early life and military service = = 
 Frederick Benjamin Carlin was born on 27 July 1912 in Northam , Western Australia , a small town in the state 's Wheatbelt . His mother , the former Charlotte Amelia Bramwell , died when he was four , and he was raised by his father , Frederick Cecil Carlin , who was an electrical engineer employed with the Western Australian Government Railways . At the age of ten , Carlin was sent to board at Guildford Grammar School in Perth . Leaving school in 1929 , he enrolled at the School of Mines in Kalgoorlie , where he studied mining engineering . Once he had qualified as an engineer , he worked for a period of time in the surrounding Goldfields region . However , in 1939 , he moved to Peking , China , to work for a British coal mining company . 
 Upon the outbreak of the Second World War , Carlin enlisted in the Indian Army . Before leaving for India , he married Gertrude Plath , a German citizen who had been living in China with her aunt and uncle . The couple wed on 20 April 1940 , at Tientsin , although they separated before the end of the war . Having originally enlisted at Shanghai , Carlin was later posted to the Madras Sappers in the Indian Army Corps of Engineers . In August 1941 , he was promoted to the position of second lieutenant , as part of a number of " emergency commissions " made at the start of the conflict . During the war , Carlin served in India , Iraq , Persia , Palestine , Syria , and Italy , and by the conflict 's end had been promoted to the rank of major . Towards the end of the war , he met an American Red Cross nurse , Elinore <unk> , who was originally from Boston . On his discharge from service in 1946 , the couple emigrated to Maryland , where they eventually married , in June 1948 . 
 = = Circumnavigation = = 
 = = = Half @-@ Safe and early preparation = = = 
 Throughout the war , the Allies had made use of a number of different varieties of amphibious vehicle . One of the more commonly used was the Ford GPA , a modified version of the Ford <unk> Jeep ( also known as a " <unk> " ) . In India towards the end of the war , Carlin had noticed a GPA in an army vehicle lot . To the mockery of his fellow engineers , he suggested that the vehicle could be used to take him around the world , supposedly remarking : " with a bit of <unk> , you could go around the world in one of those things " . This idea remained with Carlin after his marriage , and he proposed to his wife that the couple honeymoon by crossing the Atlantic Ocean in a modified GPA . After a considerable amount of trouble , the Carlins finally managed to purchase a 1942 Ford GPA ( serial number 1239 ) from a government auction in Washington , D.C. , for US $ 901 . The vehicle had originally been manufactured at Ford 's plant in River Rouge , Michigan , one of 12 @,@ 778 built during the war . He originally tried to convince Ford to sponsor his proposed trip , but the company refused , believing the craft would not make the journey . The vehicle required a number of modifications to make it seaworthy , including the addition of a more boat @-@ like bow , a rudder , a larger cabin , and two extra fuel tanks – one at the bow and one under the " belly " of the craft , at the stern . Inside the cabin , a bunk was installed , and the dash was modified to include aircraft instruments , as well as a two @-@ way radio ( including a 19 @-@ set transmitter and receiver ) . In total , the vessel 's length was extended by three feet to 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) , and the fuel capacity to 200 gallons ( 760 L ) from the original 12 gallons ( 45 L ) . The construction of the under @-@ belly fuel tank allowed it to be jettisoned when empty , reducing further its full weight of three tons ( 6 @,@ 720 lb or 3 @,@ 048 kg ) . The vessel was christened Half @-@ Safe , after the slogan of <unk> , a deodorant brand – " Don 't be half @-@ safe – use <unk> to be sure " . 
 = = = Failure of first attempts = = = 
 The couple began testing their craft in 1947 , and experienced problems with carbon monoxide removal , with the vessel 's enclosed structure potentially increasing the risks of carbon monoxide poisoning . The Carlins chose Montreal , Canada , as the official starting point of their circumnavigation attempt . They set out from the city in late 1947 for New York City , where they were to launch Half @-@ Safe for the first time , with the intention of crossing the Atlantic via the Azores . A trial run was made in early January 1948 , watched by " crowds of sceptical waterside workers " . The couple 's first attempt to complete the transatlantic crossing occurred on 16 June 1948 , launching from New York Harbor . Cheered on by " 100 amazed wharf labourers " , they were first washed up @-@ river by a strong tide , but then made their way out into the Atlantic at a speed of five knots . The Carlins failed to maintain radio contact , prompting a search by the United States Coast Guard . The craft was eventually landed five days after its departure , 40 miles ( 64 km ) south of New York City near the Shark River inlet in New Jersey . The couple had experienced problems with the steering gear and rudder , which made the vessel unable to steer at sea unless the wheel was constantly manned . With Half @-@ Safe sailed back to New York , the Carlins commenced their journey for a second time on 3 July , but were once again forced back to shore a few days later , this time after nearly being asphyxiated due to a cracked exhaust pipe . 
 A third attempt was made in late July , but was again not successful due to the mechanical troubles and heavy seasickness the Carlins experienced . The Carlins set out for a fourth time in early August , and progressed further , being sighted several days after their launch by an American destroyer almost 200 miles ( 320 km ) off of New York . However , the couple soon lost radio contact , prompting Pan @-@ American Airways to direct their crews to search for their craft . Half @-@ Safe and the Carlins were finally rescued approximately 270 miles ( 430 km ) off New York by the oil tanker New Jersey , bound for Halifax , Nova Scotia . Seven days into the voyage , a propeller bearing had welded itself fast due to lack of lubrication , leaving the vessel to drift aimlessly for a further ten days without means of steering it or navigating . According to a message Carlin radioed from the tanker to his friends in New York , the couple " drifted and fished " , enjoying a " pleasant life , cheaper than Atlantic City " . At the time of the couple 's rescue , he considered abandoning the entire voyage , but was convinced to continue by the tanker 's Norwegian captain , who greeted Carlin with the words : " Hell , you 're not going to leave that god @-@ damned Jeep lying around ? ! " 
 = = = Transatlantic crossing = = = 
 The Carlins ' fourth failed attempt in two months led them to abandon the project for a period of time in order to raise more money . With the New Jersey arriving in Halifax two weeks after their rescue , Carlin took up a position with a local marine salvage firm , while his wife returned to her family in Boston , and worked in a law office . One final attempt was considered in November 1948 , but postponed due to the approaching winter weather , with Half @-@ Safe stored in a Halifax garage . In mid 1949 , the couple began to ready Half @-@ Safe for a further attempt at the crossing . Testing in late August revealed a burnt @-@ out clutch , which was repaired , and Carlin recognised the need for much larger amounts of fuel . To achieve this extra capacity , two fuel tanks were tied behind Half @-@ Safe , painted bright yellow to aid visibility from the air . Further alterations were also made to the craft 's superstructure , and extra stabilising rudders were added . The Carlins launched again in early September 1949 . When the vessel was 35 miles ( 56 km ) off shore , both of the auxiliary fuel tanks were lost , necessitating return to Halifax . Carlin almost decided to abandon the journey and liquidate Half @-@ Safe , but was convinced by his wife to continue . 
 Over the following six months , the Carlins again made modifications to their vessel , with the most important being a large , purpose @-@ built tank that was to be towed behind the craft . This increased the total fuel capacity of Half @-@ Safe to 735 gallons ( 3 @,@ 337 L ) , with the vessel also carrying 30 gallons ( 136 L ) of water , eight gallons ( 36 L ) of oil , and six weeks ' worth of provisions . The couple left Halifax on 19 July 1950 , and , after a 32 @-@ day voyage , arrived on Flores , the most westerly island of the Azores . Their landing was well @-@ received , with LIFE featuring the crossing in a multiple @-@ page article later that year , which also featured many of the Carlins ' photographs . However , the journey had not occurred without mishap – Carlin was forced to remove the cylinder head several times in order to clean the carbon from the valves and replace the head gasket , and the couple lost radio contact halfway through the voyage , leading to fears they had been lost at sea . From Flores , the couple progressed to Horta on the island of Faial , a distance of 150 miles ( 240 km ) . They then travelled to Madeira , having obtained surplus fuel from a passing Portuguese cruiser midway through the trip . Although originally expected to head directly to Lisbon , Portugal , from Madeira , the couple instead chose to head for Morocco via the Canary Islands , coming ashore at Cap Juby in the Spanish territory of Rio de Oro on 23 February 1951 . 
 From Cap Juby , the Carlins drove north through the coastal regions of Morocco to Europe . The hot daytime temperatures , which reportedly reached 170 ° F ( 77 ° C ) within the vehicle 's cabin , necessitated that Half @-@ Safe be driven exclusively at night . The vehicle reached Casablanca , French Morocco , on 16 March 1951 , and the British territory of Gibraltar in mid April , after it was sailed across the Straits of Gibraltar . From there , the Carlins drove through a number of European countries , where they engaged in sight @-@ seeing , before finally sailing across the English Channel and concluding the first part of their journey in Birmingham , where they arrived on 1 January 1952 . 
 = = = Europe and the Middle East = = = 
 Tired , weary , and lacking in money , the Carlins decided to remain in England to rest and recuperate . Throughout the journey from Nova Scotia to the Azores , both Carlin and his wife had suffered from severe hallucinations , including one instance where he had jerked awake to find himself 60 ° off course . Another important objective of their time in Britain was to repair Half @-@ Safe , which had sustained large amounts of damage during the crossing , not least from Hurricane Charlie , which battered the vessel whilst it was amongst the islands of Macaronesia . The repairs to the craft were accomplished with the help of RAF Group Captain Malcolm Bunting , who had served alongside Carlin in India . To raise money for the continuation of the journey , Half @-@ Safe was exhibited in department stores throughout Europe . During this time , Carlin also completed Half Safe : Across the Atlantic by Jeep , a book chronicling the first half of their journey , which sold 32 @,@ 000 copies and was translated into five languages . The book was generally well received , with a reviewer in The Montreal Gazette describing Carlin as " an adventurer of the old school – full of the explorer 's instinct , and with a dry wit that makes his story an odd mixture of high @-@ adventure and real understatement " . 
 The Carlins set out again in early 1955 , arriving in France on 22 April 1955 . The vehicle continued through Switzerland , northern Italy , and Yugoslavia , where in May 1955 , it was reported that Half @-@ Safe had had its first flat tire , whilst travelling through Belgrade . The Carlins then continued through Greece and Turkey , sailing across the Bosphorus to Asia Minor , before progressing through Syria , Jordan , Iraq , Iran , and Pakistan to Calcutta , India . Carlin later noted : " the 2000 miles across the Atlantic from Nova Scotia to the Azores were in many ways much less worrying than a similar distance covered on murderous roads in Persia " . At Calcutta , the Carlins decided to transport Half @-@ Safe to Australia via steamer . At the start of his voyage , Carlin had said he would not travel to Australia or New Zealand , because petrol was " too dear " there . However , a lack of funding meant the side trip was necessary . The trip also allowed Carlin to meet with his family , who still lived in Perth – his brother , Tom Carlin , had become a captain in the Royal Australian Navy , and was actively involved in nuclear weapons testing on the Montebello Islands in 1952 , as part of Operation Hurricane . 
 = = = Far East and return to North America = = = 
 Half @-@ Safe 's Australian tour began in late October 1955 in Perth , where Carlin grew up , and included a tour of his old school , Guildford Grammar . The Carlins then went to Adelaide , and subsequently progressed to Melbourne , Sydney , and Brisbane . Half @-@ Safe was returned to Calcutta on a steamship in January 1956 . However , Elinore , Carlin 's wife , left the trip in Australia , having finally tired of the long travel and the constant seasickness she was experiencing . Carlin continued his journey alone , with the first leg consisting of a sea voyage from Calcutta to Akyab , Burma , across the Bay of Bengal . At Akyab , he was joined by Barry Hanley , another Australian . The two met on Burma 's coast in late February 1956 , and from there crossed the Arakan Yoma mountain ranges to the Irrawaddy River , where the vehicle was bogged down in mud for two days . After extricating Half @-@ Safe from the mire , the pair progressed to Rangoon , arriving on 11 March . From Burma , Half @-@ Safe was driven overland to Bangkok , Thailand , and from there to Saigon , on the coast of Indochina . From there , Carlin and Hanley set out to sail from Indochina to Japan , passing through several ports and islands in the South China Sea . Upon his arrival in Hong Kong in early May 1956 , Carlin was " mobbed by autograph @-@ seeking girls " , having been delayed on his voyage by engine trouble and headwinds in the South China Sea . He arrived in Kaohsiung , Taiwan , in early June , and from there travelled to Keelung on the northern tip of Taiwan , and Okinawa , part of the American @-@ administered Ryukyu Islands . Carlin and Hanley drove ashore at Kagoshima Prefecture at the southern tip of Japan in July 1956 , and from there drove overland to Tokyo . Hanley returned to Australia at this stage , while Carlin rested in Japan , again performing much @-@ needed repairs . An American journalist for The Japan Times , <unk> Lafayette de Mente ( originally of Phoenix , Arizona ) , offered to accompany Carlin on the journey from Japan to Alaska , departing in early 1957 for the first stage of the trip from Tokyo to Wakkanai , Hokkaidō . The pair left Tokyo on 1 May 1957 to great fanfare , cheered off from the Mainichi and Yomiuri Newspaper buildings . The craft sprung a leak while crossing the Tsugaru Strait , separating the southern island of Honshu from Hokkaidō , and collided with submerged rocks near the port of Muroran . They finally reached Wakkanai on 12 June 1957 , despite what de Mente later described as Carlin 's aggression and " irascible character " during the trip . 
 Carlin 's aim was to travel directly from Wakkanai to Shemya , a small island in the Near Islands group of the <unk> Islands chain , part of the Aleutian Islands running southwest of the Alaskan mainland . The craft was carrying enough fuel to last for approximately 21 days , but did not make contact within this time , causing the US Coast Guard 's search and rescue station to be notified . Half @-@ Safe finally landed on Shemya on 8 July , with the pair having made an unexpected detour to visit the town of Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula , at the time part of the Russian SFSR . From Shemya , Carlin and de Mente sailed to Adak Island , a distance of 350 miles ( 560 km ) , then a further 580 miles ( 930 km ) to Cold Bay , and thence along the Aleutian island chain to the mainland town of Homer , arriving in late August . Carlin and de Mente then drove Half @-@ Safe overland to Anchorage , where de Mente flew home to Phoenix . He would go on to write Once a Fool : From Tokyo to Alaska by Amphibious Jeep , a detailed account of his experiences with Carlin and Half @-@ Safe , as well as becoming a prolific author on topics relating to Mesoamerica and East Asia , publishing over 100 books . Carlin subsequently drove solo to Seattle , Washington , arriving in early November 1957 . Whilst travelling the Alaska Highway in British Columbia , he encountered the collapsed Peace River Suspension Bridge . While other motorists queued for a nearby ferry , Carlin simply drove Half @-@ Safe into the river and across to the other side . Continuing on to San Francisco , California , where he met his wife for the first time in two years , Carlin then continued onwards through the United States and north to Canada . He arrived in Toronto , Ontario , on 10 May 1958 , and three days later arrived in Montreal , where he finally completed his ten @-@ year journey . He and Half @-@ Safe had travelled 17 @,@ 780 kilometres ( 11 @,@ 050 mi ) by sea and 62 @,@ 744 kilometres ( 38 @,@ 987 mi ) by land over ten years , passing through 38 countries and over two oceans , with the entire trip costing him around $ 35 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 After the conclusion of the trip , Half @-@ Safe remained in the United States , where it was occasionally exhibited by Carlin 's friend George <unk> , who was a co @-@ owner of the vehicle . Carlin remained in the country for a period , appearing on the lecture circuit , before returning to Perth , where he took up residence in Cottesloe . Having divorced his second wife Elinore by December 1955 , Carlin wed for a third time on 1 June 1963 in the United States , marrying Cynthia Henderson . Although the couple 's marriage was short @-@ lived , the union produced one daughter , Deirdre Scott Carlin , who was born in March 1964 . Carlin died in Perth in March 1981 , of a heart attack , and was cremated at Karrakatta Cemetery . His second wife , Elinore , who completed the first half of his journey alongside him , died in 1996 in New York City . Carlin left his share in Half @-@ Safe to his old school , Guildford Grammar , as well as a sizeable endowment for the purposes of funding a scholarship . He had previously offered the craft to the Western Australian Maritime Museum , which declined the offer due to a lack of exhibition space . The Guildford Grammar School Foundation subsequently purchased the other share in the vehicle , transferring it to the school 's campus in Guildford , Western Australia . The school also posthumously published The Other Half of Half @-@ Safe , which detailed the second portion of Carlin 's journey . In 1999 , the craft was transported by truck across Australia to Corowa , New South Wales , where it featured in an annual celebration on the Murray River , along with 16 other amphibious vehicles from the Second World War . Half @-@ Safe is currently exhibited in a specially @-@ made glass enclosure at Guildford Grammar 's main campus . Money from Carlin 's estate was used to found the Charlotte Carlin Scholarship ( named for his mother ) , awarded for " the proficiency of the English language with the avoidance of clichés " . Guinness World Records recognises Carlin as having completed the " first and only circumnavigation by an amphibious vehicle " . A biography of Carlin by American writer Gordon Bass will be published by Penguin Random House Australia in 2017 . 
 = = External Links = = 
 Ben Carlin at Find a Grave 
 = Hannibal ( film ) = 
 Hannibal is a 2001 American crime horror thriller film directed by Ridley Scott , adapted from the novel of the same name by Thomas Harris . It is the sequel to the 1991 Academy Award – winning film The Silence of the Lambs in which Anthony Hopkins returns to his role as the iconic serial killer , Hannibal Lecter . Julianne Moore co @-@ stars , in the role first held by Jodie Foster , as the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent Clarice Starling . 
 The film had a difficult and occasionally troubling pre @-@ production history . When the novel was published in 1999 , The Silence of the Lambs director Jonathan Demme , screenwriter Ted Tally , and actress Jodie Foster all declined to be involved in its film adaptation . Ridley Scott became attached as director after the success of his film Gladiator , and eventually signed onto the project after reading the script pitched by Dino <unk> , who produced Manhunter ( 1986 ) , based on the 1981 Harris novel Red Dragon . After the departure of star Jodie Foster and screenwriter Ted Tally , Julianne Moore took on Foster 's role while David Mamet and Steven Zaillian wrote the screenplay . 
 Set ten years after The Silence of the Lambs , Hannibal follows Starling 's attempts to apprehend Lecter before his surviving victim , Mason Verger ( Gary Oldman ) , captures him . It is set in Italy and the United States . The novel Hannibal drew attention for its violence . Hannibal broke box office records in the United States , Australia , Canada and the United Kingdom in February 2001 , but was met with a mixed critical reception . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ten years after tracking and taking down serial killer Jame <unk> , FBI Special Agent Clarice Starling is unjustly blamed for a botched drug raid . She is later contacted by Mason Verger , the only surviving victim of the serial killer Hannibal Lecter . A wealthy child molester , Verger was paralyzed and horribly disfigured by Lecter during a therapy session . He has been pursuing an elaborate scheme to capture , torture , and kill Lecter ever since . Using his wealth and political influence , Verger has Starling reassigned to Lecter 's case , hoping her involvement will draw Lecter out . 
 After learning of Starling 's public disgrace , Lecter sends her a taunting letter . Starling detects a strange fragrance from the letter . A perfume expert later identifies a skin cream whose ingredients are only available to a few shops in the world . She contacts the police departments of the cities where the shops are located , requesting surveillance tapes . In Florence , one of said cities , Chief Inspector Rinaldo Pazzi is investigating the disappearance of a library curator . Pazzi questions Lecter , who is masquerading as Dr. Fell , the assistant curator and caretaker . 
 Upon recognizing Dr. Fell in the surveillance tape , Pazzi accesses the <unk> database of wanted fugitives . He then learns of Verger 's US $ 3 million personal bounty on Lecter . Blinded by greed , Pazzi ignores Starling 's warnings and attempts to capture Lecter alone . He recruits a pickpocket to obtain Lecter 's fingerprint to show Verger as proof . The pickpocket , mortally wounded by Lecter , manages to get the print and provides it to Pazzi . Lecter baits Pazzi into an isolated room of the Palazzo Vecchio , ties him up , then disembowels and hangs him . He then heads back to the United States . 
 Verger bribes Justice Department official Paul Krendler to accuse Starling of withholding a note from Lecter , leading to her suspension . Lecter lures Starling to Union Station . Verger 's men , having trailed Starling , capture and bring Lecter to Verger . Verger means to feed Lecter alive to a herd of wild boars bred specifically for this purpose . After her superiors refuse to act , Starling infiltrates Verger 's estate . After neutralizing the two guards and freeing Lecter she is shot by a third guard that was in hiding . Lecter picks up an unconscious Starling just before the boars break through the doors , they are on their way out when Verger arrives . He orders his physician Cordell <unk> to shoot Lecter , but with Lecter 's suggestion , Cordell shoves his hated boss into the pen . Lecter carries Starling and watches the boars eat Verger alive . 
 Lecter takes Starling to Krendler 's secluded lake house and treats her wounds . When Krendler arrives for the Fourth of July , Lecter subdues and drugs him . Starling , disoriented by morphine and dressed in a black velvet evening gown , awakens to find Krendler seated at the table set for an elegant dinner . Weakened by the drugs , she looks on in horror as Lecter removes part of Krendler 's prefrontal cortex , <unk> it , and feeds it to him . 
 After the meal , Starling tries to attack Lecter but he overpowers her . She handcuffs his wrist to hers . Hearing the police closing in , Lecter uses a meat cleaver to sever their cuffed hands and escapes . Lecter is later seen on a flight with his own boxed lunch . As he prepares to eat his meal , including what is assumed to be part of a cooked brain , a young boy seated next to him asks to try some of his food . Initially reluctant , Lecter then lets the boy eat some of his lunch . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anthony Hopkins as Dr. Hannibal Lecter 
 Julianne Moore as Clarice Starling 
 Gary Oldman as Mason Verger 
 Ray Liotta as Paul Krendler 
 Frankie Faison as Barney Matthews 
 Giancarlo Giannini as Chief Inspector Rinaldo Pazzi 
 Francesca Neri as Allegra Pazzi 
 Željko Ivanek as Dr. Cordell <unk> 
 <unk> Goodman as <unk> <unk> 
 Robert <unk> as <unk> 
 David Andrews as FBI Agent Pearsall 
 Francis Guinan as FBI <unk> Director Noonan 
 James <unk> as DEA Agent John Eldridge 
 Enrico Lo Verso as <unk> 
 Ivano <unk> as Carlo <unk> 
 Danielle de Niese as Beatrice 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1994 , a Rolling Stone magazine interviewer asked The Silence of the Lambs director Jonathan Demme about a possible sequel . Demme responded that Thomas Harris , author of The Silence of the Lambs , had been working on the follow @-@ up for " seven or eight years " . Demme had an idea even at that time that it would not be a straight follow @-@ up . Harris had told Demme : " I imagine Doctor Lecter going somewhere in Europe ... strolling round the streets of Florence or Munich , gazing in the windows of watchmakers ... " Demme stated his intention to be involved in the film adaptation of Hannibal in 1998 , less than a year before the novel was published . 
 Dino De Laurentiis produced Michael Mann 's film Manhunter in 1986 , based on Harris 's 1981 novel Red Dragon , featuring the first appearance of Hannibal Lecter , played by Brian Cox . De Laurentiis did not like Mann 's film : " Manhunter was no good ... it was not Red Dragon , " he said . De Laurentiis and his wife Martha ( also his co @-@ producer ) had no direct involvement in The Silence of the Lambs , a decision De Laurentiis came to regret . They did , however , own the rights to the Lecter character and reportedly allowed Orion Pictures , which produced The Silence of the Lambs , to use the character of Lecter for free , not wishing to be " greedy " . When The Silence of the Lambs became a commercial and critical success in 1991 , winning five Academy Awards , both Dino and Martha De Laurentiis found themselves sitting on a valuable asset and eager for a follow @-@ up novel they could adapt . After a lengthy wait , De Laurentiis finally received a call from Harris telling him he had finished the sequel to The Silence of the Lambs and De Laurentiis purchased the rights for a record $ 10 million . 
 In April 1999 , Los Angeles Times reported that the budget for an adaptation of Hannibal could cost as much as $ 100 million . It speculated that both Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins would receive $ 15 million each to reprise their roles and " $ 5 million to $ 19 million for director Jonathan Demme . " The newspaper further reported : although The Silence of the Lambs cost only $ 22 million , this would not deter the studio from going ahead with Hannibal . Mort <unk> , Harris 's agent at the time , told Los Angeles Times that Foster , Hopkins , and Demme would soon receive manuscripts of the novel , claiming it would make an unbelievable film . 
 The novel sold out of its initial 1 @.@ 6 million print run in the summer of 1999 . Hannibal went on to sell millions of copies following its release . 
 Demme informed the producers of Hannibal that he would pass on directing the film . It has been claimed Demme turned down the project because he found the material " lurid " and was averse to the novel 's " gore " . De Laurentiis said of Demme 's decision to decline : " When the pope dies , we create a new pope . Good luck to Jonathan Demme . Good @-@ bye . " He has since added that Demme felt he could not make a sequel as good as The Silence of the Lambs . 
 = = = Ridley Scott = = = 
 De Laurentiis visited Ridley Scott on the set of Gladiator and suggested to Ridley he read the novel he had bought the rights to . Scott was in the third week before principal photography was due to finish on Gladiator . Gladiator became a commercial and critical success , earning 12 Academy Award nominations . De Laurentiis asked Scott if he would like to direct the film version of Hannibal . Scott misunderstood which Hannibal he meant , thinking De Laurentiis was speaking of the general and historical figure from Carthage who nearly brought down the Roman Empire back around 200 B.C. , so he replied : " Basically , Dino , I 'm doing a Roman epic right now . I don 't wanna do elephants coming over the Alps next , old boy . " Scott read the manuscript in four sittings within a week , believing it to be a " symphony " , and expressed his desire to do it . Scott further explains how he got involved : " I was shooting Gladiator in Malta and one day , for the hell of it , I went for a walk for half a mile down the road to the Malta Film Studio to see my old buddy Dino . I had not seen him since I 'd worked on a version of Dune . This was pre @-@ Blade Runner . Dino had pursued me to direct Dune and another film . He 's always enthusiastic and aggressive and came after me when I did both Blade Runner and Alien , but I couldn 't do the films . Anyway , we had an espresso together and a few days later , he called me to ask if he could visit the Gladiator set . He arrived with a manuscript of Hannibal , about a month before it was published in book form . He said : ' Let 's make this one . ' I haven 't read anything so fast since The Godfather . It was so rich in all kind of ways . " 
 Although Scott had accepted the job Demme had rejected , he said : " My first question was : ' What about Jonathan ? ' and they said : ' The original team said it 's too violent . ' I said , ' Okay . I 'll do it . ' " Scott did , himself , have some uncertainty with the source material . In particular , he had difficulties with the ending of the novel , in which Lecter and Starling become lovers : " I couldn 't take that quantum leap emotionally on behalf of Starling . Certainly , on behalf of Hannibal — I 'm sure that 's been in the back of his mind for a number of years . But for Starling , no . I think one of the attractions about Starling to Hannibal is what a straight arrow she is . " He also " didn 't buy the book from the opera scene onwards , which became like a vampire movie . " He asked Harris if he was " married to his ending " . Harris said he was not , so Scott changed it . 
 = = = Script development = = = 
 Ted Tally , the screenwriter for The Silence of the Lambs , was another key member of the original team to decline involvement in Hannibal ( he won an Academy Award for his Silence adaptation ) . Tally , like Demme , had problems with the novel 's " excesses " . 
 Steven Zaillian ( writer of Schindler 's List ) was offered the chance to write the adaptation after Tally passed , but he also declined . He explained that " I was busy . And I wasn ’ t sure I was interested . You can almost never win when you do a sequel . " David Mamet was the first screenwriter to produce a draft , which , according to Ridley Scott and the producers , needed major revisions . Stacey Snider , co @-@ chairman of Universal Pictures ( a co @-@ production deal was struck between Universal and MGM ) said on the rejection of Mamet 's screenplay : " There 's no way David was going to read 15 pages of our notes and then be available to work on the script day @-@ to @-@ day . " Mamet was preparing to direct his own film . Zaillian , who had already passed , reconsidered and became involved in the project , saying : " It 's hard to say no to Dino once and it 's almost impossible to say no to him twice . " A script review at <unk> describes the Mamet draft as " stunningly bad " but found Zaillian 's rewrite to be " gripping entertainment " . 
 This question ( regarding the script development ) was put to Ridley Scott by Total Film magazine : " There were lots of rewrites on Hannibal — what was the main problem with the original material ? " Scott replied : " That 's inaccurate , because there were very few rewrites once I brought in Steve Zaillian . If you were to ask who were the best three screenwriters in the business , Steve Zaillian would be one of them . We discussed Hannibal endlessly . " Asked if he had read Mamet 's draft , he said : " Yes . He is very fast , very efficient , but he was off doing a film . ' Hannibal ' was green lit and his first draft only took about a month . But I was scared that he would not be able to give me enough attention , because that draft needed a lot of work . So I moved on basically . " Scott has said there were writing and " structural problems " as to what they would do with parts of the film . One of Zaillian 's key objectives was to revise the script by David Mamet until it pleased all parties , meaning the " love " story would need to be done by suggestion instead of by " assault " . Scott worked through the script with Zaillian for 28 days making him " sweat through it with him and discuss every inch of the way with him . " After 25 days Scott suddenly realized that Zaillian was " exorcising the 600 pages of the book . He was distilling through discussion what he was gonna finally do ... Frankly I could have just made it . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 It was unclear if Jodie Foster ( Clarice Starling ) and Anthony Hopkins ( Hannibal Lecter ) would reprise their respective roles for which they won Academy Awards in The Silence of the Lambs ( best actress / actor ) . It became apparent that the producers and the studio could do without one of the original " stars " ( and would go on to find a replacement ) . The withdrawal of both Foster and Hopkins could possibly have been terminal for the project , however . De Laurentiis confirmed this after the film 's release : " First and foremost , I knew we had no movie without Anthony Hopkins . " 
 = = = = Involvement of Jodie Foster = = = = 
 Regarding her involvement in a sequel to The Silence of the Lambs , Foster confirmed to Larry King in 1997 that she " would definitely be part of it " . She told Entertainment Weekly magazine in 1997 that " Anthony Hopkins always talks about it . I mean , everybody wants to do it . Every time I see him , it 's like : ' When is it going to happen ? When is it going to happen ? ' " De Laurentiis thought Foster would decline once she read the book , even believing the final film was better for it . Hopkins also had doubts Foster would be involved , saying he had a " hunch " she would not be . Foster did turn it down , confirming this in late December 1999 . This would cause problems for the studio , Universal and partner MGM . " The studio is just back from the holiday and is regrouping based on the news , and has no cohesive game plan at the moment , " said Kevin Misher , Universal 's President of Production . Misher added that , " It was one of those moments when you sit down and think , ' Can Clarice be looked upon as James Bond for instance ? A character who is replaceable ? ' Or was Jodie Foster Clarice Starling , and the audience will not accept anyone else ? " Foster said in December 1999 that the characterization of Starling in Hannibal had " negative attributes " and " betrayed " the original character . Foster 's spokeswoman said the actress declined because Claire Danes had become available for Foster 's own project , Flora Plum . Salary demands may also have played a part in Foster 's non @-@ participation . De Laurentiis said , " I call the agent of Judy [ sic ] Foster . He say to me ' I have instruction . She no want to read the script if you no give her an offer of $ 20m and 15 % of the gross . ' And I say , ' Give my love to Judy [ sic ] Foster , goodbye . ' " Entertainment Weekly described the project as becoming " a bloody mess , hemorrhaging talent and money " despite Hopkins being on @-@ board . Foster talked about Hannibal in an interview with Total Film in late 2005 . She said : " The official reason I didn 't do Hannibal is I was doing another movie , Flora Plum . So I get to say , in a nice dignified way , that I wasn 't available when that movie was being shot ... Clarice meant so much to Jonathan and I , she really did , and I know it sounds kind of strange to say but there was no way that either of us could really trample on her . " 
 = = = = Julianne Moore as Clarice Starling = = = = 
 When it became clear that Foster would skip Hannibal , the production team considered several different actresses , including Cate Blanchett , Angelina Jolie , Gillian Anderson , Hilary Swank , Ashley Judd , Helen Hunt and Julianne Moore . Hopkins asked his agent if he had any " power " over casting . He informed De Laurentiis that he knew Moore , with whom he had worked on Surviving Picasso , and thought her a " terrific actress " . Although Hopkins ' agent told him he had no contractual influence on casting , Scott thought it correct to discuss who would be Hopkins ' " leading lady " . Scott said he was " really surprised to find that [ he ] had five of the top actresses in Hollywood wanting it . " Moore would eventually secure the part . Scott said his decision was swayed in favor of Moore because : " She is a true chameleon . She can be a lunatic in Magnolia , a vamp in An Ideal Husband , a porn star in Boogie Nights and a romantic in The End of the Affair . " " Julianne Moore , once Jodie decided to pass , was always top of my list , " said Scott on his female lead . Moore talked about stepping into a role made famous by another actress : " The new Clarice would be very different . Of course people are going to compare my interpretation with that of Jodie Foster 's ... but this film is going to be very different . " 
 = = = = Anthony Hopkins as Hannibal Lecter = = = = 
 Hopkins was generally expected to reprise his Academy Award @-@ winning role . Hopkins did say in June 1999 that he would only be interested if the script was " really good " . Hopkins says on the making @-@ of feature on DVD that he couldn ’ t make up his mind to commit . " I was kind of surprised by this book , Hannibal . I thought it was really overreaching and so bizarre . So I couldn ’ t make up my mind about it all . Some of it I found intriguing , some I was a little doubtful about . " When the producers confirmed that they were going to film Harris ' novel , Hopkins told them yes , but added : " It needs some condensing . " The Hollywood Reporter would confirm that Hopkins had agreed to reprise his role in late December 1999 , saying he had approved the latest draft of the script by Steven Zaillian . Hopkins said he had no difficulty moving back into " Lecter 's mind " . " I just learned the lines and showed up and walked around as Hannibal Lecter . I thought , ' Do I repeat that same performance , or do I vary it ? ' Ten years had passed so I changed a bit . " In the book , Lecter uses bandages to disguise himself as a plastic surgery patient . This was left out of the film because Scott and Hopkins agreed to leave the face alone . Hopkins explains why : " It 's as if he 's making a statement — ' catch me if you can ' . With his big hat , he 's so obvious that nobody thinks he 's Hannibal Lecter . I 've always thought he 's a very elegant man , a Renaissance man . " In the film , Lecter is first seen in Florence " as the classical Lecter , lecturing and being smooth " , according to Hopkins . When the film moves to the U.S. , Hopkins changed his appearance by building up muscle and cropping his hair short " to make him like a mercenary , that he would be so fit and so strong that he could just snap somebody in two if they got ... in his way " . 
 = = = = Gary Oldman as Mason Verger = = = = 
 The part of Mason Verger , one of Lecter 's two surviving victims , was originally offered to Christopher Reeve based on his work as a wheelchair @-@ bound police officer in Above Suspicion ( 1995 ) . Not having read the novel , Reeve showed initial interest in the role , but ultimately declined upon realizing that Verger was a quadriplegic , facially @-@ disfigured child rapist . The part was later accepted by secondary choice Gary Oldman . Co @-@ producer Martha De Laurentiis claimed they had a " funny situation " with Oldman wanting a prominent " credit " . She said : " Now how can you have a prominent credit with Hannibal ? The characters are Hannibal and Clarice Starling . So we really couldn ’ t work something out ( at first ) . " Oldman was apparently " out " of the film for a while , but then came back in , asking to go " unbilled " . Oldman would become transformed and " unrecognizable as himself " to play the part of Verger . He would have no lips , cheeks or eyelids . Make @-@ up artist Greg Cannom said : " It 's really disgusting ... I 've been showing people pictures [ of Oldman as Verger ] , and they all just say ' Oh my God , ' and walk away , which makes me very happy . " Oldman said that having his name completely removed from the billing and credits allowed him to " do it anonymously " under the heavy make @-@ up . In home @-@ release versions of the film , Oldman 's name is included in the closing credits . 
 = = = = Further casting = = = = 
 Other stars subsequently cast included Ray Liotta as U.S. Justice Department official Paul Krendler ( the character had appeared in The Silence of the Lambs , but original actor Ron Vawter had died in the interim ) and Italian actor Giancarlo Giannini as Detective Rinaldo Pazzi . Francesca Neri played Pazzi 's wife , Allegra . Frankie Faison reprised his role as orderly Barney Matthews . 
 = = = Key production crew = = = 
 Scott recruited key production crew whom he had worked with previously . Production designer Norris Spencer had worked on Thelma & Louise , Black Rain and 1492 : Conquest of Paradise . Cinematographer John Mathieson , editor Pietro Scalia and composer Hans Zimmer had all worked on Scott 's previous film Gladiator . 
 = = Production and post @-@ production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Hannibal was filmed in 83 working days over 16 weeks . The film began production on May 8 , 2000 in Florence . The film visited key locations in Florence and various locations around the United States . Martha De Laurentiis said the film has almost a hundred locations and that it was a " constant pain of moving and dressing sets . But the locations were beautiful . Who could complain about being allowed to shoot in Palazzo Vecchio in Florence ? Or President James Madison 's farm in Montpelier or the amazing Biltmore Estate in Asheville ? " Eighty million dollars and a year and a half in production were spent before Scott got his first look at Hannibal in the editing room . 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 The whole second act of Hannibal takes place in Florence . Ridley Scott had never filmed there before , but described it as " quite an experience ... It was kind of organized chaos ... We were there at the height of tourist season . " Within Florence , the production would visit various locations such as the Palazzo <unk> ( as Dr. Fell 's workplace ) , the Ponte Vecchio , the Palazzo Vecchio , the Pharmacy of Santa Maria Novella and the Cathedral . 
 After leaving Italy on June 5 , 2000 , the production moved to Washington , D.C. Filming took place over six days at Union Station . The unusual sight of a carousel would appear in the transportation hub and shopping plaza at Ridley Scott 's request . 
 Filming would last for seven weeks in Richmond , Virginia for the shootout in a crowded fish market ( shot at Richmond Farmer 's Market ) early in the film . Julianne Moore underwent Federal Bureau of Investigation training at the Bureau 's headquarters before filming . 
 A barn in Montpelier , Virginia , situated on the estate of President James Madison , was used to house 15 " performing hogs " . The 15 Russian boars used in the shoot were from a selection of around 6 @,@ 000 that the animal <unk> observed . 
 Biltmore Estate in Asheville , North Carolina , the biggest privately owned estate in the U.S. , was chosen to signify the huge personal wealth of Mason Verger . 
 = = = Special make @-@ up effects = = = 
