 In this role , Kenney was promoted to the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel on 2 March 1935 , skipping that of major . He became involved in an acrimonious debate with the Army General Staff over the Air Corps ' desire to purchase more Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers . He also became caught up in a bureaucratic battle between Andrews and Major General Oscar Westover over whether the Chief of the Air Corps should control GHQ Air Force . As a result , Kenney was transferred to the Infantry School at Fort Benning , Georgia , on 16 June 1936 , with the temporary rank of major , to teach tactics to young infantry officers . He was promoted to the substantive rank of major on 1 October 1937 , but the assignment was hardly a choice one for an Air Corps officer . In September 1938 he accepted an offer to command the 97th Observation Squadron at Mitchell Field , New York . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1939 , Kenney was made Chief of the Production Engineering Section at Wright Field , Ohio . He was sent to France in early 1940 , once again with the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel , as Assistant Military Attaché for Air . His mission was to observe Allied air operations during the early stages of World War II . As a result of his observations , he recommended many important changes to Air Corps equipment and tactics , including upgrading armament from .30 caliber to .50 caliber machine guns , and installing leak @-@ proof fuel tanks , but his scathing comparisons of the German Luftwaffe with the Air Corps upset many officers . This resulted in his being sent back to Wright Field . In January 1941 , he became commander of the Air Corps Experimental Depot and Engineering School there , with the rank of brigadier general . He was promoted to major general on 26 March 1942 , when he became commander of the Fourth Air Force , an air defense and training organization based in San Francisco . Kenney personally instructed pilots on how to handle the Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning and A @-@ 29 Hudson . 
 = = = Southwest Pacific Area = = = 
 In July 1942 , Kenney received orders to take over the Allied Air Forces and Fifth Air Force in General Douglas MacArthur 's Southwest Pacific Area . MacArthur had been dissatisfied with the performance of his air commander , Lieutenant General George Brett . Andrews , by then a major general , turned down the job , and , offered a choice between Kenney and Major General James Doolittle , MacArthur chose Kenney . Kenney reported to MacArthur in Brisbane on 28 July 1942 , and was treated to " a lecture for approximately an hour on the shortcomings of the Air Force in general , and the Allied Air Forces in the Southwest Pacific in particular . " Kenney felt that MacArthur did not understand air operations , but recognized that he somehow needed to establish a good working relationship with him . When he asked MacArthur for authority to send people he considered " deadwood " home , something that his superiors in Washington , D.C. had refused to give , MacArthur enthusiastically approved . 
 Building a good relationship with MacArthur meant getting past Sutherland , MacArthur 's chief of staff . Brett advised Kenney that " a showdown early in the game with Sutherland might clarify the entire atmosphere . " Sutherland , who had a civil pilot 's license , had taken to issuing detailed instructions to the Allied Air Forces . This was more than simply a turf battle ; to many airmen , it was a part of the ongoing battle for an independent air force that they had long been advocating . At one point , Kenney drew a dot on a plain page of paper and told Sutherland , " the dot represents what you know about air operations , the entire rest of the paper what I know . " Sutherland backed down , and would henceforth let Kenney run the Allied Air Forces without interference . It did not follow , however , that MacArthur would invariably accept Kenney 's advice . 
 Kenney sent home Major General Ralph Royce , Brigadier Generals Edwin S. Perrin , Albert Sneed and Martin Scanlon , and about forty colonels . In Australia , he found two talented , recently arrived brigadier generals , Ennis Whitehead and Kenneth Walker . Kenney reorganized his command in August , appointed Whitehead as commander of the V Fighter Command and Walker as commander of the V Bomber Command . The Allied Air Forces was composed of both United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) and Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) personnel . Kenney moved to separate them . Brigadier General Donald Wilson arrived in September and replaced Air Vice Marshal William Bostock as Kenney 's chief of staff . Bostock took over the newly created RAAF Command . 
 This brought Kenney into conflict with the Chief of the Air Staff of the RAAF , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , who felt that an opportunity had been lost to simplify the administration of the RAAF . Kenney preferred to have Bostock in command , and while he regarded the antipathy between Jones and Bostock as a nuisance , was happy to leave arrangements the way they were . However , Kenney deviated from the normal structure of an air force by creating the Advanced Echelon ( ADVON ) under Whitehead . The new headquarters had the authority to change the assignments of aircraft in the forward area , where fast @-@ changing weather and enemy action could overtake orders drawn up in Australia . Kenney was promoted to lieutenant general on 21 October 1942 . 
 Perhaps because of his experience in World War I , Kenney had a great deal of respect for Japanese fighters . He decided to conserve his bombers , and concentrate on attaining air superiority over New Guinea . Kenney switched the bombers to attacking by night unless fighter escorts could be provided . SWPA had a low priority , and simply could not afford to replace losses from costly daylight missions . What he needed was an effective long @-@ range fighter , and Kenney hoped that the Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning would fit the bill , but the first ones delivered to SWPA were plagued with technical problems . Kenney had Charles Lindbergh teach his P @-@ 38 pilots how to extend the range of their aircraft . 
 The Southwest Pacific was not a promising theater of war for the strategic bomber . The bombers of the day did not have the range to reach Japan from Australia , and there were no typical strategic targets in the theater other than a few oil refineries . This set up a doctrinal clash between Kenney , an attack aviator , and Walker , the bomber advocate . The long @-@ standing Air Corps tactic for attacking shipping called for large formations of high @-@ altitude bombers . With sufficient mass , so the theory went , bombers could bracket any ship with walls of bombs , and do so from above the effective range of the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft fire . However the theoretical mass required was two orders of magnitude greater than what was available in the Southwest Pacific . A dozen or so bombers was the most that could be put together , owing to the small number of aircraft in the theater and the difficulties of keeping them serviceable . The results were therefore generally ineffective , and operations incurred heavy casualties . 
 Walker resisted Kenney 's proposals that the bombers conduct attacks from low level using bombs armed with instantaneous fuses . Kenney ordered Walker to try the fuses for a couple of months , so that data could be gained about their effectiveness ; a few weeks later Kenney discovered that Walker had discontinued their use . In November , Kenney arranged for a demonstration attack on the SS Pruth , a ship that had sunk off Port Moresby in 1924 and was often used for target practice . After the attack Walker and Kenney took a boat out to the wreck to inspect the damage . As expected , none of the four bombs dropped had hit the stationary wreck , but the instantaneous fuses had detonated the bombs when they struck the water , so bomb fragments had torn holes in the sides of the ship . Walker reluctantly conceded the point . A few weeks later , Walker was shot down leading a daylight raid over Rabaul , an attack that Kenney had ordered to be conducted at night . 
 In addition to trying different types of ordnance , the Allied Air Forces experimented with modifications to the aircraft <unk> the Major Paul I. " Pappy " Gunn modified some USAAF Douglas A @-@ 20 Havoc light bombers by installing four .50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) machine guns in their noses , and two 450 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 1 @,@ 700 l ; 370 imp gal ) fuel tanks were added to give the aircraft more range . This was successful , and an attempt was then made to create a longer range attack aircraft by doing the same thing to a B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bomber , to operate as a " commerce destroyer " . This proved to be somewhat more difficult . The resulting aircraft was obviously nose heavy despite adding lead ballast to the tail , and the vibrations caused by firing the machine guns were enough to make rivets pop out of the skin of the aircraft . The tail guns and belly turrets were removed , the latter being of little use if the aircraft was flying low . 
 The Allied Air Forces also adopted innovative tactics . In February 1942 , the RAAF began experimenting with skip bombing , an anti @-@ shipping technique used by the British and Germans . Flying only a few dozen feet above the sea toward their targets , aircraft would release their bombs , which would then , ideally , ricochet across the surface of the water and explode at the side of the target ship , under it , or just over it . A similar technique was mast @-@ height bombing , in which bombers would approach the target at low altitude , 200 to 500 feet ( 61 to 152 m ) , at about 265 to 275 miles per hour ( 426 to 443 km / h ) , and then drop down to mast height , 10 to 15 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) about 600 yards ( 550 m ) from the target . They would release their bombs at around 300 yards ( 270 m ) , aiming directly at the side of the ship . The two techniques were not mutually exclusive . A bomber could drop two bombs , skipping the first and launching the second at mast height . The Battle of the Bismarck Sea demonstrated the effectiveness of low @-@ level attacks on shipping . 
 Another form of airpower employed by Kenney was air transport . This started in September 1942 when troops of the 32nd Infantry Division were airlifted from Australia to Port Moresby . Later in the campaign , C @-@ 47 Dakotas landed Australian troops at Wanigela . A year later , American paratroops landed at Nadzab , enabling the Australian 7th Division to be flown in . 
 The ultimate challenge was to integrate air power with MacArthur 's strategy . Kenney described the process this way in 1944 : 
 The first step in this advancement of the bomber line is to gain and maintain air control as far into enemy territory as our longest range fighters can reach . Then we put an air blockade around the Jap positions or section of the coast which we want in order to stop him from getting supplies or reinforcements . The bombers then go to work and pulverize his defensive system , methodically taking out artillery positions , stores , bivouac areas and so on . Finally comes the air cover escorting the amphibious expedition to the landing beach , a last minute blasting and smoking of the enemy beach defenses and the maintenance of strafers and fighters overhead , on call from the surface forces until their beachhead is secured . If emergency supplies are needed we drop them by parachute . The ground troops get a transport field ready as fast as possible so that we can supplement boat supply by cargo carrying airplanes . When necessary , we evacuate the wounded and sick and bring in reinforcements in a hurry . The transport field becomes a fighter field , the strafers and finally the heavies arrive and it is time to move forward again . 
 = = = Far East Air Forces = = = 
 In June 1944 , Kenney was appointed commander of the Far East Air Forces ( FEAF ) , which came to include the Fifth , Thirteenth , and Seventh Air Forces . He created the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Air Task Forces to control air operations in forward areas , each for a specific mission , another departure from doctrine . While Kenney was enthusiastic about this innovation , Washington did not like it and , over Kenney 's objections , converted the three air task forces into the 308th , 309th and 310th Bombardment Wings . He was promoted to general on 9 March 1945 . 
 Kenney hoped to get Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortresses assigned to the Far East Air Forces so that , based from airfields near Darwin , they could destroy the Japanese oilfields at Balikpapan . His agitation for the B @-@ 29s did not endear him to the USAAF staff in Washington , D.C. After the war , the Strategic Bombing Survey concluded that this would have been far more productive than Operation Matterhorn , which saw B @-@ 29s based in China to bomb steel plants in Japan , as oil was more critical to the Japanese war effort than steel . 
 = = = War crimes accusation = = = 
 On 4 March 1943 , during the Battle of the Bismarck Sea , General George Kenney ordered Allied patrol boats and aircraft to attack Japanese rescue vessels , as well as the survivors from the sunken vessels on life rafts and swimming or floating in the sea . This was later justified on the grounds that rescued servicemen would have been rapidly landed at their military destination and promptly returned to active service . These orders violated the Hague Convention of 1907 , which banned the killing of shipwreck survivors under any circumstances . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 In April 1946 , Kenney became the first commander of the newly formed Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) . He was encouraged by Secretary of the Air Force Stuart Symington to join him in the political battle surrounding the establishment of an independent United States Air Force . Separately , the two men gave promotional speeches around the country . As a result , SAC 's efficiency suffered . On 8 May 1946 , Kenney publicly presented the Medal of Honor to the family of Thomas B. McGuire , Jr , the second @-@ highest scoring US fighter pilot , who had been killed in action . 
 Kenney left day @-@ to @-@ day operations at SAC in the hands of his deputy commander , Major General St. Clair Streett . Part of the reason for Kenney 's lack of focus on SAC was also his assignment as U.S. representative to the United Nations Military Staff Committee , which appeared at that time to be potentially an important assignment . In January 1947 , Streett was replaced by Major General Clements McMullen . With McMullen serving officially as Kenney 's deputy but actually in command , a cross @-@ training program was implemented in early 1948 to teach bomber crew members each other 's tasks , the goal being to reduce each bomber 's contingent of officers from five to three . Morale suffered as a result . Major General Lauris Norstad , responsible for reporting the readiness of American airpower to the U.S. Secretary of Defense , James Forrestal , heard from unhappy airmen that the SAC was in a poor state of readiness , and he initiated an investigation . He selected Charles Lindbergh and Paul Tibbets to perform the inquiry . Tibbets told Norstad that he found nobody at SAC knew their job . Lindbergh said that McMullen 's cross @-@ training program " seriously interfered with training the primary mission . " 
 On 6 May 1948 , Kenney spoke to a crowd in Bangor , Maine , telling them that the US was likely to be attacked by the Soviet Union as soon as the latter had enough atomic bombs . In Washington , D.C. , a group of senators including Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr. complained of Kenney 's " belligerent " speech , and previous ones in the same vein by Symington , saying that matters of foreign policy should be left to the president and the secretary of state , not to leaders of the United States Air Force ( USAF ) . Another controversy that Kenney became embroiled in concerned the Convair B @-@ 36 Peacemaker . He was less than impressed with this expensive and under @-@ performing aircraft , preferring the Boeing B @-@ 50 Superfortress , an upgraded version of the B @-@ 29 instead . The USAF , however , had staked much of its credibility on the B @-@ 36 , something that Kenney did not seem to appreciate . 
 In the context of the Berlin Blockade in June 1948 , the Air Force Chief of Staff , General Hoyt S. Vandenberg met with Forrestal to report the poor state of SAC . Following this meeting , Norstad recommended that Vandenberg replace Kenney , and Vandenberg quickly agreed , choosing Lieutenant General Curtis LeMay as the man he would prefer to lead the strategic bombing arm in case of war with the USSR . LeMay was made leader of SAC , and Kenney became commander of the Air University , a position he held from October 1948 until his retirement from the Air Force in September 1951 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 After his retirement , he lived in Bay Harbor Islands , Florida . In 1958 he appeared as the host of the TV anthology series Flight . He died on 9 August 1977 . 
 = = Books = = 
 Kenney wrote three books about the SWPA air campaigns he led during World War II . His major work was General Kenney Reports ( 1949 ) , a personal history of the air war he led from 1942 to 1945 . He also wrote The Saga of Pappy Gunn ( 1959 ) and Dick Bong : Ace of Aces ( 1960 ) , which described the careers of Paul Gunn and Richard Bong , two of the most prominent airmen under his command . 
 = = Family = = 
 He was survived by his two children , five grandsons and one granddaughter . His stepson , William " Bill " R. Kenney , rose to the rank of colonel in the USAF . His daughter , Julia , earned a B.A. in English at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1947 . In 1948 she married Edward C. Hoagland Jr . , a fighter pilot in World War II and later in Korea , who eventually retired from the USAF at the rank of lieutenant colonel . 
 = = Awards = = 
 During a career that spanned over 30 years , Kenney was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross with one oak leaf cluster , the Distinguished Service Medal with one oak leaf cluster , the Silver Star Medal , the Distinguished Flying Cross , the Bronze Star Medal , the Purple Heart and several foreign decorations . 
 = Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and The Five = 
 In mid- to late @-@ 19th @-@ century Russia , Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and a group of composers known as The Five had differing opinions as to whether Russian classical music should be composed following Western or native practices . Tchaikovsky wanted to write professional compositions of such quality that they would stand up to Western scrutiny and thus transcend national barriers , yet remain distinctively Russian in melody , rhythm and other compositional characteristics . The Five , made up of composers Mily Balakirev , Alexander Borodin , César Cui , Modest Mussorgsky , and Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , sought to produce a specifically Russian kind of art music , rather than one that imitated older European music or relied on European @-@ style conservatory training . While Tchaikovsky himself used folk songs in some of his works , for the most part he tried to follow Western practices of composition , especially in terms of tonality and tonal progression . Also , unlike Tchaikovsky , none of The Five was academically trained in composition ; in fact , their leader , Balakirev , considered academicism a threat to musical imagination . Along with critic Vladimir Stasov , who supported The Five , Balakirev attacked relentlessly both the Saint Petersburg Conservatory , from which Tchaikovsky had graduated , and its founder Anton Rubinstein , orally and in print . 
 As Tchaikovsky had become Rubinstein 's best @-@ known student , he was initially considered by association as a natural target for attack , especially as fodder for Cui 's printed critical reviews . This attitude changed slightly when Rubinstein left the Saint Petersburg musical scene in 1867 . In 1869 Tchaikovsky entered into a working relationship with Balakirev ; the result was Tchaikovsky 's first recognized masterpiece , the fantasy @-@ overture Romeo and Juliet , a work which The Five wholeheartedly embraced . When Tchaikovsky wrote a positive review of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's Fantasy on Serbian Themes he was welcomed into the circle , despite concerns about the academic nature of his musical background . The finale of his Second Symphony , nicknamed the Little Russian , was also received enthusiastically by the group on its first performance in 1872 . 
 Tchaikovsky remained friendly but never intimate with most of The Five , ambivalent about their music ; their goals and aesthetics did not match his . He took pains to ensure his musical independence from them as well as from the conservative faction at the Conservatory — an outcome facilitated by his acceptance of a professorship at the Moscow Conservatory offered to him by Nikolai Rubinstein , Anton 's brother . When Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was offered a professorship at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory , it was to Tchaikovsky that he turned for advice and guidance . Later , when Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was under pressure from his fellow nationalists for his change in attitude on music education and his own intensive studies in music , Tchaikovsky continued to support him morally , told him that he fully applauded what he was doing and admired both his artistic modesty and his strength of character . In the 1880s , long after the members of The Five had gone their separate ways , another group called the Belyayev circle took up where they left off . Tchaikovsky enjoyed close relations with the leading members of this group — Alexander Glazunov , Anatoly Lyadov and , by then , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . 
 = = Prologue : growing debate = = 
 With the exception of Mikhail Glinka , who became the first " truly Russian " composer , the only music indigenous to Russia before Tchaikovsky 's birthday in 1840 were folk and sacred music ; the Russian Orthodox Church 's proscription of secular music had effectively stifled its development . Beginning in the 1830s , Russian intelligentsia debated the issue of whether artists negated their Russianness when they borrowed from European culture or took vital steps toward renewing and developing Russian culture . Two groups sought to answer this question . <unk> idealized Russian history before Peter the Great and claimed the country possessed a distinct culture , rooted in Byzantium and spread by the Russian Orthodox Church . The <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , on the other hand , lauded Peter as a patriot who wanted to reform his country and bring it on a par with Europe . Looking forward instead of backward , they saw Russia as a youthful and inexperienced but with the potential of becoming the most advanced European civilization by borrowing from Europe and turning its liabilities into assets . 
 In 1836 , Glinka 's opera A Life for the Tsar was premiered in Saint Petersburg . This was an event long @-@ awaited by the intelligentsia . The opera was the first conceived by a Russian composer on a grand scale , set to a Russian text and patriotic in its appeal . Its plot fit neatly into the doctrine of Official Nationality being promulgated by Nicholas I , thus assuring Imperial approval . In formal and stylistic terms , A Life was very much an Italian opera but also showed a sophisticated thematic structure and a boldness in orchestral scoring . It was the first tragic opera to enter the Russian repertoire , with Ivan <unk> 's death at the end underlining and adding gravitas to the patriotism running through the whole opera . ( In <unk> 's version , Ivan is spared at the last minute . ) It was also the first Russian opera where the music continued throughout , uninterrupted by spoken dialogue . Moreover — and this is what amazed contemporaries about the work — the music included folk songs and Russian national idioms , incorporating them into the drama . Glinka meant his use of folk songs to reflect the presence of popular characters in the opera , rather than an overt attempt at nationalism . Nor do they play a major part in the opera . Nevertheless , despite a few derogatory comments about Glinka 's use of " coachman 's music , " A Life became popular enough to earn obtain permanent repertory status , the first Russian opera to do so in that country . 
 Ironically , the success of Rossini 's Semiramide earlier the same season was what allowed A Life to be staged at all , with virtually all the cast from Semiramide retained for A Life . Despite A Life 's success , the furor over Semiramide aroused an overwhelming demand for Italian opera . This proved a setback for Russian opera in general and particularly for Glinka 's next opera , Ruslan and Lyudmila when it was produced in 1842 . Its failure prompted Glinka to leave Russia ; he died in exile . 
 = = Drawing sides = = 
 Despite Glinka 's international attention , which included the admiration of Liszt and Berlioz for his music and his heralding by the latter as " among the outstanding composers of his time " , Russian aristocrats remained focused exclusively on foreign music . Music itself was bound by class structure , and except for a modest role in public life was still considered a privilege of the aristocracy . Nobles spent enormous sums on musical performances for their exclusive enjoyment and hosted visiting artists such as Clara Schumann and Franz Liszt but there were no ongoing concert societies , no critical press and no public eagerly anticipating new works . No competent level of music education existed . Private tutors were available in some cities but tended to be badly trained . Anyone desiring a quality education had to travel abroad . Composer and pianist Anton Rubinstein 's founding of the Russian Musical Society in 1859 and the Saint Petersburg Conservatory three years later were giant steps toward remedying this situation but also proved highly controversial ones . Among this group was a young legal clerk named Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky . 
 = = = Tchaikovsky = = = 
 Tchaikovsky was born in 1840 in Votkinsk , a small town in present @-@ day <unk> , formerly the Imperial Russian province of Vyatka . A precocious pupil , he began piano lessons at the age of five , and could read music as adeptly as his teacher within three years . However , his parents ' passion for his musical talent soon cooled . In 1850 , the family decided to send Tchaikovsky to the Imperial School of Jurisprudence in Saint Petersburg . This establishment mainly served the lesser nobility or gentry , and would prepare him for a career as a civil servant . As the minimum age for acceptance was 12 , Tchaikovsky was sent by his family to board at the Imperial School of Jurisprudence 's preparatory school in Saint Petersburg , 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) from his family home in <unk> . Once Tchaikovsky came of age for acceptance , he was transferred to the Imperial School of Jurisprudence to begin a seven @-@ year course of studies . 
 Music was not a priority at the School , but Tchaikovsky regularly attended the theater and the opera with other students . He was fond of works by Rossini , Bellini , Verdi and Mozart . Piano manufacturer Franz Becker made occasional visits to the School as a token music teacher . This was the only formal music instruction Tchaikovsky received there . From 1855 the composer 's father , Ilya Tchaikovsky , funded private lessons with Rudolph Kündinger , a well @-@ known piano teacher from Nuremberg , and questioned Kündinger about a musical career for his son . Kündinger replied that nothing suggested a potential composer or even a fine performer . Tchaikovsky was told to finish his course and then try for a post in the Ministry of Justice . 
 Tchaikovsky graduated on May 25 , 1859 with the rank of titular counselor , a low rung on the civil service ladder . On June 15 , he was appointed to the Ministry of Justice in Saint Petersburg . Six months later he became a junior assistant and two months after that , a senior assistant . Tchaikovsky remained there for the rest of his three @-@ year civil service career . 
 In 1861 , Tchaikovsky attended classes in music theory organized by the Russian Musical Society and taught by Nikolai Zaremba . A year later he followed Zaremba to the Saint Petersburg Conservatory . Tchaikovsky would not give up his Ministry post " until I am quite certain that I am destined to be a musician rather than a civil servant . " From 1862 to 1865 he studied harmony , counterpoint and fugue with Zaremba , while Rubinstein taught him instrumentation and composition . In 1863 he abandoned his civil service career and studied music full @-@ time , graduating in December 1865 . 
 = = = The Five = = = 
 Around Christmas 1855 , Glinka was visited by Alexander <unk> , a rich Russian amateur critic , and his 18 @-@ year @-@ old protégé Mily Balakirev , who was reportedly on his way to becoming a great pianist . Balakirev played his fantasy based on themes from A Life for the Tsar for Glinka . Glinka , pleasantly surprised , praised Balakirev as a musician with a bright future . 
 In 1856 , Balakirev and critic Vladimir Stasov , who publicly espoused a nationalist agenda for Russian arts , started gathering young composers through whom to spread ideas and gain a following . First to meet with them that year was César Cui , an army officer who specialized in the science of fortifications . Modest Mussorgsky , a <unk> Lifeguard officer , joined them in 1857 ; Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , a naval cadet , in 1861 ; and Alexander Borodin , a chemist , in 1862 . Balakirev , Borodin , Cui , Mussorgsky and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov composed in their spare time , and all five of them were young men in 1862 , with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov at just 18 the youngest and Borodin the oldest at 28 . All five were essentially self @-@ taught and eschewed conservative and " routine " musical techniques . They became known as the kuchka , variously translated as The Five , The Russian Five and The Mighty Handful after a review written by Stasov about their music . Stasov wrote , " May God grant that [ the audience retains ] for ever a memory of how much poetry , feeling , talent and ability is possessed by the small but already mighty handful [ moguchaya kuchka ] of Russian musicians " . The term moguchaya kuchka , which literally means " mighty little heap " , stuck , although Stasov referred to them in print generally as the " New Russian School . " 
 The aim of this group was to create an independent Russian school of music in the footsteps of Glinka . They were to strive for " national character , " gravitate toward " Oriental " ( by that they meant near @-@ Eastern ) melodies and favor program music over absolute — in other words , symphonic poems and related music over symphonies , concertos and chamber music . To create this Russian style of classical music , Stasov wrote that the group incorporated four characteristics . The first was a rejection of academicism and fixed Western forms of composition . The second was the incorporation of musical elements from eastern nations inside the Russian empire ; this was a quality that would later become known as musical orientalism . The third was a progressive and anti @-@ academic approach to music . The fourth was the incorporation of compositional devices linked with folk music . These four points would distinguish the Five from its contemporaries in the cosmopolitan camp of composition . 
 = = = Rubinstein and the Saint Petersburg Conservatory = = = 
 Anton Rubinstein was a famous Russian pianist who had lived , performed and composed in Western and Central Europe before he returned to Russia in 1858 . He saw Russia as a musical desert compared to Paris , Berlin and Leipzig , whose music conservatories he had visited . Musical life flourished in those places ; composers were held in high regard , and musicians were wholeheartedly devoted to their art . With a similar ideal in mind for Russia , he had conceived an idea for a conservatory in Russia years before his 1858 return , and had finally aroused the interest of influential people to help him realize the idea . 
 Rubinstein 's first step was to found the Russian Musical Society ( RMS ) in 1859 . Its objectives were to educate people in music , cultivate their musical tastes and develop their talents in that area of their lives . The first priority of the RMS acted was to expose to the public the music of native composers . In addition to a considerable amount of Western European music , works by Mussorgsky and Cui were premiered by the RMS under Rubinstein 's baton . A few weeks after the Society 's premiere concert , Rubinstein started organizing music classes , which were open to everyone . Interest in these classes grew until Rubinstein founded the Saint Petersburg Conservatory in 1862 . 
 According to musicologist Francis Maes , Rubinstein could not be accused of any lack of artistic integrity . He fought for change and progress in musical life in Russia . Only his musical tastes were conservative — from Haydn , Mozart and Beethoven to the early Romantics up to Chopin . Liszt and Wagner were not included . Neither did he welcome many ideas then new about music , including the role of nationalism in classical music . For Rubinstein , national music existed only in folk song and folk dance . There was no place for national music in larger works , especially not in opera . Rubinstein 's public reaction to the attacks was simply not to react . His classes and concerts were well attended , so he felt no reply was actually necessary . He even forbade his students to take sides . 
 = = With The Five = = 
 As The Five 's campaign against Rubinstein continued in the press , Tchaikovsky found himself almost as much a target as his former teacher . Cui reviewed the performance of Tchaikovsky 's graduation cantata and lambasted the composer as " utterly feeble .... If he had any talent at all ... it would surely at some point in the piece have broken free of the chains imposed by the Conservatory . " The review 's effect on the sensitive composer was devastating . Eventually , an uneasy truce developed as Tchaikovsky became friendly with Balakirev and eventually with the other four composers of the group . A working relationship between Balakirev and Tchaikovsky resulted in Romeo and Juliet . The Five 's approval of this work was further was followed by their enthusiasm for Tchaikovsky 's Second Symphony . Subtitled the Little Russian ( Little Russia was the term at that time for what is now called the Ukraine ) for its use of Ukrainian folk songs , the symphony in its initial version also used several compositional devices similar to those used by the Five in their work . Stasov suggested the subject of Shakespeare 's The Tempest to Tchaikovsky , who wrote a tone poem based on this subject . After a lapse of several years , Balakirev reentered Tchaikovsky 's creative life ; the result was Tchaikovsky 's Manfred Symphony , composed to a program after Lord Byron originally written by Stasov and supplied by Balakirev . Overall , however , Tchaikovsky continued down an independent creative path , traveling a middle course between those of his nationalistic peers and the traditionalists . 
 = = = Balakirev = = = 
 = = = = Initial correspondence = = = = 
 In 1867 , Rubinstein handed over the directorship of the Conservatory to Zaremba . Later that year he resigned his conductorship of the Russian Music Society orchestra , to be replaced by Balakirev . Tchaikovsky had already promised his Characteristic Dances ( then called Dances of the Hay Maidens ) from his opera The Voyevoda to the society . In submitting the manuscript ( and perhaps mindful of Cui 's review of the cantata ) , Tchaikovsky included a note to Balakirev that ended with a request for a word of encouragement should the Dances not be performed . 
 At this point The Five as a unit was dispersing . Mussorgsky and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wanted to remove themselves from Balakirev 's influence , which they now found stifling , and go in their individual directions as composers . Balakirev might have sensed a potential new disciple in Tchaikovsky . He explained in his reply from Saint Petersburg that while he preferred to give his opinions in person and at length to press his points home , he was couching his reply " with complete frankness " , adding , with a deft touch of flattery , that he felt that Tchaikovsky was " a fully fledged artist " and that he looked forward to discussing the piece with him on an upcoming trip to Moscow . 
 These letters set the tone for Tchaikovsky 's relationship with Balakirev over the next two years . At the end of this period , in 1869 , Tchaikovsky was a 28 @-@ year @-@ old professor at the Moscow Conservatory . Having written his first symphony and an opera , he next composed a symphonic poem entitled Fatum . Initially pleased with the piece when Nikolai Rubinstein conducted it in Moscow , Tchaikovsky dedicated it to Balakirev and sent it to him to conduct in Saint Petersburg . Fatum received only a lukewarm reception there . Balakirev wrote a detailed letter to Tchaikovsky in which he explained what he felt were defects in Fatum but also gave some encouragement . He added that he considered the dedication of the music to him as " precious to me as a sign of your sympathy towards me — and I feel a great weakness for you " . Tchaikovsky was too self @-@ critical not to see the truth behind these comments . He accepted Balakirev 's criticism , and the two continued to correspond . Tchaikovsky would later destroy the score of Fatum . ( The score would be reconstructed posthumously by using the orchestral parts . ) 
 = = = = Writing Romeo and Juliet = = = = 
 Balakirev 's despotism strained the relationship between him and Tchaikovsky but both men still appreciated each other 's abilities . Despite their friction , Balakirev proved the only man to persuade Tchaikovsky to rewrite a work several times , as he would with Romeo and Juliet . At Balakirev 's suggestion , Tchaikovsky based the work on Balakirev 's King Lear , a tragic overture in sonata form after the example of Beethoven 's concert overtures . It was Tchaikovsky 's idea to reduce the plot to one central conflict and represent it musically with the binary structure of sonata form . However , the execution of that plot in the music we know today came only after two radical revisions . Balakirev discarded many of the early drafts Tchaikovsky sent him and , with the flurry of suggestions between the two men , the piece was constantly in the mail between Moscow and Saint Petersburg . 
 Tchaikovsky allowed the first version to be premiered by Nikolai Rubinstein on March 16 , 1870 , after the composer had incorporated only some of Balakirev 's suggestions . The premiere was a disaster . Stung by this rejection , Tchaikovsky took Balakirev 's strictures to heart . He forced himself to reach beyond his musical training and rewrote much of the music into the form we know it today . Romeo would bring Tchaikovsky his first national and international acclaim and become a work the kuchka lauded unconditionally . On hearing the love theme from Romeo , Stasov told the group , " There were five of you ; now there are six " . Such was the enthusiasm of the Five for Romeo that at their gatherings Balakirev was always asked to play it through at the piano . He did this so many times that he learned to perform it from memory . 
 Some critics , among them Tchaikovsky biographers Lawrence and Elisabeth Hanson , have wondered what would have happened if Tchaikovsky had joined Balakirev in 1862 instead of attending the Conservatory . They suggest that he might have developed much more quickly as an independent composer , and offer as proof the fact that Tchaikovsky did not write his first wholly distinct work until Balakirev goaded and inspired him to write Romeo . How well Tchaikovsky might have developed in the long run is another matter . He owed much of his musical ability , including his skill at orchestration , to the thorough grounding in counterpoint , harmony and musical theory he received at the Conservatory . Without that grounding , Tchaikovsky might not have been able to write what would become his greatest works . 
 = = = Rimsky @-@ Korsakov = = = 
 In 1871 , Nikolai Zaremba resigned from the directorship of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory . His successor , <unk> Azanchevsky , was more progressive @-@ minded musically and wanted new blood to freshen up teaching in the Conservatory . He offered Rimsky @-@ Korsakov a professorship in Practical Composition and Instrumentation ( orchestration ) , as well as leadership of the Orchestra Class . Balakirev , who had formerly opposed academicism with tremendous vigor , encouraged him to assume the post , thinking it might be useful having one of his own in the midst of the enemy camp . 
 Nevertheless , by the time of his appointment , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had become painfully aware of his technical shortcomings as a composer ; he later wrote , " I was a dilettante and knew nothing " . Moreover , he had come to a creative dead @-@ end upon completing his opera The Maid of Pskov and realized that developing a solid musical technique was the only way he could continue composing . He turned to Tchaikovsky for advice and guidance . When Rimsky @-@ Korsakov underwent a change in attitude on music education and began his own intensive studies privately , his fellow nationalists accused him of throwing away his Russian heritage to compose fugues and sonatas . Tchaikovsky continued to support him morally . He told Rimsky @-@ Korsakov that he fully applauded what he was doing and admired both his artistic modesty and his strength of character . 
 Before Rimsky @-@ Korsakov went to the Conservatory , in March 1868 , Tchaikovsky wrote a review of his Fantasia on Serbian Themes . In discussing this work , Tchaikovsky compared it to the only other Rimsky @-@ Korsakov piece he had heard so far , the First Symphony , mentioning " its charming orchestration ... its structural novelty , and most of all ... the freshness of its purely Russian harmonic turns ... immediately [ showing ] Mr. Rimsky @-@ Korsakov to be a remarkable symphonic talent " . Tchaikovsky 's notice , worded in precisely a way to find favor within the Balakirev circle , did exactly that . He met the rest of The Five on a visit to Balakirev 's house in Saint Petersburg the following month . The meeting went well . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov later wrote , 
 As a product of the Conservatory , Tchaikovsky was viewed rather negligently if not haughtily by our circle , and , owing to his being away from St. Petersburg , personal acquaintanceship was impossible .... [ Tchaikovsky ] proved to be a pleasing and sympathetic man to talk with , one who knew how to be simple of manner and always speak with evident sincerity and heartiness . The evening of our first meeting [ Tchaikovsky ] played for us , at Balakirev 's request , the first movement of his Symphony in G minor [ Tchaikovsky 's First Symphony ] ; it proved quite to our liking ; and our former opinion of him changed and gave way to a more sympathetic one , although Tchaikovsky 's Conservatory training still constituted a considerable barrier between him and us . 
 Rimsky @-@ Korsakov added that " during the following years , when visiting St. Petersburg , [ Tchaikovsky ] usually came to Balakirev 's , and we saw him . " Nevertheless , as much as Tchaikovsky may have desired acceptance from both The Five and the traditionalists , he needed the independence that Moscow afforded to find his own direction , away from both parties . This was especially true in light of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's comment about the " considerable barrier " of Tchaikovsky 's Conservatory training , as well as Anton Rubinstein 's opinion that Tchaikovsky had strayed too far from the examples of the great Western masters . Tchaikovsky was ready for the nourishment of new attitudes and styles so he could continue growing as a composer , and his brother Modest writes that he was impressed by the " force and vitality " in some of the Five 's work . However , he was too balanced an individual to totally reject the best in the music and values that Zaremba and Rubinstein had cherished . In his brother Modest 's opinion , Tchaikovsky 's relations with the Saint Petersburg group resembled " those between two friendly neighboring states ... cautiously prepared to meet on common ground , but jealously guarding their separate interests " . 
 = = = Stasov , The Tempest and the Little Russian symphony = = = 
 Tchaikovsky played the finale of his Second Symphony , subtitled the Little Russian , at a gathering at Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's house in Saint Petersburg on January 7 , 1873 , before the official premiere of the entire work . To his brother Modest , he wrote , " [ T ] he whole company almost tore me to pieces with rapture — and Madame <unk> @-@ Korsakova begged me in tears to let her arrange it for piano duet " . <unk> @-@ Korsakova was a noted pianist , composer and arranger in her own right , transcribing works by other members of the kuchka as well as those of her husband and Tchaikovsky 's Romeo and Juliet . Borodin was present and may have approved of the work himself . Also present was Vladimir Stasov . Impressed by what he had heard , Stasov asked Tchaikovsky what he would consider writing next , and would soon influence the composer in writing the symphonic poem The Tempest . 
 Tchaikovsky wanted to focus his tone poem The Tempest primarily on her . What endeared the Little Russian to the kuchka was not simply that Tchaikovsky had used Ukrainian folk songs as melodic material . It was how , especially in the outer movements , he allowed the unique characteristics of Russian folk song to dictate symphonic form . This was a goal toward which the kuchka strived , both collectively and individually . Tchaikovsky , with his Conservatory grounding , could sustain such development longer and more cohesively than his colleagues in the kuchka . ( Though the comparison may seem unfair , Tchaikovsky authority David Brown has pointed out that , because of their similar time @-@ frames , the finale of the Little Russian shows what Mussorgsky could have done with " The Great Gate of Kiev " from Pictures at an Exhibition had he possessed academic training comparable to that of Tchaikovsky . ) 
 = = = Tchaikovsky 's private concerns about The Five = = = 
 The Five was among the myriad of subjects Tchaikovsky discussed with his benefactress , Nadezhda von Meck . By January 1878 , when he wrote to Mrs. von Meck about its members , he had drifted far from their musical world and ideals . In addition , The Five 's finest days had long passed . Despite considerable effort in writing operas and songs , Cui had become better known as a critic than as a composer , and even his critical efforts competed for time with his career as an army engineer and expert in the science of fortification . Balakirev had withdrawn completely from the musical scene , Mussorgsky was sinking ever deeper into alcoholism , and Borodin 's creative activities increasingly took a back seat to his official duties as a professor of chemistry . 
 Only Rimsky @-@ Korsakov actively pursued a full @-@ time musical career , and he was under increasing fire from his fellow nationalists for much the same reason as Tchaikovsky had been . Like Tchaikovsky , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov had found that , for his own artistic growth to continue unabated , he had to study and master Western classical forms and techniques . Borodin called it " apostasy " , adding , " Many are grieved at present by the fact that Korsakov has turned back , has thrown himself into a study of musical antiquity . I do not bemoan it . It is understandable .... " Mussorgsky was harsher : " [ T ] he mighty kuchka had degenerated into soulless traitors . " 
 Tchaikovsky 's analysis of each of The Five was unsparing . While at least some of his observations may seem distorted and prejudiced , he also mentions some details which ring clear and true . His diagnosis of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's creative crisis is very accurate . He also calls Mussorgsky the most gifted musically of the Five , though Tchaikovsky could not appreciate the forms Mussorgsky 's originality took . Nonetheless , he badly underestimates Borodin 's technique and gives Balakirev far less than his full due — all the more telling in light of Balakirev 's help in conceiving and shaping Romeo and Juliet . 
 Tchaikovsky wrote to Nadezhda von Meck that all of the kuchka were talented but also " infected to the core " with conceit and " a purely <unk> confidence in their superiority . " He went into some detail about Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's epiphany and turnaround regarding musical training , and his efforts to remedy this situation for himself . Tchaikovsky then called Cui " a talented dilettante " whose music " has no originality , but is clever and graceful " ; Borodin a man who " has talent , even a strong one , but it has perished through neglect ... and his technique is so weak that he cannot write a single line [ of music ] without outside help " ; Mussorgsky " a hopeless case " , superior in talent but " narrow @-@ minded , devoid of any urge towards self @-@ perfection " ; and Balakirev as one with " enormous talent " yet who had also " done much harm " as " the general inventor of all the theories of this strange group " . 
 = = = Balakirev returns = = = 
 Tchaikovsky finished his final revision of Romeo and Juliet in 1880 , and felt it a courtesy to send a copy of the score to Balakirev . Balakirev , however , had dropped out of the music scene in the early 1870s and Tchaikovsky had lost touch with him . He asked the publisher Bessel to forward a copy to Balakirev . A year later Balakirev replied . In the same letter that he thanked Tchaikovsky profusely for the score , Balakirev suggested " the programme for a symphony which you would handle wonderfully well " , a detailed plan for a symphony based on Lord Byron 's Manfred . Originally drafted by Stasov in 1868 for Hector Berlioz as a sequel to that composer 's Harold en <unk> , the program had since been in Balakirev 's care . 
 Tchaikovsky declined the project at first , saying the subject left him cold . Balakirev persisted . " You must , of course , make an effort " , Balakirev exhorted , " take a more self @-@ critical approach , don 't hurry things " . Tchaikovsky 's mind was changed two years later , in the Swiss Alps , while tending to his friend <unk> <unk> and after he had re @-@ read Manfred in the milieu in which the poem is set . Once he returned home , Tchaikovsky revised the draft Balakirev had made from Stasov 's program and began sketching the first movement . 
 The Manfred Symphony would cost Tchaikovsky more time , effort and soul @-@ searching than anything else he would write , even the Pathetique Symphony . It also became the longest , most complex work he had written up to that point , and though it owes an obvious debt to Berlioz due to its program , Tchaikovsky was still able to make the theme of Manfred his own . Near the end of seven months of intensive effort , in late September 1885 , he wrote Balakirev , " Never in my life , believe me , have I labored so long and hard , and felt so drained by my efforts . The Symphony is written in four movements , as per your program , although — forgive me — as much as I wanted to , I have not been able to keep all the keys and modulations you suggested ... It is of course dedicated to you " . 
 Once he had finished the symphony , Tchaikovsky was reluctant to further tolerate Balakirev 's interference , and severed all contact ; he told his publisher P. Jurgenson that he considered Balakirev a " madman " . Tchaikovsky and Balakirev exchanged only a few formal , not overly friendly letters after this breach . 
 = = Belyayev circle = = 
 In November 1887 , Tchaikovsky arrived in Saint Petersburg in time to hear several of the Russian Symphony Concerts , one of which included the first complete performance of the final version of his First Symphony and another the premiere of the revised version of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's Third Symphony . Before this visit he had spent much time keeping in touch with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and those around him . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , along with Alexander Glazunov , Anatol Lyadov and several other nationalistically @-@ minded composers and musicians , had formed a group called the Belyayev circle . This group was named after timber merchant Mitrofan Belyayev , an amateur musician who became an influential music patron and publisher after he had taken an interest in Glazunov 's work . During Tchaikovsky 's visit , he spent much time in the company of these men , and his somewhat fraught relationship with The Five would meld into a more harmonious one with the Belyayev circle . This relationship would last until his death in late 1893 . 
 As for The Five , the group had long since dispersed , Mussorgsky had died in 1881 and Borodin had followed in 1887 . Cui continued to write negative reviews of Tchaikovsky 's music but was seen by the composer as merely a critical irritant . Balakirev lived in isolation and was confined to the musical sidelines . Only Rimsky @-@ Korsakov remained fully active as a composer . 
 A side benefit of Tchaikovsky 's friendship with Glazunov , Lyadov and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov was an increased confidence in his own abilities as a composer , along with a willingness to let his musical works stand alongside those of his contemporaries . Tchaikovsky wrote to von Meck in January 1889 , after being once again well represented in Belyayev 's concerts , that he had " always tried to place myself outside all parties and to show in every way possible that I love and respect every honorable and gifted public figure in music , whatever his tendency " , and that he considered himself " flattered to appear on the concert platform " beside composers in the Belyayev circle . This was an acknowledgment of wholehearted readiness for his music to be heard with that of these composers , delivered in a tone of implicit confidence that there were no comparisons from which to fear . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The initial hostility of The Five against Tchaikovsky was mitigated by Tchaikovsky 's improved relationships , first with Balakirev and then with Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . The latter substantially embraced the cosmopolitan conservatory @-@ based approach , as distinct from pure Russian nationalism . The Five dispersed as a unit , but were replaced by the Belyayev circle of younger composers that grew around Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . This group , while writing in a nationalistic style pioneered by Rimsky @-@ Korsakov and Balakirev , was much more accommodating of Western compositional practices as personified by the music of Tchaikovsky . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wrote about this tendency : 
 At this time [ approximately 1892 ] there begins to be noticeable a considerable cooling off and even somewhat inimical attitude toward the memory of the " mighty kuchka " of Balakirev 's period . On the contrary a worship of Tchaikovsky and a tendency toward eclecticism grow even stronger . Nor could one help noticing the predilection ( that sprang up then in our circle ) for Italian @-@ French music of the time of wig and farthingale [ that is , the eighteenth century ] , music introduced by Tchaikovsky in his Queen of Spades and Iolanthe . By this time quite an accretion of new elements and young blood had accumulated in Belyayev 's circle . New times , new birds , new songs . 
 As a result of this influence plus their academic training from Rimsky @-@ Korsakov , especially in the cases of Anton Arensky and Glazunov , these composers combined the best compositional techniques of The Five and Tchaikovsky in their music . Often , however , composers in this group fell back on two sources — musical clichés and mannerisms handed down from The Five , and academic compositional techniques learned at the Conservatory . Also , the eclecticism about which Rimsky @-@ Korsakov wrote tended to overpower originality in many works , including those of Glazunov . Nevertheless , the Belyayev circle continued to influence the development of Russian music well into the 20th century . 
 = Ben Daniels = 
 Ben Daniels ( born 10 June 1964 ) is an English actor . Initially a celebrated stage actor , Daniels was nominated for Best Actor at the Evening Standard Awards for Best Supporting Actor in the Laurence Olivier Awards for Never the Sinner ( 1991 ) , 900 Oneonta ( 1994 ) , Best Actor in the <unk> Theatre Awards for Martin Yesterday ( 1998 ) , and won the Olivier award in 2001 for his performance in the Arthur Miller play All My Sons . 
 In 2008 , Daniels made his Broadway début in a revival of Les Liaisons Dangereuses , for which he was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play . In more recent years , Daniels has appeared on popular television series including Cutting It ( 2002 – 05 ) , The Virgin Queen ( 2005 ) , Law & Order : UK ( 2009 – 11 ) , The Paradise ( 2013 ) and House of Cards ( 2013 – 14 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Daniels was born in Nuneaton , Warwickshire . His father was an engineer at Rolls @-@ Royce and later a grocer , while his mother owned a children 's clothes shop . He has recalled : " I was quite a shy child , but quite disruptive as well . I was very sneaky and underhanded . " 
 = = Education = = 
 Daniels was educated at Manor Park School , a state comprehensive school in Nuneaton , near Coventry , in the English Midlands ( since closed ) . According to Daniels , drama lessons at O @-@ levels gave him a voice , and when he attended sixth form studies at Stratford College between 1980 and 1982 , doing A @-@ levels in theatre studies and English literature , he attended Royal Shakespeare Company performances . A fellow student recalled that Daniels , whom he knew as Dave , " was very serious about his work , and struck me as incredibly intelligent ... you got the sense his mind was working ; the cogs were ticking over " . Daniels subsequently trained at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art ( LAMDA ) for three years . 
 = = Career = = 
 One of Daniels ' earliest roles was as Justin Hayward , the lead singer of the Moody Blues , as a teenager in two of the band 's music videos , " Your Wildest Dreams " ( 1986 ) and " I Know You 're Out There Somewhere " ( 1988 ) . In 1992 , he made an appearance in the infamous plane crash episode " Cascade " of the television show Casualty , playing the co @-@ pilot of the doomed plane . He has taken on parts in many British television dramas , such as Robin in The Lost Language of Cranes ( 1991 ) , the Biblical character Jonathan in the 1997 Emmy @-@ nominated TV film David , the philandering Finn Bevan in Cutting It ( 2002 – 2005 ) , and Nicholas Brocklehurst in the BBC television miniseries The State Within ( 2006 ) . The latter role was notable for an unexpected same @-@ sex kiss between Daniels ' character and another person . In 2008 he appeared in Lark Rise to Candleford , a BBC production based on three semi @-@ autobiographical novels about the English countryside written by Flora Thompson . 
 Daniel has also played a number of real @-@ life characters , such as German State Secretary Dr. Josef Bühler in Conspiracy , a 2001 dramatisation of the Wannsee Conference at which the Final Solution was endorsed . He also played the English author and journalist Ian Fleming , creator of James Bond , in Ian Fleming : <unk> ( 2005 ) , as well as Sir Francis Walsingham in The Virgin Queen ( 2005 ) and English writer Saki in Who Killed Mrs De Ropp ? ( 2007 ) . In addition , he has made guest appearances in a number of British TV drama series , including Soldier Soldier ( 1992 ) , A Touch of Frost ( 1992 ) , Outside Edge ( 1994 ) , and Spooks ( 2005 ) . 
 Daniels may be most recognisable to American audiences for appearing in the 1996 gay film Beautiful Thing . Daniels portrayed Tony , boyfriend of Sandra , the protagonist Jamie 's mother . In an independent film directed by Lavinia Currier titled Passion in the Desert ( 1997 ) , Daniels played a French soldier named Augustin Robert . The film was nominated for a Golden Seashell award . Other feature films that Daniels has starred in are The Bridge ( 1992 ) , I Want You ( 1998 ) , Madeline ( 1998 ) , and Doom ( 2005 ) . He was offered roles in the 2000 releases The Patriot and Vertical Limit , but turned them down and stated that " the money was good , but it wasn 't for me " . On his Twitter account , Daniels confirms his brief appearance as a Resistance pilot in the upcoming Star Wars film Rogue One : A Star Wars Story . 
 Daniels has said that he loves acting on stage because " it 's tough and keeps you on your toes as an actor " . He appeared in All 's Well That Ends Well and As You Like It ( 1999 – 2000 ) , and played Mercutio in a 1994 TV adaptation of Romeo and Juliet . Other theatre credits include Waiting for Godot ( 1994 ) and 900 Oneonta ( 1994 ) , which earned him a nomination for Best Actor at the Evening Standard Awards . He also acted in Martin Yesterday ( 1998 ) , for which he was nominated as Best Actor in the Manchester Evening News Theatre Awards , Naked ( 1998 ) , Tales From Hollywood ( 2001 ) , Three Sisters ( 2003 ) , Iphigenia at Aulis ( 2004 ) , The God of Hell ( 2005 ) , and The Wild Duck ( 2005 – 2006 ) . In 2006 , Daniels appeared in Thérèse <unk> as Laurent , for which a reviewer labelled his performance " riveting " . 
 Daniels won the Best Supporting Actor award at the <unk> <unk> ' Choice Theatre Awards and the 25th Laurence Olivier Awards in 2001 for his performance in the Arthur Miller play All My Sons . He was first nominated for the latter award earlier in his career , in 1991 , for his performance as murderer Richard Loeb in the play Never the Sinner at the Playhouse Theatre . In 2008 , Daniels fulfilled a lifetime ambition when he made his Broadway début , headlining as the Vicomte de Valmont in a revival of Les Liaisons Dangereuses . The show opened on 1 May 2008 . Daniels was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play for his role . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Daniels is openly gay and lives in south London . He remarked : " Out ? I 've never been in . " He lives with actor Ian Gelder . They began seeing each other during a 1993 production of Joe Orton 's Entertaining Mr Sloane . Daniels was already sure of his sexuality in his teens , although he did not discuss the matter with his parents because they did not have a very close emotional relationship . He was " cautious about mentioning it when I left drama school , because AIDS was terrifying everyone and there was a huge homophobic backlash " . He decided to come out at the age of 24 , while appearing in an all @-@ star benefit performance of Martin Sherman 's Bent . 
 Daniels said in an interview : " Homophobia is still shockingly prevalent in film and TV . I know I 've lost work because of being gay , and it is always an issue . Even on a serious BBC Two drama , there will be some suit in some office going , " Hmmm , isn 't he a poof ? " I don 't consider myself politically gay , but whenever I catch a whiff of that now , I 'm on it like a ton of bricks . " In 2007 , Daniels was ranked number 79 in the annual Pink List of 100 influential gay and lesbian people in Britain published by The Independent on Sunday , down from number 47 in 2006 . 
 In his spare time , he is an amateur painter and a practitioner of Ashtanga yoga . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = Newton 's parakeet = 
 Newton 's parakeet or the Rodrigues parakeet ( Psittacula exsul ) is an extinct species of parrot that was endemic to the Mascarene island of Rodrigues in the western Indian Ocean . Several of its features diverged from related species , indicating long @-@ term isolation on Rodrigues and subsequent adaptation . The rose @-@ ringed parakeet of the same genus is a close relative and probable ancestor . Newton 's parakeet may itself have been ancestral to the endemic parakeets of nearby Mauritius and Réunion . 
 Around 40 centimetres ( 16 in ) long , Newton 's parakeet was roughly the size of a rose @-@ ringed parakeet . Its plumage was mostly greyish or slate blue in colour , which is unusual in Psittacula , a genus containing mostly green species . The male had stronger colours than the female and possessed a reddish instead of black beak , but details of a mature male 's appearance are uncertain ; only one male specimen is known , and it is believed to be immature . Mature males might have possessed red patches on the wing like the related Alexandrine parakeet . Both sexes had a black collar running from the chin to the nape , but this was clearer in the male . The legs were grey and the iris yellow . 17th @-@ century accounts indicate that some members of the species were green , which would suggest that there were both blue and green colour morphs , but there is no definitive explanation for these reports . Little is known about its behaviour in life , but it may have fed on the nuts of the bois d ’ olive tree , along with leaves . It was very tame , and was able to mimic speech . 
 Newton 's parakeet was first written about by the French Huguenot François Leguat in 1708 , and was only mentioned a few times by other writers afterwards . The specific name " exsul " is a reference to Leguat , who was exiled from France . Only two life drawings exist , both of a single specimen held in captivity in the 1770s . The first specimen known to science , a female , became the holotype when the species was described in 1872 . A male , the last specimen recorded , was collected in 1874 , and these two specimens are the only ones that exist today . It became scarce due to deforestation and perhaps hunting , but it is thought that it was finally wiped out by a series of cyclones and storms that hit Rodrigues in the late 19th century . There was unfounded speculation about the possible survival of the species as late as 1967 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Newton 's parakeet was first recorded by François Leguat in his 1708 memoir , A New Voyage to the East Indies . Leguat was the leader of a group of nine French Huguenot refugees who colonised Rodrigues between 1691 and 1693 after they were marooned there . Subsequent accounts are by Julien Tafforet , who was also marooned on the island in 1726 , and then by the French mathematician Alexandre Pingré , who travelled to Rodrigues to view the 1761 transit of Venus . 
 The first specimen known to science was a female collected by George Jenner , then the magistrate of Rodrigues , in 1871 . The specimen was preserved in alcohol and given to Edward Newton , a colonial administrator in Mauritius , who sent it to his brother , the British ornithologist Alfred Newton . Alfred Newton scientifically described the bird in 1872 and gave it the scientific name Palaeornis exsul . " <unk> " ( " exiled " ) refers to François Leguat , in that he was exiled from France when he gave the first description of the bird . Newton had tried to find a more descriptive name , perhaps based on colouration , but found it difficult . He refrained from publishing a figure of the female in his original description , though the journal Ibis had offered him the space . He instead wanted to wait until a male specimen could be procured , since he imagined it would be more attractive . The female , which is the holotype specimen of the species , is housed in the Cambridge University Museum as specimen UMZC 18 / Psi / 67 / h / 1 . 
 Alfred Newton requested further specimens , especially males , but in 1875 he finally published a plate of the female , lamenting that no male specimens could be found . Tafforet 's 1726 account had been rediscovered the previous year , and Alfred Newton noted that it confirmed his assumption that the male would turn out be much more colourful than the female . Newton 's collector , Henry H. Slater , had seen a live Newton 's parakeet the year before , but was not carrying a gun at the time . On 14 August 1874 , William <unk> shot a male specimen . It may have been the same specimen Slater had observed . It was subsequently sent to Edward Newton by William J. Caldwell . This is the paratype of the species , numbered UMZC 18 / Psi / 67 / h / 2 and housed in the Cambridge Museum . 
 Edward Newton noted that he had expected the male would be adorned with a red patch on the wing , but that the absence of this indicated it was immature . He still found it more beautiful than the female . These two specimens are the only preserved individuals of the species . The mandible and sternum were extracted from the female specimen , and subfossil remains have since been found in the Plaine Corail caverns on Rodrigues . The genus Palaeornis was later declared a junior synonym of Psittacula , and all species within the former were transferred to the latter . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Based on morphological features , the Alexandrine parakeet ( Psittacula eupatria ) has been proposed as the founder population for all Psittacula species on Indian Ocean islands , with new populations settling during the species 's southwards colonisation from its native South Asia . Features of that species gradually disappear in species further away from its range . Subfossil remains of Newton 's parakeet show that it differed from other Mascarene Psittacula species in some osteological features , but also had similarities , such as a reduced sternum , which suggests a close relationship . Skeletal features indicate an especially close relationship with the Alexandrine parakeet and the rose @-@ ringed parakeet ( Psittacula krameri ) , but the many derived features of Newton 's parakeet indicates it had long been isolated on Rodrigues . 
 Many endemic Mascarene birds , including the dodo , are descended from South Asian ancestors , and the English palaeontologist Julian Hume has proposed that this may also be the case for all parrots there . Sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene , so it was possible for species to colonise some of these less isolated islands . Although most extinct parrot species of the Mascarenes are poorly known , subfossil remains show that they shared common features such as enlarged heads and jaws , reduced pectoral bones , and robust leg bones . Hume has suggested that they all have a common origin in the radiation of the Psittaculini tribe , members of which are known as <unk> , basing this theory on morphological features and the fact that Psittacula parrots have managed to colonise many isolated islands in the Indian Ocean . The Psittaculini could have invaded the area several times , as many of the species were so specialised that they may have evolved significantly on hotspot islands before the Mascarenes emerged from the sea . Other members of the Psittacula genus from the Mascarenes include the extant echo parakeet ( Psittacula eques echo ) of Mauritius , as well as the extinct Réunion parakeet ( Psittacula eques eques ) , and Mascarene grey parakeet ( Psittacula bensoni ) of both Mauritius and Réunion . 
 A 2011 genetic study of parrot phylogeny was unable to include Newton 's parakeet , as no viable DNA could be extracted . The same paper found that the Mascarene parrot ( Mascarinus mascarinus ) of nearby Réunion was most closely related to the lesser vasa parrot from Madagascar and nearby islands , and therefore unrelated to the Psittacula parrots , undermining the theory of their common origin . A 2015 genetic study by Jackson et al. included viable DNA from the toe @-@ pad of the female Newton 's parakeet specimen . It was found to group within a clade of rose @-@ ringed parakeet subspecies ( from Asia and Africa ) , which it had diverged from 3 @.@ 82 million years ago . Furthermore , Newton 's parakeet appeared to be ancestral to the parakeets of Mauritius and Réunion . The cladogram accompanying the study is shown below : 
 = = Description = = 
 Newton 's parakeet was about 40 cm ( 16 in ) long - roughly the size of the rose @-@ ringed parakeet . The wing of the male specimen was 198 mm ( 7 @.@ 8 in ) , the tail 206 mm ( 8 @.@ 1 in ) , the culmen 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) , and the tarsus was 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) . The wing of the female specimen was 191 mm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) , the tail 210 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) , the culmen 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) , and the tarsus was 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) . The male specimen was greyish blue ( also described as " <unk> blue " ) tinged with green , and darker above . The head was bluer , with a dark line running from the eye to the cere . It had a broad black collar running from the chin to the nape , where it became gradually narrower . The underside of the tail was greyish , the upper beak was dark reddish brown , and the mandible was black . The legs were grey and the iris yellow . The female was similar , but had a greyer head and a black beak . The black collar was not so prominent as that of the male , and did not extend to the back of the neck . The general appearance of Newton 's parakeet was similar to the extant Psittacula species , including the black collar , but the bluish grey colouration set it apart from other members of its genus , which are mostly green . 
 Philibert Commerson received a live specimen on Mauritius in the 1770s and described it as " greyish blue " . Paul Jossigny made two illustrations of this specimen , the only known depictions of Newton 's parakeet in life , unpublished until 2007 . Though both existing specimens are blue , some early accounts from Rodrigues have caused confusion over the colouration of the plumage . One of these is Leguat 's following statement : 
 There are abundance of green and blew <unk> , they are of a <unk> and equal bigness ; when they are young , their Flesh is as good as young Pigeons . 
 If the green parrots Leguat referred to were not the Rodrigues parrot ( Necropsittacus rodericanus ) , they may perhaps have been a green colour morph of Newton 's parakeet , as Julian Hume has suggested . As Alfred Newton observed in his original description , some feathers of the female specimen display both blue and green tinges , depending on the light . This may explain some of the discrepancies . The green parrots mentioned could also instead have been storm @-@ blown members of Psittacula species from other islands , that survived on Rodrigues for a short time . 
 The two existing specimens were originally preserved in alcohol , but though this can discolour specimens , it is not probable that it could turn green to blue . Hume and Hein van Grouw have also suggested that due to an inheritable mutation , some Newton 's parakeets may have lacked psittacin , a pigment that together with <unk> produces green colouration in parrot feathers . Complete lack of psittacin produces blue colouration , whereas reduced psittacin can produce a colour between green and blue called <unk> , which corresponds to the colour of the two preserved Newton 's parakeet specimens . 
 Julien Tafforet also described what appears to be green Newton 's parakeets in his 1726 Relation de l 'Île Rodrigue , but the issue of colouration was further complicated : 
 The parrots are of three kinds , and in quantity ... The second species [ mature male Newton 's parakeet ? ] is slightly smaller and more beautiful , because they have their plumage green like the preceding [ Rodrigues Parrot ] , a little more blue , and above the wings a little red as well as their beak . The third species [ Newton 's parakeet ] is small and altogether green , and the beak black . 
 It has been proposed that the last two types mentioned were male and female Newton 's parakeets , and that the differences between them were due to sexual dimorphism . Alexandre Pingré also mentioned green birds , perhaps with some red colours , but his account is partially unintelligible and therefore ambiguous . A red shoulder patch is also present on the related Alexandrine parakeet . None of the existing Newton 's parakeet specimens have red patches . The single @-@ known male specimen may have been immature , judged on the colour of its beak , and this may also explain the absence of the red patch . When Psittacula are bred by aviculturalists , blue is easily produced from green ; the production of blue may suppress red colouration , so blue morphs may have lacked the red patch . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Almost nothing is known about the behaviour of Newton 's parakeet , but it is probable that it was similar to that of other members of its genus . Leguat mentioned that the parrots of the island mainly ate the nuts of the bois d ’ olive tree ( <unk> orientale ) . It may have fed on leaves as the related echo parakeet does . The fact that Newton 's parakeet survived long after Rodrigues had been heavily deforested shows that its ecology was less vulnerable than that of , for example , the Rodrigues parrot . 
 Leguat and his men were hesitant to hunt the parrots because they were so tame and easy to catch . Leguat 's group took a parrot as a pet and were able to teach it to speak : 
 Hunting and Fishing were so easie to us , that it took away from the Pleasure . We often delighted ourselves in teaching the Parrots to speak , there being vast numbers of them . We carried one to Maurice Isle [ Mauritius ] , which talk ’ d French and Flemish . 
 As the kind of parrot mentioned here by Leguat is not specified , some sources attribute it to Newton 's parakeet , and others to the Rodrigues parrot . 
 Many other species endemic to Rodrigues became extinct after humans arrived , and the island 's ecosystem remains heavily damaged . Forests covered the entire island before humans arrived , but very little forestation can be seen today . Newton 's parakeet lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the Rodrigues solitaire , the Rodrigues parrot , the Rodrigues rail , the Rodrigues starling , the Rodrigues owl , the Rodrigues night heron , and the Rodrigues pigeon . Extinct reptiles include the domed Rodrigues giant tortoise , the saddle @-@ backed Rodrigues giant tortoise , and the Rodrigues day gecko . 
 The authors of the 2015 study which resolved the phylogenetic placement of the Mascarene island parakeets suggested that the echo parakeet of Mauritius would be a suitable ecological replacement for the Réunion parakeet and Newton 's parakeet , due to their close evolutionary relationship . The echo parakeet was itself close to extinction in the 1980s , numbering only twenty individuals , but has since recovered , so introducing it to the nearby islands could also help secure the survival of this species . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Of the roughly eight parrot species endemic to the Mascarenes , only the echo parakeet has survived . The others were likely all made extinct by a combination of excessive hunting and deforestation . Leguat stated that Newton 's parakeet was abundant during his stay . It was still common when Tafforet visited in 1726 , but when Alexandre Pingré mentioned it in 1761 , he noted that the bird had become scarce . It was still present on southern islets off Rodrigues ( Isle Gombrani ) , along with the Rodrigues parrot . After this point , much of Rodrigues was severely deforested and used for livestock . 
 According to early accounts praising its flavour , it appears Newton 's parakeet was commonly eaten by visitors . Several individuals would likely be needed to provide a single meal , owing to the bird 's small size . Pingré stated : 
 The perruche [ Newton 's parakeet ] seemed to me much more delicate [ than the flying @-@ fox ] . I would not have missed any game from France if this one had been commoner in Rodrigues ; but it begins to become rare . There are even fewer perroquets [ Rodrigues parrots ] , although there were once a big enough quantity according to François Leguat ; indeed a little islet south of Rodrigues still retains the name Isle of Parrots [ Isle Pierrot ] . 
 According to government surveyor Thomas Corby , Newton 's parakeet may still have been fairly common in 1843 . Henry H. Slater reported that he saw a single specimen in south western Rodrigues during his three @-@ month stay to observe the 1874 Transit of Venus , and assistant colonial secretary William J. Caldwell saw several specimens in 1875 during his own three @-@ month visit . The male that he received in 1875 and gave to Newton is the last recorded member of the species . A series of cyclones struck the following year and may have devastated the remaining population . Further severe storms hit in 1878 and 1886 , and since few forested areas were left by this time , there was little cover to protect any remaining birds . The male could therefore have been the last of the species alive . 
 There were unfounded rumours of its continued existence until the beginning of the 20th century . In 1967 James Greenway stated that an extremely small population might still survive on small offshore islets , since this is often the last refuge of endangered birds . Hume countered that these islets were probably too small to sustain a population . 
 = Hush ( Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) = 
 " Hush " is the tenth episode in the fourth season of the supernatural drama television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer ( 1997 – 2003 ) . It was written and directed by series creator Joss Whedon and originally aired in the United States on December 14 , 1999 on The WB Television Network . After reading critical response to the series in which the dialogue was praised as the most successful aspect of the show , Whedon set out to write an episode almost completely devoid of speech . Only about 17 minutes of dialogue is presented in the entire 44 minutes of " Hush " . 
 In " Hush " , a group of fairy tale ghouls named " The Gentlemen " come to town and steal everyone 's voices , leaving them unable to scream when The Gentlemen cut out their hearts . Buffy and her friends must communicate with one another silently as they try to discover why no one can speak and find whoever is murdering the townspeople . They must also find ways to express their feelings about each other and keep some semblance of control as the town descends into chaos . 
 The episode was highly praised when it aired and was the only episode in the entire series to be nominated for an Emmy Award in Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series ; it also received a nomination for Outstanding Cinematography for a Single Camera Series ( Michael Gershman ) . " Hush " addresses the limits and assets of language and communication and the disruption to society when communication breaks down . The Gentlemen are often counted as some of the series ' most frightening villains , and the episode is frequently included on lists of the best of Buffy the Vampire Slayer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a college lecture where Dr. Maggie Walsh is discussing the difference between language and communication , Buffy has a dream in which Riley kisses her . They are interrupted by a young girl holding a distinctive box , singing a cryptic rhyme about " The Gentlemen " . Riley and Buffy speak after class and they almost kiss , but are unable to stop talking . They leave when it becomes awkward . Buffy calls Giles to tell him of her dream and the details of the little girl 's rhyme . 
 At Giles ' apartment Xander and Anya argue , as Anya is trying to get Xander to tell her what she means to him . He is unable to answer her . Willow attends a meeting of the campus Wicca group , hoping to meet others who share her interest in studying witchcraft , but is disappointed when they only talk about bake sales . Willow raises the subject of spells but is chastised for pandering to the stereotype about witches performing magic . A shy woman in the group , Tara Maclay , starts to speak up to support Willow 's suggestion , but falls silent when the attention turns to her . 
 That night , as Sunnydale sleeps , white wisps float from each person 's mouth to a belfry , where they settle in the box from Buffy 's dream as ghoulish skeletal figures , with metal @-@ toothed grins and impeccable black suits , look on . In the morning , Buffy and Willow discover they are unable to speak and become visibly distressed ; they soon discover that everybody is unable to speak . The group gathers at Giles ' where they see that the news is reporting that Sunnydale is suffering from an epidemic of laryngitis . Buffy and Riley , each concerned that chaos will ensue , find each other attempting to keep order on the streets . For the first time , Buffy sees Riley in his paramilitary role as an agent of The Initiative ; he in turn is unaware that she is the Slayer . They exchange a look and then their first kiss , before parting to continue their efforts . 
 The next night , the ghouls leave the belfry and float into town accompanied by their straitjacketed , deformed minions . They knock on the door of a student . When he opens it , aroused from sleeping , they hold him down and carve out his heart while he tries in vain to scream . At Giles ' apartment his visiting girlfriend , Olivia , is frightened by one of The Gentlemen outside Giles ' window . The following morning in a campus classroom , Giles uses a series of overhead transparencies to explain to the others that The Gentlemen steal the townspeople 's voices so no one can scream as they gather the hearts they need , and that folklore indicates that they have been vanquished before when a princess screamed : the only thing that will kill them is a live human voice . 
 That evening , Anya falls asleep on Giles ' sofa while Spike takes a <unk> of blood from the refrigerator . Xander enters Giles ' apartment as Spike , his mouth wet with blood , bends down to pick up something that he dropped in front of the sofa where Anya sleeps . <unk> that Spike bit and drank from Anya , Xander pummels him ferociously until Anya wakes and stops him ; excited that he fought to defend her , Anya gestures that they go have sex . 
 On her own Tara finds a spell to help the town get its voices back , and goes out to show it to Willow . On the way to Willow 's dorm she trips , turns around and sees The Gentlemen floating toward her . In Willow 's dorm she frantically knocks on doors which no one will open ; The Gentlemen steadily pursue her . Willow hears Tara 's panicked knocking down the hall and exits her room as Tara sprints into her , sending them both tumbling . They lock themselves into a laundry room and try to barricade the door with a vending machine , but it is too heavy for them to move . Willow , injured , sits and concentrates on moving the machine with telekinesis ; she fails , but Tara sees what she is doing . They clasp hands and the machine moves swiftly across the room , blocking the door . 
 On patrol , Riley notices shadows in the belfry and goes to investigate . Buffy finds two of The Gentlemen 's minions , kills one and runs after the other . Riley fights his way into the belfry and while he 's embattled , Buffy crashes through a window , fighting . He turns to attack and finds himself face to face with Buffy . She fights while he stares , unmoving . When a minion pins her down she sees and recognizes the box from her dream and <unk> wildly for Riley to destroy it . When he does so , the stolen voices escape . Buffy screams until the heads of The Gentlemen and their minions explode . 
 The next day , Tara tells Willow she is special and has significant power . Riley comes to visit Buffy in her dorm room and they sit facing each other , saying nothing . 
 = = Production and writing = = 
 Joss Whedon 's impetus to create " Hush " was his reaction to hearing that the primary reason behind Buffy 's success was the dialogue . He felt that he was stagnating as a director , turning into a " hack " by making formulaic episodes . Whedon tended to concentrate so much on the visual aspects of the series ' production that he was chastised by Fox executives in earlier seasons . Thus , writing and producing " Hush " depended almost solely on visuals and not on dialogue , a prospect that Whedon found terrifying , worried that viewers would find the episode boring . Much like the fourth season finale " Restless " — which consisted almost entirely of dream sequences — and the sixth season musical " Once More , with Feeling " , Whedon was certain he would fail at attempting to present the show in such a novel way . Initially , this was to be the episode where Riley and Buffy have sex , and Whedon took comfort in that plan because he knew people would not mind the silence , but ultimately he decided it was too early for the characters to sleep together , and he scrapped the idea . 
 The Gentlemen , called the " creepiest villains we 've ever done " by series writer Doug Petrie , were inspired by a nightmare Whedon had as a child , specifically one in which he was in bed and approached by a floating monster . Whedon fashioned The Gentlemen as something from a Brothers Grimm fairy tale , intending them to be frightening to children — monsters who carve out people 's hearts , smiling as they do so . Nosferatu , Pinhead from Hellraiser , and Mr. Burns from The Simpsons all served as physical models for The Gentlemen . <unk> Victorian in costume and demeanor , Whedon found their politeness and grace especially unsettling . Their metallic teeth were inspired by the intersection of Victorian culture with the height of the Industrial age , an era that Whedon considers " classically creepy " . For Buffy studies scholar Rhonda Wilcox , The Gentlemen and their straitjacket @-@ wearing minions , who clumsily flap , gyrate , and crouch as they move , are representative of class disparity and patriarchy : The Gentlemen , with their Victorian suits , move effortlessly to accomplish what they set out to do while their minions , whom Whedon called " footmen " , do the " dirty work " . 
 Doug Jones and the other actors who played The Gentlemen had previous experience performing as monsters and were professional mimes as well . This gave them an elegant grace , especially in their hand movements . Their floating effect was accomplished by suspending them from cranes with wires ( digitally removed in post @-@ production ) , or by pulling them on dollies . The cast found the actors in make @-@ up and costume to be terrifying in broad daylight , and Whedon was so impressed with the physical movements of The Gentlemen that he admitted on the DVD commentary that his mocking of mimes in general " went down about 40 % " after the episode was filmed . 
 As newcomers to the Scooby Gang , Tara Maclay and Giles ' girlfriend Olivia ( <unk> <unk> ) are inexperienced with monsters , and were brought in to express " real childlike terror " . Willow had , after three seasons , grown considerably more confident , having found her intellectual and emotional niche at college , and therefore was no longer evincing the terror she once had ; Tara , shy , unsure of herself , and unaccustomed to such experiences , served to fill the gap that Willow 's maturing had created . According to Buffy essayist Patrick Shade , Tara 's and Olivia 's fear " heighten ( s ) our sense of vulnerability and so make these scenes more frightening " . Joss Whedon has said that one of his favorite shots in the episode is of Olivia 's frightened reaction to a Gentlemen floating by her window , leering in at her . 
 Tara became a regularly recurring character throughout the fourth , fifth and sixth seasons , eventually becoming Willow 's girlfriend in what would be the first long @-@ term lesbian relationship in U.S. television . The writers decided to replace Seth Green , who played Oz , Willow 's lycanthropic boyfriend , after he announced that he would be leaving early in the fourth season . They were unaware at the time that the relationship between Willow and Tara would become romantic , but Benson 's performance and demeanor " made up our minds for us " , according to Whedon . The writers wanted to make the scene in which Tara and Willow move the vending machine by working together " sensual and powerful " , and " a very empowering statement about love ; that two people together can accomplish more than when they 're alone " . Whedon considers the scene one of the " most romantic images we 've put on film " in the course of the series . Benson and Hannigan 's chemistry was impressive enough that two episodes into Tara and Willow 's friendship Whedon took the actors aside and informed them the relationship would be turning romantic . 
 The episode is a tribute to the silent films that were played in theaters with musical accompaniment , and 27 minutes of it are entirely dialogue @-@ free . Several types of music are used to express what is not being said ; music acts as the narrator . During Giles ' overhead presentation he plays a recorded version of Camille Saint @-@ Saëns ' Danse Macabre . Buffy and Riley 's love theme is presented for the first time when they kiss in this episode . This composition by Christophe Beck — who composed scores for Buffy regularly — pleased Joss Whedon more than the Buffy and Angel love theme . He considered the Buffy @-@ Riley theme more adult , but a bit more strange and blue than the Buffy @-@ Angel theme : a prediction of where the relationship between Buffy and Riley would go . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Language = = = 
 " Hush " explores issues relating to the limits and benefits of language and communication . During the first act of the episode , the characters are presented as being overwhelmed by language that is misused , used as white noise , and employed as a means of avoiding truth . Many of the conversations between characters , even those that are seemingly insignificant to the episode 's plot or to the show 's overall history , deal in some way with various aspects or forms of communication . Whedon stated that he was unaware of how " inevitably coherent " this theme was until after the script was completed . Buffy and Riley are unable to act upon their attraction because they cannot stop babbling , primarily to keep their true identities concealed from each other , but also to avoid becoming closer emotionally . Xander is unable or unwilling to express what Anya means to him , and Anya , still new at interacting with humans , uses blunt , often rude language that distances herself from all the other characters . Giles desperately wants the others to stop talking . Willow considers the women in the Wicca group to be nonsensical , later complaining to Buffy " Talk , all talk . Blah blah Gaia . Blah blah moon , menstrual lifeforce power <unk> . You know after a couple sessions I was hoping we would get into something real , but ... " These pseudo conversations are what Buffy essayists Alice Jenkins and Susan Stuart refer to as " <unk> acts " : language that is formed to have meaning but does not engage the listener . 
 When finally faced with the loss of speech , the characters readily express what they feel . Buffy and Riley , after a series of eyebrow movements and simply mouthed questions , are able to kiss spontaneously . Xander 's actions are very clearly directed toward protecting Anya and punishing Spike for harming her , and likewise , within a matter of moments Anya 's doubts about how Xander feels about her have disappeared and she becomes instantly affectionate towards him again . Tara , who was overcome with shyness while speaking during the Wicca meeting , easily expresses courage when touching Willow , and Willow realizes she has finally found someone who understands and shares what she is seeking . 
 Without speech , the Scoobies resort to gestures or writing . Humorous misperceptions arise from this gesturing when , for example , Buffy mimes driving in a stake — as though killing a vampire — too close to her pelvis , causing the Scoobies to think she is suggesting masturbating to rid the town of The Gentlemen . In the belfry , while Buffy and Riley are fighting The Gentlemen , Buffy indicates that Riley should smash the box from her dream . He misunderstands and breaks a jar beside it , looks up and grins , awaiting Buffy 's approval . The clumsiness of the characters ' gesturing is in direct contrast to the grace of The Gentlemen , who communicate easily through gestures and other visual signals . Their communication is simple and direct ; nods , head tilts , and hand movements , achieve exactly what they want it to . The Scoobies , however , are confused and accomplish the opposite of what they intend . When they are rendered silent they are also rendered useless , unsure of how to fight The Gentlemen . According to two Buffy essayists , part of the horror stemming from the arrival of The Gentlemen is the silence that makes the people of Sunnydale helpless , easy victims . 
 Jenkins and Stuart assert that through the loss of speech , the communication in " Hush " is transformed from the senseless <unk> to the <unk> : acts upon which ideas are conveyed into instant meaning and action . The scream uttered by Buffy to destroy The Gentlemen has severe implications for them although it has no real meaning . Even Tara 's writing down Willow 's room number before going to her dorm communicates that she has been thinking of Willow and wishes to find her . This act confirms to both Tara and the audience that she is interested in Willow . 
 = = = Community = = = 
 Although Sunnydale has long been familiar with demons and monsters who have inhabited the town and fed off its residents , in this episode the conventions by which societal functions are so disrupted by the unexplained silence that significant chaos results , enough to warrant both Riley and Buffy going on patrol to keep order . Buffy and Willow walk down a familiar street , arm @-@ in @-@ arm and easily startled , and see a bank closed and patrons running into a liquor store that is obviously open . The breakdown of order also causes sudden religious fervor ; a group of people have gathered on the street to read the Bible ( Revelation 15 : 1 is written on a signboard — an allusion to the seven angels with seven plagues as there are seven Gentlemen , according to author Nikki Stafford ) . Opportunistic capitalist fervor results in a man selling overpriced dry erase boards . Community , notes Patrick Shade ( citing sociologist George Herbert Mead ) , consists of institutions such as language , religion , and economics . When one institution disappears , Sunnydale residents begin to depend more heavily on the others . Mostly , however , individuals are isolated from one another during the silence . Even the Scoobies find their bonds shaken , as they are unable to use the witty banter that has marked them as a group thus far . ( This awkwardness extended even to the actors : the first silent scene the entire cast attempted was the Scoobies gathering in Giles ' apartment following the discovery that all of Sunnydale 's denizens had lost their voices . It took several rehearsals as the scene came out mistimed , with all of the actors having trouble playing off one another without the use of verbal cues , or all <unk> over one another . ) Without a common language to fall back upon the Scoobies are forced to depend on their shared history to help them recover well enough to be able to take action . 
 The resolution to this isolation and ineffectiveness is speaking out : restoring the voices of the people of Sunnydale . Shade states that this facet of the episode gives it a political overtone . Noel Murray from The A.V. Club writes that the silence imposed by The Gentlemen is a metaphor for how evil spreads : " When dissent is stifled , or people fail to tell the truth , or when we ’ re just distracted by other concerns , things can get out of hand . " Authority figures in the series , such as the school principal , the mayor 's office , and the Sunnydale Police Department , repeatedly either abet the town 's endemic evil or choose not to hear about it . During " Hush " , at Giles ' apartment the Scoobies listen to a newscaster reporting that authorities in the town attribute the silence to a flu vaccine gone awry , causing mass laryngitis . Wilcox writes , " [ H ] ow many times will we see those in power maintain such a silence while evil proceeds ? It is not surprising that [ The Gentlemen 's ] attendants wear <unk> ; their garb suggests the insanity of such behavior — the pretense of civilized politeness while killing is accepted is a matter of course . " 
 = = = Fairy tales = = = 
 Two other episodes in the Buffy canon are also based on , or have elements of , fairy tales : " Killed by Death " , where only sick children can see a demon who sucks away their lives , and " Gingerbread " , where a demon takes on the forms of Hansel and Gretel to create a moral panic in Sunnydale . " Hush " is often compared to these episodes because they contain similar elements . Whedon intended The Gentlemen to be Brothers Grimm @-@ like monsters , with Giles playing the role of the wise man , Buffy the princess , and Tara the " little girl wandering through the woods " . In this incarnation , however , Buffy is a swashbuckling princess whose scream saves the town . Instead of being the damsel in distress she is the hero , breaking through a boarded @-@ up window in the belfry , then grabbing a rope and swinging across the room to kill one of The Gentlemen 's footmen by smashing her feet into his chest . 
 In many Buffy episodes , understanding why evil has appeared is important in knowing how to fight it , but the reasons for The Gentlemen 's arrival and their need to take seven human hearts are never made explicit ; they are simply there . According to Giles ' overhead transparencies , they can appear in any town . Several Buffy scholars assert that a sexual element similar to what is presented in classic fairy tales is evident in " Hush " . Buffy often has prophetic dreams , and it is in a dream that she first sees one of The Gentlemen ; she sees a flash of his face just as Riley touches her shoulder . Buffy has only been sexually intimate twice before : with the vampire Angel , whose lovemaking cost him his soul , and with the womanizing Parker Abrams . Riley is notably different from both and Buffy 's anxiety about becoming intimate with him , according to scholars , either calls The Gentlemen to Sunnydale or is represented by them . The Gentlemen murder by cutting chests open and removing hearts , penetrative acts . In Buffy 's dream Riley says , " If I kiss you , it 'll make the sun go down " and when he does so , it instantly becomes night , as if Buffy has crossed over a threshold . Riley 's kiss creates physical and emotional intimacy , but initiates mental , intuitive knowledge as well : in this episode Buffy learns of Riley 's secret role as a member of The Initiative . Threshold imagery is again used when Tara and Willow block the door with their combined efforts , shutting The Gentlemen out . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When the episode was originally broadcast in the United States on December 14 , 1999 , it received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 1 and a share of 7 , meaning that roughly 4 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 7 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode placed fifth in its timeslot and 93rd among broadcast television for the week of December 13 – 19 , 2001 . It was the most watched program on WB that night , and the second most watched program that week , trailing 7th Heaven . 
 " Hush " was highly praised when it aired , not only for its riskiness in presenting viewers with extended silence , but for the frightening qualities of The Gentlemen . Robert Bianco from USA Today comments , " ( i ) n a medium in which producers tend to grow bored with their own creations , either trashing them or taking them in increasingly bizarre directions , Whedon continues to find new ways to make his fabulously entertaining series richer and more compelling . With or without words , he 's a TV treasure . " In the Ottawa Citizen , Chuck Barney writes , " I wondered if this enormously entertaining cult favourite would lose some starch once our favourite little slayer moved on to college . But happily , it continues to win us over with the way it deftly bounces between the genres of comedy , horror and romance . The recent silent episode ( Hush ) was brilliant . " Alan Sepinwall in The Star @-@ Ledger calls it a " magnificently daring episode " , explaining " ( w ) hat makes it particularly brave is that , even when Buffy has been failing to click dramatically this year , the show has still been able to get by on the witty dialogue , which is all but absent after the first few scenes . Whedon finds ways to get around that , with several cast members — particularly Anthony Head as the scholarly Giles and Alyson Hannigan as nervous witch Willow — proving to be wonderfully expressive silent comedians . " 
 Likewise , in the New York Daily News , David Bianculli states that the episode is " a true tour de force , and another inventive triumph for this vastly underrated series " Brian <unk> in Australia 's Sunday Age agrees , and writes that " Hush " is " ( c ) lever , well @-@ written and brightly directed ... Buffy at its best . " Robert Hanks from The Independent in the UK writes that " Buffy the Vampire Slayer , in most weeks the funniest and cleverest programme on TV , reached new heights " with " Hush " . Noel Murray in The A.V. Club calls it an " episode unlike any other , with a <unk> score and some of the most genuinely disturbing imagery I 've yet seen on Buffy . " The episode was included among 13 of the scariest films or television shows by Salon.com , and justified by Stephanie Zacharek , who states it " scans just like one of those listless dreams in which you try to scream , and can 't . Everybody 's had ' em — and yet the way the eerie quiet of ' Hush ' sucks you in , you feel as if the experience is privately , and unequivocally , your own . " 
 " Hush " was the only episode of the entire Buffy series to be nominated for an Emmy Award in the Writing in a Drama Series category . It also received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination . Following the series finale in 2003 , " Hush " continued to receive praise . Lisa Rosen in the Los Angeles Times states that the episode is " one of TV 's most terrifying hours " . Smashing Magazine counted " Hush " as one of the top ten television episodes that inspire creativity . Keith McDuffee of TV Squad named it the best Buffy episode in the series , writing " ( i ) f someone who had never seen Buffy ( blasphemy ! ) asked me to show them just one episode of the show to get them hooked , this would be it " . TV.com named it as the fourth most frightening episode in television history . 
 Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post listed the scene in which Buffy mimes staking The Gentlemen and its humorous misunderstandings by the other characters among the top five best Buffy moments , especially praising Sarah Michelle Gellar 's ( Buffy ) comedic acting . Nikki Stafford , author of Bite Me ! The Unofficial Guide to Buffy the Vampire Slayer writes " Hush " is " mind @-@ blowing " and " one of the best hours of television ever " . For Buffy studies scholar Roz Kaveney , the primary reason " Hush " was successful was the acting strengths of the central cast . " Hush " is Alyson Hannigan 's ( Willow ) favorite episode of the Buffy series , and the one Nicholas Brendon ( Xander ) considers the most frightening . Series writer Jane Espenson stated the episode " redefined what an episode of television could do " . 
 = SM UB @-@ 14 = 
 SM UB @-@ 14 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The submarine was also known by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy designation of SM U @-@ 26 . 
 UB @-@ 14 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in November . UB @-@ 14 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 tonnes ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 14 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to the Austrian port Pola for reassembly . She was launched and commissioned in March 1915 as SM UB @-@ 14 in the German Imperial Navy under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Heino von Heimburg . 
 Because Germany and Italy were not yet at war when UB @-@ 14 entered service , she was transferred in name only to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The submarine retained her German captain and crew , and remained under German command as a part of the Kaiserliche Marine 's Pola Flotilla . During her first patrol in the Adriatic , UB @-@ 14 torpedoed and sank the Italian armored cruiser Amalfi . While traveling to Constantinople ( present @-@ day Istanbul ) to join the Constantinople Flotilla , UB @-@ 14 attacked two British troopships , sinking Royal Edward with heavy loss of life , and seriously damaging Southland . All three of UB @-@ 14 's first victims were among the largest ships attacked by U @-@ boats during the war . 
 Although UB @-@ 14 sank the British submarine E20 in the Sea of Marmara in November 1915 , she spent most of the rest of her career patrolling in the Black Sea . The U @-@ boat had only limited success there , sinking only three ships through the end of the war . After the war ended , the submarine was disarmed at Sevastopol and surrendered at Malta in November 1918 . UB @-@ 14 was broken up in 1920 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . 
 UB @-@ 14 was part of the initial allotment of seven submarines — numbered UB @-@ 9 to UB @-@ 15 — ordered on 15 October from AG Weser of Bremen , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . UB @-@ 14 was laid down by Weser in Bremen on 9 November . As built , UB @-@ 14 was 27 @.@ 88 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Körting 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 7 @.@ 45 knots ( 13 @.@ 80 km / h ; 8 @.@ 57 mph ) , surfaced , and 6 @.@ 24 knots ( 11 @.@ 56 km / h ; 7 @.@ 18 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 14 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 14 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 14 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 = = Launching and commissioning = = 
 Most of the UB I boats were shipped to their port of operations by rail , where they were assembled , launched , tested , and commissioned . Information on UB @-@ 14 suggests that she may not have followed that pattern as closely as most other boats . According to several sources , UB @-@ 14 was launched on 23 March 1915 , and commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 14 on 25 March under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Heino von Heimburg a 25 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . Those same sources are silent on UB @-@ 14 's whereabouts at the time , but information on UB @-@ 14 ' later shipment and arrival in the Mediterranean suggest that her initial launch and commissioning may have occurred in Germany . 
 UB @-@ 14 was shipped by rail in June to the main Austrian naval base at Pola , with an arrival date on the 12th . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . German engineers and technicians that accompanied earlier UB I boats to Pola worked under the supervision of Kapitänleutnant Hans Adam , head of the U @-@ boat special command ( German : Sonderkommando ) . Typically , the UB I assembly process took about two to three weeks . 
 While UB @-@ 14 made her way to Austria @-@ Hungary , von Heimburg and his German crew were assigned to UB @-@ 15 at Pola . The submarine was temporarily commissioned into the German Imperial Navy before a subsequent transfer to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as its U @-@ 11 . Von Heimburg and his German crew , with one Austrian officer aboard , gained valuable experience in UB @-@ 15 / U @-@ 11 , sinking the Italian submarine Medusa on that U @-@ boat 's first patrol . UB @-@ 15 / U @-@ 11 was handed over to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 16 June , and von Heimburg and his crew were transferred intact on 21 June to UB @-@ 14 , which was still a few days from completion . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Italy had declined to join its Triple Alliance partners — Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary — in declaring war against the Entente Powers , and opted to remain neutral . Pressure from the United Kingdom and France swayed Italy to sign the secret 1915 Treaty of London on 26 April , in which Italy promised to leave the Triple Alliance and declare war against its former allies within a month in return for territorial gains after the end of the war . Because Italy initially declared war only on Austria @-@ Hungary , Germany and Italy were not officially at war . As a consequence , German submarines operating in the Adriatic and the Mediterranean were all assigned Austrian numbers and flew the flag of Austria @-@ Hungary when making attacks on Italian vessels ; UB @-@ 14 was assigned the designation of U @-@ 26 and entered onto the rolls of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , despite the fact that she remained completely under German control . According to historian Lawrence Sondhaus , this dual numbering system reflected the close submarine cooperation between the two countries and still makes it difficult to distinguish between submarines of the two navies . 
 On 1 July , UB @-@ 14 joined the Pola Flotilla ( German : Deutsche U @-@ Halbflotille Pola ) , and departed soon thereafter on her first patrol . On the night of 6 / 7 July , Italian armored cruisers that had recently been deployed at Venice undertook a " reconnaissance in force " off Pola in an attempt to discourage future Austrian sorties against the Italian coast . When the Italian ships retired in the early morning hours of the 7th , UB @-@ 14 was about 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) off Venice . At dawn , the armored cruiser Amalfi crossed paths with UB @-@ 14 and was torpedoed . Amalfi quickly began listing to port and sank within 30 minutes with the loss of 67 men . At 10 @,@ 118 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 958 long tons ) displacement , Amalfi was one of the largest ships sunk by U @-@ boats during the war . UB @-@ 14 escaped the scene without damage . 
 = = Aegean Sea = = 
 Enver Pasha and other Turkish leaders had been pleading with their German and Austrian allies to send submarines to the Dardanelles to help attack the British and French fleet pounding Turkish positions . As part of the German response , UB @-@ 14 was ordered to Constantinople ( present @-@ day Istanbul ) to join U @-@ 21 ; sister boats UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 ; and the UC I boats UC @-@ 14 and UC @-@ 15 in the Constantinople Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote der Mittelmeer division in Konstantinopel ) . Since her intermediate refueling stop at Bodrum was beyond her limited range , UB @-@ 14 departed Pola under tow from an Austrian destroyer on 15 July 1915 . UB @-@ 14 's engine and gyrocompass broke down while off Crete , leaving the boat dead in the water for a time , but temporary repairs by the crew enabled the boat to make Bodrum on the 24th . A repair crew from Constantinople was dispatched — having to travel by train and camel just to reach UB @-@ 14 — and the ship was ready to resume her journey on 13 August . 
 Shortly after departing Bodrum , UB @-@ 14 had just cleared the Greek island of Kos and was off the nearby island of Kandeloussa when von Heimburg sighted several potential victims . The first ship seen was the British hospital ship Soudan , headed to Alexandria from the Dardanelles . Von Heimburg , seeing the properly identified hospital ship , allowed Soudan to pass unmolested . The next ship was not so lucky , however . It was the unescorted Royal Edward , a Canadian ocean liner pressed into troopship duties . Royal Edward was headed in the opposite direction from Soudan : from Alexandria to the Dardanelles with reinforcements for the British 29th Infantry and a small group with the Royal Army Medical Corps , all of whom were destined for Gallipoli . Von Heimburg launched one of his two torpedoes from about a mile ( 2 km ) away and hit Royal Edward in the stern ; the ship sank stern @-@ first in six minutes , with a large loss of life . Soudan and several other ships were able to rescue nearly 700 men , but over 900 died . Royal Edward , at 11 @,@ 117 gross register tons ( GRT ) , was also among the largest ships hit by U @-@ boats during the war . While evading the rescue ships , which included two French destroyers , UB @-@ 14 's compass broke down again , forcing a return to Bodrum on the morning of the 15th . 
 After repairs were completed at Bodrum , UB @-@ 14 continued on her way with a passenger , Prince Heinrich XXXVII Reuss of <unk> ( of the Reuss Junior Line ) who needed passage to Constantinople . During the journey north , UB @-@ 14 came upon another fully loaded troopship near the island of <unk> , about 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) from Lemnos . At 09 : 51 on 2 September , von Heimburg launched a single torpedo at the British troopship Southland , which was carrying mostly Australian troops headed for Gallipoli . The torpedo scored a hit on the starboard bow of the liner , which immediately began to list in that direction . As the men boarded lifeboats to abandon ship , another torpedo narrowly missed the stricken ship . The British seaplane carrier Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree sped to the scene of the attack , and rescued nearly 700 men from the water . The hospital ship <unk> was also on the scene and rescued a sizable number . A group of about 40 volunteers stayed on board Southland to help the crew , and with some towing assistance from Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree , were able to beach the ship on Lemnos . In all , fewer than 40 men died in the attack ; among Southland 's survivors was James Martin , who , upon his death less than two months later , became the youngest Australian known to have died in the war . The stricken ship had received serious damage , but was later repaired and returned to service . As with UB @-@ 14 's first two targets , Southland was also the largest ships hit by U @-@ boats , giving von Heimburg and UB @-@ 14 three victims from the list of the largest in their first three attacks . 
 After the attack on Southland , UB @-@ 14 broke down again and put in at Chanak to await repairs . While there on 4 September , word came of the British submarine E7 entangled in Turkish antisubmarine nets off Nagara Point . Von Heimburg , Prince Heinrich , and UB @-@ 14 's cook , a man by the name of Herzig , set out in a rowboat to observe the Turkish attempts to destroy E7 . After several mines that formed part of the net had been detonated to no avail , von Heimburg and his group rowed out and repeatedly dropped a plumb line until it contacted metal . Then , von Heimburg dropped a Turkish sinker mine with a shortened fuse right on top of E7 . After the hand @-@ dropped mine detonated too close for the British submarine 's captain 's comfort , he ordered his boat surfaced , abandoned , and scuttled . Between shellfire from the Turkish shore batteries and E7 's scuttling charges , von Heimburg and company narrowly escaped harm . While most sources credit E7 's sinking to the Turkish efforts , author Robert Stern contends that von Heimburg and UB @-@ 14 deserve partial credit for the demise of E7 . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Black Sea = = 
 After UB @-@ 14 's repairs were completed , she continued on to Constantinople and , from there , began a patrol in the Black Sea on 3 October . During this patrol , von Heimburg torpedoed the 474 @-@ ton Russian steamer Katja about 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) northwest of Sevastopol on the 7th , and <unk> , a Belgian steamer expropriated by the Imperial Russian Navy , 24 nautical miles ( 44 km ; 28 mi ) south of Cape Chersonesos on the 8th . After her return to Constantinople on the 19th , UB @-@ 14 was prepared for another patrol in the Black Sea . Just before her scheduled departure , however , the U @-@ boat 's destination was changed from the Black Sea to the Sea of Marmara and von Heimburg and UB @-@ 14 headed south on 5 November . While UB @-@ 14 had been in port on 30 November , Turkish forces had captured the French submarine Turquoise before the submarine or any of the confidential papers on board could be destroyed . When Turquoise was caught , her commander had not signaled her predicament to anyone , so a scheduled rendezvous with the British submarine E20 — as far as anyone other than Turquoise or the Germans and Turks knew — was still on . UB @-@ 14 had been sent to keep the rendezvous , reportedly going so far as to radio messages in the latest British code . Upon arriving at the designated location , UB @-@ 14 surfaced and fired a torpedo at E20 from a distance of 500 metres ( 550 yd ) . Only when E20 's crew saw the torpedo did they realize something was amiss , but it was too late to avoid the weapon . The torpedo hit E20 's conning tower and sank the submarine with the loss of 21 men . UB @-@ 14 rescued nine men , including E20 's captain who , reportedly , had been brushing his teeth at the time of the attack . 
 In December , von Heimburg was replaced as UB @-@ 14 's commander by Kapitänleutnant Albrecht von <unk> , but in early February 1916 , von Heimburg resumed command . UB @-@ 14 's activities between November and May are not reported in sources , but Paul Halpern reports that UB @-@ 14 patrolled in the Black Sea off Trebizond from late May to early June , returning to Constantinople without success . 
 On 17 June , von Heimburg was recalled to Germany to command the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ commissioned UC @-@ 22 , and was replaced on UB @-@ 14 by Kapitänleutnant Kurt Schwarz , a first time U @-@ boat commander . Soon after Schwarz assumed command , UB @-@ 14 was in the Black Sea in support of a July sortie by the German battlecruiser Goeben and the light cruiser Breslau in the eastern Black Sea . Because the Russian fleet , headquartered at Sevastopol , might have an opportunity to cut off the German warships on the mission , UB @-@ 14 was sent on station off Sevastopol . When the Russian fleet did sortie , Schwarz attempted to torpedo the Imperatritsa Mariya , but was seen and driven off by Russian dreadnought 's screen of destroyers . 
 After Romania joined the war on the side of the Triple Entente in August and was quickly overrun by the Central Powers , the Russian efforts in the Black Sea in the second half of 1916 were focused in the west . Because German submarines never really accomplished all that much in the Black Sea , the February 1917 resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare led the Germans to temporarily abandon the Black Sea in lieu of the more target @-@ rich Mediterranean . UB @-@ 14 's whereabouts and activities during the latter half of 1916 and the first few months of 1917 are unreported in sources . 
 On 28 May 1917 , Oberleutnant zur See Ernst Ulrich replaced Schwarz , and , soon after , UB @-@ 14 sailed on the first German patrol of the year in the Black Sea . On 5 June , UB @-@ 14 sank the 155 @-@ ton Russian sailing vessel <unk> north of Poti ; <unk> was the last ship credited to UB @-@ 14 . Other than to note that Oberleutnant zur See Bodo <unk> succeeded Ulrich in March 1918 , there is no mention in sources of UB @-@ 14 's activities between June 1917 and November 1918 . 
 After the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic signed the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk with the Central Powers on 3 March 1918 , exiting the war , forces of the Central Powers surrounded and later seized the port of Sevastopol . UB @-@ 14 was at Sevastopol after the Germany signed the armistice treaty that ended all fighting on 11 November . UB @-@ 14 and the three other surviving Constantinople Flotilla boats were disarmed on 25 November . UB @-@ 14 was scuttled in the Black Sea off Sevastopol in the early months of 1919 . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 = Ryan Leaf = 
 Ryan David Leaf ( born May 15 , 1976 ) is a former American football player who was a quarterback in the National Football League ( NFL ) for four seasons . He played for the San Diego Chargers and the Dallas Cowboys between 1998 and 2001 , and also spent time with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the Seattle Seahawks . 
 Leaf had a successful college career for the Washington State Cougars of Washington State University , where he was a finalist for the Heisman Trophy after his junior year . He was selected as the second overall pick in the 1998 NFL Draft , but his career was short and interrupted by poor play , bad behavior , and injuries . He struggled to stay focused . An episode of NFL Top 10 ranked him as the No. 1 " draft bust " in NFL history . 
 After his NFL career ended , Leaf completed his degree at Washington State . He would later have legal troubles involving drugs beginning in 2010 , after a Texas judge sentenced him to 10 years ' probation . Two years later , Leaf pleaded guilty to felony burglary and drug possession in Montana . After a suspended sentence with a stint in drug rehabilitation , Leaf began serving a seven @-@ year sentence in state prison in December 2012 . In 2014 , Leaf was sentenced to five years in prison for breaking into a home in Montana to steal prescription drugs , which violated his Texas probation . He was released from prison on December 3 , 2014 . 
 = = College career = = 
 After leading Charles M. Russell High School in Great Falls , Montana to the 1992 Montana state title , he considered playing college football as a linebacker at the University of Miami . He chose to be a quarterback for the Washington State Cougars instead after head coach Mike Price , who had coached longtime New England Patriots starting quarterback Drew Bledsoe , called him on the phone while Leaf was watching the Rose Bowl , and told him " If you come here , we 're going there " even though Washington State had not reached the Rose Bowl since 1931 . Leaf told Sports Illustrated that he immediately knew he wanted to accept a scholarship and play for Price . 
 He played in 32 games for Washington State , starting 24 of them . In his junior year , he averaged 330 @.@ 6 yards passing per game and threw for a then Pacific @-@ 10 Conference ( Pac @-@ 10 ) record 33 touchdowns . He also led the Cougars to their first Pac @-@ 10 championship in school history . Despite his strong early showing in the 1998 Rose Bowl , Washington State was defeated 21 – 16 by the eventual Associated Press national champion Michigan Wolverines . 
 Leaf was a finalist in balloting for the Heisman Trophy that year , which is given annually to the " most outstanding " player in American college football voted in by media figures and former players . He finished third behind the winner , defensive back Charles Woodson of Michigan , and fellow quarterback Peyton Manning of Tennessee . He was named Pac @-@ 10 Offensive Player of the Year , was named first @-@ team All @-@ American by The Sporting News , and finished second in the nation in passer rating . The Rose Bowl helped make him a possible first overall selection in the NFL Draft , and Leaf decided to forgo his senior year at Washington State and enter the 1998 draft . 
 = = NFL career = = 
 = = = 1998 Draft = = = 
 Peyton Manning and Leaf were widely considered the two best players available in the 1998 draft , and scouts and analysts debated who should be selected first . Many favored Leaf 's stronger arm and greater potential , while others deemed Manning the more mature player and the safer pick . Most observers , however , believed that it would not greatly matter whether Manning or Leaf was drafted first because either would greatly benefit his team . 
 The Indianapolis Colts owned the first draft pick that year . Team scouts favored Leaf , but Colts president Bill Polian and coaching staff preferred Manning , especially after discovering during individual workouts that he could throw harder than Leaf . Manning also impressed the team during his interview , while Leaf missed his . Leaf 's draft prospect profile described the player as " self @-@ confident to the point where some people view him as being arrogant and almost obnoxious " . Leaf gained about 20 pounds between the end of his junior season and the NFL Combine in February , which Jerry Angelo , one of six experts Sports Illustrated consulted on the choice , described as " a [ negative ] signal " about his self @-@ discipline . All six believed that Manning was the better choice , but the magazine concluded " What does seem reasonably certain is that ... both Manning and Leaf should develop into at least good NFL starters " . 
 The San Diego Chargers needed a new quarterback after having scored the fewest touchdowns in the league in the previous season . To obtain the second draft pick , the team traded its third overall pick , a future first round pick , a second round pick , and three @-@ time Pro Bowler Eric Metcalf to the Arizona Cardinals , guaranteeing the Chargers the right to draft whichever of the two quarterbacks Indianapolis did not take first . Manning was drafted first by the Colts and Leaf second by the Chargers , who signed him to a four @-@ year contract worth $ 31 @.@ 25 million , including a guaranteed $ 11 @.@ 25 million signing bonus , the largest ever paid to a rookie at the time . Leaf said , " I 'm looking forward to a 15 @-@ year career , a couple of trips to the Super Bowl , and a parade through downtown San Diego . " The night after the draft , Leaf flew to Las Vegas , Nevada on the jet of Chargers owner Alex Spanos and partied all night ; the following day Leaf <unk> during his first news conference . 
 = = = San Diego Chargers ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1998 season = = = = 
 San Diego 's high hopes for Leaf were soon dashed , as his rookie season was marred by poor behavior . Before the season started , he skipped the final day of a symposium mandatory for all NFL draftees and was fined $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Leaf did well in the preseason and led the Chargers to victory in the first two regular @-@ season games . The Chargers won the season opener on September 6 , 1998 , 16 – 14 over the Buffalo Bills despite mistakes from Leaf such as fumbling his first snap and throwing two interceptions ; Buffalo penalties voided two would @-@ be interceptions from Leaf . In the game , Leaf 's 6 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Bryan Still that followed a 67 @-@ yard pass to Still gave San Diego a 10 – 0 lead . However , late in the game , San Diego fell behind 14 – 13 after a Leaf interception . Leaf completed 16 of 31 passes for 192 yards in the opener and 13 of 24 passes for 179 yards ( with 31 rushing yards in 7 carries ) in the second game , a 13 – 7 win over the Tennessee Oilers . In the third game of the season on September 20 , Leaf completed only one of 15 passes for four yards , threw two interceptions and fumbled four times ( losing three ) in a loss to the Kansas City Chiefs . The Thursday before that game , Leaf was hospitalized for a viral infection . Leaf later said that infected turf fibers entered his skin and lymph glands . 
 After Leaf threw four interceptions in the first half against the New York Giants in the Week 4 game ( September 28 ) , coach Kevin <unk> benched Leaf in favor of Craig <unk> . The following game on October 4 against the Indianapolis Colts matched Leaf against the number one 1998 draft pick Peyton Manning . Indianapolis won 17 – 12 , as both quarterbacks completed 12 of 23 passes with an interception each , but Leaf threw for 160 yards ( 23 more than Manning ) , and only Manning threw a touchdown . Manning was never sacked ; Leaf was sacked four times . Inside the final two minutes and San Diego down 14 – 6 , Leaf 's 56 @-@ yard pass to Charlie Jones set up a one @-@ yard <unk> Means touchdown run , but Leaf 's potential tying two @-@ point conversion pass to Webster Slaughter was incomplete . 
 <unk> replaced Leaf on November 8 after Leaf completed only 4 of 15 passes and became starter on a permanent basis afterwards . Leaf finished the season having played 10 games with 1 @,@ 289 passing yards , 45 @.@ 3 % completed passes , 2 touchdowns , and 15 interceptions , with an abysmally poor quarterback rating of 39 @.@ 0 . 
 Leaf related poorly to both the media and his teammates , whom he tended to blame for his poor play . In a locker @-@ room incident during Leaf 's rookie year , he was caught on camera screaming at San Diego Union Tribune reporter Jay Posner , and was physically restrained by Junior <unk> . He soon developed a reputation for a poor work ethic to the point of occasionally being found on the golf course while the other quarterbacks were studying film . After Leaf 's rookie season ended , Charger safety Rodney Harrison described it as " a nightmare you can 't even imagine , " adding : " If I had to go through another year like that , I 'd probably quit playing . " 
 = = = = 1999 season = = = = 
 Leaf missed his second season due to a shoulder injury suffered 20 minutes into the Chargers ' first training camp workout on July 23 , 1999 . Leaf had surgery to fix a labral tear in his throwing shoulder . During an August training camp , a fan heckled Leaf : " Hey , Ryan , you 're the worst draft choice in NFL history . You make Heath Shuler look like an All @-@ Star . " Leaf , accompanied by a coach and security guards , walked towards the fan and asked a question . The fan began walking closer to Leaf , and two coaches restrained Leaf , with another Chargers employee saying " No , don 't do it , Ryan . Don 't do it . " Leaf later explained the incident : " ... what I wanted to do was say , ' Hey , look , I 've grown up , I 'm calm about it , I would like to understand why you would say that about me . ' " 
 He was placed on injured reserve but made headlines in early November when he got into a shouting match with GM Bobby Beathard and one of the coaches , resulting in a fine , a suspension without pay and an apology by Leaf ( four weeks later ) . During his suspension , he was caught on video playing flag football at a San Diego park , a violation of his contract according to Charger management . 
 = = = = 2000 season = = = = 
 In the final game of the 2000 preseason , Leaf completed a pass to Trevor Gaylor to seal a 24 – 20 win over the Arizona Cardinals . After the game , he appeared on the cover of the September 4 , 2000 issue of Sports Illustrated along with headline " Back from the Brink " . The cover story characterized his comeback as " an ascent from pariah to possible standout pro passer " . He started the first two games of the 2000 season but completed less than half of his pass attempts and threw five interceptions but only one touchdown . In the season opener on September 4 , a 9 – 6 loss to the Oakland Raiders , Leaf completed 17 of 39 passes for 180 yards and threw three interceptions , including one on a 4th @-@ and @-@ inches play with 1 : 37 left and sealing the Raiders victory . After the game , Leaf 's left hand was swollen , and a late hit from Regan Upshaw gave Leaf a chin gash that required seven or eight stitches . The following game , a 28 – 27 loss to the New Orleans Saints , Leaf completed 12 of 24 passes for 134 yards and threw his first touchdown pass since his rookie season , a 20 @-@ yard pass to Curtis Conway ; however , Leaf threw two interceptions , including one that ended the Chargers ' final drive . 
 Coach Mike Riley started Moses Moreno for the Week 3 game , but Leaf took over after Moreno went down with a shoulder injury . Leaf injured his wrist when he threw an interception in the Week 4 game and next played in Week 11 . By October , Leaf speculated that the Chargers would release him after the season . Late that month , reports suggested that Leaf lied about a hand injury to get out of practice and play golf instead . 
 In the Week 11 game on November 12 against the Miami Dolphins , Leaf replaced Moreno mid @-@ game . Leaf threw an interception on his fourth snap , led a touchdown drive in the Chargers ' next series , and left the game with nearly a minute to go after straining a hamstring on a scramble . This game was the first since 1993 where three quarterbacks for a team - in this case Leaf , Moreno , and Jim Harbaugh - threw interceptions in one game . On November 19 against the Denver Broncos , Leaf completed 13 of 27 passes and reached career single @-@ game highs in quarterback rating ( 111 @.@ 8 ) , passing yards ( 311 ) , and passing touchdowns ( 3 ) , but the Chargers lost the game 38 – 37 . After a 0 – 11 start , the Chargers got their first win on November 26 , 17 – 16 over the Kansas City Chiefs . San Diego took a 14 – 3 lead early in the second quarter after Leaf made two touchdown passes to Freddie Jones , but the offense struggled later in the game , and Leaf threw two interceptions , one of which was returned for a touchdown . 
 Leaf would again play poorly , as he threw four interceptions on December 3 against the San Francisco 49ers and completed only 9 of 23 passes on December 10 against the eventual Super Bowl champion Baltimore Ravens . He improved on December 17 , completing 23 of 43 passes for 259 yards , 2 touchdowns , and 1 interception , but San Diego lost to the Carolina Panthers 30 – 22 . In the Chargers ' final drive , with nearly two minutes remaining in the game , Leaf completed a 10 @-@ yard pass to Curtis Conway that referees ruled was six inches short of the end zone . On first down , however , miscommunication between Leaf and running back Jermaine <unk> resulted in a fumble and 8 @-@ yard loss , and the next two plays followed by a penalty forced a fourth down and goal 10 yards from the end zone , and Leaf 's fourth down pass was incomplete . On the final game of the season on December 24 , Leaf made a 71 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Jeff Graham on the first play from scrimmage , but San Diego lost to the Pittsburgh Steelers 34 – 21 . In the game , Leaf completed 15 of 29 passes for 171 yards , 1 touchdown , and 1 interception and fumbled his final snap . After finishing the season 1 – 15 , the Chargers released Leaf on February 28 , 2001 . In three years with San Diego , Leaf had only four wins as a starter . For the 2000 season , Leaf completed 50 % ( 161 of 322 ) of his passes for 1 @,@ 883 yards , 11 touchdowns , and 18 interceptions . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Buccaneers ( 2001 ) = = = 
 On March 2 , 2001 , two days after the Chargers released him , Leaf was claimed by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , who were intrigued by his physical talent and planned to develop him more slowly , giving him time to watch and learn . Leaf 's wrist had still not healed , and doctors recommended surgery . After mediocre preseason performances , he was asked to accept demotion to fourth quarterback status on the team and accept a lower salary . He refused , and was released on September 3 , five days before the start of the 2001 season . 
 = = = Dallas Cowboys ( 2001 ) = = = 
 His next attempt at a comeback was with the Dallas Cowboys , who signed him after the Buccaneers released him , but he failed his first physical and was let go on September 5 . After regular starter Quincy Carter suffered an injury , the Cowboys signed Leaf again on October 12 . The Cowboys released him in May 2002 after he had appeared in only four games — all losses — throwing for a four @-@ game total of 494 yards with only one touchdown and three interceptions . 
 = = = Retirement and legacy = = = 
 Days later , he got still another chance when the Seattle Seahawks signed him to a one @-@ year contract , planning to let him develop slowly ( as the Buccaneers had done ) to allow his still @-@ injured wrist time to heal . He attended the team 's spring <unk> and seemed upbeat about his new team , but then abruptly retired at the age of 26 just before the start of the Seahawks ' 2002 training camp , offering no explanation at first . Seahawk coach and general manager Mike Holmgren told the media Leaf 's wrist didn 't bother him with either the Cowboys or the Seahawks . 
 During his brief career in the NFL , Leaf appeared in 25 games and made 21 starts . He completed 317 of 655 ( 48 @.@ 4 % ) passes for 3 @,@ 666 yards , with 14 touchdowns and 36 interceptions and a career quarterback rating of only 50 @.@ 0 . After hearing of Leaf 's retirement , Rodney Harrison , one of his most outspoken critics on the Chargers , said , " He took the money and ran . Personally , I could never rest good at night knowing my career ended like that . Normally in this game , you get back what you put into it , and he pretty much got back what he put into it . " 
 The ESPN sports network put Leaf first on its list of 25 biggest sports flops between 1979 and 2004 . NBC Sports commentator Michael Ventre called him " the biggest bust in the history of professional sports " . Since Leaf 's retirement , sportswriters and commentators have characterized subsequent drafted potential NFL quarterback flops as " the next Ryan Leaf " . In 2010 , the NFL Network listed Leaf as the number one NFL quarterback bust of all time , adding that the only good that came out of drafting Leaf for the Chargers is that it put the team in position to draft LaDainian Tomlinson , Drew Brees , and eventually ( after it initially appeared Brees himself would be a draft bust ) Philip Rivers . In lists of " Worst NFL Draft Picks Ever " compiled since 2010 , Leaf is always listed in either 1st or 2nd place , directly ahead of or only trailing <unk> Russell as the worst NFL draft pick of all time . 
 Deadspin ranked Leaf as the 6th worst NFL player of all time in 2011 , opining " To call Leaf a bust is unfair to the Blair Thomases and David Carrs of the world . " 
 More recently , Dish Network included Leaf in their " Biggest NFL Bust Bracket " where he was a " 1 Seed " along with fellow busts Jamarcus Russell , Tony <unk> , and David Carr . 
 On February 4 , 2016 in an interview with Yahoo ! Sports , Leaf himself compared the problems of Cleveland Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel to his own , saying it was like " looking in the mirror " and that the only difference was that Leaf 's substance abuse problems happened after he retired . Leaf went on to state that Manziel is able to get the help he needs . 
 = = Life after football = = 
 After retiring from professional football , Leaf returned to San Diego and became a financial consultant . In 2004 , Leaf resumed his education at Washington State University and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in humanities in May 2005 . The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune reported that among his classes in the spring 2005 was a sports management course titled Media Relations . 
 He then joined Don <unk> 's West Texas A & M University staff as a volunteer quarterbacks coach in 2006 , commenting , " About a year after I retired from playing , I decided that I wanted to get back to college , where I had the greatest time of my life , and to get involved with college football . " He also admitted that he was unprepared for the NFL when he was drafted back in 1998 . In April 2008 , ESPN described Leaf as having come to terms with his past . He said at the time , " When playing football became a job , it lost its luster for me . I kind of got out of the spotlight , and life 's never been this good . " 
 But in November 2008 he was put on indefinite leave , and resigned the next day , from his coaching position at West Texas A & M for allegedly asking one of his players for a pill to help him deal with pain in his wrist from past injuries . 
 In October 2009 , he went to work in Vancouver , British Columbia as business @-@ development manager for a travel company . 
 In September 2010 , he began writing a regular column about Washington State University football for the website <unk> He wrote nine columns that football season and his work attracted a strong following among Washington State fans . In December 2010 , he signed a contract with Pullman , Washington @-@ based Crimson Oak Publishing to write no fewer than three memoirs . Crimson Oak describes its mission as publishing books with themes of " hope , possibility , and determination . " Crimson Oak released Leaf 's first book 596 Switch : The Improbable Journey from The Palouse to Pasadena in October 2011 . The book focuses on the 1997 Washington State football team that made the 1998 Rose Bowl . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2001 , Leaf married Nicole Lucia , a Charger cheerleader and daughter of financial radio host Ray Lucia . They separated in November 2003 and eventually divorced . 
 His younger brother Brady was a backup quarterback and cornerback for the Oregon Ducks football team from 2003 to 2006 . 
 In September 2010 , the Associated Press reported that Leaf was spending time with his family in Montana . 
 In June 2011 , he had a benign tumor from his brainstem surgically removed . 
 = = = Legal troubles = = = 
 In May 2009 , Leaf was indicted on burglary and controlled @-@ substance charges in Texas . He was in a drug @-@ rehabilitation program in British Columbia at the time of the indictment , and was arrested by customs agents at the border on his return to the U.S as he was intending to fly to Texas to surrender on the indictment . However , his attorney Jeffrey A. Lustick successfully blocked the fugitive warrant extradition process , therefore legally allowing Leaf to go to Texas on his own . Lustick later successfully got the Washington fugitive action against Leaf dismissed with prejudice . On June 17 , he posted a $ 45 @,@ 000 bond in Washington state for the criminal charges in Texas . In April 2010 , he pleaded guilty in Amarillo , Texas to seven counts of obtaining a controlled substance by fraud and one count of delivery of a simulated controlled substance , all felonies . State District Judge John B. Board sentenced him to ten years of probation and fined him $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 On March 30 , 2012 , he was arrested on burglary , theft and drug charges in his home town of Great Falls , Montana . Four days later he was arrested again on burglary , theft , and two counts of criminal possession of dangerous drugs . As part of a plea bargain on May 8 , 2012 , he pleaded guilty to one count of felony burglary and one count of criminal possession of a dangerous drug . 
 In late April 2012 , Texas authorities issued two arrest warrants for him and set his bond at $ 126 @,@ 000 . 
 On June 19 , 2012 , Leaf was sentenced to seven years in custody of the Montana Department of Corrections , with two years suspended if he abided by the conditions imposed by District Judge Kenneth Neil in Montana . He was to spend the first nine months of his sentence in a lockdown addiction treatment facility , Nexus Treatment Center in Lewistown , Montana . But on January 17 , 2013 , Leaf was remanded to Montana State Prison in Deer Lodge after being found guilty of " behavior that violated conditions of his drug treatment placement . " He was also accused of threatening a program staff member . 
 In May 2014 , Leaf was incarcerated at Crossroads Correctional Facility in Shelby , Montana . 
 On September 9 , 2014 , a Texas judge sentenced Leaf to five years ' imprisonment , giving credit for time spent in prison in Montana . According to ESPN , Leaf would not see further time in jail , but would also not be released from Montana prison . On December 3 , 2014 , Leaf was released from prison and placed under the supervision of Great Falls Probation and Parole . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Leaf , Ryan D. ( 2011 ) . 596 Switch : The Improbable Journey from The Palouse to Pasadena . Pullman , Washington : Crimson Oak Publishing . ISBN <unk> . 
 = 1903 Jamaica hurricane = 
 The 1903 Jamaica hurricane devastated Martinique , Jamaica , and the Cayman Islands in August 1903 . The second tropical cyclone of the season , the storm was first observed well east of the Windward Islands on August 6 . The system moved generally west @-@ northwestward and strengthened into a hurricane on August 7 . It struck Martinique early on August 9 , shortly before reaching the Caribbean Sea . Later that day , the storm became a major hurricane . Early on August 11 , it made landfall near Morant Point , Jamaica , with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , with would be the hurricane 's maximum sustained wind speed . Early on the following day , the storm brushed Grand Cayman at the same intensity . The system weakened before landfall near Playa del Carmen , Quintana Roo , early on August 13 , with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . The system emerging into the Gulf of Mexico early on August 14 after weakening while crossing the Yucatán Peninsula , but failed to re @-@ strengthen . Around 00 : 00 UTC on August 16 , the cyclone made landfall north of Tampico , Tamaulipas , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The hurricane soon weakened to a tropical storm and dissipated over San Luis Potosí late on August 16 . 
 In Martinique , hundreds of homes were deroofed in Fort @-@ de @-@ France , while about 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the villages of Fond , Fourniols , La Haye , Recluce , and Tivoli , all of which were established after the eruption of Mount Pelée in 1902 . The hurricane also left extensive damage to crops and eight fatalities . In Jamaica , several communities were completely or nearly destroyed , including Manchioneal , Port Antonio , and Port Maria . Thousands of homes also suffered damage in the capital city of Kingston . Banana crops were devastated so severely that many growers were forced into bankruptcy . Numerous ships were wrecked , particularly on the north coast of the island . There were at least 65 deaths and about $ 10 million ( 1903 USD ) in damage . In the Cayman Islands , more than 200 houses and seven of eight churches on Grand Cayman were destroyed or heavily damaged . Of the 23 ships in the harbor , only the Governor Blake survived . Most of the crews on board those ships were reported killed , but loss of life on shore was minimal . The storm also caused heavy damage on the Yucatán Peninsula . Many ships were wrecked and communications were cutoff in several places . In the Tampico area , there was considerable damage to the port and many ships being sunk or driven ashore . Much of the land between Tampico and Cárdenas in San Luis Potosí was submerged due to flooding . In all , the storm is believed to have killed at least 149 people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed by a ship about 835 mi ( 1 @,@ 345 km ) northeast of Cayenne , French Guiana , early on August 6 , according to historic weather maps . However , due to scarce observations , its genesis likely occurred earlier than this time but was undetected operationally . With initial winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , the system moved generally west @-@ northwestward and strengthened into Category 1 hurricane on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale about 24 hours later . The first indication of the storm to the east of Barbados was on August 8 via telegraph reports . Early on August 9 , the cyclone struck Martinique as either a strong Category 1 or a weak Category 2 hurricane . The storm entered the Caribbean Sea shortly thereafter . Around 12 : 00 UTC , the cyclone intensified into a Category 3 hurricane , becoming the first major hurricane in the Atlantic basin since the second storm of 1900 and the first in the Caribbean Sea since the 1899 San Ciriaco hurricane . 
 After 06 : 00 UTC on August 11 , the cyclone struck Jamaica near Morant Point with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . At 06 : 00 UTC on August 12 , while brushing Grand Cayman , the hurricane peaked with maximum sustained winds of the same intensity and a minimum barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) , observed by the Governor Blake . The system weakened to a Category 2 around the time of landfall near Playa del Carmen , Quintana Roo , early on August 13 , with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . By 12 : 00 UTC , the storm further weakened to a Category 1 , based on the Empirical Inland Wind Decay Model . After crossing the Yucatán Peninsula and emerging into the Gulf of Mexico early on August 14 , the hurricane failed to re @-@ strengthen . Around 00 : 00 UTC on August 16 , it made landfall north of Tampico , Tamaulipas , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The hurricane soon weakened to a tropical storm and dissipated over San Luis Potosí late on August 16 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Telegraph reports of " a disturbance probably of dangerous strength " approaching Barbados from the east were sent to stations throughout the Lesser Antilles on August 8 . Shipping interests in the Gulf of Mexico and in parts of the western Atlantic were alerted daily of the progress of the hurricane until August 14 . Additionally , hurricane warnings were issued by the Weather Bureau for Florida and the Gulf Coast of the United States as the storm approached the western Caribbean , due to the possibility of the storm curving northward . 
 In the Windward Islands , Martinique suffered the worst damage . At Fort @-@ de @-@ France , hundreds of homes were unroofed . Streets were covered in roof tiles and impassible due to uprooted trees , which tore up the roads . Several vessels were severely damaged . Additionally , the towns of La Trinité , Le <unk> , Le François , Saint @-@ Joseph , and Sainte @-@ Marie " suffered considerably " . About 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the destroyed villages of Fond , Fourniols , La Haye , Recluce , and Tivoli , all established after the eruption of Mount Pelée in 1902 . Throughout the island , there was extensive damage to crops . Eight deaths were reported , with one in Fort @-@ de @-@ France and seven in La Trinité . 
 The storms severely damaged crops on Dominica , particularly cocoa . After several years of increasing amounts of exported cocoa , there was a decrease of approximately 1 @.@ 86 % in pounds between 1902 – 03 and 1903 @-@ 04 . In Puerto Rico , there was high winds and heavy rainfall along the north coast of the island . 
 The northern shore of Jamaica was devastated , with many ships being washed ashore . There was a storm surge about 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in height at Falmouth . This implies that the storm surge along Jamaica 's northern coast may have reached that height . Numerous ships were also wrecked along the coast . Only six homes remained standing at Port Antonio . The hotel , offices , plantations , and wharves owned by the United Fruit Company were nearly destroyed . Additionally , the company 's five vessels were beached , including the Alfred <unk> , Brighton , and Simon <unk> . In Port Maria , which was almost obliterated , " it was impossible to find where streets had been after the storm . " Homes were destroyed in such a way that " how anyone escaped alive is a mystery . " At Manchioneal , all but a few dwellings suffered destruction from the wind or were swept out to sea . The Norwegian steamship Salvatore di Giorgio was swept ashore at Annotto Bay . In the eastern portions of the island , entire villages were demolished , leaving thousands of peasants without shelter or food . 
 Thousands of homes were damaged in Kingston , while the electrical works building was deroofed , disabling the machinery . Local railroad traffic and streets cars stopped . Waves damaged wharves and capsized several vessels in the harbor . Some areas on the south side of the island were left completely devoid of crops . Although the western areas of Jamaica were not as devastated as other portions of the island , some banana plantations there were partially destroyed and there was a loss to orange and coffee crops . Throughout Jamaica , devastation to the banana crop was " complete " , forcing many growers into bankruptcy . It was estimated that the fruit trade would be paralyzed for as much as a year . Damage reached $ 10 million and there were at least 65 deaths , while other reports indicate as many as 90 fatalities . 
 At the Cayman Islands , wind gusts reached as high as 110 – 120 mph ( 180 – 190 km / h ) . More than 200 houses and seven of eight churches on Grand Cayman were destroyed or heavily damaged . In George Town , a number of dwellings were destroyed . Of the 23 ships in the harbor , only the Governor Blake survived . Most of the crews on board those ships were reported killed but loss of life on shore was minimal . Throughout the islands , all trees and crops were destroyed . In Cuba , the hurricane knocked out telegraphic communications in the eastern portions of the island , but the connection to Santiago de Cuba was quickly restored . A number of dwellings were damaged there , some were deroofed , while other homes were reduced to fragments . Pieces of sheet iron also became airborne . East of the city , all small ports received impact from the storm . Cienfuegos was " ravaged by the storm " , while extensive damage occurred in Cárdenas and Matanzas . In the outskirts of Havana , thatch houses were blown away . Farther west in Pinar del Río Province , some crops and small buildings were demolished . 
 In the Gulf of Mexico , the British steamship Rosina encountered the hurricane . The storm damaged the pipes and smokestacks , ripped out the ventilator , and washed 30 @,@ 000 oranges into the sea . Additionally , a Greek sailor was swept overboard and presumably drowned . The storm sunk or drove many ships ashore along the Yucatán Peninsula . Communications were disrupted in many areas after telegraph lines fell , while a number of roads were left impassible after trees toppled . In the Tampico area , there was considerable damage to the port and many ships being sunk or driven ashore . All of the bridges along Monterey and Mexican Gulf Railroad were destroyed . The roof at the general market was almost completely torn off . Many of the businesses suffered serious losses after rain subsequently poured in the building , with damage reaching at least $ 4 @,@ 200 ( 10 @,@ 000 pesos ) . The chamber of commerce building collapsed with people inside , though no injuries or deaths occurred . Much of the land between Tampico and Cárdenas in San Luis Potosí was submerged due to flooding . In Barra , a city in Tamaulipas , the hospital was nearly destroyed , as was the marketplace . In San Luis Potosí , the casino and restaurant in <unk> were demolished . Twenty bridges were destroyed in San Luis Potosí . Railroad traffic between San Luis Potosí and Monterrey , the capital of Nuevo León , was completely disrupted . 
 Overall , the storm is believed to have killed between 149 and 188 people . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the storm , thousands in Jamaica were left destitute , without food or shelter . Committees were formed in each parish affected to assess the damage , with Governor Augustus Hemming later visiting the areas of destruction . On September 17 , the Parliament of Jamaica passed the Hurricane Loans Law , which provided low interest loans to planters impacted by the storm . The Secretary of State of Jamaica authorized just over $ 241 @,@ 000 ( 50 @,@ 000 £ ) to be used for the loans . A total of 2 @,@ 983 people applied for a loan , 1 @,@ 477 of whom were granted . During a meeting in Port Antonio , the citizens issued an appeal to Americans for aid , after receiving approval from Governor Hemming . Relief efforts originated both locally and from other British possessions via the West India Committee . The Daily Gleaner newspaper was credited for its efforts in obtaining considerable amounts of food and building materials . Trinidad , then a colony of the United Kingdom , donated almost $ 5 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = Banksia grossa = 
 Banksia grossa , commonly known as the coarse banksia , is a species of shrub in the plant family Proteaceae endemic to Southwest Australia . It is one of fourteen species of banksia of the series Abietinae , all of which bear predominantly cylindrical or oval inflorescences . Collected in 1965 , it was described in 1981 by Alex George . Its thick leaves and large seeds distinguish it from other members of the Abietinae , and are the basis of its species name . 
 Found in sand or sand over laterite among heath between Eneabba and Badgingarra in Western Australia , it grows as a many @-@ stemmed shrub to 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high with narrow leaves and oval brownish flower spikes up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) high , composed of hundreds of individual flowers . Flowering occurs throughout the cooler months of March to September . Flower spikes develop woody follicles which bear the seeds . After bushfire , Banksia grossa regenerates from its woody lignotuber ; bushfires also stimulate the release of seeds , which germinate after disturbance . Visitors to ( and likely pollinators of ) inflorescences include insects and a nocturnal mammal , the white @-@ tailed <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia grossa grows as a bushy shrub , generally 70 to 1 m ( 2 @,@ 756 to 39 in ) high , or occasionally up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) high . Its many stems rise from a woody lignotuber . Young stems have a coating of woolly hairs , while older stems are covered in flaky pale brown bark . Borne on 3 to 5 mm long petioles , the somewhat fleshy leaves are needle @-@ like . Although they are between 4 to 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 in ) long , and only 2 to 3 mm wide , they are still thicker than those of other members of the series Abietinae . The margins of the leaves are straight with no teeth and rolled over , and the upper surfaces are sparsely hairy when young , but later hairless . New growth occurs over spring and early summer . 
 Flowers occur in a typical Banksia flower spike : an inflorescence made up of hundreds of small individual flowers , or florets , densely packed around ( and completely obscuring ) a woody cylindrical axis . In B. grossa , this axis is 5 to 7 cm ( 2 to 3 in ) high with a diameter of 0 @.@ 7 – 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 28 – 0 @.@ 35 in ) . From this , the florets radiate out laterally , giving the inflorescence a diameter of 8 or 9 cm ( 3 or 3 @.@ 5 in ) . Flowers are rusty brown to golden brown , and consist of a hairy 3 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) long tubular perianth which opens at maturity ( anthesis ) to release the dark red to purple style . 3 @.@ 8 – 4 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 9 in ) long , the style extends past the perianth and is curved at the tip . The flower spikes arise from short thick branchlets running off larger stems , though some flower spikes are terminal ( located at the ends of branches and more prominently displayed in the foliage ) . 
 Flowering occurs between March and September , though early flowering in December has been recorded . It takes five to eight weeks for a flower to develop from bud to the end of flowering . About three weeks before the flowers open , they develop a strong musky smell . The opening of flowers occurs sequentially , starting at the bottom of the inflorescence and sweeping through to the top over a period of around two weeks . At anthesis the flowers produce copious quantities of nectar ; indeed , some flowers produce so much that it drips to the ground . After flowering , the old florets wither and curl against the spike , giving it a hairy appearance . Now known as an infructescence , it is roughly ellipsoidal , 6 to 10 cm high ( 2 @.@ 2 – 4 in ) and 4 to 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 3 in ) wide . Up to 25 smooth , elliptical follicles develop on the spike , each containing up to two wide wedge @-@ shaped winged seeds . One field study revealed , on average , eight follicles for each fertile cone . Initially covered in fine fur , these are 2 to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 77 in ) long , 1 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) high and jut out by 1 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) . The fur rubs off and they become smooth with wear , and generally remain closed until opened by fire . 
 The seeds of Banksia grossa are the largest of all the species of the series Abietinae . Measuring 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 in ) long , they are made up of a cuneate ( wedge @-@ shaped ) seed body , 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 55 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) long by 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 35 in ) wide , and a 2 @.@ 7 – 3 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 3 in ) wide wing . The woody separator is the same shape as the seed , with an impression where the seed body lies next to it . The bright green cotyledons are obovate and can be either convex or concave , measuring 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 2 cm long by 0 @.@ 9 to 1 @.@ 2 cm wide . These arise from a stocky seedling stem , known as the hypocotyl , which is reddish and covered in short hairs . The auricles of the cotyledons are 2 mm long . Seedling leaves arise 0 @.@ 6 to 0 @.@ 8 cm beyond the cotyledons and are oppositely arranged . Linear , they are 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 6 cm long with recurved margins and are covered in white hair . The stem remains reddish . Subsequent leaf pairs are successively longer . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first known specimen collection of B. grossa was made by botanist Fred W. Humphreys in 1965 . Alex George has expressed surprise that it was not collected by earlier visitors to the area , speculating that " perhaps they were diverted by its similarity to B. leptophylla and B. sphaerocarpa . " George formally described the species in his 1981 monograph " The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) " , based on a specimen collected by him on the Brand Highway , 76 km north of Regans Ford , on 14 May 1969 . He placed it in subgenus Banksia because of its flower spike ; section Oncostylis because its styles are hooked ; and the resurrected series Abietinae , which he constrained to contain only round @-@ fruited species . It was placed in phyletic order between B. micrantha and B. leptophylla . The specific epithet is from the Latin <unk> ( " coarse " ) and refers to the leaves , flowers and fruit , all of which George observed were more coarse than other members of B. ser . Abietinae . 
 George 's arrangement remained current until 1996 , when Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published an arrangement informed by a cladistic analysis of morphological characteristics . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . Banksia ser . Abietinae was found to be very nearly monophyletic , and so was retained . It further resolved into four subclades , so Thiele and Ladiges split it into four subseries . Banksia grossa appeared as the most basal member of the second of these : 
 This clade became the basis for the new subseries <unk> , which Thiele defined as containing those species with lignotubers , styles loosely curling around the infructescence ( although this trait was reversed in B. micrantha ) , and " transversely aligned cells of the seed wing inner face " . The species other than B. grossa also have shouldered follicles . 
 Questioning the emphasis on cladistics in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement , George published a slightly modified version of his 1981 arrangement in his 1999 treatment of Banksia for the Flora of Australia series of monographs . The placement of B. grossa was the same as in 1981 , except that B. telmatiaea was moved to set between it and B. leptophylla . The placement of B. grossa in George 's 1999 arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia ( 9 series , 50 species , 9 subspecies , 3 varieties ) 
 B. sect . Coccinea ( 1 species ) 
 B. sect . Oncostylis 
 B. ser . Spicigerae ( 7 species , 2 subspecies , 4 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Tricuspidae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Dryandroideae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Abietinae 
 B. sphaerocarpa ( 5 varieties ) 
 B. micrantha 
 B. grossa 
 B. telmatiaea 
 B. leptophylla ( 2 varieties ) 
 B. lanata 
 B. scabrella 
 B. violacea 
 B. incana 
 B. laricina 
 B. pulchella 
 B. meisneri ( 2 subspecies ) 
 B. nutans ( 2 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is very different from George 's arrangement . Banksia grossa was inferred to be sister to a polytomous clade consisting of B. leptophylla , B. telmatiaea , B. scabrella and B. lanata : 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement of Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. grossa is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia grossa mainly occurs from west of <unk> in the north , south to Badgingarra National Park , and east almost to <unk> . It grows in shallow sand over laterite , in deep sand , and occasionally atop lateritic rises , on flat or gently undulating land , among kwongan shrubland . Around 40 % of plants occur on road verges . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Banksia grossa resprouts from its woody lignotuber after bushfire . Shrubs carry relatively low numbers of seeds compared with plant species that regenerate by seed after bushfire . A field study in Eneabba showed shrubs bore anywhere from 30 to 90 seeds per plant . Seeds borne on plants , however , are less likely to be eaten by animals than seed lying dormant in the soil , and hence survive to produce future seedlings . Populations of resprouting plants , like B. grossa , benefit more from longer intervals between fires as their stored seedbank takes longer to accumulate than reseeding species . The follicles generally open after bushfire , releasing seeds which germinate after disturbance . Species with persistent flowers on old spikes often require higher temperatures for follicles to open after burning ; laboratory testing resulted in 50 % opening after exposure to 270 ° C and 90 % after 400 ° C. 
 The leaves of B. grossa are adapted to a dry climate . The lower surfaces are protected by the strongly revolute shape of the leaf , the leaf margins curling around underneath almost to the mid @-@ vein . The trichomes ( leaf hairs ) run along the mid @-@ vein and the margins , further protecting the surface where the <unk> are located , thus minimising water loss . Cladistic analysis suggests this species and its relatives in the series Abietinae developed long narrow leaves with inrolled margins as they invaded drier climates in Australia 's southwest , having evolved from ancestors with broad leaves . 
 The inflorescences are highly attractive to insects . The rare bee species Hylaeus <unk> is a recorded visitor . Large numbers of ladybirds have been reported drinking the nectar of this species , while ignoring nearby Banksia attenuata inflorescences . The white @-@ tailed <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) has been observed visiting flower spikes . Pollen has been found on the snouts and in the scat of several species of <unk> marsupials , which suggests these animals are likely pollinators of Banksia species in general . No pollinators of this species were recorded in The Banksia Atlas survey . 
 Banksia grossa is one of five closely related Banksia species that have highly unusual flower nectar . Whereas other Banksia species produce nectar that is clear and watery , the nectar of these species is pale yellow initially , but gradually becomes darker and thicker , changing to a thick , olive @-@ green mucilage within one to two days of secretion , and eventually becoming " an almost black , gelatinous lump adhering to the base of the flowers " . It was first noted by Byron Lamont in 1980 ; he attributed it to cyanobacteria that feed off the nectar sugars . Noting that many of these cyanobacteria had heterocysts , he speculated that they aid the plant by fixing atmospheric nitrogen , which is then washed off the flower heads by rain , and absorbed by the proteoid root mat . This purported symbiosis was investigated by Barrett and Lamont in 1985 , but no evidence of nitrogen fixing was found . Further investigation by Markey and Lamont in 1996 suggested that the discolouration is not caused by cyanobacteria or other microorganisms in the nectar , but is rather " a chemical phenomenon of plant origin " . Their analyses indicated that the nectar had unusually high levels of sugar and free amino acids , but three of these species , including B. sphaerocarpa , have since been shown to have normal nectar sugar compositions . The purpose of coloured nectar is unclear , especially as pollinators such as nocturnal mammals are not thought to forage by sight . However , nectar that becomes more obvious by appearance or smell as it ages might encourage pollinators to prioritise it over newer nectar . It is possible the colour change is unrelated to pollination . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia grossa is cultivated for its attractive needle @-@ like leaves and rusty @-@ brown flower spikes , both of which can be quite variable in colour . This species favours well @-@ drained sandy or loamy acidic soils with a pH of 5 @.@ 5 to 7 , and a sunny aspect . Once established , it tolerates dry spells . It can be pruned heavily as it resprouts from its lignotuber . 
 Propagation is by seed . The seeds do not require any treatment before sowing , and take around 14 days to germinate . This is a slow @-@ growing plant , taking 5 to 7 years to reach maturity and begin flowering . 
 = LG G2 = 
 The LG G2 is an Android smartphone developed by LG Electronics . Serving as a successor to 2012 's Optimus G and the 2013 Optimus G Pro phablet , the G2 was unveiled at a press event in New York City on 7 August 2013 , and first released in September 2013 . The G2 is primarily distinguished by software features that LG billed would " learn " from users , a high fidelity sound system designed to produce higher quality audio , a 5 @.@ 2 in ( 130 mm ) 1080p screen with technology that the company claimed would improve energy efficiency and reduce the size of the bezel around it , along with the unique placement of its power and volume keys — eschewing their typical location on the edge of a smartphone by placing them on the rear below the camera lens . 
 The device was released to mostly positive reception ; the G2 was universally praised for LG 's efforts to produce a more seamless and compact design , its high performance , the quality of its display and camera , along with its long @-@ lasting battery . Critics were divided on certain aspects of its design , such as its rear button layout , and its plastic chassis — which was panned for closely resembling recent Samsung Galaxy products and being a regression from the glass @-@ based chassis of the Optimus G. Similarly , while its software and user interface was praised for its usability and large number of customization options , some reviewers felt that the software suffered from feature creep and contained notable usability regressions in comparison to " stock " Android . 
 Sales of the G2 exceeded LG 's estimates ; in late @-@ December 2013 , a Korean news agency reported that at least 3 million units of the G2 had been sold worldwide . 
 = = Release = = 
 The G2 was first unveiled during a press event at New York City 's Jazz at Lincoln Center on 7 August 2013 . LG announced that it would begin to release the G2 globally on over 130 carriers within the next two months , in markets such as South Korea and the United States . 
 To promote the G2 , LG attempted to hold a city @-@ wide scavenger hunt in Seoul , South Korea ; during a press event at a local park on 9 August 2013 , helium balloons ( tying in with its " G in the Cloud " advertising campaign ) were released that contained 100 vouchers . After the vouchers were scattered through the city by the deflating balloons , LG planned to give away <unk> to those who found the vouchers . While only members of the media were formally invited , the event was disrupted by members of the public who learned about the promotion on the internet . As the balloons were released , attendees attempted to use BB guns and other makeshift tools to retrieve them . The resulting quarrel which broke out over the balloons resulted in 20 injuries ; following the incident , LG apologized and stated that it would pay for the medical treatment of those injured in the event . LG also called off plans to hold similar events in other South Korean cities . 
 The G2 was first released in the United States by Verizon on 12 September 2013 , and released by AT & T the following day . T @-@ Mobile released the G2 on 25 September , while Sprint released theirs on 8 November 2013 . The G2 was released in Canada on 27 September 2013 , across six national and regional carriers , including Bell , Rogers , <unk> , Telus , <unk> , and Wind Mobile . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The G2 's exterior consists of a polycarbonate shell — unlike its predecessor , which used a glass @-@ based construction . The rear cover is adorned with a subtle pattern resembling carbon fiber . The G2 's volume and power keys are located directly below the camera on the rear of the device . The power button contains an LED lamp , which can be used as a notification light . The positioning of the buttons on the rear deviates from the majority of smartphones , where they are located on the bezel ( side edge ) of the phone . LG argued that buttons located on the bezel were harder to reach on larger smartphones , and made it more likely for users to drop their phone when adjusting the volume during a call . As such , the G2 's buttons are instead located where the index finger would normally lie when the phone is held . Alongside the power button , the G2 is also powered on by double @-@ tapping on the screen , and turned off by double @-@ tapping on the status bar or a blank area on the home screen , a feature branded as " <unk> " . When the phone is off , the volume keys can also be used to launch directly into the camera or QuickMemo applications by holding them down . 
 The G2 is powered by a 2 @.@ 26 & GHz quad @-@ core Snapdragon 800 processor with 2 GB of RAM and support for LTE or LTE Advanced networks where available . The G2 is equipped with a 5 @.@ 2 @-@ inch 1080p IPS display ; to reduce the size of its screen bezel , wiring for touchscreen components is routed both above and below the screen itself . To help conserve battery life , the G2 also implements a panel self @-@ refresh system ; if the display is showing static content , it is refreshed solely from framebuffer memory ( referred to as " graphics RAM " ) , allowing other display components ( such as the GPU ) to become idle . LG claimed that this system would allow the screen to use 26 % less power than comparable displays on other smartphones . 
 The G2 's audio hardware and software is optimized to support 24 @-@ bit / 192 kHz audio ; during LG 's press event , ringtones recorded by the Vienna Boys ' Choir ( which are also bundled with the device ) were used to demonstrate the high quality audio from its internal speaker . The G2 also includes a 13 @-@ megapixel rear @-@ facing camera with optical image stabilization , and an infrared emitter which allows it to serve as a universal remote with the accompanying <unk> app . 
 The G2 comes with either 16 or 32 GB of non @-@ expandable storage , and includes a non @-@ removable 3000 mAh battery . The Verizon Wireless model of the G2 offers support for Qi wireless charging . Unlike the models released in other countries , South Korean models of the G2 have a removable back cover , a MicroSD card slot for expanded storage , and a removable 2610 mAh battery . 
 = = = Software = = = 
 The G2 ships with Android 4 @.@ 2 @.@ 2 " Jelly Bean " with a custom interface and software . It contains a number of features that are designed to " learn " from users by predicting future actions , and allow for flexibility and customization . The G2 retains features from previous LG models such as the Optimus G and G Pro , including QuickMemo ( which allows users to write notes on top of a screenshot ) , <unk> ( a feature which allows the device to serve as a universal remote ) , <unk> pop @-@ up apps , and Voice Mate . New features introduced by the G2 include <unk> , which analyzes text messages to detect content such as addresses and times that can be passed to other apps ( such as the calendar , a note , or Google Maps ) , a pop @-@ up menu of relevant apps triggered when plugging in headphones or a USB cable ( Plug & Pop ) , the ability to answer a phone call by holding the phone to the user 's head ( <unk> ) , Slide Aside , a multitasking feature which allows users to " slide " away apps onto cards with a three @-@ finger gesture , the Clip Tray ( which collects content that had been copied to the clipboard ) , and Guest Mode . The G2 uses on @-@ screen buttons ; users can change their background color ( which includes black and white options , either solid colored or with a gradient ) , customize the order of the buttons , or add additional buttons for opening QuickMemo or the notification shade . The G2 's default music player supports the playback of WAV and FLAC files with 24 @-@ bit / 192 kHz audio . 
 An update to Android 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 2 " KitKat " was released in South Korea in November 2013 , and for international models in March 2014 . LG touted a " noticeable speed boost " over Jelly Bean , along with battery life improvements , user interface tweaks , and other improvements brought by KitKat . A further update added a new security feature known as " Knock Code " ( as introduced by the LG G Pro 2 ) , which allows users to unlock their device by tapping quadrants of the screen in a sequence . 
 An update to Android 5 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 " Lollipop " was first released in South Korea in January 2015 . Alongside other internal improvements , it introduces the refreshed " G UI " first introduced by the LG G3 , which itself received improvements to match the new visual style and features of Lollipop , The update was also released for the international model and the U.S. carrier versions , but will not be released in Canada . 
 = = = Model variants = = = 
 Several different model variants of the G2 are sold , with most variants differing only in support for regional network types and bands . However , the South Korean version features a removable ( but smaller ) battery and a MicroSD slot , while the U.S. Verizon Wireless version includes Qi wireless charging , but has a noticeably different rear cover design with different designs for the buttons and camera , and replaces the solid black option for the button background with a pink pattern option . In January 2014 , in honor of the Chinese New Year , LG released two " limited edition " models of the G2 in selected Asian markets ; available in red or gold colors , the limited edition models featured textured casings instead of the glossier plastic used normally by the G2 . 
 = = = Accessories = = = 
 The <unk> case accessory for the G2 was unveiled on 30 July 2013 — prior to the unveiling of the phone itself . The <unk> case consists of a plastic shell with a polyurethane flip cover . The cover contains a rounded rectangular window that exposes a portion of the display , allowing a number of functions to be accessed without opening the cover , including notifications , a customizable clock , and a music player . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 While complimenting its performance and other unique features , The Verge believed that LG was trying too hard to compete with the Samsung Galaxy S4 by closely imitating its design , specifications , and emphasis on features instead of differentiating itself through further innovations . TechRadar also praised its performance and display quality , but considered the design of the G2 itself to be " dull " , and believed that while offering many options for advanced users , LG 's skinned version of Android 4 @.@ 2 was too complex for " casual " users ( especially noting its notification pull @-@ down , where roughly half the screen is taken up by options ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The LG G2 was released to mostly positive reception . In December 2013 , the British magazine Stuff named the G2 its 2013 Phone of the Year and Gadget of the Year , reporting that " LG has previously struggled to make an impact on the smartphone market , but the LG G2 is as good as smartphones get in 2013 , and shows the established names how it should be done . " 
 The G2 was considered by critics to be well @-@ built , but was criticized for replacing the glass @-@ based construction of the Optimus G with a plainer , plastic @-@ based design , drawing comparisons to recent Samsung products . Ars Technica further criticized the Verizon Wireless version for having a cheaper appearance than the international versions , with a plainer rear cover , modified buttons , and a different speaker layout . The G2 's rear buttons were met with equally mixed reception , with most reviewers believing that users would be able to adjust themselves to operate them . Accordingly , the ability to wake the phone by tapping on the screen was considered a more convenient method . The G2 was praised for its high @-@ end hardware , with Engadget describing the device as a " beast " with specifications that " seem familiar to anyone who 's read a flagship Android phone review in the last 12 months " , recognizing that it had become harder for manufacturers to differentiate their flagship products beyond displays and processors . The G2 's display was praised for its high resolution and color accuracy , along with LG 's efforts to reduce the screen bezel size . The G2 was also praised for having unexpectedly longer battery life than any of its competitors ( along with Motorola 's Droid <unk> Maxx ) . After lasting about 20 hours of " standard " use in its testing , the G2 's battery was considered by Engadget to be " a sign that we 're finally crossing into a world of sensible smartphone batteries . " 
 LG 's Android interface design received mixed reviews ; TechRadar gave it a positive review , describing it as being " easy enough for novice and expert smartphone users alike " , and noting its dynamic elements and customization features . Its increased customization abilities ( including different lock screen and home screen animations , and the ability to change the background and layout of the on @-@ screen navigation buttons ) was noted by reviewers . The usefulness of the " Slide Aside " feature was questioned due to the availability of other , more efficient means to switch apps . LG 's software was generally panned for being unpolished in places , suffering from feature creep , and containing too many unneeded visual effects and skeuomorphic elements ( the latter having generally fallen out of favor ) . The G2 's software was also panned for containing usability digressions in comparison to stock Android , such as the notification tray being taken up by options , not using Android 4 @.@ 2 's updated " Complete action using " menu and behavior , and , despite using on @-@ screen buttons , continued use of the " Menu " key which was officially deprecated by Google in its Android human interface guidelines for Android <unk> ( on apps which comply with the <unk> , overflow menus are intended to be displayed within the apps themselves . The device 's Menu key is replaced by a " Recent apps " key , and a small " Menu " key appears to the side when needed ) . 
 The G2 's camera was considered good for its class , with its processor contributing to quicker HDR photo processing than its competitors . The Verge remarked that despite LG having " practically stole [ n ] " Samsung 's camera design and modes , the G2 's camera interface were among the better implementations of Android camera software due to its available options . However , its low @-@ light photos and some of its other modes were panned for not being as good as those of other devices such as the Nokia Lumia 920 and HTC One . In a photography @-@ focused review by Digital Photography Review , the optical image stabilization system was praised for helping maintain good levels of exposure , and well @-@ lit photos were found to have a decent level of detail , noting that its lens was " sharp pretty much all across the frame and free of chromatic aberrations . " However , it was noted that " as the light gets dimmer and in [ sic ] the ISO starts to increase " , the device began to suffer from " very heavy @-@ handed noise reduction which results in visible softness " , and further noted that " [ its ] detail starts to suffer as soon as you go higher than base ISO and by ISO 400 most low @-@ contrast detail is gone . " However , in a December 2013 comparison against other recent phones such as the One , Galaxy S4 Zoom , Xperia Z1 , iPhone 5S , and Lumia 1020 by TechRadar , the G2 was named the best <unk> of the six for " [ performing ] very well in terms of picture quality , ease of use and functionality , as well as post processing " , although it was panned for not having as many options as its competitors , and for the probability of fingers accidentally getting into landscape shots due to the positioning of the lens . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In December 2013 , Asia Today reported that 2 @.@ 3 million units of the G2 had been sold since its release in September 2013 , with at least 600 @,@ 000 sold in South Korea alone . These numbers were below LG 's original estimates of 3 million units . However , later in the month , news agency Yonhap reported more positive numbers from analysts , with at least 3 million units sold and 900 @,@ 000 sold in South Korea . 
 = Tales of Symphonia = 
 Tales of Symphonia ( Japanese : テイルズ オブ シンフォニア , Hepburn : Teiruzu Obu Shinfonia ) is a Japanese role @-@ playing game released for the Nintendo GameCube on August 29 , 2003 in Japan . It was published by Namco and is the fifth core product of the Tales series . The game was localized and released in North America on July 13 , 2004 and in Europe on November 19 , 2004 . In Japan , the game was ported for the PlayStation 2 with additional content and was released on September 22 , 2004 . 
 The game takes place in a fictional world called Sylvarant and follows Lloyd Irving . Lloyd accompanies his childhood friend , Colette Brunel , who is destined to go on a journey to save their world . As their journey progresses , they learn that saving Sylvarant endangers Tethe 'alla , a world parallel to their own . The game 's central theme is Kimi to Hibiki au RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " RPG that resonates with you " ) . 
 The game 's reception was generally positive with critics praising the gameplay but criticizing the plot . It received a Japan Game Awards in 2003 and had received re @-@ releases under the Player 's Choice and PlayStation 2 the Best labels . In the United States , over 100 thousand copies were sold during the first two weeks and has sold over a million copies worldwide . 
 Since its release , Tales of Symphonia spawned a substantial media franchise in Japan . The game has been adapted into seven manga collections , two novel series , seven drama CDs , and an OVA anime series . A sequel entitled Tales of Symphonia : Dawn of the New World was released for the Wii in 2008 . Tales of Symphonia and its sequel was collected as a PlayStation 3 high definition release in Tales of Symphonia Chronicles in 2013 . A Steam version was released on February 2 , 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like previous installments in the Tales series , Tales of Symphonia consists primarily of three major areas : an overworld field map , town and dungeon maps , and a battle screen . The overworld map is a 3D model , featuring a scaled @-@ down version of the game 's fictional world which the player travels through to reach the game 's locations . As with preceding games in the series , the world map can be traversed by foot , on the party 's quadrupedal pet <unk> , and on flying vehicles known as <unk> . On field maps , characters are directed across realistically scaled environments . The battle screen is a 3D representation of an area , in which the player commands the characters in battles against CPU @-@ controlled enemies . 
 On the overworld and field maps , various skits between the characters can be viewed . They involve animated character portraits , subtitles , and , in the Japanese version , full voice acting . Skits concern anything from character development to side details . Overworld map skits affect Lloyd 's relationships with other party members . The player will be able to make certain decisions that imperceptibly affect how the other characters think of Lloyd . Some of these choices have minor ramifications for the game 's storyline . 
 Battle system 
 During battle sequences , the game uses the Multi @-@ Line Linear Motion Battle System . Four characters from the party are chosen to battle ; those not controlled by a player are guided by artificial intelligence with instructions set by the player beforehand . Damage dealt to the opponent fills a " Unison Gauge " . When this is full , a " Unison Attack " can be triggered , allowing the party to use techniques simultaneously on a single enemy . When certain techniques are combined , a special attack results in additional damage . 
 After battle , a currency called Grade is awarded or subtracted based on specific criteria that are fulfilled in battle . It is used to purchase bonuses during New Game Plus . Players are also prompted to cook food after battles if they have the materials . Cooking recipes determine the benefits received such as health recovery . The degree of the benefit is determined by which character is chosen to cook . 
 Tales of Symphonia 's skill system is built around the use of " EX Gems " , which come in four ranks . Each character can equip up to four EX Gems and set abilities to those gems . The abilities determine if the characters will learn Strike or Technical techniques and spells . Combinations of EX Gem abilities can also grant additional abilities called " EX @-@ Skills " . The development of a character 's attributes is determined by their equipped " Title " . Titles are earned through story progression , side quests , or completion of miscellaneous criteria . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lloyd Irving and his friend , <unk> Sage accompany the chosen , Colette Brunel and her guardians , Raine Sage and Kratos Aurion on her journey of world regeneration . The purpose of the journey is to replenish Sylvarant with mana , a necessary energy to their survival . The path of the journey consists of five temples which must be unsealed by Colette . On their journey , they meet Sheena Fujibayashi who comes from Tethe 'alla , a world parallel to Sylvarant . She tells them about how the two worlds vie for each other 's mana through the journey of regeneration . Hoping to save both worlds , the party is told by the angel <unk> both worlds can be saved by Colette 's journey . At the final seal , they are betrayed by <unk> and Kratos ; both are revealed to be part of <unk> , an evil organization led by Mithos Yggdrasill . 
 The party leaves for Tethe 'alla to search for a way to save both worlds and are joined by Zelos Wilder , <unk> <unk> , and Regal Bryant . The party learns that awakening the Summon Spirits in both worlds will sever the mana tie between them . Believing that to be the answer , they successfully sever all mana ties between the two worlds . Their actions instead destabilize the Great Seed , the supplier of mana to both worlds , causing it to grow and engulf Sylvarant at an exponential rate . After the party re @-@ stabilizes the seed , they learn from Yuan Ka @-@ Fai about the origins of Sylvarant and Tethe 'alla and how they used to be one world but was split by Mithos with the Eternal Sword ; the party realizes they can save the world if they wield the Eternal Sword , merge the worlds , and germinate the Great Seed . They decide to confront and defeat Mithos before seeking the Eternal Sword . 
 Kratos is revealed to have been gathering materials to have Lloyd use the Eternal Sword . He succeeds but Mithos survives his apparent death and possess a member from the party before fleeing to the comet <unk> @-@ <unk> . Mithos attempts to take the Great Seed with him but is foiled and killed by Lloyd . Using the Eternal Sword , Lloyd merges Sylvarant and Tethe 'alla together and germinates the Great Seed into a Giant <unk> Tree to supply the world with mana . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The game was first announced on May 8 , 2002 by Namco to be one of the many titles it would be releasing on the Nintendo GameCube . Namco stated it would be a part of the Tales of Phantasia series and expected comics , animation , drama CDs and novels to be spun off from the game . Its name was revealed to be Tales of Symphonia in February 2003 . An April 2003 edition of Famitsu revealed the game has been in development for two years , its developers are the same from Tales of Eternia , the game will have the most main characters in the Tales series , and will be the first 3D game in the series . During Electronic Entertainment Expo 2003 , a North American localization was confirmed . A conference by Namco on June 9 , 2003 revealed the game will be on two disks and its theme song will be " Starry Heavens " by Day After Tomorrow . To celebrate its release in Japan , the game was bundled with a symphonic green Nintendo GameCube . For the North American version , the localization producer replaced Starry Heavens with an orchestral anthem and focused on hiring professional voice actors to dub the game in order to appeal to the Western audience . The game was released in Japan on August 29 , 2003 and was localized in North America and Europe on July 13 , 2004 and November 19 , 2004 respectively . The game was re @-@ released in North America under the Player 's Choice label on July 19 , 2004 . 
 During the second week of April 2004 , Weekly Shōnen Jump announced a PlayStation 2 port of Tales of Symphonia . It received new in @-@ game additions and its theme song is " Soshite Boku ni <unk> Koto " ( <unk> ? , lit . " And Thus , I Can Do It " ) by Day After Tomorrow . It was released exclusively in Japan on September 22 , 2004 and re @-@ released under the PlayStation 2 the Best label on July 7 , 2005 . 
 = = = Scenario = = = 
 Takumi Miyajima , the game 's writer , explained Tales of Symphonia was planned to create a " unique <unk> " , dependent on the player 's choices and the affection system . Miyajima wrote many scenarios , with the most significant events centered on Zelos Wilder . Originally , Zelos ' death was supposed to be canon . His survival would have been dependent on the affection system : He would die early on if he was ranked the lowest in the affection system , would die at the end if he ranked in the middle , and would only survive if he ranked the top . However , the development staff suggested to have Kratos Aurion return to the party and the team discussed how it would work . The change in scenario had Miyajima rework Zelos ' death into a non @-@ canon path of the story . While generally a self @-@ contained story , Symphonia apparently takes place within either the same or a similar timeline to the first Tales game , Tales of Phantasia . 
 = = = Sequel and Chronicles release = = = 
 The sequel Tales of Symphonia : Knight of Ratatosk ( テイルズ オブ シンフォニア <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Shinfonia <unk> no Kishi ) , localized in English as Tales of Symphonia : Dawn of the New World , was announced on July 20 , 2007 for the Wii . It was released in Japan and North America in 2008 and in Europe a year after . 
 Tales of Symphonia Chronicles was announced on June 1 , 2013 for the PlayStation 3 . It contains Tales of Symphonia and Tales of Symphonia : Dawn of the New World with remastered graphics and additional content . It was released in Japan on October 10 , 2013 , and it was released in North America and Europe on February 2014 as both a retail version and download release , with the option to purchase Tales of Symphonia as a standalone release . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Tales of Symphonia spawned seven manga adaptations after its release : six anthology collections and a traditional manga series . 
 The first anthology collection , Tales of Symphonia Comic Anthology , consists of five volumes which were released between November 25 , 2003 and February 25 , 2006 by Ichijinsha . The second anthology collection , Tales of Symphonia Yonkoma Kings , is a yonkoma . It consists of five volumes released between November 25 , 2003 and December 25 , 2006 by Ichijinsha . A third anthology collection entitled BC Anthology Collection Tales of Symphonia had two volumes published by Mag Garden on February 2005 and 2007 . The fourth anthology collection is BC Anthology Collection Tales of Symphonia Yonkoma Short Comic Collection and consisted of a single volume which was released by Mag Garden on October 10 , 2007 . The fifth anthology collection is Super Comic Theater : Tales of Symphonia . It consisted of two volumes which were released by Square Enix on May 27 , 2005 and September 16 , 2005 . The sixth anthology collection is Tales of Symphonia Comic Anthology : The Best is a single volume released on June 5 , 2010 by Ichijinsha . 
 The manga series by Hitoshi Ichimura was titled Tales of Symphonia and was an adaptation of the game 's storyline . The first four chapters were serialized between the April and July 2005 editions of Monthly Comic Blade . Future chapters were released in tankōbon volumes by Mag Garden thereafter . Six volumes were released : the first was released on August 10 , 2005 and the last two were released on July 10 , 2007 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Tales of Symphonia has spun off two novel series adaptions , four strategy guides , a character book , an official scenario book , and an art book . The first novel series is titled Tales of Symphonia and is written by Kiyoshi Yuki . It consisted of three novels released between November 21 and December 20 , 2003 by Shueisha . The second novel series is titled Tales of Symphonia : Radiance of Time ( テイルズ オブ シンフォニア 久遠 <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Shinfonia Toki no <unk> ) and is written by Sera Yajima . It consists of four volumes released between December 20 , 2003 and June 19 , 2004 by Enterbrain . An after story by the same author was released on September 18 , 2004 . 
 Two strategy guides under the V Jump Books brand were published by Shueisha : the Gamecube guide was released on August 29 , 2003 and the PS2 on September 22 , 2004 . Namco Bandai Games released two official strategy guides on October 1 , 2003 and October 27 , 2004 for the Gamecube and PS2 respectively . Tales of Symphonia Illustration : Kosuke Fujishima 's Character Work is a book by the game 's designer , Kōsuke Fujishima , and was released on January 26 , 2004 by Ichijinsha . It provides details on the characters ' back story and how their design came to be . Tales of Symphonia Official Scenario Book was released on June 26 , 2008 by Namco Bandai . The book details the history of the world and characters . Tales of Symphonia The Animation Visual Complete Picture Book is an art book for the anime released on March 28 , 2013 by ASCII Media Works . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 Seven drama CDs based on the game 's plot were produced by Frontier Works . Drama CD : Tales of Symphonia ( A Long Time Ago ) 1 , 2 , and 3 are stories preceding the game . They were released between July 23 , 2004 and September 24 , 2004 . Drama CD : Tales of Symphonia Anthology 1 ( Rodeo Ride Tour ) First Part and Second Part follow Sheena Fujibayashi and Zelos Wilder as they tour the world a year after the events of the main game . The two CDs were released on May 25 , 2005 and June 24 , 2005 . Tales of Symphonia Comic Market 78 and Tales of Symphonia Comic Market 79 are side stories with guest characters from Tales of Vesperia and Tales of Graces , respectively . 
 Tales of Symphonia Original Soundtrack was published by DigiCube on October 1 , 2003 and consists of 4 discs . It debuted at 98 on Oricon 's charts . The soundtrack was re @-@ released on October 27 , 2004 by King Records ( Japan ) for the PS2 port of Tales of Symphonia . 
 = = = = Original Soundtrack listing = = = = 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Tales of Symphonia The Animation ( テイルズ オブ シンフォニア The Animation , Teiruzu Obu Shinfonia The Animation ) was an OVA series animated by Ufotable and produced by Geneon Universal Entertainment and Frontier Works . It consists of four episodes which were released direct @-@ to @-@ video on four separate DVDs on June 8 , August 10 , October 24 , and December 21 of 2007 . They were later released in a Blu @-@ ray Disc collection on September 26 , 2008 . The series later rereleased on Universal Media Disc between June 25 and July 23 , 2010 . On May 8 , 2010 , the series were aired on AT @-@ X as a promotion to the sequel of the series . The episodes used three pieces of theme music : The opening theme is " <unk> " by Eri Kawai and the two ending themes were " Negai " ( <unk> ? , lit . " Wish " ) by Kaori <unk> and Uchi e <unk> ( <unk> ? , lit . " Let 's Go Home " ) by Nana Mizuki . 
 The sequel series , Tales of Symphonia the Animation : Tethe 'alla Episode ( テイルズ オブ シンフォニア The Animation <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Shinfonia The Animation : <unk> hen ) , was announced during Tales of Festival 2008 . It consists of four episodes which were released on March 25 , May 26 , September 23 , 2010 and February 25 , 2011 . All four episodes received an early screening : The first was screened on March 13 , 2010 in Fukuoka and was hosted by Music Plaza Indo ; The second on May 4 , 2010 in Tokushima , Tokushima by Ufotable ; the third on September 17 , 2010 in Yokohama by Animate ; and the fourth on February 20 , 2011 in Roppongi by Toho . The first two episodes were later aired on September 12 , 2010 on AT @-@ X. The episodes used the opening theme " Tenkuu no Canaria " ( <unk> ? , lit . " Canary in the Sky " ) by Nana Mizuki and the ending theme " Inori no Kanata " ( <unk> ? , lit . " Beyond the Prayers " ) by Akiko Shikata . 
 The second sequel , Tales of Symphonia the Animation : The United World Episode ( テイルズ オブ シンフォニア The Animation <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Shinfonia The Animation : Sekai Tōgō @-@ hen ) , concludes the anime 's plot . It consists of three episodes released directly to DVD and Blu @-@ ray on November 23 , 2011 , June 20 , 2012 , and October 24 , 2012 . All three episodes had early screenings : the first was screened between September 23 and September 25 , 2011 by Cinema Sunshine in Ikebukuro ; the second on May 3 , 2012 in Tokushima by Ufotable ; and the third is on September 29 , 2012 by Cinema Sunshine in Ikebukuro . The episodes use four pieces of theme musics : an opening theme " Ho @-@ n @-@ to @-@ u @-@ so " ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ・ ウ ・ <unk> ? , lit . " Truth and Lies " ) by <unk> and three ending themes , " Ta ga Tame no Sekai " ( <unk> ? , lit . " A World for Someone Else " ) , " <unk> " ( <unk> ? , lit . " Distortion " ) , and " Hikari <unk> basho de ~ <unk> ~ " ( <unk> ～ <unk> ～ ? , lit . " At the Place Where the Light Falls ~ Promise ~ " ) , all by Akiko Shikata . 
 A Blu @-@ ray box set containing all three series was announced on June 1 , 2013 and released on November 6 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tales of Symphonia garnered generally positive reception from critics . Over 100 @,@ 000 copies were sold in the United States during the first two weeks after its release . In December 2007 , Namco announced that the GameCube version had sold 953 @,@ 000 copies worldwide , and the PlayStation 2 port had sold 486 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . The bargain reissue for the PlayStation 2 in 2005 sold almost 50 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of 2006 . Its total worldwide sales across its original platforms have reached 1 @.@ 6 million as of 2008 , making it the best @-@ selling Tales title to date . The game has appeared on many top game rankings and received a Japan Game Awards in 2003 for excellence . The January 2009 issue of Game Informer listed it at # 24 in its " Top 25 GameCube Games " . Nintendo Power ranked Tales of Symphonia 107th in a list of " Top 200 Nintendo Games Ever " . IGN users placed it 75th in a Top 100 Games list , while GameFAQs users put it at 81st in a similar list . 
 Critics have praised the game for its cel @-@ shaded art style and real @-@ time battle system . 1UP , GameSpot , GameSpy , IGN , and X @-@ Play , applauded the amount of details in the scenes with GameSpy noting the steady 60 fps . GameSpy described the battle system as " wonderfully fast and to the point " while X @-@ Play noted its accessibility and potential to attract non @-@ RPG gamers . Meanwhile , the story and audio have received negative criticism . Eurogamer , GameSpot , GameSpy , IGN , and X @-@ Play criticized the plot for being cliché and un @-@ engaging . The reviewers agreed that the music and English voices met standards . GameSpy and X @-@ Play additionally praised the character interactions for being likeable . 
 = CAC / PAC JF @-@ 17 Thunder = 
 The PAC JF @-@ 17 Thunder ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> ) , or CAC FC @-@ 1 <unk> ( Fierce Dragon ; Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Lóng ) , is a lightweight , single @-@ engine , multi @-@ role combat aircraft developed jointly by the Pakistan Aeronautical Complex ( PAC ) and the Chengdu Aircraft Corporation ( CAC ) of China . The JF @-@ 17 can be used for aerial reconnaissance , ground attack and aircraft interception . Its designation " JF @-@ 17 " by Pakistan is short for " Joint Fighter @-@ 17 " , while the designation and name " FC @-@ 1 <unk> " by China means " Fighter China @-@ 1 Fierce Dragon " . 
 The JF @-@ 17 can deploy diverse ordnance , including air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ surface missiles , and a 23 mm GSh @-@ 23 @-@ 2 twin @-@ barrel autocannon . Powered by a Guizhou WS @-@ 13 or Klimov RD @-@ 93 afterburning turbofan it has a top speed of Mach 1 @.@ 6 . The JF @-@ 17 is to become the backbone of the Pakistan Air Force ( PAF ) , complementing the General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon whose performance it roughly matches , at half the cost . The PAF inducted its first JF @-@ 17 squadron in February 2010 and as of December 2015 , 49 JF @-@ 17 Thunder Aircraft were in service with 50 additional airframes ordered , of which 17 have been delivered . The Pakistan Air Force plans to induct a twin @-@ seater version for training and enhanced operational capability , known as the JF @-@ 17B by 2017 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The JF @-@ 17 was primarily developed to meet the PAF 's requirement for an affordable , modern , multi @-@ role combat aircraft as a replacement for its large fleet of Dassault Mirage III / 5 fighters , Nanchang A @-@ 5 bombers , and Chengdu F @-@ 7 interceptors , with a cost of US $ 500 million , divided equally between China and Pakistan . The aircraft was also intended to have export potential as a cost @-@ effective and competitive alternative to more expensive Western fighters . The development of this aircraft was headed by Yang Wei ( aircraft designer ) , who is considered China 's " ace designer " . Wei also designed the Chengdu J @-@ 20 . 
 By 1989 , because of economic sanctions by the US , Pakistan had abandoned Project Sabre II , a design study involving US aircraft manufacturer Grumman and China , and had decided to redesign and upgrade the Chengdu F @-@ 7 . In the same year , China and Grumman started a new design study to develop the Super 7 , another redesigned Chengdu F @-@ 7 . Grumman left the project when sanctions were placed on China following the political fallout from the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests . After Grumman left the Chengdu Super 7 project , the Fighter China project was launched in 1991 . In 1995 , Pakistan and China signed a memorandum of understanding ( MoU ) for joint design and development of a new fighter , and over the next few years worked out the project details . In June 1995 , Mikoyan had joined the project to provide " design support " , this also involved the secondment of several engineers by CAC . 
 = = = Launch of FC @-@ 1 project = = = 
 In October 1995 , Pakistan was reportedly to select a Western company by the end of the year to provide and integrate the FC @-@ 1 's avionics , which was expected to go into production by 1999 . The avionics were said to include radar , Inertial navigation system , Head @-@ up display , and Multi @-@ function displays . Competing bids came from Thomson @-@ CSF with a variant of the Radar Doppler <unk> ( <unk> ) , SAGEM with a similar avionics package to those used in the ROSE upgrade project , and Marconi Electronic Systems with its Blue Hawk radar . <unk> 's ( now SELEX Galileo ) Grifo S7 radar was expected to be selected due to the company 's ties with the PAF . In February 1998 , Pakistan and China signed a letter of intent covering airframe development . Russia 's Klimov offered a variant of the RD @-@ 33 turbofan engine to power the fighter . In April 1999 , South Africa 's <unk> offered to arm the Super 7 with the T @-@ darter beyond @-@ visual @-@ range ( BVR ) air @-@ to @-@ air missile ( AAM ) , rather than the previously reported R @-@ Darter . Previously in 1987 , Pratt & Whitney offered the Super @-@ 7 project three engine options ; <unk> , F404 , and <unk> , with local manufacturing in either China or Pakistan . Rolls Royce offered its RB199 @-@ 127 / 128 turbofan engine ; this plan was scrapped in 1989 . 
 In June 1999 , the contract to jointly develop and produce the Chengdu FC @-@ 1 / Super 7 was signed . The project was to be a 50 : 50 partnership ; the air forces of both countries would be committed to ordering the fighter . After GEC @-@ Marconi had abandoned the bidding to supply an integrated avionics suite , <unk> and Thomson @-@ CSF proposed a number of avionics suites based on the Grifo S7 and <unk> radars respectively , despite previously hoping to use the PAF 's Super 7 to launch its new Blue Hawk radar . Because of sanctions placed on Pakistan after the country 's 1998 nuclear weapons tests , design work progressed very slowly over the next 18 months , preventing delivery of the Western avionics to the PAF . In early 2001 , the PAF decided to decouple the airframe from the avionics , enabling design work on the aircraft to continue . As the airframe was developed , any new avionics requirements by the PAF could be more easily integrated into the airframe . 
 Prototype production began in September 2002 ; a full @-@ size mock @-@ up of the FC @-@ 1 / Super 7 was displayed at Airshow China in November 2002 . The first batch of Klimov RD @-@ 93 turbofan engines that would power the prototypes was also delivered in 2002 . According to a China National Aero @-@ Technology Import & Export Corporation ( <unk> ) official , the JF @-@ 17 's low cost is due to some of the on @-@ board systems having been adapted from those of the Chengdu J @-@ 10 . The official said , " This transfer of technology — transposing the aircraft systems from the J @-@ 10 to the JF @-@ 17 — is what makes the JF @-@ 17 so cost @-@ effective " . The use of computer @-@ aided design software shortened the design phase of the JF @-@ 17 . 
 = = = Flight testing and redesigning = = = 
 The first prototype , PT @-@ 01 , was rolled out on 31 May 2003 and transferred to the Chengdu Flight Test Centre to be prepared for its maiden flight . This was initially planned to take place in June , but was delayed due to concerns about the SARS outbreak . The designation Super @-@ 7 was replaced by " JF @-@ 17 " ( Joint Fighter @-@ 17 ) around this point . Low speed taxiing trials began at <unk> Airport , Chengdu , on 27 June 2003 . The maiden flight was made in late August 2003 ; an official maiden flight of the prototype took place in early September . The prototype was marked with the new PAF designation JF @-@ 17 . By March 2004 , CAC had made around 20 test flights of the first prototype . On 7 April 2004 , PAF test pilots Rashid Habib and Mohammad Ehsan ul @-@ Haq flew PT @-@ 01 for the first time . The maiden flight of the third prototype , PT @-@ 03 , took place on 9 April 2004 . In March 2004 , Pakistan was planning to induct around 200 aircraft . 
 Following the third prototype , several design improvements were developed and incorporated into further aircraft . Because of excessive smoke emissions by the RD @-@ 93 engine , the air intakes were widened . Reported control problems found in testing resulted in alterations to the wing leading edge root extensions ( LERX ) . The vertical tail fin was enlarged to house an expanded electronic warfare equipment bay in the tip . The redesigned aircraft had a slightly increased maximum take @-@ off weight and incorporated an increased quantity of Chinese @-@ sourced avionics ; however PAF had selected Western avionics for their aircraft , postponing PAF deliveries from late 2005 until 2007 . Pakistan evaluated British , French , and Italian avionics suites , the winner of which was expected to be finalised in 2006 . PT @-@ 04 , the fourth prototype and the first to incorporate the design changes , was rolled out in April 2006 and made its first flight on 28 April 2006 . 
 The modified air intakes replaced conventional intake ramps — whose function is to divert turbulent boundary layer airflow away from the inlet and prevent it entering the engine — with a <unk> supersonic inlet ( DSI ) design . The DSI uses a combination of forward @-@ swept inlet cowls and a three @-@ dimensional compression surface to divert the boundary layer airflow at high sub @-@ sonic and supersonic speeds . According to Lockheed Martin , the DSI design prevents most of the boundary layer air from entering the engine at speeds up to two times the speed of sound , reduces weight by removing the need for complex mechanical intake mechanisms , and is stealthier than a conventional intake . In 1999 , developmental work on the DSI with the aim of improving aircraft performance commenced . The JF @-@ 17 design was finalised in 2001 . Multiple models underwent wind tunnel tests ; it was found that the DSI reduced weight , cost , and complexity while improving performance . 
 For the avionics and weapons qualification phase of the flight testing , PT @-@ 04 was fitted with a fourth @-@ generation avionics suite that incorporates sensor fusion , an electronic warfare suite , enhanced man @-@ machine interface , Digital Electronic Engine Control ( DEEC ) for the RD @-@ 93 turbofan engine , FBW flight controls , day / night precision surface attack capability , and multi @-@ mode , pulse @-@ Doppler radar for BVR air @-@ to @-@ air attack capability . The sixth prototype , PT @-@ 06 , made its maiden flight on 10 September 2006 . Following a competition in 2008 , Martin @-@ Baker was selected over a Chinese firm for the supply of fifty <unk> ejection seats . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On 2 March 2007 , the first consignment of two small @-@ batch @-@ production ( SBP ) aircraft arrived in a dismantled state in Pakistan . They flew for the first time on 10 March 2007 and took part in a public aerial demonstration during a Pakistan Day parade on 23 March 2007 . The PAF intended to induct 200 JF @-@ 17 by 2015 to replace all its Chengdu F @-@ 7 , Nanchang A @-@ 5 , and Dassault Mirage III / 5 aircraft . In preparation for the in @-@ flight refuelling of JF @-@ 17s , the PAF has upgraded several Mirage IIIs with IFR probes for training purposes . A dual @-@ seat , combat @-@ capable trainer was originally scheduled to begin flight testing in 2006 ; in 2009 Pakistan reportedly decided to develop the training model into a specialised attack variant . 
 In November 2007 , the PAF and PAC conducted flight evaluations of aircraft fitted with a variant of the NRIET KLJ @-@ 10 radar developed by China 's Nanjing Research Institute for Electronic Technology ( NRIET ) , and the <unk> SD @-@ 10 active radar homing AAM . In 2005 , PAC began manufacturing JF @-@ 17 components ; production of sub @-@ assemblies commenced on 22 January 2008 . The PAF was to receive a further six pre @-@ production aircraft in 2005 , for a total of 8 out of an initial production run of 16 aircraft . Initial operating capability was to be achieved by the end of 2008 . Final assembly of the JF @-@ 17 in Pakistan began on 30 June 2009 ; PAC expected to complete production of four to six aircraft that year . They planned to produce twelve aircraft in 2010 and fifteen to sixteen aircraft per year from 2011 ; this could increase to twenty @-@ five aircraft per year . On December 29 , 2015 , Pakistan Aeronautical Complex ( PAC ) announced the rollout of 16th JF @-@ 17 Thunder fighter manufactured in the calendar year 2015 , taking total number of manufactured aircraft to more than 66 . Later , a PAF spokesperson said that in light of the interest shown by various countries , it has been decided that production capacity of JF @-@ 17 Thunder at PAC <unk> will be expanded . 
 Russia signed an agreement in August 2007 for re @-@ export of 150 RD @-@ 93 engines from China to Pakistan for the JF @-@ 17 . In 2008 , the PAF was reportedly not fully satisfied with the RD @-@ 93 engine and that it would only power the first 50 aircraft ; it was alleged that arrangements for a new engine , reportedly the Snecma <unk> @-@ P2 , may have been made . Mikhail <unk> , head of the MiG and Sukhoi design bureaus , recommended the Russian defence export agency Rosoboronexport block RD @-@ 92 engine sales to China to prevent export competition from the JF @-@ 17 against the MiG @-@ 29 . At the 2010 Farnborough Airshow , the JF @-@ 17 was displayed internationally for the first time ; aerial displays at the show were intended but were cancelled due to a late attendance decision as well as license and insurance costs . According to a Rosoboronexport official at the Airshow China 2010 , held on November 16 – 21 , 2005 in Zhuhai , China , Russia and China had signed a contract worth $ 238 million for 100 RD @-@ 93 engines with options for another 400 engines developed for the FC @-@ 1 . 
 According to media reports , Pakistan plans to increase production of JF @-@ 17s by 25 % in 2016 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 Pakistan negotiated with British and Italian defence firms regarding avionics and radars for the JF @-@ 17 development . Radar options include the Italian Galileo <unk> 's Grifo S7 , the French Thomson @-@ CSF 's <unk> ( a variant of the <unk> @-@ 2 ) , and the British company SELEX Galileo 's Vixen <unk> active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar . In 2010 , the PAF had reportedly selected ATE Aerospace Group to integrate French @-@ built avionics and weapons systems over rival bids from <unk> , Finmeccanica and a Thales @-@ Sagem joint venture . Fifty JF @-@ 17s were to be upgraded and an optional fifty from 2013 onwards , at a cost of up to US $ 1 @.@ 36 billion . The RC @-@ 400 radar , MICA AAMs , and several air @-@ to @-@ surface weapons are believed to be in the contract . The PAF also held talks with South Africa for the supply of <unk> A @-@ darter AAMs . 
 In April 2010 , after eighteen months of negotiations , the deal was reportedly suspended ; reports cited French concerns about Pakistan 's financial situation , the protection of sensitive French technology , and lobbying by the Indian government , which operates many French @-@ built aircraft . France wanted the PAF to purchase several Mirage 2000 @-@ 9 fighters from the United Arab Emirates Air Force , which would overlap with the upgraded JF @-@ 17 . In July 2010 , the PAF 's Chief of Air Staff , Air Chief Marshal Rao Qamar Suleman , said these reports were false . He said , " I have had discussions with French Government officials who have assured me that this is not the position of their government " . Suleman also speculated that " someone was trying to cause mischief — to put pressure on France not to supply the avionics we want " . 
 On 18 December 2013 , production of Block 2 JF @-@ 17s began at PAC 's <unk> facility . These aircraft have air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling capability , improved avionics , enhanced load carrying capacity , data link , and electronic warfare capabilities . Block 2 construction activity is planned to run until 2016 , after which the manufacturing of further developed Block 3 aircraft is planned . In December 2015 , it was announced that the 16th Block II aircraft had been handed over resulting in standing up of the 4th squadron . 
 Usman Shabbir of the Pakistan Military Consortium has said that Block 3 aircraft might include AESA radar , HMD , avionics improvements , and perhaps some reworking of the airframe . Local media has indicated that a 2 @-@ seat version will also be part of Block III package Unconfirmed reports says that Block III will also have better flight management system / software On 17 June 2015 , Jane 's Defence Weekly confirmed this that Block 3 will have an AESA radar and will also include a helmet @-@ mounted display ( HMD ) and possibly an internal infrared search and tracking ( IRST ) system . 
 Selex ES next @-@ generation cockpit includes a new mission computer , an enhanced head @-@ up display and contemporary multi @-@ function displays , plus the capability for the pilot to instead use a single , large @-@ area display . Selex is positioning the cockpit as a possible upgrade of JF @-@ 17 Block III . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Airframe and cockpit = = = 
 The airframe is of semi @-@ monocoque structure constructed primarily of aluminium alloys . High strength steel and titanium alloys are partially adopted in some critical areas . The airframe is designed for a service life of 4 @,@ 000 flight hours or 25 years , the first overhaul being due at 1 @,@ 200 flight hours . Block 2 JF @-@ 17s incorporate greater use of composite materials in the airframe to reduce weight . The retractable undercarriage has a tricycle arrangement with a single steerable nose @-@ wheel and two main undercarriages . The hydraulic brakes have an automatic anti @-@ skid system . The position and shape of the inlets is designed to give the required airflow to the jet engine during manoeuvres involving high angles of attack . 
 The mid @-@ mounted wings are of cropped @-@ delta configuration . Near the wing root are the LERX , which generate a vortex that provides extra lift to the wing at high angles of attack encountered during combat manoeuvres . A conventional tri @-@ plane empennage arrangement is incorporated , with all @-@ moving stabilators , single vertical stabiliser , rudder , and twin ventral fins . The flight control surfaces are operated by a computerised flight control system ( FCS ) , which also adjusts the slats / flaps for improved manoeuvrability . Up to 3 @,@ 629 kg ( 8 @,@ 001 lb ) of ordnance , equipment , and fuel can be mounted under the hardpoints , two of which are on the wing @-@ tips , four are under the wings and one is under the fuselage . 
 The glass cockpit is covered by a transparent , acrylic canopy that provides the pilot with a good , all @-@ round field of view . A centre stick is used for pitch and roll control while rudder pedals control yaw . A throttle is located to the left of the pilot . The cockpit incorporates hands @-@ on @-@ throttle @-@ and @-@ stick ( HOTAS ) controls . The pilot sits on a Martin @-@ Baker Mk @-@ <unk> zero @-@ zero ejection seat . The cockpit incorporates an electronic flight instrument system ( EFIS ) and a wide @-@ angle , holographic head @-@ up display ( HUD ) , which has a minimum total field of view of 25 degrees . The EFIS comprises three colour multi @-@ function displays , providing basic flight information , tactical information , and information on the engine , fuel , electrical , hydraulics , flight control , and environment control systems . The HUD and MFD can be configured to show any available information . Each MFD is 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) and 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) tall and is arranged side @-@ by @-@ side in portrait orientation . The central MFD is placed lowest to accommodate a control panel between it and the HUD . 
 = = = Avionics = = = 
 The avionics software incorporates the concept of open architecture . Instead of the military @-@ optimised Ada programming language , the software is written using the popular C + + programming language , enabling the use of the numerous civilian programmers available . The aircraft also includes a health and usage monitoring system , and automatic test equipment . The flight control system ( FCS ) comprises conventional controls with stability augmentation in the yaw and roll axis and a digital fly @-@ by @-@ wire ( FBW ) system in the pitch axis . The leading edge slats / flaps and trailing edge flaps are automatically adjusted during manoeuvring to increase turning performance . The FCS of serial production aircraft reportedly have a digital quadruplex ( quad @-@ redundant ) FBW system in the pitch axis and a duplex ( dual @-@ redundant ) FBW system in the roll and yaw axis . 
 The JF @-@ 17 has a defensive aids system ( DAS ) composed of various integrated sub @-@ systems . A radar warning receiver ( RWR ) provides data such as direction and proximity of enemy radars , and an electronic warfare ( EW ) suite housed in a fairing at the tip of the tail fin interferes with enemy radars . The EW suite is also linked to a Missile Approach Warning ( MAW ) system to defend against radar @-@ guided missiles . The MAW system uses several optical sensors across the airframe to detect the rocket motors of missiles across a 360 @-@ degree coverage . Data from the MAW system , such as direction of inbound missiles and the time to impact , is shown on cockpit displays and the HUD . A countermeasures dispensing system releases decoy flares and chaff to help evade hostile radar and missiles . The DAS systems will also be enhanced by integration of a self @-@ protection radar @-@ jamming pod that will be carried externally on a hardpoint . 
 The first forty @-@ two PAF production aircraft are equipped with the NRIET KLJ @-@ 7 radar , a variant of the KLJ @-@ 10 radar developed by China 's Nanjing Research Institute of Electronic Technology ( NRIET ) and also used on the Chengdu J @-@ 10 . Multiple modes can manage the surveillance and engagement of up to forty air , ground , and sea targets ; the track @-@ while @-@ scan mode can track up to ten targets at BVR and can engage two simultaneously with radar @-@ homing AAMs . The operation range for targets with a radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) of 5 m2 ( 54 sq ft ) is stated to be ≥ 105 km ( 65 mi ) in look @-@ up mode and ≥ 85 km ( 53 mi ) in look @-@ down mode . A forward looking infrared ( FLIR ) pod for low @-@ level navigation and infra @-@ red search and track ( IRST ) system for passive targeting can also be integrated ; the JF @-@ 17 Block 2 is believed to incorporate an IRST . 
 A helmet @-@ mounted sight ( HMS ) developed by Luoyang Electro @-@ Optics Technology Development Centre of <unk> was developed in parallel with the JF @-@ 17 ; it was first tested on Prototype 04 in 2006 . It was dubbed as EO HMS , ( Electro @-@ Optical Helmet Mounted Sight ) and was first revealed to the public in 2008 at the 7th Zhuhai Airshow , where a partial mock @-@ up was on display . The HMS tracks the pilot 's head and eye movements to guide missiles towards the pilot 's visual target . An externally carried day / night laser designator targeting pod may be integrated with the avionics to guide laser @-@ guided bombs ( LGBs ) . An extra hardpoint may be added under the starboard air intake , opposite the cannon , for such pods . To reduce the numbers of targeting pods required , the aircraft 's tactical data link can transmit target data to other aircraft not equipped with targeting pods . The communication systems comprise two VHF / UHF radios ; the VHF radio has the capacity for data linking for communication with ground control centres , airborne early warning and control aircraft and combat aircraft with compatible data links for network @-@ centric warfare , and improved situation awareness . 
 In April 2016 , Air Marshal Muhammad Ashfaque <unk> said that , " JF @-@ 17 needs a targeting pod , as the jets ’ usefulness in current operations was limited due to lack of precision targeting . To fulfill this gap the Air Force was interested in buying the Thales @-@ made Damocles , a third @-@ generation targeting pod ; which was a priority . 
 = = = Propulsion and fuel system = = = 
 The first two blocks of JF @-@ 17 is powered by a single Russian RD @-@ 93 turbofan engine , which is a variant of the RD @-@ 33 engine used on the MiG @-@ 29 fighter . The engine gives more thrust and significantly lower specific fuel consumption than turbojet engines fitted to older combat aircraft being replaced by the JF @-@ 17 . The advantages of using a single engine are a reduction in maintenance time and cost when compared to twin @-@ engined fighters . A thrust @-@ to @-@ weight ratio of 0 @.@ 99 can be achieved with full internal fuel tanks and no external payload . The engine 's air supply is provided by two bifurcated air inlets ( see airframe section ) . 
 The RD @-@ 93 is known to produce smoke trails . The Guizhou Aero Engine Group has been developing a new turbofan engine , the WS @-@ 13 Taishan , since 2000 to replace the RD @-@ 93 . It is based on the Klimov RD @-@ 33 and incorporates new technologies to boost performance and reliability . A thrust output of 80 to 86 @.@ 36 kN ( 17 @,@ 980 to 19 @,@ 410 lbf ) , a lifespan of 2 @,@ 200 hours , and a thrust @-@ to @-@ weight ratio of 8 @.@ 7 are expected . An improved version of the WS @-@ 13 , developing a thrust of around 100 kN ( 22 @,@ 000 lbf ) ( 22 @,@ 450 lb ) , is also reportedly under development . During the 2015 Paris Air Show , it was announced that flight testing of a JF @-@ 17 equipped with the WS @-@ 13 engine had begun . In 2015 , a representative of Pakistan Aeronautical Complex said that Pakistan would continue to use the RD @-@ 93 engine on their fighters . Local media reports in Jan 2016 say that , Russia is planning to sell engines for JF @-@ 17 directly to Pakistan . According to a PAC representative , Pakistan is looking to collaborate with Russia in developing and repairing engines 
 The fuel system comprises internal fuel tanks located in the wings and fuselage with a capacity of 2 @,@ 330 kg ( 5 @,@ 140 lb ) ; they are refuelled through a single point pressure refuelling system ( see turbine fuel systems ) . Internal fuel storage can be supplemented by external fuel tanks . One 800 @-@ litre ( 180 imp gal ) drop tank can be mounted on the aircraft 's centerline hardpoint under the fuselage and two 800 @-@ litre or 1 @,@ 110 @-@ litre ( 240 imp gal ) drop tanks can be mounted on the two inboard under @-@ wing hardpoints . The fuel system is compatible with in @-@ flight refuelling ( IFR ) , allowing tanker aircraft to refuel inflight , and increasing its range and loitering time significantly . All production aircraft for the PAF are to be fitted with IFR probes . In June 2013 , PAF Air Chief Marshal Tahir Rafique Butt said ground tests on the JF @-@ 17 's refuelling probes had been successfully completed and the first mid @-@ air refuelling operations would commence that summer . 
 = = = Weaponry = = = 
 The JF @-@ 17 can be armed with up to 3 @,@ 629 kg ( 8 @,@ 001 lb ) of air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ ground weaponry , and other equipment mounted externally on the aircraft 's seven hardpoints . One hardpoint is located under the fuselage between the main landing gear , two are underneath each wing , and one is at each wing @-@ tip . All seven hardpoints communicate via a MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1760 data @-@ bus architecture with the Stores Management System , which is stated to be capable of integration with weaponry of any origin . Internal armament comprises one 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) GSh @-@ 23 @-@ 2 twin @-@ barrel cannon mounted under the port side air intake , which can be replaced with a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) GSh @-@ 30 @-@ 2 twin @-@ barrel cannon . 
 The wing @-@ tip hardpoints are typically occupied by short range infra @-@ red homing AAMs . Many combinations of ordnance and equipment such as targeting pods can be carried on the under @-@ wing and under @-@ fuselage hardpoints . Underwing hardpoints can be fitted with multiple ejector racks , allowing each hardpoint to carry two 500 lb ( 230 kg ) unguided bombs or LGBs — <unk> or GBU @-@ 12 . It is unknown whether multiple ejector racks can be used for ordnance such as beyond visual range ( BVR ) AAMs . Active radar homing BVR AAMs can be integrated with the radar and data @-@ link for mid @-@ course updates . The Chinese PL @-@ 12 / SD @-@ 10 is expected to be the aircraft 's primary BVR air @-@ to @-@ air weapon , although this may change if radars of other origin are fitted . Short range , infra @-@ red homing missiles include the Chinese PL @-@ 5E and PL @-@ 9C , and the AIM @-@ 9L . The PAF is also seeking to arm the JF @-@ 17 with a fifth generation close @-@ combat missile such as the IRIS @-@ T or A @-@ darter . These will be integrated with the HMS / D and the radar for targeting . 
 Unguided air @-@ to @-@ ground weaponry includes rocket pods , gravity bombs and Matra Durandal anti @-@ runway munitions . Precision @-@ guided munitions such as LGBs and satellite @-@ guided bombs are also compatible with the JF @-@ 17 , as are other guided weapons such as anti @-@ ship missiles and anti @-@ radiation missiles . Pakistan planned to bring the Brazilian MAR @-@ 1 anti @-@ radiation missile into service on its JF @-@ 17 fleet in 2014 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Initial delivery , evaluation , and induction = = = 
 Small batch production of the single @-@ seat , single @-@ engine JF @-@ 17s began in China in June 2006 . The first two small @-@ batch @-@ produced aircraft were delivered on 2 March 2007 and first flew in Pakistan on 10 March . They took part in an aerial display on 23 March 2007 as part of the Pakistan Day Joint Services Parade in Islamabad . Another six small @-@ batch @-@ produced aircraft were delivered by March 2008 . These were extensively flight @-@ tested and evaluated by the PAF . Two serial production aircraft were delivered from China in 2009 and the first Pakistani @-@ manufactured aircraft was delivered to the PAF in a ceremony on 23 November 2009 . 
 On 18 February 2010 , the first JF @-@ 17 squadron , No. 26 Black Spiders , was officially inducted into the PAF with an initial strength of 14 fighter planes . These aircraft first saw service in the anti @-@ terrorist operation in South Waziristan , during which various types of weapons were evaluated . They took part in the PAF 's High Mark 2010 exercise from 29 April , where they were used by the Blue Force to attack Red Land surface targets with precision air @-@ to @-@ surface weapons . A re @-@ equipment ceremony for No. 26 Black Spiders Squadron took place on 11 April 2011 , during which it was stated that the JF @-@ 17 had " revolutionised the PAF 's operational concepts " . The then Chief of the Air Staff , Air Chief Marshal Rao Qamar Suleman said : " Today as we re @-@ equip No 26 squadron , we have also raised No. 16 Squadron with the JF @-@ 17 Thunder aircraft . I would like to mention and appreciate the contribution and support of the Chinese in helping us acquire a technological breakthrough in the shape of this aircraft . " According to Pakistani forums , No 27 Squadron " <unk> " replaced its Mirage <unk> with JF @-@ 17 in 2013 . No 2 Squadron currently tasked with sea strikes reequipped with JF @-@ 17s in Sept 2015 replacing the <unk> . No 16 Squadron " Black Panthers " has already stood up . The next squadron is supposed to be No 7 Squadron . 
 = = = Potential operators = = = 
 Various countries including Algeria , Argentina , Bangladesh , Myanmar , Egypt , Iran , Lebanon , Malaysia , Morocco , Nigeria , Sri Lanka , and Uruguay have shown interest in the JF @-@ 17 . 
 The Azerbaijani Air Forces has negotiated with China for several dozen JF @-@ 17s worth approximately US $ 16 to 18 million each . The Sudanese Air Force was reportedly negotiating to buy twelve aircraft . The Air Force of Zimbabwe reportedly had plans to purchase twelve JF @-@ 17s in 2004 , as part of the $ 240 million deal with China . But none of the aircraft sales have been materialized . In 2010 , China was reportedly in talks about the JF @-@ 17 with five or six countries , some of which had sent pilots to China to undergo test flights . 
 Argentine officials at the 2013 Paris Air Show said they had discussed JF @-@ 17 co @-@ production with Chinese officials , calling it the first formal effort potentially leading to the co @-@ production of a modern Chinese fighter in Latin America . Fábrica Argentina de Aviones ( <unk> ) officials said the co @-@ produced FC @-@ 1 could be called the " Pulqui @-@ III " , recalling <unk> 's Pulqui @-@ II , Latin America 's first swept wing jet fighter . On 15 February 2015 , after a three @-@ day visit to Beijing by Argentine president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner , Argentina completed negotiations to purchase twenty FC @-@ 1s from Chengdu Aircraft Corporation . In January 2014 , the Royal Saudi Air Force was reportedly examining potential technology transfer and co @-@ production opportunities for the JF @-@ 17 . Saudi Defence Minister Prince Salman bin Sultan toured the JF @-@ 17 project during a visit to Pakistan . 
 The Burma Times reported on 15 June 2014 that Myanmar was considering local production of the JF @-@ 17 with China and Pakistan assistance . 
 In December 2014 , during the International Defence Exhibition and Seminar in Karachi , Nigeria was reportedly buying between 25 and 40 JF @-@ 17s from Pakistan . Nigerian Air Force chief Air Marshal <unk> <unk> <unk> had visited Pakistan earlier in October 2014 . Nigeria became the second customer in 2016 by placing an order for 3 planes . However , as the news reports value the deal at US $ 25 million , so it is not clear if the item is <unk> . June 2016 article in Jane 's re @-@ affirmed NAF budget for 3 JF @-@ 17 , 10 Super <unk> , and 2 Mi @-@ <unk> aircraft in 2016 . 
 In June 2015 , Pakistani media reports suggested that export orders have also been confirmed and signed with the Sri Lanka Air Force , according to Pakistan @-@ based 92 News while some other sources claim that Myanmar is the first buyer of Pakistani JF @-@ 17 Thunder jets . The article goes on to say that deliveries are likely to begin in 2017 . According to the report , the order will be for around 18 @-@ 24 aircraft , potentially confirming claims made at the 51st Paris Air Show that the first contract for the sale of the JF @-@ 17 had been signed with the Sri Lanka Air Force . 
 Though there are reports that Sri Lanka signed an agreement to buy eight JF @-@ 17 Thunders from Pakistan during a state visit by Nawaz Sharif in January 2016 , but Sri Lankan government denies that any such deal happened . The deal was cancelled after Indian pressure . The deal would have been for 10 @-@ 12 planes , valuing each plane at US $ 35 million for a total of US $ 400 million 
 Moroccan media has revealed that the country is interested in buying JF @-@ 17 and has invited the sales team to showcase the aircraft in the Marrakech Air Show 2016 According to a local analyst , the deal might be difficult to come to fruition , as the JF @-@ 17 Block I and Block II do not match the on @-@ board electronics suites and air @-@ to @-@ air / air @-@ to @-@ surface munitions inventories of Morocco 's current western avionics equipped Mirage F @-@ 1 ( <unk> ) , F @-@ 5E / F Tiger II and Alpha Jets 
 Egypt in 2015 reportedly expressed an interest again in the JF @-@ 17 despite buying French and Russian planes earlier that year . This has come as a surprise to analysts who had considered the possibility of Egypt acquiring the JF @-@ 17 to be lost . 
 = = Notable accidents and incidents = = 
 A JF @-@ 17 Thunder crashed in Attock , Pakistan on 14 November 2011 killing its pilot . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Prototypes = = = 
 Two airframe configurations were tested during the prototype stage . The first configuration was tested on the first three prototype aircraft ; PT @-@ 01 , PT @-@ 02 , and PT @-@ 03 . The next three prototypes PT @-@ 04 , PT @-@ 05 , and PT @-@ 06 were of the second configuration , incorporating modifications such as DSI , wider LERX , extended ventral fins , and a taller , less swept vertical stabiliser with a rectangular fairing at the tip containing electronic warfare equipment and small blister fairings at the base containing Missile Approach Warning sensors . The PT @-@ 04 prototype was primarily used for avionics and weapon qualification tests . Prototype @-@ 01 first flew in August 2003 ; Prototype @-@ 03 followed in April 2004 . On 10 May 2006 , Prototype 04 made its maiden flight . 
 In 2007 , a dual @-@ seat version for training and strike roles was proposed and due to the customer interests the development started in 2015 . 
 According to local media , the newly launched JF @-@ 17B dual seat fighter jet will be inducted in the Air Force by April 2017 with the maiden flight by the end of the year . 
 = = = Production versions = = = 
 JF @-@ 17 Block 1 — Production in China began in June 2006 . The first three Chinese weapons to be integrated are the PL @-@ 5E II AAM , the SD @-@ 10 AAM , and the C @-@ <unk> anti @-@ shipping missile . Block 1 aircraft had performed " better than expected " according to PAF Air Commodore Junaid . Production of Block 1 was completed on 18 December when the fiftieth aircraft — 58 % of which was produced in Pakistan — was delivered . A Block 1 JF @-@ 17 had cost approximately US $ 15 million per unit . 
 JF @-@ 17 Block 2 — Production began on 18 December 2013 and initial testing began on 9 February 2015 . These aircraft have air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling capability , improved avionics , enhanced load carrying capacity , data link , and electronic warfare capabilities . The construction will continue until 2016 , after which the manufacture of Block 3 is planned . A Block 2 JF @-@ 17 costs approximately US $ 25 million per unit . Chairman of PAC , Air Marshal <unk> Ahmed said : " We will hand over 16 Block @-@ II JF @-@ 17s to the PAF every year " , and that the manufacturing plant has the capacity to produce 25 units in a year . According to local media , PAC rolled out the 16th Block 2 aircraft in December 2015 enabling the 4th <unk> squadron to be stood up . The JF @-@ 17B two seat version would start testing in September 2016 . 
 JF @-@ 17 Block 3 — Projected to feature further avionics advancements such as an AESA radar , more use of composites , a new engine , helmet mounted display , and a two @-@ seater cockpit option , with a top speed of 2 @.@ 0 + Mach . Pakistani Air Force officials have described it as a " fourth generation plus " fighter jet . According to unconfirmed media reports the induction is expected to start around 2019 . As of January 2016 , the design of the JF @-@ 17 Block III has not been finalized . 
 JF @-@ 17B - is a twin seater variant and is to be inducted into the Pakistan Air Force by 2017 , it 's multi @-@ roles include use for training and for enhanced surveillance and support capability 
 = = Operators = = 
 Pakistan 
 Pakistan Air Force : 66 units in <unk> Base Minhas 
 JF @-@ 17 <unk> ( Test and Evaluation Flight ) ( 2007 – 2010 ) 
 PAF Base <unk> . 26 Squadron Black Spiders ( 2010 ) 
 No. 16 Squadron Black Panthers ( 2011 ) 
 PAF Base Masroor 
 No. 2 Squadron Minhas ( 2015 ) 
 PAF Base <unk> 
 Combat Commanders School ( 2015 ) 
 = = Specifications ( Block 1 ) = = 
 Data from Pakistan Aeronautical Complex 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 14 @.@ 93 m ( 49 ft ) 
 Wingspan : 9 @.@ 45 m ( 31 ft , including 2 wingtip missiles ) 
 Height : 4 @.@ 72 m ( 15 ft 6 in ) 
 Wing area : 24 @.@ 4 m ² ( 263 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 6 @,@ 586 kg ( 14 @,@ 520 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 9 @,@ 100 kg ( 20 @,@ 062 lb ) 
 Useful load : <unk> ( Block 1 ) ( ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 12 @,@ 500 kg ( 28 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Klimov RD @-@ 93 or Guizhou WS @-@ <unk> thrust : 49 @.@ 7 kN / 51 @.@ 2 kN ( 11 @,@ 106 lbf / 11 @,@ 510 lbf ) 
 Thrust with afterburner : 84 @.@ 6 kN ( 19 @,@ 000 lbf ) 
 G @-@ limit : + 8 g / -3 g 
 Internal Fuel Capacity : 2 @,@ 350 kg ( 5 @,@ 130 lb ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Mach 1 @.@ 6 ( 1 @,@ 217 @.@ 9 mph ; 1 @,@ 960 @.@ 1 km / h ) 
 Combat radius : 1 @,@ 352 km ( 840 mi ) 
 Ferry range : 3 @,@ 482 km ( 1 @,@ 880 NM ) 
 Service ceiling : 16 @,@ 920 m ( 55 @,@ 500 ft ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 95 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 23 mm GSh @-@ 23 @-@ 2 twin @-@ barrel cannon or 1x 30 mm GSh @-@ 30 @-@ 2 
 Hardpoints : 7 in total ( 4 × under @-@ wing , 2 × wing @-@ tip , 1 × under @-@ fuselage ( Joint <unk> ) ; pylon stations number 3 , 4 and 5 are wet @-@ plumb capable ) with a capacity of 8 @,@ 001 lb ( 3 @,@ 629 kg ) for external fuel and ordnance 
 Missiles : Air @-@ to @-@ air missiles : 
 MAA @-@ 1 Piranha ( Short @-@ range ) 
 AIM @-@ 9L / M ( Short @-@ range ) 
 PL @-@ <unk> ( Short @-@ range ) 
 PL @-@ 9C ( Short @-@ range ) 
 PL @-@ 12 / SD @-@ 10 ( Beyond visual range ) 
 Air @-@ to @-@ surface missiles : 
 MAR @-@ 1 ( Anti @-@ radiation missile ) 
 Ra 'ad ALCM ( Nuclear @-@ capable Subsonic Cruise missile ) 
 CM @-@ <unk> supersonic anti @-@ shipping missile , export version of YJ @-@ 12 
 C @-@ <unk> Anti @-@ ship missile 
 CM 102 supersonic Anti radiation missile 
 GB @-@ 6 Air @-@ Launched Standoff <unk> Dispenser Precision Guided Weapon 
 Bombs : 
 Unguided bombs : 
 Mk @-@ 82 ( general purpose bomb ) 
 Mk @-@ 84 ( general purpose bomb ) 
 Matra Durandal ( anti @-@ runway bomb ) 
 CBU @-@ 100 / Mk @-@ 20 Rockeye ( anti @-@ armour cluster bomb ) 
 Precision guided munitions ( PGM ) : 
 GBU @-@ 10 ( Laser @-@ guided ) 
 GBU @-@ 12 ( Laser @-@ guided ) 
 LT @-@ 2 ( Laser @-@ guided ) 
 H @-@ 2 ( electro @-@ optically guided ) 
 H @-@ 4 ( electro @-@ optically guided ) 
 LS @-@ 6 ( satellite @-@ guided glide bombs ) 
 Satellite @-@ guided bombs 
 Others : 
 Rocket Pods 
 Countermeasures ( Flares , Chaff ) 
 Up to 3 external drop tanks ( 2 × under @-@ wing 1 @,@ 100 litres ( 240 imp gal ; 290 US gal ) , 1 × under @-@ fuselage 800 litres ( 180 imp gal ; 210 US gal ) ) for extended range / loitering time 
 Avionics 
 DEEC electronic warfare suite 
 NRIET KLJ @-@ 7 multi @-@ mode fire @-@ control radar 
 Night vision goggles ( NVG ) compatible glass cockpit 
 Externally mounted avionics pods : 
 KG @-@ <unk> self @-@ protection radar jamming pod 
 WMD @-@ 7 day / night targeting pod 
 = Carbon = 
 Carbon ( from Latin : carbo " coal " ) is a chemical element with symbol C and atomic number 6 . On the periodic table , it is the first ( row 2 ) of six elements in column ( group ) 14 , which have in common the composition of their outer electron shell . It is nonmetallic and tetravalent — making four electrons available to form covalent chemical bonds . Three isotopes occur naturally , 12C and 13C being stable while 14C is radioactive , decaying with a half @-@ life of about 5 @,@ 730 years . Carbon is one of the few elements known since antiquity . 
 Carbon is the 15th most abundant element in the Earth 's crust , and the fourth most abundant element in the universe by mass after hydrogen , helium , and oxygen . Carbon 's abundance , its unique diversity of organic compounds , and its unusual ability to form polymers at the temperatures commonly encountered on Earth enables this element to serve as a common element of all known life . It is the second most abundant element in the human body by mass ( about 18 @.@ 5 % ) after oxygen . 
 The atoms of carbon can be bonded together in different ways , termed allotropes of carbon . The best known are graphite , diamond , and amorphous carbon . The physical properties of carbon vary widely with the allotropic form . For example , graphite is opaque and black while diamond is highly transparent . Graphite is soft enough to form a streak on paper ( hence its name , from the Greek verb " <unk> " which means " to write " ) , while diamond is the hardest naturally @-@ occurring material known . Graphite is a good electrical conductor while diamond has a low electrical conductivity . Under normal conditions , diamond , carbon nanotubes , and graphene have the highest thermal conductivities of all known materials . All carbon allotropes are solids under normal conditions , with graphite being the most thermodynamically stable form . They are chemically resistant and require high temperature to react even with oxygen . 
 The most common oxidation state of carbon in inorganic compounds is + 4 , while + 2 is found in carbon monoxide and transition metal carbonyl complexes . The largest sources of inorganic carbon are limestones , dolomites and carbon dioxide , but significant quantities occur in organic deposits of coal , peat , oil , and methane clathrates . Carbon forms a vast number of compounds , more than any other element , with almost ten million compounds described to date , and yet that number is but a fraction of the number of theoretically possible compounds under standard conditions . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The allotropes of carbon ( see below ) includes graphite , one of the softest known substances , and diamond , the hardest naturally occurring substance . It bonds readily with other small atoms including other carbon atoms , and is capable of forming multiple stable covalent bonds with such atoms . Carbon is known to form almost ten million different compounds , a large majority of all chemical compounds . Carbon also has the highest sublimation point of all elements . At atmospheric pressure it has no melting point as its triple point is at 10 @.@ 8 ± 0 @.@ 2 MPa and 4 @,@ 600 ± 300 K ( ~ 4 @,@ 330 ° C or 7 @,@ 820 ° F ) , so it sublimes at about 3 @,@ 900 K. 
 Carbon sublimes in a carbon arc which has a temperature of about 5 @,@ 800 K ( 5 @,@ 530 ° C ; 9 @,@ 980 ° F ) . Thus , irrespective of its allotropic form , carbon remains solid at higher temperatures than the highest melting point metals such as tungsten or rhenium . Although thermodynamically prone to oxidation , carbon resists oxidation more effectively than elements such as iron and copper that are weaker reducing agents at room temperature . 
 Carbon compounds form the basis of all known life on Earth , and the carbon @-@ nitrogen cycle provides some of the energy produced by the Sun and other stars . Although it forms an extraordinary variety of compounds , most forms of carbon are comparatively unreactive under normal conditions . At standard temperature and pressure , it resists all but the strongest oxidizers . It does not react with sulfuric acid , hydrochloric acid , chlorine or any alkalis . At elevated temperatures , carbon reacts with oxygen to form carbon oxides , and will rob oxygen from metal oxides to leave the elemental metal . This exothermic reaction is used in the iron and steel industry to smelt iron and to control the carbon content of steel : 
 Fe 
 3O 
 4 + 4 C ( s ) → 3 Fe ( s ) + 4 CO ( g ) 
 with sulfur to form carbon disulfide and with steam in the coal @-@ gas reaction : 
 C ( s ) + H2O ( g ) → CO ( g ) + H2 ( g ) . 
 Carbon combines with some metals at high temperatures to form metallic carbides , such as the iron carbide cementite in steel , and tungsten carbide , widely used as an abrasive and for making hard tips for cutting tools . 
 As of 2009 , graphene appears to be the strongest material ever tested . The process of separating it from graphite will require some further technological development before it is economical for industrial processes . 
 The system of carbon allotropes spans a range of extremes : 
 = = = Allotropes = = = 
 Atomic carbon is a very short @-@ lived species and , therefore , carbon is stabilized in various multi @-@ atomic structures with different molecular configurations called allotropes . The three relatively well @-@ known allotropes of carbon are amorphous carbon , graphite , and diamond . Once considered exotic , fullerenes are nowadays commonly synthesized and used in research ; they include buckyballs , carbon nanotubes , carbon <unk> and nanofibers . Several other exotic allotropes have also been discovered , such as lonsdaleite ( questionable ) , glassy carbon , carbon <unk> and linear <unk> carbon ( <unk> ) . 
 The amorphous form is an assortment of carbon atoms in a non @-@ crystalline , irregular , glassy state , which is essentially graphite but not held in a crystalline <unk> . It is present as a powder , and is the main constituent of substances such as charcoal , <unk> ( soot ) and activated carbon . At normal pressures , carbon takes the form of graphite , in which each atom is bonded trigonally to three others in a plane composed of fused hexagonal rings , just like those in aromatic hydrocarbons . The resulting network is 2 @-@ dimensional , and the resulting flat sheets are stacked and loosely bonded through weak van der Waals forces . This gives graphite its softness and its cleaving properties ( the sheets slip easily past one another ) . Because of the delocalization of one of the outer electrons of each atom to form a π @-@ cloud , graphite conducts electricity , but only in the plane of each covalently bonded sheet . This results in a lower bulk electrical conductivity for carbon than for most metals . The delocalization also accounts for the energetic stability of graphite over diamond at room temperature . 
 At very high pressures , carbon forms the more compact allotrope , diamond , having nearly twice the density of graphite . Here , each atom is bonded tetrahedrally to four others , forming a 3 @-@ dimensional network of puckered six @-@ membered rings of atoms . Diamond has the same cubic structure as silicon and germanium , and because of the strength of the carbon @-@ carbon bonds , it is the hardest naturally occurring substance measured by resistance to scratching . Contrary to the popular belief that " diamonds are forever " , they are thermodynamically unstable under normal conditions and transform into graphite . Due to a high activation energy barrier , the transition into graphite is so slow at normal temperature that it is unnoticeable . Under some conditions , carbon crystallizes as lonsdaleite , a hexagonal crystal lattice with all atoms covalently bonded and properties similar to those of diamond . 
 <unk> are a synthetic crystalline formation with a graphite @-@ like structure , but in place of hexagons , fullerenes are formed of pentagons ( or even <unk> ) of carbon atoms . The missing ( or additional ) atoms warp the sheets into spheres , ellipses , or cylinders . The properties of fullerenes ( split into buckyballs , <unk> , and <unk> ) have not yet been fully analyzed and represent an intense area of research in nanomaterials . The names " fullerene " and " buckyball " are given after Richard Buckminster Fuller , popularizer of geodesic domes , which resemble the structure of fullerenes . The buckyballs are fairly large molecules formed completely of carbon bonded trigonally , forming spheroids ( the best @-@ known and simplest is the <unk> @-@ shaped C60 buckminsterfullerene ) . Carbon nanotubes are structurally similar to buckyballs , except that each atom is bonded trigonally in a curved sheet that forms a hollow cylinder . <unk> were first reported in 2007 and are hybrid <unk> tube / buckyball materials ( buckyballs are covalently bonded to the outer wall of a nanotube ) that combine the properties of both in a single structure . 
 Of the other discovered allotropes , carbon <unk> is a ferromagnetic allotrope discovered in 1997 . It consists of a low @-@ density cluster @-@ assembly of carbon atoms strung together in a loose three @-@ dimensional web , in which the atoms are bonded trigonally in six- and seven @-@ membered rings . It is among the lightest known solids , with a density of about 2 kg / m3 . Similarly , glassy carbon contains a high proportion of closed porosity , but contrary to normal graphite , the graphitic layers are not stacked like pages in a book , but have a more random arrangement . Linear <unk> carbon has the chemical structure - ( C : : : C ) n- . Carbon in this modification is linear with sp orbital hybridization , and is a polymer with alternating single and triple bonds . This <unk> is of considerable interest to nanotechnology as its Young 's modulus is forty times that of the hardest known material – diamond . 
 In 2015 , a team at the North Carolina State University announced the development of another allotrope they have dubbed Q @-@ carbon , created by a high energy low duration laser pulse on amorphous carbon dust . Q @-@ carbon is reported to exhibit <unk> , fluorescence , and a hardness superior to diamonds . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Carbon is the fourth most abundant chemical element in the universe by mass after hydrogen , helium , and oxygen . Carbon is abundant in the Sun , stars , comets , and in the atmospheres of most planets . Some meteorites contain microscopic diamonds that were formed when the solar system was still a protoplanetary disk . Microscopic diamonds may also be formed by the intense pressure and high temperature at the sites of meteorite impacts . 
 In 2014 NASA announced a greatly upgraded database for tracking polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) in the universe . More than 20 % of the carbon in the universe may be associated with PAHs , complex compounds of carbon and hydrogen without oxygen . These compounds figure in the PAH world hypothesis where they are hypothesized to have a role in abiogenesis and formation of life . PAHs seem to have been formed " a couple of billion years " after the Big Bang , are widespread throughout the universe , and are associated with new stars and exoplanets . 
 It has been estimated that the solid earth as a whole contains 730 ppm of carbon , with 2000 ppm in the core and 120 ppm in the combined mantle and crust . Since the mass of the earth is 5 @.@ 972 × 1024 kg , this would imply 4360 million gigatonnes of carbon . This is much more than the amount of carbon in the oceans or atmosphere ( below ) . 
 In combination with oxygen in carbon dioxide , carbon is found in the Earth 's atmosphere ( approximately 810 gigatonnes of carbon ) and dissolved in all water bodies ( approximately 36 @,@ 000 gigatonnes of carbon ) . Around 1 @,@ 900 gigatonnes of carbon are present in the biosphere . Hydrocarbons ( such as coal , petroleum , and natural gas ) contain carbon as well . Coal " reserves " ( not " resources " ) amount to around 900 gigatonnes with perhaps 18 000 Gt of resources . Oil reserves are around 150 gigatonnes . Proven sources of natural gas are about 175 1012 cubic metres ( containing about 105 gigatonnes of carbon ) , but studies estimate another 900 1012 cubic metres of " unconventional " deposits such as shale gas , representing about 540 gigatonnes of carbon . 
 Carbon is also found in methane hydrates in polar regions and under the seas . Various estimates put this carbon between 500 , 2500 Gt , or 3000 Gt . 
 In the past , quantities of hydrocarbons were greater . According to one source , in the period from 1751 to 2008 about 347 gigatonnes of carbon were released as carbon dioxide to the atmosphere from burning of fossil fuels . Another source puts the amount added to the atmosphere for the period since 1750 at 879 Gt , and the total going to the atmosphere , sea , and land ( such as peat bogs ) at almost 2000 Gt . 
 Carbon is a constituent ( about 12 % by mass ) of the very large masses of carbonate rock ( limestone , dolomite , marble and so on ) . Coal is very rich in carbon ( anthracite contains 92 – 98 % ) and is the largest commercial source of mineral carbon , accounting for 4 @,@ 000 gigatonnes or 80 % of fossil fuel . 
 As for individual carbon allotropes , graphite is found in large quantities in the United States ( mostly in New York and Texas ) , Russia , Mexico , Greenland , and India . Natural diamonds occur in the rock kimberlite , found in ancient volcanic " necks " , or " pipes " . Most diamond deposits are in Africa , notably in South Africa , Namibia , Botswana , the Republic of the Congo , and Sierra Leone . Diamond deposits have also been found in Arkansas , Canada , the Russian Arctic , Brazil , and in Northern and Western Australia . Diamonds are now also being recovered from the ocean floor off the Cape of Good Hope . Diamonds are found naturally , but about 30 % of all industrial diamonds used in the U.S. are now manufactured . 
 Carbon @-@ 14 is formed in upper layers of the troposphere and the stratosphere at altitudes of 9 – 15 km by a reaction that is precipitated by cosmic rays . Thermal neutrons are produced that collide with the nuclei of nitrogen @-@ 14 , forming carbon @-@ 14 and a proton . 
 Carbon @-@ rich asteroids are relatively preponderant in the outer parts of the asteroid belt in our solar system . These asteroids have not yet been directly sampled by scientists . The asteroids can be used in hypothetical space @-@ based carbon mining , which may be possible in the future , but is currently technologically impossible . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Isotopes of carbon are atomic nuclei that contain six protons plus a number of neutrons ( varying from 2 to 16 ) . Carbon has two stable , naturally occurring isotopes . The isotope carbon @-@ 12 ( 12C ) forms 98 @.@ 93 % of the carbon on Earth , while carbon @-@ 13 ( 13C ) forms the remaining 1 @.@ 07 % . The concentration of 12C is further increased in biological materials because biochemical reactions discriminate against 13C . In 1961 , the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) adopted the isotope carbon @-@ 12 as the basis for atomic weights . Identification of carbon in nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) experiments is done with the isotope 13C . 
 Carbon @-@ 14 ( 14C ) is a naturally occurring radioisotope , created in the upper atmosphere ( lower stratosphere and upper troposphere ) by interaction of nitrogen with cosmic rays . It is found in trace amounts on Earth of up to 1 part per trillion ( 0 @.@ <unk> % ) , mostly confined to the atmosphere and superficial deposits , particularly of peat and other organic materials . This isotope decays by 0 @.@ 158 MeV β − emission . Because of its relatively short half @-@ life of <unk> years , 14C is virtually absent in ancient rocks . The amount of 14C in the atmosphere and in living organisms is almost constant , but decreases predictably in their bodies after death . This principle is used in radiocarbon dating , invented in 1949 , which has been used extensively to determine the age of carbonaceous materials with ages up to about 40 @,@ 000 years . 
 There are 15 known isotopes of carbon and the shortest @-@ lived of these is 8C which decays through proton emission and alpha decay and has a half @-@ life of <unk> − 21 s . The exotic <unk> exhibits a nuclear halo , which means its radius is appreciably larger than would be expected if the nucleus were a sphere of constant density . 
 = = = Formation in stars = = = 
 Formation of the carbon atomic nucleus requires a nearly simultaneous triple collision of alpha particles ( helium nuclei ) within the core of a giant or supergiant star which is known as the triple @-@ alpha process , as the products of further nuclear fusion reactions of helium with hydrogen or another helium nucleus produce lithium @-@ 5 and beryllium @-@ 8 respectively , both of which are highly unstable and decay almost instantly back into smaller nuclei . This happens in conditions of temperatures over 100 <unk> and helium concentration that the rapid expansion and cooling of the early universe prohibited , and therefore no significant carbon was created during the Big Bang . 
 According to current physical cosmology theory , carbon is formed in the interiors of stars in the horizontal branch by the collision and transformation of three helium nuclei . When those stars die as supernova , the carbon is scattered into space as dust . This dust becomes component material for the formation of second or third @-@ generation star systems with accreted planets . The Solar System is one such star system with an abundance of carbon , enabling the existence of life as we know it . 
 The CNO cycle is an additional fusion mechanisms that powers stars , wherein carbon operates as a catalyst . 
 Rotational transitions of various isotopic forms of carbon monoxide ( for example , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) are detectable in the submillimeter wavelength range , and are used in the study of newly forming stars in molecular clouds . 
 = = = Carbon cycle = = = 
 Under terrestrial conditions , conversion of one element to another is very rare . Therefore , the amount of carbon on Earth is effectively constant . Thus , processes that use carbon must obtain it from somewhere and dispose of it somewhere else . The paths of carbon in the environment form the carbon cycle . For example , photosynthetic plants draw carbon dioxide from the atmosphere ( or seawater ) and build it into biomass , as in the Calvin cycle , a process of carbon fixation . Some of this biomass is eaten by animals , while some carbon is exhaled by animals as carbon dioxide . The carbon cycle is considerably more complicated than this short loop ; for example , some carbon dioxide is dissolved in the oceans ; if bacteria do not consume it , dead plant or animal matter may become petroleum or coal , which releases carbon when burned . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 = = = Organic compounds = = = 
 Carbon can form very long chains of interconnecting C @-@ C bonds , a property that is called catenation . Carbon @-@ carbon bonds are strong and stable . Through catenation , carbon forms a countless number of compounds . A tally of unique compounds shows that more contain carbon that those that do not . A similar claim can be made for hydrogen because most organic compounds also contain hydrogen . 
 The simplest form of an organic molecule is the hydrocarbon — a large family of organic molecules that are composed of hydrogen atoms bonded to a chain of carbon atoms . Chain length , side chains and functional groups all affect the properties of organic molecules . 
 Carbon occurs in all known organic life and is the basis of organic chemistry . When united with hydrogen , it forms various hydrocarbons that are important to industry as refrigerants , lubricants , solvents , as chemical feedstock for the manufacture of plastics and petrochemicals , and as fossil fuels . 
 When combined with oxygen and hydrogen , carbon can form many groups of important biological compounds including sugars , <unk> , <unk> , alcohols , fats , and aromatic esters , carotenoids and terpenes . With nitrogen it forms alkaloids , and with the addition of sulfur also it forms antibiotics , amino acids , and rubber products . With the addition of phosphorus to these other elements , it forms DNA and RNA , the chemical @-@ code carriers of life , and adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , the most important energy @-@ transfer molecule in all living cells . 
 = = = Inorganic compounds = = = 
 Commonly carbon @-@ containing compounds which are associated with minerals or which do not contain hydrogen or fluorine , are treated separately from classical organic compounds ; the definition is not rigid ( see reference articles above ) . Among these are the simple oxides of carbon . The most prominent oxide is carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . This was once the principal constituent of the <unk> , but is a minor component of the Earth 's atmosphere today . Dissolved in water , it forms carbonic acid ( H 
 2CO 
 3 ) , but as most compounds with multiple single @-@ bonded oxygens on a single carbon it is unstable . Through this intermediate , though , resonance @-@ stabilized carbonate ions are produced . Some important minerals are carbonates , notably calcite . Carbon disulfide ( CS 
 2 ) is similar . 
 The other common oxide is carbon monoxide ( CO ) . It is formed by incomplete combustion , and is a colorless , odorless gas . The molecules each contain a triple bond and are fairly polar , resulting in a tendency to bind permanently to hemoglobin molecules , displacing oxygen , which has a lower binding affinity . Cyanide ( CN − ) , has a similar structure , but behaves much like a halide ion ( pseudohalogen ) . For example , it can form the nitride cyanogen molecule ( ( CN ) 2 ) , similar to diatomic halides . Other uncommon oxides are carbon suboxide ( C 
 3O 
 2 ) , the unstable <unk> monoxide ( <unk> ) , carbon trioxide ( CO3 ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> anhydride ( <unk> ) . 
 With reactive metals , such as tungsten , carbon forms either carbides ( C4 − ) , or <unk> ( C2 − 
 2 ) to form alloys with high melting points . These anions are also associated with methane and acetylene , both very weak acids . With an electronegativity of 2 @.@ 5 , carbon prefers to form covalent bonds . A few carbides are covalent lattices , like carborundum ( SiC ) , which resembles diamond . 
 = = = Organometallic compounds = = = 
 Organometallic compounds by definition contain at least one carbon @-@ metal bond . A wide range of such compounds exist ; major classes include simple alkyl @-@ metal compounds ( for example , tetraethyllead ) , η2 @-@ alkene compounds ( for example , Zeise 's salt ) , and <unk> @-@ allyl compounds ( for example , <unk> chloride dimer ) ; metallocenes containing cyclopentadienyl ligands ( for example , ferrocene ) ; and transition metal carbene complexes . Many metal carbonyls exist ( for example , <unk> ) ; some workers consider the carbon monoxide ligand to be purely inorganic , and not organometallic . 
 While carbon is understood to exclusively form four bonds , an interesting compound containing an octahedral <unk> carbon atom has been reported . The cation of the compound is [ ( <unk> ) 6C ] 2 + . This phenomenon has been attributed to the <unk> of the gold ligands . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 The English name carbon comes from the Latin carbo for coal and charcoal , whence also comes the French <unk> , meaning charcoal . In German , Dutch and Danish , the names for carbon are <unk> , <unk> and <unk> respectively , all literally meaning coal @-@ substance . 
 Carbon was discovered in prehistory and was known in the forms of soot and charcoal to the earliest human civilizations . Diamonds were known probably as early as 2500 BCE in China , while carbon in the form of charcoal was made around Roman times by the same chemistry as it is today , by heating wood in a pyramid covered with clay to exclude air . 
 In 1722 , René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur demonstrated that iron was transformed into steel through the absorption of some substance , now known to be carbon . In 1772 , Antoine Lavoisier showed that diamonds are a form of carbon ; when he burned samples of charcoal and diamond and found that neither produced any water and that both released the same amount of carbon dioxide per gram . In 1779 , Carl Wilhelm Scheele showed that graphite , which had been thought of as a form of lead , was instead identical with charcoal but with a small admixture of iron , and that it gave " aerial acid " ( his name for carbon dioxide ) when oxidized with nitric acid . In 1786 , the French scientists Claude Louis <unk> , Gaspard Monge and C. A. <unk> confirmed that graphite was mostly carbon by oxidizing it in oxygen in much the same way Lavoisier had done with diamond . Some iron again was left , which the French scientists thought was necessary to the graphite structure . In their publication they proposed the name <unk> ( Latin <unk> ) for the element in graphite which was given off as a gas upon burning graphite . Antoine Lavoisier then listed carbon as an element in his 1789 textbook . 
 A new allotrope of carbon , fullerene , that was discovered in 1985 includes nanostructured forms such as buckyballs and nanotubes . Their discoverers – Robert Curl , Harold Kroto and Richard Smalley – received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1996 . The resulting renewed interest in new forms lead to the discovery of further exotic allotropes , including glassy carbon , and the realization that " amorphous carbon " is not strictly amorphous . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Graphite = = = 
 Commercially viable natural deposits of graphite occur in many parts of the world , but the most important sources economically are in China , India , Brazil and North Korea . Graphite deposits are of metamorphic origin , found in association with quartz , mica and feldspars in schists , gneisses and metamorphosed sandstones and limestone as lenses or veins , sometimes of a metre or more in thickness . Deposits of graphite in Borrowdale , Cumberland , England were at first of sufficient size and purity that , until the 19th century , pencils were made simply by sawing blocks of natural graphite into strips before encasing the strips in wood . Today , smaller deposits of graphite are obtained by crushing the parent rock and floating the lighter graphite out on water . 
 There are three types of natural graphite — amorphous , flake or crystalline flake , and vein or lump . Amorphous graphite is the lowest quality and most abundant . Contrary to science , in industry " amorphous " refers to very small crystal size rather than complete lack of crystal structure . Amorphous is used for lower value graphite products and is the lowest priced graphite . Large amorphous graphite deposits are found in China , Europe , Mexico and the United States . Flake graphite is less common and of higher quality than amorphous ; it occurs as separate plates that crystallized in metamorphic rock . Flake graphite can be four times the price of amorphous . Good quality flakes can be processed into expandable graphite for many uses , such as flame retardants . The foremost deposits are found in Austria , Brazil , Canada , China , Germany and Madagascar . Vein or lump graphite is the rarest , most valuable , and highest quality type of natural graphite . It occurs in veins along intrusive contacts in solid lumps , and it is only commercially mined in Sri Lanka . 
 According to the USGS , world production of natural graphite was 1 @.@ 1 million tonnes in 2010 , to which China contributed 800 @,@ 000 t , India 130 @,@ 000 t , Brazil 76 @,@ 000 t , North Korea 30 @,@ 000 t and Canada 25 @,@ 000 t . No natural graphite was reported mined in the United States , but 118 @,@ 000 t of synthetic graphite with an estimated value of $ 998 million was produced in 2009 . 
 = = = Diamond = = = 
 The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses , and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world ( see figure ) . 
 Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds . The ore is crushed , during which care has to be taken in order to prevent larger diamonds from being destroyed in this process and subsequently the particles are sorted by density . Today , diamonds are located in the diamond @-@ rich density fraction with the help of X @-@ ray fluorescence , after which the final sorting steps are done by hand . Before the use of X @-@ rays became commonplace , the separation was done with grease belts ; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore . 
 Historically diamonds were known to be found only in alluvial deposits in southern India . India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BCE to the mid @-@ 18th century AD , but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non @-@ Indian diamonds were found in 1725 . 
 Diamond production of primary deposits ( kimberlites and lamproites ) only started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond fields in South Africa . Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of 4 @.@ 5 billion carats have been mined since that date . About 20 % of that amount has been mined in the last 5 years alone , and during the last ten years 9 new mines have started production while 4 more are waiting to be opened soon . Most of these mines are located in Canada , Zimbabwe , Angola , and one in Russia . 
 In the United States , diamonds have been found in Arkansas , Colorado and Montana . In 2004 , a startling discovery of a microscopic diamond in the United States led to the January 2008 bulk @-@ sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana . 
 Today , most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia , Botswana , Australia and the Democratic Republic of Congo . In 2005 , Russia produced almost one @-@ fifth of the global diamond output , reports the British Geological Survey . Australia has the richest diamantiferous pipe with production reaching peak levels of 42 metric tons ( 41 long tons ; 46 short tons ) per year in the 1990s . There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada , Siberia ( mostly in Yakutia territory ; for example , Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe ) , Brazil , and in Northern and Western Australia . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Carbon is essential to all known living systems , and without it life as we know it could not exist ( see alternative biochemistry ) . The major economic use of carbon other than food and wood is in the form of hydrocarbons , most notably the fossil fuel methane gas and crude oil ( petroleum ) . Crude oil is distilled in refineries by the petrochemical industry to produce gasoline , kerosene , and other products . Cellulose is a natural , carbon @-@ containing polymer produced by plants in the form of wood , cotton , linen , and hemp . Cellulose is used primarily for maintaining structure in plants . Commercially valuable carbon polymers of animal origin include wool , cashmere and silk . Plastics are made from synthetic carbon polymers , often with oxygen and nitrogen atoms included at regular intervals in the main polymer chain . The raw materials for many of these synthetic substances come from crude oil . 
 The uses of carbon and its compounds are extremely varied . It can form alloys with iron , of which the most common is carbon steel . Graphite is combined with clays to form the ' lead ' used in pencils used for writing and drawing . It is also used as a lubricant and a pigment , as a molding material in glass manufacture , in electrodes for dry batteries and in electroplating and <unk> , in brushes for electric motors and as a neutron moderator in nuclear reactors . 
 Charcoal is used as a drawing material in artwork , barbecue grilling , iron smelting , and in many other applications . Wood , coal and oil are used as fuel for production of energy and heating . Gem quality diamond is used in jewelry , and industrial diamonds are used in drilling , cutting and polishing tools for machining metals and stone . Plastics are made from fossil hydrocarbons , and carbon fiber , made by pyrolysis of synthetic polyester fibers is used to reinforce plastics to form advanced , lightweight composite materials . 
 Carbon fiber is made by pyrolysis of extruded and stretched filaments of <unk> ( PAN ) and other organic substances . The crystallographic structure and mechanical properties of the fiber depend on the type of starting material , and on the subsequent processing . Carbon fibers made from PAN have structure resembling narrow filaments of graphite , but thermal processing may re @-@ order the structure into a continuous rolled sheet . The result is fibers with higher specific tensile strength than steel . 
 Carbon black is used as the black pigment in printing ink , artist 's oil paint and water colours , carbon paper , automotive finishes , India ink and laser printer toner . Carbon black is also used as a filler in rubber products such as tyres and in plastic compounds . Activated charcoal is used as an absorbent and adsorbent in filter material in applications as diverse as gas masks , water purification , and kitchen extractor hoods , and in medicine to absorb toxins , poisons , or gases from the digestive system . Carbon is used in chemical reduction at high temperatures . Coke is used to reduce iron ore into iron ( smelting ) . Case hardening of steel is achieved by heating finished steel components in carbon powder . <unk> of silicon , tungsten , boron and titanium , are among the hardest known materials , and are used as abrasives in cutting and grinding tools . Carbon compounds make up most of the materials used in clothing , such as natural and synthetic textiles and leather , and almost all of the interior surfaces in the built environment other than glass , stone and metal . 
 = = = Diamonds = = = 
 The diamond industry falls into two categories : one dealing with gem @-@ grade diamonds and the other , with industrial @-@ grade diamonds . While a large trade in both types of diamonds exists , the two markets act in dramatically different ways . 
 Unlike precious metals such as gold or platinum , gem diamonds do not trade as a commodity : there is a substantial mark @-@ up in the sale of diamonds , and there is not a very active market for resale of diamonds . 
 Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and heat conductivity , with the gemological qualities of clarity and color being mostly irrelevant . About 80 % of mined diamonds ( equal to about 100 million carats or 20 tonnes annually ) are unsuitable for use as gemstones are relegated for industrial use ( known as bort ) . synthetic diamonds , invented in the 1950s , found almost immediate industrial applications ; 3 billion carats ( 600 tonnes ) of synthetic diamond is produced annually . 
 The dominant industrial use of diamond is in cutting , drilling , grinding , and polishing . Most of these applications do not require large diamonds ; in fact , most diamonds of gem @-@ quality except for their small size can be used industrially . Diamonds are embedded in drill tips or saw blades , or ground into a powder for use in grinding and polishing applications . Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high pressure experiments ( see diamond anvil cell ) , high @-@ performance bearings , and limited use in specialized windows . With the continuing advances in the production of synthetic diamonds , new applications are becoming feasible . Garnering much excitement is the possible use of diamond as a semiconductor suitable for microchips , and because of its exceptional heat conductance property , as a heat sink in electronics . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Pure carbon has extremely low toxicity to humans and can be handled and even ingested safely in the form of graphite or charcoal . It is resistant to dissolution or chemical attack , even in the acidic contents of the digestive tract . Consequently , once it enters into the body 's tissues it is likely to remain there indefinitely . Carbon black was probably one of the first pigments to be used for tattooing , and Ötzi the Iceman was found to have carbon tattoos that survived during his life and for 5200 years after his death . Inhalation of coal dust or soot ( carbon black ) in large quantities can be dangerous , irritating lung tissues and causing the congestive lung disease , <unk> 's pneumoconiosis . Diamond dust used as an abrasive can harmful if ingested or inhaled . <unk> of carbon are produced in diesel engine exhaust fumes , and may accumulate in the lungs . In these examples , the harm may result from contaminants ( e.g. , organic chemicals , heavy metals ) rather than from the carbon itself . 
 Carbon generally has low toxicity to life on Earth ; but carbon nanoparticles are deadly to Drosophila . 
 Carbon may burn vigorously and brightly in the presence of air at high temperatures . Large accumulations of coal , which have remained inert for hundreds of millions of years in the absence of oxygen , may spontaneously combust when exposed to air in coal mine waste tips , ship cargo holds and coal bunkers , and storage dumps . 
 In nuclear applications where graphite is used as a neutron moderator , accumulation of Wigner energy followed by a sudden , spontaneous release may occur . Annealing to at least 250 ° C can release the energy safely , although in the Windscale fire the procedure went wrong , causing other reactor materials to combust . 
 The great variety of carbon compounds include such lethal poisons as tetrodotoxin , the lectin ricin from seeds of the castor oil plant <unk> communis , cyanide ( CN − ) , and carbon monoxide ; and such essentials to life as glucose and protein . 
 = = Bonding to carbon = = 
 = Hurricane Ekeka = 
 Hurricane Ekeka was an unusual Pacific tropical cyclone that attained major hurricane status during the month of February . The first storm of the 1992 Pacific hurricane season , Ekeka developed on January 28 well to the south of Hawaii . It gradually intensified to reach major hurricane status on February 2 , although it subsequently began to weaken due to unfavorable wind shear . It crossed the International Date Line as a weakened tropical storm , and shortly thereafter degraded to tropical depression status . Ekeka continued westward , passing through the Marshall Islands and later over Chuuk State , before dissipating on February 9 about 310 miles ( 500 km ) off the north coast of Papua New Guinea . The storm did not cause any significant damage or deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During the El Niño of 1991 – 92 , as typical with other such events , the monsoon trough extended into the central north Pacific Ocean , which is the body of water between the International Date Line and 140 ° W. At the same time , sea surface temperatures near the equator were anomalously warm , and wind shear values were low . At the end of January , a large area of convection persisted for several days near the north side of the equator . By January 23 , several ships reported squalls and strong southwesterly winds in the region . The Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) began monitoring the system on January 26 , while it was located about 950 miles ( 1530 km ) south of Ka Lae , the southernmost point in Hawaii . The disturbance organized further as it tracked westward , and on January 28 it developed into Tropical Depression One @-@ C , located a short distance north of Kiritimati and east of <unk> . 
 With favorable conditions , the depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm ; upon doing so , it was named Ekeka by the CPHC , which is Hawaiian for Edgar . Ekeka continued gradually intensifying while moving slowly west @-@ northwestward , and it attain hurricane status on January 30 about 100 miles ( 160 km ) northwest of Palmyra Atoll . On February 2 , the hurricane attained peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , making Ekeka a major hurricane , or Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Subsequently , it began to weaken due to increased wind shear , and concurrently its forward motion increased as the subtropical ridge strengthened to the north of the hurricane . A large trough in the Westerlies increased the wind shear , which weakened Ekeka to a tropical storm early on February 3 . Later that day , it crossed the International Date Line into the western Pacific Ocean ; both of the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) assessed the storm 's winds at 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Shortly before that , the JMA assessed the pressure as 985 mbar , which is the lowest known minimum central pressure associated with the storm ; the CPHC did not include pressure in their year @-@ end report . 
 Tropical Storm Ekeka continued weakening , degrading to tropical depression status by February 4 . The depression moved quickly through the Marshall Islands , and on February 6 turned to the west @-@ southwest . On February 8 , the JMA declared Ekeka dissipated ; however , the JTWC continued monitoring the system , with Ekeka passing over Chuuk as a weak depression . Early on February 9 , the JTWC declared Ekeka dissipated about 800 miles ( 1300 km ) east @-@ southeast of Palau , or about 310 miles ( 500 km ) off the north coast of Papua New Guinea . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 No deaths were reported in association with Ekeka . The storm passed through the Marshall Islands without causing significant impact . When Ekeka hit the island of Chuuk , winds of 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) were reported . While in the central Pacific Ocean , Ekeka became one of only three tropical cyclones on record to be located within the Palmyra Atoll Exclusive Economic Zone ; Ekeka was the only hurricane within the area . 
 Ekeka is most unusual for its formation in January . Tropical cyclones rarely form east of the International Date Line outside of the tropical cyclone season , which starts May 15 in the eastern Pacific and June 1 in the central Pacific , and ends on November 30 in both regions . In the official Pacific hurricane database , Ekeka was the second tropical cyclone on record to occur in January or February within the Pacific Ocean east of the International Date Line , after Tropical Storm Winona of 1989 . It is third earliest cyclone on record within the basin , behind Hurricane Pali of 2016 , and the aforementioned Winona . 
 = Knicks – Nuggets brawl = 
 The Knicks – Nuggets brawl was an on @-@ court altercation at a National Basketball Association ( NBA ) game between the New York Knicks and Denver Nuggets at Madison Square Garden in New York City , New York , U.S. on December 16 , 2006 . This altercation was the most penalized on @-@ court fight in the NBA since the Pacers – Pistons brawl two years before . 
 The fight began with a flagrant foul by Knicks guard Mardy Collins on Nuggets guard J. R. Smith in the closing seconds of the game . Several players joined in the confrontation , and began to make physical contact . The fight briefly spilled into the stands , and also stretched to the other end of the court . All ten players on the floor at the time were ejected after the altercation was finished . When suspensions were announced , seven players were suspended without pay for a combined total of 47 games . 
 Although they were not penalized , Nuggets coach George Karl and Knicks coach Isiah Thomas were both scrutinized for their part in the brawl . Carmelo Anthony was also criticized for harming his image as a star , and several writers said the league had penalized the players excessively because it wanted to keep its image free from violence . 
 = = Game recap = = 
 Entering the game , the New York Knicks had a record of 9 – 17 while the Denver Nuggets sported a 13 – 9 record . Despite trailing the entire game , the Knicks came as close as 2 points in the first half but the Nuggets regrouped and closed the half with a 13 @-@ point advantage and continued to lead in the second half by as much as 26 points in the third quarter . The Knicks briefly came within 10 points with ten minutes left in the game , but the Nuggets went on a 12 – 2 run and were never threatened again . Carmelo Anthony scored 24 points to lead the Nuggets , and Marcus Camby added 24 points and 9 rebounds ; Stephon Marbury scored a season @-@ high 31 points for the Knicks . 
 = = = Altercation = = = 
 The incident occurred with 1 : 15 remaining in the Knicks ' home game at Madison Square Garden , where the Nuggets were leading 119 – 100 . The Knicks ' Mardy Collins fouled the Nuggets ' J. R. Smith on a fast break by slapping his arms around Smith 's neck , knocking him to the ground . As Smith stood up to confront Collins , Nate Robinson pulled Smith away , and then began pushing and shouting at him . David Lee tried to hold Smith back , but Smith broke free and charged into Robinson , causing both players to fall into the photographers and front row courtside seats , before they were quickly separated by teammates . 
 As the fighting was seemingly coming to an end , Carmelo Anthony confronted Collins and punched him in the face , knocking him to the ground . Jared Jeffries immediately tried to attack Anthony but tripped over Marcus Camby , before being restrained by coaches and teammates , while Anthony backed up towards the Nuggets ' bench . Collins also ran down the court to get at Anthony but was blocked by <unk> and Smith . All ten players on the court at the time of the incident were ejected by the officiating crew that consisted of Dick Bavetta , Violet Palmer , and Robbie Robinson . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Suspensions = = = 
