 Free @-@ roaming horses could once be found throughout much of the American frontier west of the Mississippi River , and may have numbered as many as two million around 1850 . However , no comprehensive estimate of free @-@ roaming horse numbers was done until 1971 , and thus early estimates are speculative . Horse numbers were in decline as domestic cattle and sheep competed with them for resources . Ranchers shot horses to leave more grazing land for other livestock , other horses were captured off the range for human use , and some were rounded up for slaughter . 
 By the end of the 1920s , free @-@ roaming horses mostly lived on General Land Office ( GLO ) <unk> lands and National Forest <unk> in 11 Western States . Their genetic origins were diverse , reflecting the American westward expansion from the mid @-@ 1800s on . Their bloodlines included horses of Spanish @-@ Barb descent as well as draft and saddle horses turned loose on the open range . 
 Management of horses running on the range was initially left to <unk> and local ranchers , but in 1934 , the Taylor Grazing Act ( TGA ) established the United States Grazing Service ( Grazing Service ) to manage livestock grazing on public lands . The TGA authorized the Grazing Service to grant ranchers individual grazing allotments and set fees for grazing . The fee to graze a horse was twice that for a cow , and as a result , ranchers allowed unbranded horses to run loose rather than pay for them . At the time the Taylor Grazing Act was passed , it was estimated that 50 @,@ 000 @-@ 150 @,@ 000 horses roamed wild on public land subject to the Act . The Grazing Service , along with the Forest Service , was committed to removing the free @-@ roaming horses , which were viewed as mavericks , from the lands they administered . In 1939 , the Grazing Service began to directly hire people to remove horses from public land . The United States Forest Service periodically gave ranchers notice to round up their strays and thereafter shot any remaining horses . 
 In 1946 , the BLM was formed by combining the General Land Office and the Grazing Service . It no longer directly removed horses from the lands it administered , but issued permits to hunters . It is unknown how many free @-@ roaming horses were on the public lands at that time , and it is not clear if there were too many horses , or if the land was incurring damage due to the presence of the horses , but removal probably exceeded the animals ' reproductive rate , resulting in a decline in numbers . After World War II , captured horses were often slaughtered to meet the demands of the pet food market . 
 By the 1950s , the free @-@ roaming horse population was down to an estimated 25 @,@ 000 animals . Horses were being chased to exhaustion by airplanes , poisoned at water holes , and removed with other inhumane practices . Between 1950 and 1959 , led by Velma Bronn Johnston — better known as " Wild Horse Annie , " — animal welfare and horse advocates lobbied for passage of a federal law to prevent the capture of wild horse by inhumane methods . Their efforts were successful . On September 8 , 1959 , President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed into law the Hunting Wild Horses and Burros on Public Lands Act , Pub.L. 86 – 2345 , also known as the " Wild Horse Annie Act " , which banned the hunting of feral horses on federal land from aircraft or motorized vehicles . 
 Ownership of free @-@ roaming herds remained contentious , and ranchers continued to use airplanes to gather them . Horses were still subject to individual states ' estray laws , and no law prevented the complete elimination of horse herds . Federal agencies also continued to try to eliminate horses from areas where they were perceived to be causing resource damage . Under BLM policy , ranchers could release a branded mare into a herd then later round up not only the mare , but the band the mare ran with , for slaughter or sale . In Nevada , state law permitted ranchers to round up any unbranded horses on their private land and slaughter or sell them . Concerned about these practices , and about continuing horse hunts in unprotected areas , International Society for the Protection of Mustangs and Burros of which Johnston was the first president , began working to pass federal legislation to protect feral horses throughout the U.S. She was joined by a number of prominent people , including country music singer Judy Lynn , Gunsmoke actress Amanda Blake , and New Hampshire Union Leader publisher and conservative William Loeb III , who continued to lobby for federal rather than state control over the disposition of free @-@ roaming horses . 
 In 1962 , public pressure lead to the establishment of the Nevada Wild Horse Range , and in 1968 , the Pryor Mountains Wild Horse Range was established . In 1969 , the National Mustang Association , headquartered in Utah , persuaded Senator Frank Moss to introduce a bill ( S @-@ <unk> ) to protect the remaining mustangs of Spanish descent under the Endangered Species Act of 1966 . However , since the bill also called for the removal from public lands of all non @-@ Spanish horses , it came under heavy opposition . 
 Federal protection for all free @-@ roaming horses was ultimately accomplished by the passage of the Wild and Free @-@ Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 , which specifically states : " A person claiming ownership of a horse or burro on the public lands shall be entitled to recover it only if recovery is permissible under the branding and estray laws of the State in which the animal is found . " which alleviated the problem of horses being rounded up under the auspices of belonging to local ranchers . Ranchers were given a specified time period following passage of the Act to claim their horses , and any remaining unbranded and unclaimed herds roaming BLM or Forest Service became the property of the federal government . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 The Act gave jurisdiction over challenges to BLM and Forest Service management of wild horses and how the act is implemented to the Department of the Interior 's Board of Land Appeals . The act also contained provisions for the removal of excess animals ; the destruction of lame , old , or sick animals ; the private placement or adoption of excess animals ; and even the destruction of healthy animals if range management required it . Revisions proposed in 1974 increased concern that destruction of free @-@ roaming horses could resume . However , the destruction of healthy or unhealthy horses almost never occurred , and in January 1982 , the director of BLM issued a moratorium on the destruction of excess <unk> animals . 
 The Act left range management policy unresolved in many respects , although it did specify that BLM and the Forest Service consult with state wildlife agencies . In practice , BLM struggled to accommodate the needs of feral horses among its other priorities ( which included livestock grazing , prevention of soil erosion , and accommodating big game hunting ) . In November 1971 , the BLM announced a major effort to save the Pryor Mountain herd from starvation after a poor summer growing season left vegetation on the range stunted . By 1974 , the herd on the Pryor Mountain range was said to have increased by 17 percent over the 1968 level , but there was strong disagreement over whether the population had actually increased . 
 Pursuant to the 1978 amendments to the Public Rangelands Improvement Act ( PRIA ) , the BLM established 209 herd management areas ( HMAs ) where feral horses were permitted to live on federal land . As of 2013 , the number of HMAs had been reduced to 179 , covering 31 @.@ 6 million acres . Three HMAs are dedicated solely to the protection of feral horses : the Pryor Mountains Wild Horse Range in Montana , the Little Book Cliffs Wild Horse Range in Colorado and the Nevada Wild Horse Range in Nevada . Another HMA is dedicated to feral burros , the Marietta Wild Burro Range , also in Nevada . 
 In 1973 , BLM began a pilot project on the Pryor Range known as the Adopt @-@ A @-@ Horse initiative . The program took advantage of provisions in the Act to allow private " qualified " individuals to " adopt " as many horses as they wanted if they could show that they could provide adequate care for the animals . At the time , title to the horses remained permanently with the U.S. federal government . The pilot project was so successful that BLM allowed it to go nationwide in 1976 . In 1978 , Public Rangelands Improvement Act ( PRIA ) authorized the BLM to relinquish title to adopted horses after one year of satisfactory private maintenance . Through 2001 , the Adopt @-@ a @-@ Horse program was the primary method of disposal of excess feral horses from BLM and Forest Service land . 
 Despite the success of the adoption program , the BLM struggled to maintain acceptable herd levels , as without natural predators , herd sizes can double every four years . As of 2013 , there were over 40 @,@ 000 horses and burros on BLM @-@ managed land , exceeding the BLM 's estimated " appropriate management level " ( AML ) by almost 14 @,@ 000 . In addition to these on @-@ range horses , there are 49 @,@ 000 additional wild horses , also protected under the Act , living in off @-@ range corrals and pastures . 
 The BLM uses limited amounts of contraceptives to control herd numbers , in the form of PZP vaccinations ; advocates say that additional use of these vaccines would help to diminish the excess number of horses currently under BLM management . As of 2013 , the BLM is also researching the possibility of spaying some mares to permanently prevent pregnancies , and a new vaccine , the " first single @-@ shot , multiyear wildlife contraceptive for use in mammals " , has been approved for use by the Environmental Protection Agency . 
 From 1988 to 2004 , Congress prohibited BLM from using any funds to destroy excess animals . In 2008 , the BLM announced the possibility of euthanizing excess horses , a move which was quickly condemned by horse advocates . 
 = = Legal challenges = = 
 The constitutionality of the new law was disputed . Up until then , feral horses and burros were considered to be under the jurisdiction of State estray laws , and managed as unclaimed livestock that the Federal government had no right to interfere with . To test this assertion , in 1974 the New Mexico Livestock Board seized 19 free @-@ roaming feral burros which were preventing cattle from using a watering hole on federal land . The United States District Court for the District of New Mexico held that , under the Property Clause of the U.S. Constitution , Congress could regulate " wild " animals only to protect public land from damage . The case went to the Supreme Court of the United States . In Kleppe v. New Mexico , 426 U.S. 529 ( 1976 ) , the Supreme Court ruled that Congress 's power to manage public land " necessarily includes the power to regulate and protect the wildlife living there . " and that , unclaimed free @-@ roaming horses could be considered " wildlife " for purposes of determining whether Congress has the power to protect them . In United States v. Johnson , 685 F.2d 337 ( 9th Cir . 1982 ) the act was challenged in court for being unconstitutionally vague and unconstitutionally overbroad in its definition of " unbranded and unclaimed horses " . The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld the wording of the <unk> 
 In the early 1980s , the Mountain States Legal Foundation ( foundation ) and the Rock Springs Grazing Association ( association ) won a writ of mandamus by the District Court requiring the BLM to remove all horses from the private lands of the " checkerboard " of private and public lands grazed by the association , and to reduce the number of horses on the public lands . The District Court , however issued a summary judgement for the government against the contention that feral horses who ate grass or drank water on privately owned lands had " taken " these resources from the ranchers in violation of the " takings clause " of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the government must compensate the private landowners $ 500 @,@ 000 . The foundation appealed the summary judgement to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit . In Mountain States Legal Foundation v. Hodel , 799 F.2d 1423 ( 1986 ) , <unk> den 'd . 480 U.S. 951 ( 1987 ) , the appeals court remanded the summary judgement back to the district court , which ultimately ruled that a wild animal was not an " agent " of the federal government and hence could not be found guilty of " taking " the ranchers ' grass or water . However , in 2000 , the " takings " argument was brought up again , this time in Bradshaw v. United States U.S. Court of Federal Claims 47 <unk> 549 ( Sept . 15 , 2000 ) wherein the plaintiffs held that free @-@ roaming horses were taking forage that they paid for with their grazing permit , and the horses were drinking water from springs for which they owned the water rights . The court dismissed the argument , referring back to the earlier court findings . 
 Although the PRIA limited the number of horses that could be adopted in any one year by a single adopter to four , it allowed the BLM to make exceptions to the limit . In the mid @-@ 1980s , the BLM had placed for adoption over 20 @,@ 000 horses to large scale adopters , and thousands of the horses were slaughtered . In March 1987 , the Animal Protection Institute sued the Department of the Interior , arguing that BLM was turning a blind eye to " adopters " who obtained horses with the intent to slaughter . In Animal Protection Institute v. Hodel , 671 F. Supp . 695 ( 1987 ) , the United States District Court for the District of Nevada held that BLM could not ignore the intent of adopters . The decision was upheld by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Animal Protection Institute v. Hodel , 860 F.2d 920 ( 1988 ) . In 1988 , the BLM terminated the large scale adoption program . In 1997 , the Animal Protection Institute and BLM signed an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement under which BLM would require individuals to sign an affidavit stating they had no intent to sell the animal for slaughter or for use as rodeo stock . The settlement also required BLM to establish rules requiring horse slaughterhouses to maintain paperwork on horses for no less than one year and to report any horses to which clear title was not established . BLM also agreed to no longer permit adoption by proxy or power of attorney . But the district court refused to enforce this settlement in 2000 , leaving the issue unresolved . 
 In November 1996 , Congress passed the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act , which clarified the earlier 1976 amendment to the Act authorizing BLM and the Forest Service to use helicopters and motor vehicles to round up and transport feral horses on public lands . The use of helicopters in roundups has been challenged by feral @-@ horse advocates on the grounds that they are dangerous to the horses . In 2011 , a case was brought before the U.S. District Court in Nevada , regarding a roundup in that state , alleging in part that helicopter pilots flew too close to horses . The judge in that case issued a temporary restraining order against the " mistreatment of mustangs during BLM gathers " , including inadequate distance between helicopters and animals . In 2013 , the BLM issued new policy directives covering humane treatment of animals during roundups , including the use of helicopters , and stated that " further animal handling policy changes [ are expected ] in the future " . 
 = = Subsequent Congressional action = = 
 In 1976 , Congress included a provision in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act that permitted the humane use of helicopters in capturing free @-@ roaming horses on federal land , and for the use of motorized vehicles in transporting them to corrals . When problems with the Adopt @-@ a @-@ Horse program emerged and the BLM was accused of allowing too many adoptions so as to deplete feral horse populations on federal land and allowing " adopted " horses to sell for slaughter , in 1978 Congress passed the Public Rangelands Improvement Act ( PRIA ) . The PRIA limited adoptions to only four horses a year per individual and allowed BLM to relinquish title to the horse after one year ( during which inspections regarding the animal 's treatment were to occur ) . The law also required BLM to inventory all feral horse herds , scientifically determine what constituted " appropriate " herd levels , and determine through a public process whether " excess " animals should be removed . Congress further amended PRIA in 1978 to require updated herd counts . 
 In 2004 , Republican Senator from Montana Conrad Burns inserted a rider into the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005 ( a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ page omnibus appropriations bill ) which amended the WFRHBA to require the BLM to sell excess animals more than 10 years old or which have been offered for adoption three times . The amendment also required that excess , <unk> horses " shall be made available for sale without limitation . " Burns was reportedly acting on behalf of ranching interests , who wished more of the horses removed from federal land . The legislation , signed into law by President George W. Bush , was described by one media outlet as " undercut [ ing ] more than three decades of lobbying and legislative action aimed at protecting America 's wild horses from slaughter " . In May , 2005 the " Rahall Amendment " was passed to limit implementation of the Burns amendment by preventing appropriated funds to be used to facilitate the sale and slaughter of protected wild horses and burros . In the 2007 Interior Appropriations Act the language of Rahall Amendment was re @-@ added . As of August 2012 , it remained in effect . 
 In early 2005 , the BLM discovered that some of the excess wild horses it had sold had been slaughtered . BLM suspended the sales program in April 2005 and resumed it in May 2005 after implementing new requirements to deter buyers from slaughtering the animals . In the fall of 2007 , the last three horse slaughterhouses in the United States closed . In January 2007 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ruled that a 1949 Texas law banned the possession , transfer , or sale of horse meat . This ruling forced the two slaughterhouses in Texas to close . In September 2007 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit upheld a similar ban in Illinois , causing the plant located in that state to close . However , BLM procedures do not ban the export of wild horses for sale and slaughter outside the United States . In 2008 , the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) concluded BLM was not in compliance with the 2004 amendment , as the department had imposed limitations on the sale of excess horses to help ensure that they were not slaughtered . The GAO also stated that the BLM had a serious " dilemma " in the need to balance their charge to protect and preserve the feral horses with their charge to destroy or sell without limitation excess animals . It recommended that the BLM " develop cost @-@ effective alternatives to the process of caring for wild horses removed from the range in long @-@ term holding facilities and seek the legislative changes that may be necessary to implement those alternatives " . 
 In February 2009 , U.S. Representatives Nick Rahall , a Democrat from West Virginia , and Raul Grijalva , a Democrat from Arizona , introduced HR 1018 , the " Restore Our American Mustangs Act " . The act , if passed , would have amended the 1971 Act to increase available acreage for feral horses , develop additional sanctuaries , " [ forbid ] the killing of healthy animals , and [ allow ] greater public participation in herd management decisions . " The bill passed a House vote on July 17 , 2009 with a vote of 239 for and 185 against , but died in the Senate after being referred to the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee . 
 = Reese Witherspoon = 
 Laura Jeanne Reese Witherspoon ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born March 22 , 1976 ) is an American actress and producer . Born in Louisiana and raised in Tennessee , Witherspoon began her career as a child actress , making her professional screen debut in The Man in the Moon ( 1991 ) , for which she was nominated for a Young Artist Award . 
 Following breakout roles in Desperate Choices : To Save My Child ( 1992 ) and Jack the Bear , she starred in the comedy @-@ drama Pleasantville ( 1998 ) , for which she won the Young Hollywood Award for Breakthrough Performance . Her leading role of Tracy Flick in Election was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Comedy or Musical . 
 Witherspoon 's breakthrough role came in 2001 in Legally Blonde , in the famous role of Elle Woods , for which she received international recognition and her second Golden Globe nomination . The following year , she starred in the romantic comedy Sweet Home Alabama ( 2002 ) , which emerged as her biggest live @-@ action commercial success . In 2005 , Witherspoon received worldwide attention for her portrayal of June Carter in Walk the Line , which earned her the Academy Award , Golden Globe Award , BAFTA Award , Screen Actors Guild Award and the Critics Choice Award for Best Actress . Her other films include Legally Blonde 2 : Red , White & Blonde ( 2003 ) , Monsters vs. Aliens ( 2009 ) and Water for Elephants ( 2011 ) . In 2014 , Witherspoon produced the thriller Gone Girl and received critical acclaim for portraying Cheryl Strayed in Wild , for which she earned her second Academy Award nomination for Best Actress . 
 Witherspoon owns a production company , Pacific Standard , and she is actively involved in children 's and women 's advocacy organizations . She serves on the board of the Children 's Defense Fund ( CDF ) and was named Global Ambassador of Avon Products in 2007 , serving as honorary chair of the charitable Avon Foundation . Witherspoon received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on December 1 , 2010 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Laura Jeanne Reese Witherspoon was born on March 22 , 1976 in Southern Baptist Hospital , New Orleans , Louisiana , while her father , Dr. John Draper Witherspoon , was a student at Tulane University medical school . Her father was born in Georgia and served as a lieutenant colonel in the United States Army Reserve . He was in private practice as an otolaryngologist until 2012 . Her mother , Mary Elizabeth " Betty " ( née Reese ) , is from Harriman , Tennessee , and earned a BS and master 's degrees in Nursing , and a doctor of education ; she worked as a professor of nursing ( child care and mental health ) at Vanderbilt University . In 1988 , her mother began nursing babies back to health in the neonatal intensive care unit of Vanderbilt University Hospital until she retired . Witherspoon has claimed descent from Scottish @-@ born John Witherspoon , who signed the United States Declaration of Independence ; however , this claim has not been verified by the Society of the Descendants of the Signers of the Declaration of Independence genealogists . Her parents are still legally married , although they separated in 1996 . 
 Because Witherspoon 's father worked for the U.S. military in Wiesbaden , Germany , she lived there for four years as a child . After returning to the U.S. , she spent her childhood in Nashville , Tennessee in the suburb of Belle Meade . She was raised as an Episcopalian . Her older brother , John Jr. is a real estate agent . She received high grades in school , loved reading , and considered herself " a big dork who read loads of books . " On mentioning her love for books , she said , " I get crazy in a bookstore . It makes my heart beat hard because I want to buy everything . " Witherspoon attended middle school at Harding Academy and graduated from the all @-@ girls ' <unk> Hall School in Nashville , during which time she was a cheerleader . She attended Stanford University as an English literature major . After completing one year of studies , she left Stanford to pursue an acting career . Witherspoon is proud of the " definitive Southern upbringing " which she received . She said that it gave her " a sense of family and tradition " and taught her about " being conscientious about people 's feelings , being polite , being responsible and never taking for granted what you have in your life . " Witherspoon is described as a " multi @-@ achiever " and was given the nickname " Little Type A " by her parents . On discussing her early achievements , she told Interview magazine , " I just don 't see any of it as that remarkable . Maybe that 's the attitude I choose to have to keep me sane and keep my feet on the ground . I grew up in an environment where women accomplished a lot . And if they weren 't able to , it was because they were limited by society . " 
 At the age of seven , Witherspoon was selected as a model for a florist 's television advertisements , which motivated her to take acting lessons . At age eleven , she took first place in the Ten @-@ State Talent Fair . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1991 – 98 : Early work = = = 
 In 1991 , Witherspoon attended an open casting call for The Man in the Moon , intending to audition as a bit player ; she was instead cast for the lead role of Dani <unk> , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old country girl who falls in love for the first time with her 17 @-@ year @-@ old neighbor . Her performance was regarded as " memorably touching " by Variety magazine , and critic Roger Ebert commented , " Her first kiss is one of the most perfect little scenes I 've ever seen in a movie . " For this role , Witherspoon was nominated for the Young Artist Award Best Young Actress . Later that year , she made her television debut role in Wildflower with Patricia Arquette . In 1992 , Witherspoon appeared in the TV movie Desperate Choices : To Save My Child , portraying a critically ill young girl . 
 In 1993 , she played a young wife in the CBS miniseries Return to Lonesome Dove , <unk> Parker in the Disney film A Far Off Place and had a minor role in Jack the Bear , which garnered her the Young Artist Award for Best Youth Actress Co @-@ star . The next year , Witherspoon had another leading role as Wendy Pfister in the 1994 film <unk> , directed by <unk> Levy . In 1996 , Witherspoon starred in two major films , the thriller Fear alongside Mark Wahlberg ( whom she dated ) , as Nicole Walker , a teenage girl who starts dating a man with obsessive tendencies , and the black @-@ comedy thriller Freeway , alongside Kiefer Sutherland and Brooke Shields , where she had the lead role . Her character , Vanessa Lutz , is a poor girl living in Los Angeles , who encounters a serial killer on the way to her grandmother 's home in Stockton . The film received positive reviews from the press . Among them was the San Francisco Chronicle , with Mick LaSalle commenting , " Witherspoon , who does a shrill Texas accent , is dazzling , utterly believable in one extreme situation after the other . " Witherspoon 's performance won her the Best Actress Award at the Cognac Police Film Festival and firmly established her as a rising star . The making of the film also gave Witherspoon significant acting experience ; as she said , " Once I overcame the hurdle of that movie – which scared me to death – I felt like I could try anything . " 
 Witherspoon took a break from acting in 1997 to focus on dating with Ryan Phillippe . She returned to the screen in 1998 with major roles in three movies : Overnight Delivery , Pleasantville and Twilight . In Pleasantville , she starred with Tobey Maguire in a tale about 1990s teenage siblings who are magically transported into the setting of a 1950s television series . She portrayed the sister , Jennifer , who is mainly concerned about appearances , relationships and popularity . Her performance received good reviews and garnered her the Young Hollywood Award for Best Female Breakthrough Performance . Director Gary Ross said he firmly believed Witherspoon would be an outstanding movie star . 
 = = = 1999 – 2000 : Early critical success = = = 
 In 1999 , Witherspoon starred alongside Alessandro Nivola in the drama thriller Best Laid Plans ; she played Lissa , a woman who schemes with her lover Nick to escape a small dead @-@ end town . Also that year co @-@ starred with Sarah Michelle Gellar and Ryan Phillippe in the drama film Cruel Intentions , a modern take on the 18th @-@ century French novel Les Liaisons Dangereuses . The San Francisco Chronicle praised her performance as Annette Hargrove : " Witherspoon is especially good in the least flashy role , and even when called upon to make a series of cute devilish faces , she pulls it off . " She also appeared in a music video by Marcy Playground for the film 's soundtrack and starred with Matthew Broderick in Election which is based on Tom Perrotta 's novel . For her portrayal of ambitious overachiever Tracy Flick , she received vast critical acclaim and won the Best Actress Award from the National Society of Film Critics and the Online Film Critics Society , a first Golden Globe nomination and an Independent Spirit Award nomination . Witherspoon also received a rank on the list of 100 Greatest Film Performances of All Time by Premiere . Director Alexander Payne said of her , " She 's got that quality that men find attractive , while women would like to be her friend . But that 's just the foundation . Nobody else is as funny or brings such charm to things . She can do anything . " 
 In spite of her success with Election , Witherspoon noted in an interview that she struggled to find work after completing the film , due to typecasting . Analyzing the reasons behind her difficulty to find work , Witherspoon commented , " I think because the character I played was so extreme and sort of shrewish — people thought that was who I was , rather than me going in and creating a part . I would audition for things and I 'd always be the second choice — studios never wanted to hire me and I wasn 't losing the parts to big box office actresses but to ones who I guess people felt differently about . " In 2000 , Witherspoon played a supporting role in American Psycho and made a cameo appearance in Little Nicky . She also guest starred in season six of Friends as Rachel Green 's sister Jill . The next year , Witherspoon voiced Serena in the animated film The Trumpet of the Swan , produced by Crest Animation Productions . 
 = = = 2001 – 04 : International recognition = = = 
 The 2001 film Legally Blonde marked a turning point in Witherspoon 's career ; she starred as Elle Woods , a fashion @-@ merchandising major who decides to become a law student in order to follow her ex @-@ boyfriend to Harvard Law School . Witherspoon said about the role , " When I read Legally Blonde , I was like , ' She 's from Beverly Hills , she 's rich , she 's in a sorority . She has a great boyfriend . Oh yeah , she gets dumped . Who cares ? I still hate her . ' So we had to make sure she was the kind of person you just can 't hate . " Legally Blonde was a box @-@ office hit , grossing US $ 96 million domestically . Witherspoon 's performance earned her praise from critics , as the press began referring to her as " the new Meg Ryan " . Roger Ebert commented , " Witherspoon effortlessly animated this material with sunshine and quick wit " , and Salon.com noted that " she [ Witherspoon ] delineates Elle 's character beautifully " . Meanwhile , the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer concluded , " Witherspoon is a talented comedian who can perk up a scene just by marching in full of pep and drive and she powers this modest little comedy almost single @-@ handedly . " For her work , Witherspoon garnered her second Golden Globe Best Actress nomination and an MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance . 
 In 2002 , after the success of Legally Blonde , Witherspoon starred in several roles , such as Greta Wolfcastle in The Simpsons episode " The Bart Wants What It Wants " , and as Cecily in the comedy The Importance of Being Earnest , a film adaptation of Oscar Wilde 's play in which she received a Teen Choice Award nomination . Later that year , she starred with Josh Lucas and Patrick Dempsey in Andy Tennant 's film Sweet Home Alabama , where she played Melanie Carmichael , a young fashion designer who intends to marry a New York politician but must return to Alabama to divorce her childhood sweetheart , from whom she has been separated for seven years . Witherspoon regarded this as a " personal role " , in that it reminded her of experiences she had when she moved from her hometown Nashville to Los Angeles . The movie became Witherspoon 's biggest box office hit to date , earning over $ 35 million in the opening weekend and grossing over $ 127 million in the U.S. Despite the commercial success , critics gave Sweet Home Alabama negative reviews . It was called " a romantic comedy so rote , dull and predictable " by The Miami Herald , and the press widely agreed that Witherspoon was the only reason the movie attracted such a large audience . When describing Witherspoon 's role in the movie , The Christian Science Monitor concluded , " She is not the movie 's main attraction , she is its only attraction . " 
 In 2003 , Witherspoon followed up the success of Legally Blonde by starring in the sequel Legally Blonde 2 : Red , White & Blonde . Elle Woods has become a Harvard @-@ educated lawyer who is determined to protect animals from cosmetics @-@ industry science tests . The sequel was not as financially successful as the first film and it generated mostly negative reviews . USA Today considered the movie " plodding , unfunny and almost cringe @-@ worthy " , but also noted that " Reese Witherspoon still does a fine job portraying the fair @-@ haired lovable brainiac , but her top @-@ notch comic timing is wasted on the humorless dialogue . " Meanwhile , Salon.com concluded that the sequel " <unk> everything that was enjoyable about the first movie " . Despite being panned by critics , the sequel took in over $ 39 million in its first five days in the U.S. box office charts and eventually grossed $ 90 million in the US . Witherspoon received a $ 15 million paycheck for the role — a starting point to make her consistently one of Hollywood 's highest @-@ paid actresses from 2002 until 2010 . In 2004 , Witherspoon starred in Vanity Fair , adapted from the 19th @-@ century classic novel Vanity Fair and directed by Mira Nair . Her character , Becky Sharp , is a poor woman with a ruthless determination to find fortune and establish herself a position in society . Witherspoon was carefully costumed to conceal that during the filming she was pregnant with her second child . This pregnancy was not a hindrance to her work as Witherspoon believed the gestation had in fact helped her portrayal of Sharp 's character : " I love the luminosity that pregnancy brings , I love the fleshiness , I love the ample bosom — it gave me much more to play with " , she said . The film and Witherspoon 's portrayal of Sharp received positive reviews , as The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " Nair 's cast is splendid . Witherspoon does justice to the juicy role by giving the part more buoyancy than naughtiness . " At the same time , The Charlotte Observer called her work " an excellent performance that 's soft around the edges " and the Los Angeles Times concluded that Becky is " a role Reese Witherspoon was born to play " . 
 = = = 2005 – 06 : Walk the Line and critical achievements = = = 
 In late 2004 , Witherspoon began working alongside Mark Ruffalo on the romantic comedy Just Like Heaven . Her character , Elizabeth Masterson , is an ambitious young doctor who gets into a car accident on her way to a blind date and is left in a coma ; her spirit returns to her old apartment where she later finds true love . 
 Earlier that year Witherspoon was chosen to portray June Carter Cash , the second wife of country music singer @-@ songwriter Johnny Cash ( Joaquin Phoenix ) , in Walk the Line . She never had the chance to meet Carter Cash , as Witherspoon was filming Vanity Fair at the time Carter Cash died . Witherspoon performed her own vocals in the film and her songs had to be performed in front of a live audience , she was so worried about needing to perform live that she asked her lawyer to terminate the film contract . " That was the most challenging part of the role , " she later recalled in an interview , " I 'd never sung professionally . " Subsequently , she had to spend six months learning how to sing for the role . Witherspoon 's portrayal of Carter Cash was well received by critics , and Roger Ebert wrote that her performance added " boundless energy " to the movie . She won several awards for her performance , including the Golden Globe Award , the Screen Actors Guild , the BAFTA and the Academy Award for Best Actress in a Lead Role . Besides critical success in the movie industry , Witherspoon and Phoenix received a nomination for " collaborative video of the year " from the CMT Music Awards . Witherspoon expressed her passion for the movie : " I really like in this film that it is realistic and portrays sort of a real marriage , a real relationship where there are forbidden thoughts and fallibility . And it is about compassion in the long haul , not just the short easy solutions to problems . " She also stated that she believed Carter Cash was a woman ahead of her time : " I think the really remarkable thing about her character is that she did all of these things that we sort of see as normal things in the 1950s when it wasn 't really acceptable for a woman to be married and divorced twice and have two different children by two different husbands and travel around in a car full of very famous musicians all by herself . She didn 't try to comply to social convention , so I think that makes her a very modern woman . " 
 Witherspoon 's first post @-@ Oscar role came in the modern @-@ day fairy tale Penelope , as Annie , the best friend of Penelope ( Christina Ricci ) , a girl who has a curse in her family . The film was produced by her company Type A Films , with filming commencing in March 2006 , immediately following Witherspoon 's Oscar win for Walk the Line . Although the movie premiered at the 2006 Toronto International Film Festival , the final release date of Penelope was delayed twice before an eventual February 2008 release . 
 = = = 2007 – 12 : Creative struggles and " love triangle period " = = = 
 Following her critical success with Walk the Line , Witherspoon admits to spending several years " kind of floundering career @-@ wise " . Reflecting on this period of time in a December 2014 interview , Witherspoon attributed it to her separation from her first husband in October 2006 and their subsequent divorce , stating that she spent " a few years just trying to feel better . You know , you can 't really be very creative when you feel like your brain is scrambled eggs . " She claims that she " wasn 't making things I was passionate about . I was just kind of working , you know . And it was really clear that audiences weren 't responding to anything I was putting out there . " 
 This period of Witherspoon 's career began with the filming of the abduction thriller Rendition in November 2006 . In the film , she plays Isabella El @-@ Ibrahim , the pregnant wife of a bombing suspect . The film was released in October 2007 and marked Witherspoon 's first appearance in theaters since the 2005 release of Walk the Line . The movie received mostly negative reviews and was generally considered a disappointment at the Toronto International Film Festival . Witherspoon 's performance was also criticized : " Reese Witherspoon is surprisingly lifeless " , USA Today wrote , " She customarily injects energy and spirit into her parts , but here , her performance feels tamped down . " 
 In December 2007 , Witherspoon began working with Vince Vaughn , filming the holiday comedy Four Christmases , a story about a couple who must spend their Christmas Day trying to visit all four of their divorced parents . The film was released in November 2008 . Despite receiving only average reviews by critics , the movie became a box @-@ office success , earning more than 120 million US dollars domestically and 157 million US dollars worldwide . In 2009 , Witherspoon voiced Susan Murphy , the main character in DreamWorks ' computer @-@ animated 3 @-@ D feature film Monsters vs. Aliens , released in March 2009 , and she also co @-@ produced the Legally Blonde spin @-@ off Legally Blondes , starring Milly and Becky Rosso . 
 However , Witherspoon did not appear in a live @-@ action film for two years after the 2008 release of Four Christmases . She told Entertainment Weekly that the " break " was unplanned , stating that , " I just didn 't read anything I liked ... There are a lot of really , really , really big movies about robots and things — and there 's not a part for a 34 @-@ year @-@ old woman in a robot movie . " Witherspoon returned with three films released in 2010 , 2011 and 2012 , all centered on her as a woman caught in a love triangle between two men . In a 2012 interview with MTV , Witherspoon jokingly referred to this trio of films as her " love triangle period " . 
 The first film was James L. Brooks 's romantic comedy How Do You Know , which starred Witherspoon as a former national softball player who struggles to choose between a baseball star boyfriend ( Owen Wilson ) and a business executive being investigated for white @-@ collar crime ( Paul Rudd ) . The movie was filmed in Philadelphia and Washington , D.C. during the summer and fall of 2009 and released on December 17 , 2010 . The movie was both a critical and box office failure . Despite an over- $ 100 million budget , the film earned only $ 7 @.@ 6 million in its opening weekend , leading the Los Angeles Times to call it " one of the year 's biggest flops " . The movie earned mainly negative reviews from critics , scoring 35 % on Rotten Tomatoes with 111 reviews as of late December 2010 . 
 Witherspoon 's second consecutive love @-@ triangle movie was the film adaptation of the 1930s circus drama Water for Elephants . She began circus training in March 2010 for her role as Marlena , a glamorous performer stuck in a marriage to a volatile husband ( Christoph Waltz ) but intrigued by the circus 's new veterinarian ( Robert Pattinson ) . The movie was filmed between late May and early August 2010 in various locations in Tennessee , Georgia , and California . It was released on April 22 , 2011 and received mixed critical reviews , but was a modest box office success . 
 In September 2010 , Witherspoon began principal photography in Vancouver for the third love @-@ triangle film , This Means War , a 20th Century Fox spy comedy directed by McG in which Witherspoon 's character is at the center of a battle between best friends ( played by Chris Pine and Tom Hardy ) who are both in love with her . The film had a " sneak @-@ peek " release on Valentine 's Day , before fully opening on February 17 , 2012 . The film was panned by critics ( with a 25 % Rotten Tomatoes rating ) , and fared poorly at the box office , taking fifth place on its opening weekend with sales of $ 17 @.@ 6 million . The New York Times remarked that this " extended the box office cold streak for the Oscar @-@ winning Ms. Witherspoon . " 
 = = = 2013 – present : Renewed critical success – Wild and beyond = = = 
 Witherspoon 's subsequent films signaled a departure from the love @-@ triangle theme . In September 2011 , a year after beginning work on This Means War , she filmed a small role in Jeff Nichols 's coming @-@ of @-@ age drama Mud in Arkansas , playing Juniper , the former girlfriend of a fugitive ( Matthew McConaughey ) , who enlists two local boys to help him evade capture and rekindle his romance with her . Mud premiered in May 2012 in competition for the Palme d 'Or at the Cannes Film Festival , but did not win . Following its American debut at the Sundance Film Festival on January 19 , 2013 , the film had a limited release in select North American theaters on April 26 , 2013 . 
 Witherspoon next starred in Devil 's Knot , which is based on Atom Egoyan 's true crime book of the same name and examines the controversial case of the West Memphis Three . Like Mud , the film is set in Arkansas . Witherspoon played Pam Hobbs , the mother of one of three young murder victims . In an interview subsequent to her casting in the film , Egoyan noted that although the role requires " an emotionally loaded journey " , he " met with Reese , and ... talked at length about the project , and she 's eager to take on the challenge " . The movie was shot in Georgia in June and July 2012 . Witherspoon was pregnant with her third child during filming . The film 's world premiere was held on September 8 , 2013 at the Toronto International Film Festival . It was then released in selected American theaters on May 9 , 2014 . 
 In April 2013 , Witherspoon began production in Atlanta on Canadian director Philippe Falardeau 's film The Good Lie . It is based on real @-@ life events , about a brash American woman assigned to help four young Sudanese refugees ( known as Lost Boys of Sudan ) who win a lottery for relocation to the U.S. It was released on October 3 , 2014 . 
 Witherspoon shot a small role in Inherent Vice ( 2014 ) , an adaptation of Thomas Pynchon 's novel , in Pasadena , California in summer 2013 . Through her company Pacific Standard , Witherspoon served as a producer in the film adaptation of Gillian Flynn 's novel Gone Girl , though she did not star . Indeed , Witherspoon and her producing partner " had little to do with the production of Gone Girl " , leaving it to director David Fincher while focusing their efforts on another adaptation produced via Pacific Standard , that of Cheryl Strayed 's memoir Wild , which began production in fall 2013 on the same day as Gone Girl . Witherspoon starred in the project , portraying Strayed herself on her 1 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) hike along the Pacific Crest Trail . Wild was released in December 2014 to critical acclaim ; Michael Phillips of Chicago Tribune wrote in his review , " Witherspoon does the least acting of her career , and it works . <unk> yet restlessly , she brings to life Strayed 's longings , her states of grief and desire and her wary optimism . " Wild was promoted as Witherspoon 's primary " comeback " vehicle following her previous career slump , and she earned her second Academy Award nomination for the role . 
 In May 2014 , Witherspoon began production in Louisiana on Hot Pursuit , a comedy in which she plays a police officer trying to protect a drug lord 's widow ( Sofia Vergara ) . The movie was released on May 8 , 2015 . Witherspoon has officially signed on to produce and play the title character in the upcoming Disney film , Tink , which will retell the story of Peter Pan through the eyes of Tinker Bell . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 Witherspoon owned a production company called Type A Films , which the media believed was a moniker honoring her childhood nickname " Little Miss Type A. " However , when asked about the company by Interview magazine , she clarified the name 's origin : " ... people think I named it after myself ... It was actually an in @-@ joke with my family because at [ age ] 7 I understood complicated medical terms , such as the difference between type A and type B personalities . But I just wished I 'd named the company <unk> Films or Fork or something . You carry that baggage all your life . " In March 2012 , Witherspoon merged Type A Films with producer Bruna <unk> 's Make Movies banner to create a new production company entitled Pacific Standard . In 2013 , Witherspoon recorded a cover of the classic Frank Sinatra and Nancy Sinatra duet , " Somethin ' Stupid " with Michael Bublé for his 2013 album , To Be Loved . 
 In May 2015 , Reese launched Draper James , a retail brand with a focus on fashion , accessories and home décor inspired by the American South . The brand is named after Reese ’ s grandparents , Dorothea Draper and William James Witherspoon , who are said to be her greatest influences . The products are be manufactured and designed in @-@ house , and the brand launched direct to consumers online before opening its first brick and mortar store in fall 2015 in Reese ’ s hometown of Nashville , Tennessee . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Witherspoon is actively involved in children 's and women 's advocacy organizations . She is a longtime supporter of Save the Children , an organization that helps provide children around the world with education , health care and emergency aid . She also serves on the board of the Children 's Defense Fund , a child advocacy and research group . In 2006 , she was among a group of actresses who went to New Orleans , Louisiana in a CDF project to publicize the needs of Hurricane Katrina victims . During this trip , she helped open the city 's first Freedom School , as she met and talked with the children . Witherspoon later called this an experience that she would never forget . In 2007 , Witherspoon made her first move into the world of endorsements , as she signed a multi @-@ year agreement to serve as the first Global Ambassador of cosmetic company Avon Products . She acts as a spokeswoman for Avon 's cosmetic products and serves as the honorary chair of the Avon Foundation , a charitable organization that supports women and focuses on breast cancer research and the prevention of domestic violence . Witherspoon is also committed to participating in cosmetics product development and appearing in commercial advertisements . Explaining her motives for joining the foundation , she said , " As a woman and a mother I care deeply about the well being of other women and children throughout the world and through the years , I have always looked for opportunities to make a difference . " 
 = = In the media = = 
 Witherspoon hosted Saturday Night Live on September 29 , 2001 , the first episode to air after the September 11 attacks . In 2005 , she was ranked No. 5 in Teen People magazine 's list of most powerful young Hollywood actors . In 2006 , Witherspoon was listed among the Time 100 . Her featured article was written by Luke Wilson . In the same year , she was selected as one of the " 100 Sexiest Women In The World " by the readers of FHM . Witherspoon has appeared on the annual Celebrity 100 list by Forbes magazine in 2006 and 2007 , at No. 75 and No. 80 , respectively . Forbes also put her on the top ten <unk> Celebrities list . She was listed among <unk> Magazine 's Top Accomplished Women Entertainers . 
 In 2006 , Star fabricated a story saying Witherspoon was pregnant with her third child , which led to Witherspoon suing the magazine 's parent company American Media Inc in Los Angeles Superior Court for privacy violation . She sought unspecified general and punitive damages in the lawsuit , asserting that the claim harmed her reputation because it suggested she was hiding the news from producers of her upcoming films . Witherspoon has been featured four times in the annual " 100 Most Beautiful " issues of People magazine . 
 In 2007 , she was selected by People and the entertainment news program Access Hollywood as one of the year 's best @-@ dressed female stars . The yellow dress she wore to that year 's Golden Globe Awards was widely acclaimed . A study conducted by E @-@ Poll Market Research showed that Witherspoon was the most likable female celebrity of 2007 . That same year , Witherspoon established herself as the highest @-@ paid actress in the American film industry , earning $ 15 to $ 20 million per film . In recent years , however , her appearance in a number of movies that fared badly at the box office caused a turnabout in her status , and she has been noted as one of the most overpaid actors in Hollywood in 2011 , 2012 and 2013 . In April 2011 , Witherspoon ranked 3rd on the 22nd annual People 's Most Beautiful issue . 
 On December 1 , 2010 , Witherspoon received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at <unk> Hollywood Blvd . 
 In 2015 , Witherspoon made her second appearance among the Time 100 , with her featured article being written by Mindy Kaling . The same year , she was awarded , by a unanimous vote from the committee , the American Cinematheque for being " a perfect example of an actress flourishing in today ’ s world " and " an active and successful movie producer who is moving her career forward both behind and in front of the camera " . 
 In June 2013 , Witherspoon filed suit against Marketing Advantages International Inc . , claiming it used her name and image extensively in jewelry advertising without her permission , both throughout the United States and internationally . In December 2015 , while Witherspoon 's trademark claims to her name were rejected , for she had not established secondary meaning to her full name , that she did not claim " emotional distress " and the " photos and facts were generally known by the public and the photos were taken in public with Plaintiff 's consent " , the court ruled that she could proceed with her right of publicity claims against a number of defendants . Two months later , Witherspoon withdrew her lawsuit , having " come to private agreements with the various defendants , including <unk> Sales , Fragrance Hut , <unk> and others " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Witherspoon has cited Meryl Streep , Holly Hunter , Frances McDormand , Jodie Foster , Goldie Hawn , Sally Field , Sigourney Weaver , Lucille Ball , Carole Lombard , Judy Holliday , Gena Rowlands and Tom Hanks as influences in her acting . Her favorite films are Splendor in the Grass and Overboard . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Witherspoon met actor Ryan Phillippe at her 21st birthday party in March 1997 . They became engaged in December 1998 and married near Charleston , South Carolina , on June 5 , 1999 , at Old Wide Awake Plantation . The couple had two children , daughter , Ava Elizabeth Phillippe ( born September 9 , 1999 ) , and son , Deacon Reese Phillippe ( born October 23 , 2003 ) . In October 2006 , Witherspoon and Phillippe announced that they were separating . The following month Witherspoon filed for divorce , citing irreconcilable differences . In her petition , she sought joint legal and sole physical custody of their children , with full visitation rights for Phillippe . With no prenuptial agreement , they would be entitled to half of all assets gained during the marriage under California law — with Witherspoon 's being the more significant . Witherspoon requested that the court grant no spousal support for Phillippe , and he did not contest . On May 15 , 2007 , he filed for joint physical custody of their children and made no motion to block Witherspoon from seeking support from him . Witherspoon and Phillippe 's final divorce documents were granted by the Los Angeles Superior Court on October 5 , 2007 . 
 Throughout 2007 , there was persistent speculation in the mass media about a romantic relationship between Witherspoon and her Rendition co @-@ star Jake Gyllenhaal . After her divorce was finalized in October 2007 , they became more open about their relationship , mainly due to the release of paparazzi pictures of them vacationing together in Rome , Italy . They reportedly broke up in December 2009 . 
 In early February 2010 , it was reported that Witherspoon had begun dating Jim Toth , a talent agent and co @-@ head of motion picture talent at the Creative Artists Agency , where Witherspoon is a client . Witherspoon and Toth announced their engagement in December 2010 , and married on March 26 , 2011 in Ojai , California , at Libbey Ranch , Witherspoon 's country estate ( which she since has sold ) . The couple 's son , Tennessee James Toth , was born on September 27 , 2012 . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 She attended All Saints ' Episcopal Church in Beverly Hills , California . 
 = = = 2013 arrest = = = 
 Early in the morning of April 19 , 2013 , while in Atlanta , Georgia filming The Good Lie , Witherspoon and Toth were pulled over after the car in which they were traveling was seen weaving across a double line on Peachtree Street . Toth , who was driving , was found to have a blood alcohol level of 0 @.@ 139 and was arrested and charged with driving under the influence and failing to maintain a lane . Witherspoon was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct for disobeying the arresting officer 's instructions to remain in the vehicle and arguing with him , saying that she did not believe he was a real police officer and asking if he knew who she was . The couple was released on bond at 3 : 30 AM the same day . Witherspoon was able to attend the New York premiere of her film Mud on April 21 , 2013 , and she issued an apology later that night , stating that she had " clearly had one drink too many " and was " deeply embarrassed about the things I said ... I was disrespectful to the officer who was just doing his job . I have nothing but respect for the police and I ’ m very sorry for my behavior . " When Witherspoon 's lawyer and her husband appeared in court on May 2 , Toth pleaded guilty and was ordered to complete 40 hours of community service , an alcohol @-@ education program , and one year of probation ; Witherspoon pleaded no contest and was fined $ 213 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Witherspoon has won numerous awards , including the BAFTA Award and the Academy Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in Walk the Line in 2005 . In 2015 , Witherspoon was nominated for another Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role for her performance in Wild . 
 = Cyclone Bola = 
 Cyclone Bola was one of the costliest cyclones in the history of New Zealand , causing severe damage as an extratropical cyclone when it passed near the country in March 1988 . It formed on February 24 to the north of Fiji , and tracking generally southwestward it reached hurricane @-@ force winds near Vanuatu on February 28 . The next day it generated peak wind velocities of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) , though it quickly weakened as it accelerated southward . On March 4 Bola transitioned into an extratropical storm , passing to the north of the North Island of New Zealand on March 8 . It weakened further and was absorbed by a stationary trough near the South Island on March 12 . 
 The cyclone first affected Fiji , where it produced gale force winds and strong waves . In Vanuatu , Bola dropped heavy rainfall , which destroyed two bridges and caused severe damage to islands in the group . Bola caused severe damage to the North Island of New Zealand , where heavy rainfall peaked at 917 mm ( 36 @.@ 1 in ) in Gisborne Region . Damage totaled over $ 82 million ( 1988 USD ) . Three people were killed due to flooding , and hundreds were evacuated when a swollen river threatened Wairoa . In <unk> Harbor Northland a samaritan act accounted for another Bola fatality when an elderly male long time resident of <unk> road <unk> Bay attempted to tie down a neighbours empty water tank . He suffered a massive heart attack and died during the peak of the storm . The name Bola was later retired , meaning it will not be used again within the same basin . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The system that was to become Severe Tropical Cyclone Bola was first noted during February 24 , as a depression that had developed within the South Pacific Convergence Zone about 850 km ( 530 mi ) to the north @-@ east of Nadi , Fiji . During that day the system moved south @-@ westwards and passed about 260 km ( 160 mi ) to the north of Nadi , Fiji , before it started to move north @-@ westwards during February 25 . The system was subsequently named Bola by the Fiji Meteorological Service during the next day , after it had become a Category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . The system subsequently moved south @-@ westwards which meant that the islands of Maewo and Pentecost were threatened . However , as Bola moved further southwards it entered a region of light and variable wind during February 27 , which along with an area of high pressure in the Tasman Sea blocked Bola 's movement southwards . By this time Bola had become a category 2 tropical cyclone on the Australian scale , with wind speeds of between 95 – 110 km / h ( 60 – 70 mph ) occurring near the centre . During February 28 , the system became a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone on the Australian scale , as it performed a small clockwise loop , between the Shepherd Islands and Efate . After completing its first cyclonic loop during February 29 , Bola started to move south @-@ eastwards , before it performed a second cyclonic loop during the next day . 
 As it completed its second cyclonic loop during March 2 , the FMS reported that the system had peaked with 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , which made it a Category 4 severe tropical cyclone on the Australian scale . The United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center also reported that the system had peaked with 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) , which made it equivalent to a category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . 
 After reaching peak intensity , Cyclone Bola quickly weakened as it accelerated southeastward toward a frontal trough . On March 3 , its winds dropped below hurricane @-@ force , and it gradually lost its tropical characteristics . The structure became asymmetric , with a large band of clouds extending well south of the circulation . By March 4 , Bola had completed the transition into an extratropical cyclone . Which turned south and began to affect the North Island of New Zealand on March 6 . A building ridge of high pressure to its south caused the extratropical remnants of Bola to slow and turn to the west on March 7 . The next day , the storm passed about 110 km ( 70 mi ) north of the North Island . Around the same time , the storm began slowly filling , meaning the low pressure area associated with Bola was losing its identity . It turned southward on March 9 , and on March 12 was absorbed by a stationary trough in the Westerlies near the western coast of the South Island . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Vanuatu = = = 
 Cyclone Bola remained near Vanuatu for about a week , during which it reached its peak intensity while executing a cyclonic loop . The most affected locations were Epi island , the Shepherd Islands , and the islands in <unk> Province , and throughout the country the cyclone affected more than 15 @,@ 000 people and 3 @,@ 000 houses . In a five @-@ day period the cyclone dropped about 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) of rainfall . Two bridges on Malakula were destroyed , and several other bridges were flooded or damaged . The passage of the cyclone also left several buildings , roads , and crop fields damaged . 
 = = = Fiji = = = 
 Fiji was first affected by Bola on February 25 , while the system was within its developing stages . The system subsequently affected the island nation for a second time between March 3 and 4 . As it impacted the island nation for a second time , gale force winds of up to 81 km / h ( 50 mph ) and waves of up to 5 m ( 16 ft ) were observed . Only very minor damage to sugarcane , <unk> and other crops was reported , while the Fijian Government decided not to assess the damage caused by Bola . During March 3 , an open punt went missing between Kadavu and <unk> with six fishermen on board . All six fishermen were subsequently presumed dead after repeated air searches had failed to find them . 
 = = = New Zealand = = = 
 Cyclone Bola created some of the heaviest rainfall totals for a single storm in the history of New Zealand , with some locations receiving more than half of their annual rainfall totals from the storm . While the cyclone passed north of the island , a strong easterly flow over the North Island contained the interaction between moist air from Bola and drier air from the ridge to its southeast . In the Gisborne region , the flow resulted in the heaviest rainfall totals , when the moisture ascended over the region 's western mountainous areas and condensed into precipitation . One station recorded 419 mm ( 16 @.@ 5 in ) in a 24 ‑ hour period . The maximum rainfall total attributed to the storm was 917 mm ( 36 @.@ 1 in ) , reported at a station near <unk> Bay . Heavy rainfall totals of up to and over 300 mm ( 12 in ) were observed in the regions of Auckland and Northland . The cyclone is the largest to be recorded in 93 years of rainfall records . As such , it had a large and lasting effect on the rivers of the area when it deposited a large amount of sediment , as recorded in the sedimentary record of Lake <unk> . Shortly prior to losing its identity , the remnants of Bola also dropped 100 – 200 mm ( 4 – 8 in ) of precipitation on the South Island of New Zealand . 
 Storm damage was heaviest in Gisborne , where rain destroyed or damaged several roads and bridges . Three days of continuous rainfall led to mudslides , flooding , and erosion . Flooding killed three people when a car was swept away . In Te <unk> in Gisborne , a flooded river forced 500 residents to evacuate . A total of 1 @,@ 765 farmers were affected by the flooding , accounting for about 3 @,@ 600 hectares ( 8 @,@ 900 acres ) of damaged crop fields and about $ 90 million in crop damage ( 1988 NZD , $ 82 million 1988 USD ) . Water supplies were disrupted in two cities due to flooding . Rainfall in Northland Region caused flooding and outages to telephone and power . Additionally , beginning on about 6 March , the cyclone began affecting the North Island with strong easterly winds of over hurricane force , caused by the interaction between the extratropical remnants of Bola and a ridge of high pressure to its south . The winds damaged a few homes , including some in which the roofs were damaged or destroyed . In addition , the strong winds downed several trees , and at the same time , erosion and landslides left hillsides bare without grass or trees . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Vanuatu , cyclone victims received food and emergency aid following the storm . Australian patrol boat HMAS Cessnock provided manpower assistance to 11 islands in the country . Reconstruction costs in Vanuatu totalled about $ 5 million ( 1988 USD ) , which was about 10 percent of the country 's national budget . 
 After the passage of the storm , four towns in New Zealand declared states of emergency . The New Zealand government provided about $ 80 million ( 1988 NZD ) to the east coast region of the North Island for assisting in cyclone damage . $ 8 million was used to create an East Coast Forestry Conservation Scheme , which was set to protect forests and prevent erosion . A study was taken five years after the storm , consisting of a group of 112 people who were evacuated or received monetary assistance in response to the cyclone ; the study showed 12 % of the respondents as experiencing Posttraumatic stress disorder , of which they reported a general lack of assistance and public support . 
 = Doctor Ox 's Experiment ( opera ) = 
 Doctor Ox 's Experiment is an opera in two acts by Gavin Bryars . It has an English @-@ language libretto by Blake Morrison after the novella of the same name by Jules Verne . It was first performed on 15 June 1998 at the London Coliseum by English National Opera ( ENO ) who co @-@ commissioned the opera with BBC Television . 
 In the experiment of the title , Doctor Ox introduces a gas into a sedate and conservative Flemish village with the result that everyone and everything becomes speeded up and chaotic . ( Ox 's and his assistant 's names combine to make <unk> , the French name for Oxygen . ) ` The opera explores the conflict between Ox 's advocacy of modernity and scientific and political change and Ygène 's belief that liberation and the accompanying loss of the traditional rhythms of life might bring unhappiness . 
 The music is predominantly slow @-@ moving and quiet . Bryars allocated distinct voice types to the different types of roles : town elders , young lovers and scientists . He also included some unusual instruments in his orchestra : an oboe d 'amore and an amplified jazz bass in the love scene , an electronic keyboard and a flugelhorn instead of trumpets in the brass section . The reception was mixed with several critics complaining of boredom while others wrote of members of the audience being entranced by the music . 
 = = Composition history = = 
 Bryars began to think about his next opera in 1984 , when he was in France for the production of Medea , his first work in the genre . The three subjects he came up with were Flaubert 's Bouvard et <unk> , De Quincey 's The Last Days of Immanuel Kant and Verne 's Dr. Ox 's Experiment . Unknown to Bryars , this last had already been the subject of two other operas , the opéra @-@ bouffe Le docteur Ox by Jacques Offenbach and il <unk> Oss by Annibale <unk> . 
 The first music to materialise in connection with any of these projects was " By the Vaar " , a 1987 work for jazz bass and chamber orchestra commissioned by the Camden Jazz Festival with Charlie Haden in mind . The title refers to the river that flows through the town in Verne 's story and to the love scene between Frantz and Suzel that takes place on its banks . The author has been a source for several other of the composer 's works . Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea supplied text for three different compositions and The Green Ray provided the name and inspiration for his saxophone concerto . 
 Bryars approached Blake Morrison in May 1988 with the suggestion of working on an opera based on Verne 's novella . At the time Morrison knew neither the Verne story nor Bryars 's music but he agreed to the proposal after a lunchtime meeting with the composer . They worked together on a concert piece which was premiered as Doctor Ox 's Experiment ( Epilogue ) by the soprano Sarah Leonard and the Gavin Bryars Ensemble in November 1988 . 
 Both composer and librettist were distracted by other projects but Dennis Marks , who had moved from the BBC to become General Director of ENO , commissioned a full @-@ scale opera to be premiered at the Coliseum . Bryars incorporated material from both By the Vaar and Doctor Ox 's Experiment ( Epilogue ) into the opera . The main development occurred in the period 1994 – 1996 . Bryars and Morrison received guidance and advice from David Pountney , the opera director . 
 In developing the opera , Bryars and Morrison decided to flesh out some of the roles , including Ox , Ygène and Aunt Hermance . They also added a second pair of lovers . At one point , the composer considered giving the title role to American rock @-@ singer Tom Waits , who had recorded one of the versions of Bryars 's Jesus ' Blood Never Failed Me Yet . Bryars was looking for a means of making Ox sound distinct from the rest of the cast but in the end decided to make it a tenor role . The opera was dedicated to Bryars 's mother . 
 = = Performance and recording history = = 
 The opera was given its premiere at the London Coliseum by ENO on June 15 , 1998 in a production by Atom Egoyan . This was the first full @-@ scale opera to be premiered either at the Coliseum or at the Royal Opera House for several years and came after a year 's delay . Doctor Ox received four further performances during that run , one of which was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 . 
 <unk> Anderson and David James went on to partially reprise their roles in Duets from Doctor Ox ’ s Experiment , first performed at La Botanique , Brussels on October 16 , 1998 . In 1999 there was a new staging at the <unk> Dortmund , produced by Pascal Paul @-@ Harang and conducted by Alexander Rumpf . The original 1988 version of the Epilogue was given in Tallinn in October 2003 sung by Anna Maria <unk> , with the <unk> E ensemble conducted by <unk> <unk> including Bryars on bass . 
 Although no complete recording exists of the opera , there are two performances available of the study By the Vaar . One features the original soloist Charlie Haden ( Point Music 454 126 @-@ 2 ) ; the other has Bryars himself as the bassist ( GB Records <unk> ) . This work has been performed in venues in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Germany , the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Music = = 
 The opera is scored for 2 flutes , the second doubling piccolo , 2 oboes , 1 doubling oboe d 'amore , and the other doubling cor anglais , a clarinet and bass clarinet , a bassoon and contrabassoon , 4 horns , a flugelhorn , 4 trombones , a bass trombone , 1 timpanist , 3 percussionists , harp , electronic keyboard doubling piano and a string section consisting of at least six each first and second violins , 5 violas , four cellos and 3 double basses , including at least one bass with a 5th string or low extension , plus an improvising jazz player on amplified bass . The percussion consists of marimba , vibraphone , glockenspiel , crotales , tubular bells , cow bells , bass drum , tam @-@ tam , sizzle cymbal , suspended cymbal , mark @-@ tree , Chinese bell @-@ tree and wind @-@ machine . 
 Bryars wanted the scenes with the lovers to " have something of the purity of early music " and pointed to the obbligato oboe d 'amore and the " relatively light orchestral textures " as means by which he achieved this . The improvisation by the amplified jazz bass is confined to the scene by the Vaar though the instrument is also used in the epilogue . The flugelhorn replaced the trumpet of the traditional brass section because it is " mellower [ and ] less assertive " . The bass clarinet was included for several reasons . It had doubled the jazz bass parts in the two study works for the opera . It was an instrument that had a prominent role in Les Huguenots in which Meyerbeer exploited modifications in the instrument 's mechanism , developed by Adolphe Sax who , like most of the characters in Dr Ox , was Belgian . 
 Bryars chose to distinguish the character types through the vocal ranges they were given . The adults of the town are largely given deep voices , bass and bass @-@ baritone for the men , contralto and mezzo @-@ soprano for the women . The lovers have high voices , soprano and counter @-@ tenor . In order to make the scientists sound unlike the townspeople , Bryars made Ox a tenor and Ygène a baritone , both parts being agile , lyric and relatively high in their voice range . 
 The music is post @-@ modern and largely quiet and slow @-@ moving . One critic describes it as " suffused with a melancholy sweetness that drowns all differences , " while another compares the epilogue to " slow @-@ motion Mahler " . The climactic moments of each act violate the established pattern in different ways : The fastest tempo of the opera appears in the chaos of the performance of Les Huguenots ; the explosion in Act II has the loudest dynamics . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The critical reception that Doctor Ox received was mixed . David Murray of the Financial Times summed the contrasted reactions up as follows . " For some of the audience , clearly , the word for the opera would be ' paralytic ' . Others found it mysteriously , even hypnotically beautiful . " Norman Lebrecht noted a contrast between the views of the critics and the audience : 
 His own reaction was positive . " Doctor Ox was aurally alluring , with a row of lyrical ideas flowering from a Straussian seed @-@ bed and just enough drama to justify the stage business – but I was there to enjoy , not review . " 
 Michael White in the Independent on Sunday considered that the opera " is more an aesthetic experience than a dramatic one . " He expressed a liking for the hues brought out in the instrumental writing and for the vocal lines and picked out the love scene and Suzel 's final monologue as highlights . But his conclusion was that , although " the sounds are sometimes ravishing " , the overall work was " invertebrate , a shapeless , spineless lump of aural jelly . " Paul Griffiths found a mixture of beauty and boredom in " a conceptual artist 's opera , put together in a spirit of detachment and disbelief . " 
 Among the most hostile critics was Rupert Christiansen : " Short of a week 's exposure to the relentless drip @-@ drip @-@ drip of Chinese water @-@ torture , I can conceive of no more excruciatingly tedious experience than watching and listening to Doctor Ox 's Experiment , a new opera . " Michael Tanner 's view was similar . 
 More positively , Keith Potter thought that Bryars had shown wisdom in selecting a story whose setting suited his taste for slow @-@ moving music and " laid @-@ back nonchalance " . In contrast to some others Potter felt that " Bryars makes ... a success of the ensuing action , which demands , and receives , quicker changes of mood and tempo and the establishment of a real dramatic momentum . " 
 Paul Driver found the premiere " something of a triumph " . 
 Morrison 's libretto was appreciated by various critics as " charming " and for having " wit and characterful colours " and supplying " jaunty lines ... some individual characters , dramatic story @-@ telling " . Tanner , however , thought the text rather opaque and found the problem of comprehension aggravated by the high vocal lines which made it difficult to make out the words . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The opera is set during the nineteenth century in the fictional Flemish town of Quiquendone . 
 = = = Act I = = = 
 Doctor Ox and Ygène chance upon Quiquendone which , as the chorus sings , is not on any map . The townspeople celebrate their sedate existence and have their tea while discussing small matters . Three scenes then go on in parallel . 
 In their laboratory , Ox and his assistant set up their equipment . When Ygène questions the wisdom of their experiment , Ox praises the wonders that science will bring mankind . He looks forward to his bright lighting and how the " <unk> " gas he plans to introduce in his experiment will light up the slow lives of the locals . Ygène expresses concern that there might be an explosion but Ox says that everything will be safe . 
 In the town hall , the members of the town council decide that it is rather hasty to come to a decision about creating a new post after just ten years of discussion . They continue agreeing to pass no resolutions on other matters . They discuss Ox 's request for a meeting . 
 In the town square , the two pairs of lovers and Hermance , their chaperone , sing about how their courtship should not be hurried ; engagements should last the same ten years it takes to train as a doctor . 
 While Ox 's workers lay pipes , the chorus wonder what Ox is up to and what his background is but there are just contradictory rumours . The leading citizens visit Ox and , after initially complaining about his starting work without permission , find themselves telling him to accelerate his plans and get everything ready in a week . 
 By the river Vaar , Frantz and Suzel look forward to their wedding which is now only five years away . 
 Ygène questions whether the townspeople would agree to their lives being speeded up in their experiment . Ox dismisses this as comparable to asking if animals agree to be vivisected . The people will learn to thank him . 
 The town has gathered to watch a performance of Meyerbeer 's opera Les Huguenots and this is Ox 's chosen occasion for his experiment . Things start slowly and then speed up and become chaotic as the experiment proceeds . The audience join in the performance . Uproar occurs . Frantz challenges Fritz to a duel for flirting with Suzel . Hermance is left alone when everyone else has left the <unk> wonders what has happened . She is sure someone must pay . 
 = = = Act II = = = 
 The experiment is now in full flow with the gas affecting the townspeople 's thinking . About half the town , including Frantz and Suzanne , talk revolution . Others give themselves to pleasure . Fritz and Suzel sing of making love until the day they die . The political agitators intend to overthrow the town council but Niklausse and Van Tricasse persuade them instead to attack a neighbouring town over an incident 700 years earlier involving a stray cow . Frantz is appointed the war leader for pledging to kill the most people . 
 Ox is thinking about his next research when Niklausse and Van Tricasse come to demand new weapons . Ox agrees to supply something . Ygène wants to stop the experiment but Ox says it should proceed whatever the cost . 
 Niklausse and Van Tricasse climb up the clock tower to survey the troops . They are at first argumentative , then calm down and help each other in the clean air at the top . They agree they must stop the war but , once they reach the polluted air , they argue again in their urgency to get to war . 
 Ygène becomes more and more agitated by the results of the experiment . The army calls for more gas but no one is in the laboratory . 
 There is an explosion . 
 Although the town is badly damaged , everyone is back to their normal selves . Suzel and Frantz are together again , but she wonders if his feelings really are the same . Ygène is heard calling for Ox . 
 = Princess Sophia of the United Kingdom = 
 The Princess Sophia ( Sophia Matilda ; 3 November 1777 – 27 May 1848 ) was the 12th child and 5th daughter of King George III and Charlotte of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz . Sophia is perhaps best known for the rumours surrounding a supposed illegitimate child to which she gave birth as a young woman . 
 In her youth , Sophia was closest to her father , who preferred his daughters over his sons ; however , she and her sisters lived in fear of their mother . The princesses were well @-@ educated but raised in a rigidly strict household . Though he disliked the idea of matrimony for his daughters , King George had intended to find them suitable husbands when they came of age . However , the King 's recurring bouts of madness , as well as the Queen 's desire to have her daughters live their lives as her companions , stopped would @-@ be suitors from offering for the most of the princesses . As a result , Sophia and all but one of her sisters grew up in their mother 's cloistered household , which they frequently referred to as a " Nunnery " . 
 Though she never wed , rumours spread that Sophia became pregnant by Thomas Garth , an equerry of her father 's , and gave birth to an illegitimate son in the summer of 1800 . Other gossip declared the child was the product of rape by her elder brother the Duke of Cumberland , who was deeply unpopular . Historians are divided on the validity of these stories , as some believe she gave birth to Garth 's child while others call them tales spread by the Royal Family 's political enemies . 
 The efforts of the Prince Regent to gain his sisters increased independence were further hastened along with Queen Charlotte 's death in 1818 . In her last years , Sophia resided in the household of her niece Princess Victoria of Kent ( the future Queen Victoria ) , at Kensington Palace . There , she fell under the sway of Victoria 's comptroller , Sir John Conroy , who took advantage of her senility and blindness ; rumours also circulated that Sophia was in awe of Conroy because of his ability to deal effectively with the " bullying importunities " of Sophia 's supposed illegitimate son . Sophia frequently served as his spy on the Kensington household as well as on her two elder brothers , while Conroy squandered most of her money . The princess died on 27 May 1848 at her residence in Vicarage Place , Kensington Palace . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The Princess Sophia was born at Buckingham House , London on 3 November 1777 , the twelfth child and fifth daughter of King George III and Charlotte of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz . The young princess was christened on 1 December 1777 in the Great Council Chamber at St James 's Palace by Frederick Cornwallis , Archbishop of Canterbury . Her godparents were Prince August of Saxe @-@ Gotha @-@ Altenburg ( her first cousin once @-@ removed ) , The Duchess of Brunswick @-@ Wolfenbüttel ( her first cousin twice @-@ removed ) and The Duchess of Mecklenburg ( wife of her first cousin once @-@ removed ) , all of whom were represented by proxies . 
 Upon Sophia 's birth , King George ensured his daughters and younger sons would have allowances ; through a provision of Parliament , Sophia and her elder sisters each were to receive an annual income of £ 6 @,@ 000 either upon their marriages or the king 's death . The royal household was very rigid and formal , even when only the royal family were together in private . For instance , when the King entered a room , his daughters were expected to stand up , remain silent until addressed , and not leave until given permission . Queen Charlotte made attempts to be economical where possible ; the younger princesses wore country @-@ made dresses , which were less expensive , and ate plain food . 
 Sophia 's early life was focused on education . Lady Charlotte Finch served as Sophia 's governess , a role she performed for all the royal children . As with the strict education and discipline received by her brothers , Lady Charlotte through the sub @-@ governesses chosen by Queen Charlotte arranged expert tutors to give the princesses lessons in English , French , music , art , and geography ; Sophia and her sisters were also allowed to play sports and boisterous games with their brothers . The queen sought to combine her daughters ' entertainments with educational benefits . Sophia and her siblings were brought up with an exposure to theatre , and were entertained with special performances . Princess Sophia 's first appearance in public occurred when she accompanied her parents and elder siblings to a commemoration for George Frideric Handel , held at Westminster Abbey on 26 May 1784 . 
 Uncommon for the period , Sophia 's father was an involved parent in her early years , and preferred his daughters to his sons . When possible he attended the princesses ' birthday parties and other special events , and was kept informed on their progress in the schoolroom . A family friend once remarked , " I never saw more lovely children , nor a more pleasing sight than the King 's fondness for them . " On the other hand , Queen Charlotte invoked fear in her daughters and , according to royal historian A.W. Purdue , she was not " <unk> maternal " . 
 = = Adulthood = = 
 By 1792 Sophia and her sister Mary were being included in more family activities , and at age fourteen , Sophia debuted at court on her father 's birthday , 4 June 1792 . According to biographer Christopher Hibbert , in her young adulthood Sophia was a " delightful though moody girl , pretty , delicate and passionate . " As within her childhood , Sophia was devoted to her father , though she occasionally found him exasperating . She wrote that " the dear King is all kindness to me , and I cannot say how grateful I feel for it . " Prior to 1788 , King George had told his daughters that he would take them to Hanover and find them suitable husbands despite misgivings he had , which stemmed from his sisters ' own unhappy marriages . He remarked , " I cannot deny that I have never wished to see any of them marry : I am happy in their company , and do not in the least want a separation . " However , the King suffered his first bout of madness that year , when Sophia was aged eleven . Sophia remarked of her father 's behaviour , " He is all affection and kindness to me , but sometimes an over kindness , if you can understand that , which greatly alarms me . " Further lapses into insanity occurred in 1801 and 1804 , thus forestalling talk of marriage for his daughters . The question of matrimony was rarely raised ; Queen Charlotte feared the subject , something which had always discomforted the King , would push him back into insanity . Furthermore , the queen , strained from her husband 's illness , wanted the princesses to remain close to her . 
 As a result , like most of her sisters , Princess Sophia was forced to live her life as a companion of her mother . The princesses were not allowed to mix with anyone outside of the Royal Court , and rarely came into contact with men other than pages , <unk> , or attendants . Constantly chaperoned , the girls frequently complained about living in a " Nunnery " . For entertainment , the queen read sermons to them and the princesses practised embroidery . On one occasion Sophia wrote their days were so " deadly dull ... I wished myself a kangaroo . " 
 The Princess Royal was the only daughter who was able to marry while relatively young . The rest of the princesses were not without suitors , but most of the various men 's efforts were stopped by Queen Charlotte . Most of the girls longed for families and children of their own , and often asked the Prince of Wales , to whom they remained close , for help , either in finding spouses , allowing them to marry their loves , or allowing them to live outside of Queen Charlotte 's household . A grateful Sophia once jokingly wrote to her brother , saying " I wonder you do not vote for putting us in a sack and drowning us in the Thames . " Before George became regent , he had little power to oblige his sisters . His ascension to the regency in 1811 led to Sophia and the other remaining unmarried princesses to receive increases in their allowances , from £ 10 @,@ 000 to £ 13 @,@ 000 . He also supported their desire to venture out into society . Queen Charlotte was outraged at these attempts , and the Prince @-@ Regent had to reconcile the two parties carefully so that his sisters could still enjoy some independence . 
 = = = Illegitimate child = = = 
 During Sophia 's lifetime , there were various rumours about her alleged incestuous relationship with her brother , Ernest Augustus , Duke of Cumberland , who later became the King of Hanover . The Prince Regent supposedly warned his sisters not to be alone in the same room with the Duke , and Cumberland was deeply unpopular with the British people . It is unclear whether there was truth to these rumours or whether they were circulated by the Duke 's numerous political enemies . 
 Limited in exposure to eligible men , Sophia and several of her sisters became involved with courtiers and <unk> . Sophia entered into a relationship with her father 's chief equerry , Major @-@ General Thomas Garth , a man thirty @-@ three years her senior . He had a large purple birthmark on his face , causing Sophia 's sister Mary to refer to him as " the purple light of love " and courtier and diarist Charles Greville to call him a " hideous old devil " . Despite this , one lady @-@ in @-@ waiting noted " the princess was so violently in love with him that everyone saw it . She could not contain herself in his presence . " Greville wrote about Sophia and her sisters ' affairs in a diary entry , " women fall in love with anything – and opportunity and the accidents of the passions are of more importance than any positive merits of mind or of body ... [ The princesses ] were secluded from the world , mixing with few people – their passions boiling over and ready to fall into the hands of the first man whom circumstances enabled to get at them . " 
 Gossip soon spread of the existence of an illegitimate child . Some historians contend that , sometime before August 1800 in Weymouth , Sophia gave birth to a child fathered by Garth . Flora Fraser believes the rumours that Sophia had a child , but has questioned whether the child was fathered by Garth , or Sophia 's brother the Duke of Cumberland . Historians further write that the child , baptised Thomas Garth like his father , was raised by his father in Weymouth , where his mother would visit him occasionally . In 1828 , this child apparently tried to blackmail the royal family with certain incriminating documents from his father about his supposed parents ' relationship , though this ended in failure . 
 Conversely , Anthony Camp challenges the belief that Sophia had a child and provides a detailed summary of the available evidence . In his book Royal Babylon : the <unk> History of European Royalty , author Karl Shaw writes of the possibility that the Duke raped his sister , citing evidence from Charles Greville 's diaries , as well as other factors . Historian Gillian Gill believes that Sophia secretly gave birth to the child and that this is the reason Sophia never married . Alison Weir and others , however , write of a possible marriage between Sophia and Garth the same year as the child 's birth , but there is no evidence to back this assertion other than the presence of a wedding ring in a portrait of an aged Sophia . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Sophia was a favourite of her niece , Princess Charlotte of Wales , as the young princess liked her gentle character and had a certain fascination for the gossip surrounding Sophia 's past . Charlotte detested her other aunts , and once wrote , " I can hardly believe [ Sophia ] belongs to <unk> so wholly different is she in thoughts , opinions , matters . Her nobleness and rectitude of mind renders her no favourite here . The constant scenes of intrigue , of <unk> , she can but ill support . " The Prince Regent 's efforts to help his sisters led to the marriages of Mary and Elizabeth , and Queen Charlotte 's death in 1818 allowed Augusta and Sophia their domestic freedom , though it was too late for them to marry . From her mother Sophia inherited Lower Lodge at Windsor Great Park , which she in turn gave to the Prince Regent . The death of Princess Augusta in 1840 resulted in Sophia inheriting Clarence House and Frogmore . 
 After the queen 's death , Sophia lived in Kensington Palace during her final years , next to her niece Princess Victoria of Kent , the future Queen Victoria . As a result , Princess Sophia was one of the few paternal relatives that Victoria saw often . Like her sister @-@ in @-@ law the Duchess of Kent , Sophia fell under the spell of Victoria 's comptroller Sir John Conroy and let him manage her money . The princess became a part of the Duchess of Kent 's social circle and , in return , Sophia spied for Conroy when he was absent from Kensington Palace . Sophia also reported to Conroy on what she heard at St. James 's Palace , as she had privileged access to courtiers as well as to her two elder brothers . <unk> speculated that Conroy 's successful ability to deal with the " bullying <unk> " of Sophia 's illegitimate son endeared her to him , while some historians write that Conroy took advantage of Sophia , who in her last years had become " dizzy , easily muddled ... mourning her fading looks " and a " confused , nearly blind aunt . " Sophia often dined with the household , but the Duchess of Kent despised her . Princess Victoria was aware her aunt was a spy and the two never became close . Sophia 's wealth allowed Conroy to live a rich lifestyle , acquiring for himself a house in Kensington for £ 4000 , as well as two other estates for £ 18 @,@ 000 . Sophia was also responsible for certain members of Victoria 's household gaining higher statuses ; Victoria 's governess Louise Lehzen , for instance , was made a Hanoverian baroness on the orders of George IV , and Conroy was named a Knight Commander of the Hanoverian Order . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 After having been blind for over ten years , on the morning of 27 May 1848 , Princess Sophia became ill at her residence at Vicarage Place , Kensington ; she was visited by her sister Mary , sister @-@ in @-@ law Queen Adelaide , and nephew @-@ in @-@ law Prince Albert . Sophia 's death occurred at 6 : 30 later that day , when Mary , the Duchesses of Kent and Cambridge were present . 
 The princess was buried at Kensal Green Cemetery in London , immediately in front of ( east of ) the central chapel rather than at Windsor Castle , as she wished to be near her brother , Prince Augustus Frederick , Duke of Sussex ( who lies on the opposite side of the path ) . After her death , it was discovered that Conroy had squandered most of her money and that the princess had virtually no estate to bequeath . Charles Greville wrote an entry in his diary on 31 May : 
 " The Princess Sophia died a few days ago , while the Queen [ Victoria ] was holding the Drawing @-@ room for her Birthday . She was blind , helpless , and suffered martyrdom ; a very clever , well @-@ informed woman , but who never lived in the world . " 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 3 November 1777 – 27 May 1848 : Her Royal Highness The Princess Sophia 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 As of 1789 , as a daughter of the sovereign , Sophia had use of the arms of the kingdom , differenced by a label of three points argent , the centre point bearing a heart gules , the outer points each bearing a rose gules . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Whitemore , Tasmania = 
 Whitemore is a small rural town in Northern Tasmania , in the Meander Valley Council area . The town 's land and surrounding rural area was first granted to Richard Dry in the 1830s then sold for farming to William Hingston in 1854 . Hingston constructed a Wesleyan Chapel , near which a few later buildings were added . Over time the town has had a blacksmith , post office , library , shops and petrol station ; none of these remain in the 21st Century . 
 Shaw Contracting , a large Civil engineering firm formed by James Alan Hope Shaw , has been the most significant business in the town 's history . Whitemore 's most prominent features are the 1864 brick church , adjacent original church building dating from 1857 — now a community hall — and the large workshop and offices of Shaw contracting . 
 From 1870 to sometime before 1978 the town had a nearby rail service but in the 21st century transport is by car or school bus . The town has a small largely Australian born , and aging , population . Whitemore has a few houses , a church that is part of the Uniting Church in Australia , the offices and workshops of Shaw Contracting , and a recreation ground and tennis courts used by the towns ' tennis and cricket teams . 
 = = History = = 
 Whitemore is in the southern part of the former Quamby estate . The estate was granted to Richard Dry , father of Richard Dry who was later Premier of Tasmania , in 1837 . The estate was in two main parts . The southern section was approximately 4 @,@ 500 acres ( 1 @,@ 800 ha ) , including an outlying part of 500 acres ( 200 ha ) on which the modern town of Whitemore lies . The land in this section was recorded as first leased to William Burke in 1846 . He worked a 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) lot as a tenant farmer , though it was probably leased before this , as at the time 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) was recorded in the lands returns records as cleared . This southern part of Quamby Estate covered the Whitemore Creek valley , the later town of Whitemore and Shaw 's farm , amongst other later farms . 
 By 1851 , 350 acres of the 500 acre section was cleared . By the mid 1850s the area had been settled for almost two decades and was noted as " fairly well populated " . Dry sold land in the area in 1854 to William Hingston , who named a 120 acres ( 49 ha ) section " Whitemoor farm " after a farm his family had run as tenant farmers in Cornwall . Hingston 's land ownership and actions assisted the establishment of Whitemore as a central village of the surrounding farming area . Around 1857 Hingston donated the land for a Wesleyan chapel that became known as " Whitemoor chapel " . Over time this name was taken by the village that grew around the church . Hingston built " Whitemoor house " in <unk> using locally made bricks . The building was extant as of 2002 . 
 By the time Hingston built Whitemoor House the town had a modest country store , a blacksmith 's shop and the Wesleyan chapel . The town never became the population centre and Whitemoor remained a farming district with only a few buildings clustered near the church . By 1865 the town had four substantial buildings : A brick church ; the original wooden church now used as a school ; and two cottages . As late as 1915 there were only three occupied cottages in the town . 
 Land was purchased by the local council in 1951 for a memorial hall to commemorate those who served in the two world wars . Built largely using volunteer labour and working bees , the hall opened on 9 December 1953 . The buildings in Whitemore are constructed either side of the only road through the town . The town section of this road was sealed in 1953 . 
 = = Services = = 
 In common with the rest of Tasmania , Whitemore no longer has passenger rail transport ; the last Tasmanian passenger rail service stopped in 1978 and the service to Whitemore prior to that . Rail transport for Whitemore opened in the late 1870s . The first passenger train was on 27 April 1870 and the rail line opened for regular traffic in February 1871 . This transport was from a siding rather than a station . The Whitemore siding did not have a full @-@ time station master and was not a regular stop ; passengers had to request the train stop or flag the train for a pickup . The town ’ s only regular transport services as of 2014 are Redline Coaches ' private school @-@ bus services . 
 One of the town 's buildings was used as a house and a shop from 1859 ; a Shell petrol <unk> was installed in the late 1920s outside the shop . A district post office was established in 1871 at the railway siding 's station house . By 1908 the post office was run from the chapel house in the main part of the town , and a shop ran from the same building . This building was used for around 70 years as a store , telephone exchange , mail exchange and petrol station . The post office closed in 1977 and has not reopened . 
 Telephone services reached Whitemore in 1918 , initially with only three subscribers . Telephone switching was done at the post office . Whitemore was connected to the State 's electricity system in 1929 . The electricity was fed from the Hydro @-@ Electric scheme and was connected to twelve buildings , in Whitemore and several nearby farms , by August of the same year . There may have been blacksmiths in Whitemore from the mid @-@ 19th century . A blacksmith established a shop on the main road in 1895 that was , by 1900 , the only blacksmith in the area . Shaw Contracting 's office is on the site of this former blacksmith 's shop . 
 The Whitemore irrigation scheme was begun in 2010 to provide irrigation water to 12 @,@ 000 hectares ( 46 sq mi ) of farmland with water from the <unk> Hydroelectric Power Station . The scheme uses a 400 megalitre dam for storage . 
 = = Religion = = 
 A Methodist circuit had been established in Westbury in 1848 with meetings held in homes of the Oaks Estate . After Hingston purchased his land in 1854 , Methodist meetings were held at his home . Hingston 's home proved too cramped for religious meetings so in 1857 he donated land for a chapel , which was built in the same year by Joshua Higgs . It was an all timber 18 by 30 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m × 9 @.@ 1 m ) building made from pit @-@ sawn beams clad with split timber . It opened for services on 13 December 1857 , after completion at a total cost of 250 pounds . The wooden church was also used as a Sunday school and state school from 1865 to 1928 . A chapel house was built in 1859 next to the church by the Wesleyan trustees . This house was used initially by David <unk> , the town 's first school teacher . 
 In the 1860s a new church was planned . The original wooden building was relocated in 1864 , and the new church subsequently built on its site . Its foundation stone was laid on 30 November 1864 ; the year of the Australian Wesleyan Church 's jubilee observance . The church is a brick @-@ structure in a Gothic architectural style , and was designed to hold 200 people . The new Wesleyan chapel at Whitemoor , as it was then known , was opened Sunday 4 June 1865 . It had cost 450 pounds , 150 from the Wesleyan building fund and the remainder from subscriptions , fund @-@ raising and donations . The money from Wesleyan building fund was a 10 @-@ year loan . By 1929 it was used as a Methodist chapel in 1929 and in the 21st century is part of the Uniting Church in Australia . 
 The original wooden church building was moved again in 1909 and extended in 1928 for use as a community hall . It had a kitchen extension added in 1955 and a kindergarten room in 1958 . The split paling cladding was replaced with weatherboards in the 1900s . The roof was replaced with iron , probably in 1914 when the brick church was also re @-@ roofed in iron . The interior paling lining of the old wooden church was covered with pine sheeting in the late 1930s . This building has been used as a church for seven years , more than sixty years as a meeting room and community centre and more than seventy years as a day and Sunday school . After the school moved to a new building in 1929 the old building remained in use as a Sunday school . 
 = = Sport and recreation = = 
 On the main street , opposite the church , is a recreation ground and playground , both maintained by the Meander Valley Council . The recreation ground was upgraded with toilets <unk> that were replaced with newer ones in 1966 . Playground equipment was installed in 1964 . 
 Whitemore cricket club began in the 19th century . An early record is of a match against Oaks in 1898 , though club minutes date only from 1927 at which time it was playing in the Westmoreland association . A cricket pavilion was built some time prior to 1900 and was replaced during 1962 @-@ 63 . The cricket club has continued to field teams and in 2013 they played in the B grade of the Northern Midlands Cricket Association . Their most successful years were from the 1960s through to the 1980s . 
 Whitemore tennis club had its first meeting on 18 November 1910 . Asphalt was laid on the courts in November 1921 and a shed built in February 1923 . From 1928 the tennis club fielded two teams in the newly formed district tennis association . Lights were installed on the courts in 1958 . The tennis club had three <unk> courts by 2002 . As of 2012 the Whitemore Tennis club fielded an amateur A grade team , and others in lower divisions 
 = = School and Library = = 
 The first wooden church was used as the area 's school from 1857 . This dual use of the church as a school has been stated , by local historian Ivan Heazlewood , as likely to be planned from the beginning . The area was more heavily populated in the past than in the 21st century due to a large number of tenant farmers with large families . Heazlewood speculated that the later 1865 church was probably used for classes due the small size of the wooden school building . The school grew to around 100 pupils on the register in 1900 . The church building , also used for <unk> Sunday school , was used as a school until 1929 . For this period the Education Department rented it from the Church trustees . A new school was built , on donated land , opposite the church and next to the recreation ground . This state school was opened in a ceremony on 23 August 1929 . The school remained open as late as the end of 1954 . 
 A library was operating from the wooden church building by 1860 . Patronage of the library had declined markedly by the 20th century and by the 1930s it was virtually unused . A mobile library began calling in the 1960s and for a time called once per month . The bookmobile service was finally ended , for all places not only Whitemore , in 1998 . 
 = = Current town = = 
 In the 21st century , Whitemore consists of a small cluster of buildings either side of the only road , surrounded by farming land . At the 2011 census the total population was 259 , of which almost 95 % were Australian Citizens and almost 92 % born in Australia . By the late 20th Century the town 's population was ageing , and it was described as somewhat of a retirement village . The buildings owned by Shaw Contracting dominate the town ; they have two workshops and a three @-@ storey office . 
 = = = Agriculture and land = = = 
 The town sits on flat to gently undulating land in the base of the Meander Valley . The soil is primarily of alluvial origin , underlain by dolomite bedrock . Whitemore creek , a tributary of the Meander River ( Tasmania ) , flows past Whitemore . The creek is seasonal , often drying up completely in summer . The Whitemore Irrigation Scheme has reduced the dry periods by discharging up to 2 megalitres ( 71 @,@ 000 cu ft ) per day into the creek for downstream irrigation use . 
 Whitemore , along with Hagley , has historically had one of the highest concentrations of stud farms breeding pedigree livestock , in Australia . In the 1950s there were more than 100 registered studs within 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of the town 's centre . The Poll Dorset , an important breed in prime lamb production in Australia , was first bred at a Whitemore stud . Whitemore farmers , the French family , began breeding Ryeland lambs in early 21st century . The family had originally farmed this breed in the 1930s , but it had now become uncommon in Australia due to changing fashions in meat . The Heazlewood family breeds the Border Leicester , another sheep breed that is now uncommon in Australia . The family was honoured by the Royal Agricultural Society of Tasmania in 2013 for their involvement in the Tasmanian sheep industry over the previous one hundred years . 
 In 2014 a Whitemore farm attracted media attention creating the first crop maze in Tasmania . It was designed by specialist crop design company from the United Kingdom , and created to attract tourists and visitors . The maze was in the form of a stylized Tasmanian tiger , cut into a 5 @-@ hectare ( 12 @-@ acre ) sorghum field . An open day was held on 28 February 2014 and the maze subsequently opened to the public , until the crop was harvested a few weeks later . 
 = = = Shaw Contracting = = = 
 Shaw Contracting is a large Tasmanian civil contracting firm based in Whitemore . Its two large workshops and three @-@ storey office dominate the town ; the company has stood large in Whitemore since the mid @-@ 20th Century . James Alan Hope Shaw was born in <unk> , Tasmania in 1904 . He designed and built agricultural machinery , including the first " stump jump " <unk> that was suitable for the northwest coast of Tasmania . In 1939 Shaw was granted a patent for " An improved scraper for reversible disc ploughs " . This plough was never commercialised though some prototypes were built and used . Shaw moved to Whitemore in late 1935 and began work as an agricultural service provider , from what had been a blacksmith 's workshop . 
 His company expanded into civil construction work during World War II . Using in @-@ house manufactured equipment they <unk> 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of road so it was ready for regrading . The company 's work did have some negative impacts on the town . When they had electricity installed their first welder drew so much power the town 's supply had to be upgraded . This welder also put out sufficient radio @-@ frequency interference to disrupt radio reception elsewhere the town ; a matter that caused some complaint . They added vehicle sales and maintenance in the 1940s and expanded with the purchase of a one @-@ acre lot opposite the original workshop in 1946 . A significant part of the Shaw company 's income from the late 1940s to the early 1950s was selling vehicle tires . The company continued to expand and a new workshop was opened in the town , with a ceremony in August 1953 . In the same year the company became an agent for " David Brown " tractors , its first agency . 
 In 1958 James Shaw and a partner purchased a 25 ton International Harvester <unk> tractor that was formerly owned by Tasmania 's Hydro Electric Commission . The company by this point was known as " <unk> Shaw & Sons " . With the lack of a transporter at first the tractor could only be used in the close surrounds . One of its first jobs was levelling the tennis courts in Whitemore . By 1960 <unk> Shaw & Sons had moved into large scale earth @-@ moving . In 1970 they tendered for , and won , work on the Cressy to Longford irrigation scheme ; 7 km ( 4 mi ) of main channel excavation and 100 km ( 62 mi ) of smaller channels . By the 1970s the company was known as " Shaw Contracting " . An offshoot was launched in 1973 as " Shaw Mix " which sold concrete and created and installed precast concrete panels . Shaw Mix were involved with the Launceston General Hospital and some cast concrete bridges but this line of work ceased during the 1990s . Other significant contracts have included : Building 11 kilometres ( 7 mi ) of the Hume freeway from Seymour to <unk> Victoria in 1978 ; A road upgrade near Samoa 's capital Apia in 2004 ; Constructing , from 2009 , a 15 kilometres ( 9 mi ) bypass of the Town of <unk> on the road from Launceston to Georgetown . The company completed their three @-@ storey offices in the town in 1999 . Alwyn Shaw — Son of James Shaw — and his wife Judy ran the business until 2013 , when they sold it to a group that included long @-@ term company employees . When sold the company had approximately 100 employees . 
 = Deep Throat ( The X @-@ Files episode ) = 
 " Deep Throat " is the second episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , which premiered on the Fox network on September 17 , 1993 . Written by series creator Chris Carter and directed by Daniel Sackheim , the episode introduced several elements which would become staples of the series ' mythology . 
 FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder believes in paranormal phenomena , while the skeptical Scully attempts to discredit them . In this episode , the pair investigate a possible conspiracy in the US Air Force and Mulder meets a mysterious informant who warns him to stay away from the case . Undeterred , Mulder continues and comes closer to the truth about extraterrestrial life than ever before , only to have his progress taken away from him again . 
 The episode introduced the Deep Throat character , played by Jerry Hardin , who served as Mulder 's informant for the first season . The character was inspired by the historical Deep Throat , and served to bridge the gap between the protagonists and the conspirators they would investigate . The episode itself focused on common elements of ufology , with a setting reminiscent of Area 51 and Nellis Air Force Base . It contained several special effects that Carter later described as " good , given the [ series ' ] restrictions " ; although he singled out the scenes featuring blinking lights as being poorly executed . In its initial American broadcast , " Deep Throat " was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 9 million households and 11 @.@ 1 million viewers and attracted positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In southwestern Idaho , near Ellens Air Force Base , military police raid the home of Colonel Robert Budahas , who has stolen a military vehicle and barricaded himself inside . They discover Budahas in his bathroom , trembling and covered in rashes . 
 Four months later , FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) meet at a Washington bar to discuss the Budahas case . Mulder explains that Budahas , a test pilot , has not been seen since the raid and the military will not comment on his condition ; the FBI has refused to investigate . Mulder claims that six other pilots are missing at the base , which is subject to rumors about experimental aircraft . While using the bar 's restroom , Mulder is approached by a mysterious informant named " Deep Throat " ( Jerry Hardin ) , who cautions him to avoid the case . He claims that Mulder is under surveillance , which later proves to be true . 
 Mulder and Scully travel to Idaho and meet with Budahas ' wife , Anita , who claims her husband exhibited erratic behavior before his disappearance . She takes them to a neighbor whose husband , also a test pilot , is behaving similarly . Scully makes an appointment with the base 's director , Colonel Kissell , but he refuses to talk when they visit his home . They subsequently meet local reporter Paul Mossinger , who refers them to a local UFO @-@ themed diner ; there , they discuss UFOs with the owner , who believes she has witnessed several nearby . 
 Visiting the base that night , the agents witness a mysterious aircraft performing seemingly impossible maneuvers in the night sky . They flee when a black helicopter approaches , seemingly in pursuit of Emil and Zoe , a trespassing teenage couple . As Mulder treats Emil and Zoe to a meal at the diner , they tell the agents about the lights and how they believe the UFOs are launched from another nearby base . Meanwhile , Budahas is returned to his home with no memory of what happened . After leaving the diner , Mulder and Scully are confronted by black @-@ suited agents , who destroy the photographs they have taken and order them to leave town . 
 An indignant Mulder sneaks onto the base with help from Emil and Zoe . He sees a triangular craft fly overhead and then is captured by soldiers who tamper with his memory . Meanwhile , Scully <unk> Mossinger , who she discovers is actually a security operative for the base . At gunpoint , she forces him to guide her to the base and exchanges him for Mulder . Having been denied the truth about the base , Mulder and Scully return to Washington . Days later , Mulder encounters Deep Throat while jogging at a local track . Mulder asks if " they " really are present on Earth ; Deep Throat responds that " they have been here for a long , long time " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and pre @-@ production = = = 
 This episode marked Hardin 's first appearance as Deep Throat . Series creator Chris Carter stated that the character was inspired by the historical Deep Throat , an informant who leaked information about the FBI 's investigation of the Watergate scandal to journalists Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward . This Deep Throat was later revealed to be FBI Associate Director Mark Felt . Also cited as an influence was X , the character portrayed by Donald Sutherland in the 1991 Oliver Stone film JFK . Carter created the character to bridge the gap between Mulder and Scully and the shadowy conspirators working against them ; describing Deep Throat as a man " who works in some level of government that we have no idea exists " . Carter was drawn to Hardin after seeing him in The Firm , and described the casting as an " easy choice " . Hardin flew to Vancouver every few weeks to film his scenes . Carter called Hardin 's portrayal " very , very good " . 
 According to Carter , it was evident that The X @-@ Files was a " series in making " during this episode . The episode was inspired by common ufology . Believers in aliens have long thought that Nevada 's Area 51 and Nellis Air Force Base have alien technology captured during 1947 's Roswell UFO incident . The name Ellens Air Force Base was derived from the name of Carter 's college girlfriend , whose last name was Ellens . The story 's military project was inspired by a rumor that the United States Air Force had started a project named the Aurora Project . Carter said he remembered people talking about this rumor and that its inclusion in the story was a " nod " to it . The surname for the two guest characters , Budahas , came from a high school friend of Carter . Duchovny and Anderson had never used a gun or held one before , so they were trained on how to hold them properly . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The scenes in which Mulder infiltrates the air base were shot at a real United States airbase . With a small budget and a television schedule to think of , Carter said the effects seemed " good , given the restrictions " they faced . The UFO was digitally constructed , based around what visual effects supervisor Mat Beck described as a " sort of disco light rig " that was rented from a " party supplier " . Carter commented on Sackheim 's direction , noting that the episode was " shot well " . Towards the end of filming the night @-@ time scenes , the sun was beginning to rise , forcing crew member John Bartley to rig the angles to keep the scenes as dark as possible . One scene , in which Mulder infiltrates the Air Force base , had already been rewritten to change its daytime setting to night ; the rising sun forced the scene to be filmed as originally conceived . 
 The house used for the exterior shots of the Budahas family 's home was reused in Carter 's next series , Millennium , as the home of protagonist Frank Black . The house 's owner was a flight attendant who frequently met cast and crew members as they traveled in and out of Vancouver . The initial scene with Duchovny and Anderson in the bar was shot at a Vancouver restaurant called The Meat Market , which according to Carter was a much " <unk> location than the production designers would have you believe " . The Meat Market was the only bar the crew could find that had not been renovated in the wake of Expo 86 and retained a " well @-@ travelled " feel . It later appeared in the third season episode " Piper Maru " . The roadside diner used for interior shots of the " Flying Saucer Diner " was remote enough from the other filming locations that a bus was made available to transport crew members , to save on travel expenses . Only key grip Al Campbell made use of this bus service , causing producers to abandon the idea until the fourth season episode " Herrenvolk " . 
 Guest star Seth Green stated that despite being cast as " stoner kid " Emil , and having " cornered the market on the affable stoner in TV and film " , he had never used cannabis before . Green related that his first day on the set came just after Duchovny had finished filming his final scene ; Green was impressed with Duchovny 's demeanour and improvisational acting , and has added that the two " just goofed off the whole time " . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Carter claimed that the scenes with the flashing lights in the sky were the " worst effects we 've ever done " , given limits on money and time ; he also commented that special effects were still in their infancy . Beck was the special effects producer and supervisor during season one ; he and Carter unsuccessfully tried to make the special effects look three dimensional and " better " . According to Carter , the result looked like a " kind of hi @-@ tech Pong game " . 
 This episode marks Mark Snow 's debut as a solo composer for the series . Carter stated he and the production crew were " fearful " of using too much music in the episode , and the first season as a whole . Anderson 's voice over narration towards the end of the episode was inserted after complaints from Fox executives , who desired more closure . The executives felt that viewers were not supposed to be " confused " after watching and must have at least a slight idea of what was going on . The voiceovers became a common technique for the remainder of the series . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Mossinger 's warning to Mulder that some truths should be kept hidden from the public has been cited by scholars as representing the difficulty of forcing large organizations to take responsibility for wrongdoing . The episode 's final revelation , that aliens have been on Earth " for a long , long time " , has been cited as following a trend of post @-@ futurism established by science fiction cinema in the 1980s . This trend has replaced traditional science fiction topics such as space exploration with themes inspired by the Watergate scandal and the spread of conspiracy theories . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Deep Throat " premiered on the Fox network on September 17 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on September 24 , 1994 . This episode 's initial American broadcast was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 9 million households and 11 @.@ 1 million viewers . It earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 3 , with a 14 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was released on VHS in 1996 , alongside " Pilot " ; as well being released on DVD as part of the complete first season . It was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 1 – Abduction , a DVD collection containing episodes centered on the series ' mythology . 
 In a first season retrospective in Entertainment Weekly , the episode was rated a B + , with praise for Hardin 's " world @-@ weary " performance , though the review noted that the " querulous , ominous tone " of the episode was " a little awkward , but full of promise of things to come " . Adrienne Martini of the Austin Chronicle called the episode " fun to watch " , describing it as " great TV " ; while the San Jose Mercury News called the title character " the most interesting new character on television " , also calling the episode " strange but marvellous " . The Toronto Star 's Mike Antonucci wrote that the episode demonstrates that Carter " can blend subtle , complicated elements with heart @-@ pounding action " , adding that " Nothing is obvious about The X @-@ Files , in fact , except its quality " . Michael <unk> of The Beaver County Times was more critical , calling it " an acquired taste " and noting that it " sort of <unk> out in the end " , lacking " a completely satisfactory resolution " . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps rated the episode an A- , finding it " almost like an extension of the pilot " . Phipps felt the scene featuring Mulder 's kidnapping to be " one of the scariest moments from the series ' early days , as much for what it suggests as for what it shows " . Writing for website Den of Geek , Matt Haigh reviewed the episode positively , praising its decision not to answer all of the questions that it asks . Haigh noted that " the fact that we are left as clueless about what really happened as Mulder and Scully only enhances the viewing experience " , finding such mystery to be " a rare thing indeed " on network television . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five , finding it to be " much more confident in its pacing and tone " than the previous episode . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode was " a skilfully scripted story of cover @-@ up and paranoia " , and noted that " it sets up the overall themes of the show so well , it almost seems like a primer " . 
 " Deep Throat " was cited as beginning to " set the stage for the central conflicts " of the series . IGN 's Dan Iverson felt that the episode served to " open the door to the possibilities of this series " ; while Tor.com 's Meghan Deans noted that " although the pilot introduced the idea of government conspiracy , it 's ' Deep Throat ' that kicks out the edges of the canvas " . The introduction of Hardin as Deep Throat in the episode was listed by Entertainment Weekly as number 37 on its list of " The 100 Greatest Television Moments " of the 1990s . 
 = Never Let Me Go ( 2010 film ) = 
 Never Let Me Go is a 2010 British dystopian alternative history romantic drama film based on Kazuo Ishiguro 's 2005 novel of the same name . The film was directed by Mark Romanek from a screenplay by Alex Garland . Never Let Me Go is set in an alternative history and centres on Kathy , Ruth and Tommy portrayed by Carey Mulligan , Keira Knightley and Andrew Garfield respectively , who become entangled in a love triangle . Principal photography began in April 2009 and lasted several weeks . The movie was filmed at various locations , including Andrew Melville Hall . Never Let Me Go was produced by DNA Films and Film4 on a $ 15 million budget . 
 Prior to the book 's publication , Garland had approached the film 's producers — Andrew Macdonald and Andrew Reich — about a possible film , and wrote a 96 @-@ page script . The producers initially had trouble finding an actress to play Kathy . Mulligan was cast in the role after Peter Rice , the head of the company financing the film , recommended her by text message while watching her performance in An Education . Mulligan , a fan of the book , enthusiastically accepted the role , as it had long been a wish of hers to have the opportunity to play the part . The film 's message and themes were the factors that attracted Garfield to become a part of the film . 
 Never Let Me Go premiered at the 37th annual Telluride Film Festival in September 2010 , where the audience positively responded to its message . The film was also screened at festivals including the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival , and the 54th London Film Festival which it opened . The film was distributed by Fox Searchlight Pictures to cinemas in the United States on 15 September 2010 , where it was given a limited release . It opened on 14 January 2011 in the United Kingdom . In the United States , Never Let Me Go opened at four theatres , grossing over $ 111 @,@ 000 during its first weekend , eventually growing to $ 2 @.@ 5 million . The movie got off to a better start in its first weekend in the UK , earning £ 625 @,@ 000 and taking ninth place at the box office . 
 Never Let Me Go earned $ 9 @.@ 4 million at the box office and an additional $ 1 @.@ 8 million in DVD sales revenue . Never Let Me Go was met with generally positive reviews from film critics , with most reviewers praising the cast 's performances . It was placed on several critics ' top ten lists for the year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with on @-@ screen captions explaining that a medical breakthrough in 1952 has permitted the human lifespan to be extended beyond 100 years . It is narrated by 28 @-@ year @-@ old Kathy H ( Carey Mulligan ) as she reminisces about her childhood at a boarding school called Hailsham , as well as her adult life after leaving the school . The first act of the film depicts the young Kathy ( Izzy Meikle @-@ Small ) , along with her friends Tommy ( Charlie Rowe ) and Ruth ( Ella Purnell ) , spending their childhood at Hailsham in the late 1970s . The students are encouraged to create artwork , and their best work gets into The Gallery run by a mysterious woman known only as Madame ( Nathalie Richard ) . One day , a new teacher , Miss Lucy ( Sally Hawkins ) quietly informs the students of their fate ; they are destined to be organ donors and will die , or " complete " , in their early adulthood . Shortly afterward she is sacked by the headmistress , Miss Emily ( Charlotte Rampling ) for her revelation . As time passes , Kathy falls in love with Tommy , but Ruth and Tommy begin a relationship and stay together throughout the rest of their time at Hailsham . 
 In the second act , Kathy , Ruth ( Keira Knightley ) and Tommy ( Andrew Garfield ) , now teenagers , are rehoused in cottages on a farm in 1985 . They are permitted to leave the grounds on day trips , but are resigned to their eventual fate . At the farm , they meet former pupils of schools similar to theirs , and it is revealed that they are all clones . They also hear rumours of the possibility of " deferral " – a temporary reprieve from organ donation for donors who are in love and can prove it . Tommy becomes convinced that The Gallery at Hailsham was intended to look into their souls and that artwork sent to The Gallery will be able to confirm true love where it is present . The relationship between Tommy and Ruth becomes sexual , and jealousy causes Kathy and Ruth to break their friendship . The lonely Kathy leaves and becomes a " carer " – a clone who is given a temporary reprieve from donation as a reward for supporting and comforting donors as they are made to give up their organs . Tommy and Ruth 's relationship ends . 
 In the third and final act , 10 years later , Kathy is still working as a carer , and has watched many clones gradually die as their organs are harvested . Kathy , who has not seen Ruth or Tommy since the farm , discovers Ruth , frail after two donations . They find Tommy , who is also weakened by his donations , and drive to the sea . There , Ruth admits that she did not love Tommy , and only seduced him because she was afraid to be alone . She is consumed with guilt and has been searching for a way to help Tommy and Kathy . She believes that the rumours of " deferral " are true , and has found the address of the gallery owner , Madame from Hailsham , who she thinks may grant <unk> to couples in love . Ruth dies on the operating table shortly afterward . 
 Kathy and Tommy finally begin a relationship . Tommy explains to Kathy that he has been creating art in the hope that it will aid deferral . He and Kathy drive to visit Madame , who lives with the headmistress of Hailsham . The two teachers tell them that there is no such thing as deferral , and that Tommy 's artworks will not help him . They also explain that the purpose of The Gallery was to see if clones have souls , and to challenge the ethics of the creation of donors ; Hailsham was the last place to consider the ethical implications of the donor scheme . As they take in the news on their return journey , Tommy breaks down in an explosion of rage and frustration as Kathy <unk> accepts her fate . The film ends with Tommy dying on the operating table . Kathy is left alone , knowing that her donations will begin in a month . Contemplating the ruins of her childhood , she asks in voice @-@ over whether her fate is really any different from the people who will receive her organs : after all , " we all complete " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Carey Mulligan as Kathy H 
 Isobel Meikle @-@ Small as young Kathy 
 Keira Knightley as Ruth C 
 Ella Purnell as young Ruth 
 Andrew Garfield as Tommy D 
 Charlie Rowe as young Tommy 
 Sally Hawkins as Miss Lucy 
 Charlotte Rampling as Miss Emily 
 Nathalie Richard as Madame 
 Domhnall Gleeson as Rodney 
 Andrea Riseborough as Chrissie 
 = = Themes = = 
 Director Mark Romanek has said that , as in the novel , everyone has to uncover their relationship to our own mortality ; we have two options : either go against it , or try to figure out a way around it like the character Tommy does . Romanek hoped the audience of Never Let Me Go would be reminded of what is important : love , behaviour , and friendships . He recalled an email a person had written to him : " ' I saw your film and it made me cry and I haven 't reacted to a film emotionally like that in years . And I called my father , cause I realized I hadn ’ t spoken to him in 3 weeks and I told him how much I love him and how much I appreciated what a good father he 's been . ' " 
 Andrew Garfield believes the story of Never Let Me Go is about humans , and exploring " what it is to have a soul , and how you prove what a soul is " ; he says he enjoys the way the film is a " call to arms " about the positives of life . He adds that its message could hopefully remind people that they have a choice when they arise in the morning whether to pursue their own choice of activities for the day , or to do what they should do or are obliged to do . Keira Knightley feels that the film 's story is alarming , but has said that the film is " more about humanity 's ability to look the other way " . " You know in fact that if your morals can go out the window if you think you can survive in a certain way , whatever your morals may be " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Alex Garland , a long @-@ time friend of Ishiguro , asked the author for the rights to the novel before he had finished reading it . Before the novel was published in 2005 , Garland had already written a script for a possible film . He gave the screenplay to two producers , Andrew Macdonald and Allon Reich , and development started at that moment . " We are delighted to be shooting this special project , which Alex Garland first brought to us before the book 's publication in 2005 . " The script for the film was 96 pages long , and divided into chapters . Director Mark Romanek was originally attached to The Wolfman , but when he was dropped from that production for an unknown reason , he accepted the offer to work on Never Let Me Go . The movie was made into a dystopian drama . Romanek was glad to get the opportunity to shoot this film : " From the moment I finished [ reading ] the novel , it became my dream to film it . Ishiguro 's conception is so daring , so eerie and beautiful . Alex Garland 's adaptation is sensitive and precise . The cast is perfect , the crew superb . " The Seattle Times observed that the project was " something of a departure " for the novelist , noting that it merges Ishiguro 's signature " elegant prose with a decidedly science @-@ fiction theme " . 
 Garland , who has explored science fiction themes in some of his previous work , was a sounding board for ideas for the novel and an early reader of the book . Ishiguro stated that , despite Garland 's screenwriting skills and previous experience with film , they did not discuss the idea of a film until after the novel was complete . " I try not to think about things like that when writing a novel — in fact , quite the reverse " , he stated . He said that he attempts to " go for something ... very interior , following thoughts and memories , something that I think is difficult to do on the screen , which is essentially a third @-@ person medium . " Thus he was surprised when Garland , after reading a complete version of the book , said he would like to try to adapt it . Ishiguro recalled that Garland wrote a draft very quickly and immediately asked of his opinion of it " as a first go " . Ishiguro was very satisfied with Garland 's screenplay — which was changed very little from its initial draft to the filmed version — and with the final film . When asked to compare the experience with that of The Remains of the Day , he acknowledged that both were more hands @-@ on with this film . Romanek said that he did not make Never Let Me Go a science fiction film ; rather , he was presenting a love story with fictional science context mixed in . He described the film as telling a " love story where the science fiction is this subtle patina on the story . " The filmmaker explained that had they done the film with " science fiction @-@ y things " , it would have been more openly , with props such as futuristic structures and devices . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Carey Mulligan plays the narrator , Kathy , an introverted , observant character who projects both innocence and knowingness , and who over the course of the story develops from a passionate , optimistic child to a wise and accepting young woman . Prior to her casting , Mulligan had already read the novel a few times , considering it to be a favourite of hers . She recalled that from when she first read the book three years ago she had wanted to play Kathy . The young actress said that she could not " bear the idea of anyone else " portraying Kathy , although she acknowledged that she thought other people would be able to do a better performance . She was certain that someone would make a film adaptation of the novel and had hoped that they would wait until she would be old enough to play the character . Romanek told The Los Angeles Times that he originally was having difficulty finding the right actress to play Kathy ; a tight filming deadline loomed prior to Mulligan 's casting . Peter Rice , the head of Fox Searchlight ( the company financing the film ) was watching An Education at the Sundance Film Festival in January . He wrote Romanek a four @-@ word text message : " Hire the genius Mulligan . " When later asked why the message was so abrupt , he explained that he was still in the middle of viewing the film . Rice exhibited what was described as a " rare foresight " in greenlighting a film with an almost unknown lead actress . " He just knew that she was it " , said Romanek . 
 Andrew Garfield was given the role of Tommy , a well @-@ meaning , rather dim young person who struggles to find a place in an environment which values imagination and creativity above all . He said of his character , " There 's a sense of anxiety that runs through these kids , especially Tommy , because he 's so sensory and feeling and animalistic , that 's my perspective of him . " Garfield was attracted to the film based on the existential questions the story expresses . He called the experience of being a part of Never Let Me Go a " dream to come true " . Garfield enjoys an opportunity to let loose with his roles . He said the scenes in which his character — unable to contain his frustration — erupts with a wail , was " intense " for him . " I think those screams are inside all of us , I just got a chance to let mine out " . Before shooting the film , he had read the screenplay and the book . In March 2009 Daily Variety reported that Knightley was signed to the project . Knightley admitted that she only agreed to appear in Never Let Me Go because co @-@ star and friend Mulligan had asked her to . She portrays Ruth , a zealous , ambitious character who behaves <unk> out of inner insecurity . When asked what she did and did not have in common with her character , Knightley said she was unable to relate to Ruth 's situation of being involved in a love triangle . 
 The three lead characters do not have last names because " they are not normal people " . Romanek believed that the three main characters act with great dignity . He noted that they are not materialistic or looking for power , but just desire to acknowledge their love for each other and stay close in their friendship . An example he mentioned was how Ruth tries to seek redemption by attempting to set right a big mistake she had made . What he found the most moving aspect of the film was the " graceful place of acceptance that Kathy comes to at the end " . Child actors Isobel Meikle @-@ Small , Ella Purnell , and Charlie Rowe play the younger versions of Never Let Me Go 's three lead actors . Hawkins , who co @-@ starred with Mulligan in An Education , had a supporting role as Miss Lucy , who is a teacher at an isolated English boarding school where the students slowly become aware of the fact that they are feared by people in the outside world . Charlotte Rampling portrays Miss Emily , a schoolmaster who presides over the orphanage at Hailsham . Richard was cast as an administrator , who is known as Madame . The character has been conducting an ongoing project that aims to analyse the students ’ characters and psychologies , which has been compared to treating them as if they were subjects in an experiment . Riseborough 's casting in Never Let Me Go was announced in April 2009 by Screen Daily ; she had a small role in the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Never Let Me Go was given a production budget of US $ 15 million . Principal photography for the film started in April 2009 and lasted a few weeks . Production design was done by Mark Digby , and Adam Kimmel was assigned to cinematography . The commercial director was Duncan Reid , who works for Ingenious Media , and the film was shot by crewmembers of the English company DNA Films . On 8 May 2009 , the production moved to Norfolk for filming . The beach at Holkham is also featured in the film . Knightley previously shot scenes at nearby Holkham Hall for her 2008 film The Duchess . A location on Hill Road In Clevedon was used , and a shop was converted into a travel agency . They also filmed on the beach and the Victorian pier in Clevedon . The pier is featured on the film poster and the cover of the rereleased book . A large property on the Bexhill @-@ on @-@ Sea seafront was used on 12 and 13 May 2009 to act as the exterior for the residence of Madame , where Tommy and Kathy go to apply for a deferral . 
 Andrew Melville Hall in the University of St. Andrews was the setting for the Dover Recovery Centre . Nearly thirty film extras , film producers , and location scouts had to wait several hours for the sun to set so they could film the scenes there . The restaurant scene , which is featured in the trailer and in promotional screenshots , was shot in the Regent Restaurant and Coffee Lounge in Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare in April 2009 . Chiswick Town Hall , a dark building in London , was also used as a shooting location . The scenes where the Hailsham assemblies were held was filmed at a school in Snaresbrook , called Forest School , in May 2009 . Ham House , Richmond , was used for filming mostly exterior scenes at Hailsham School and a couple of interior scenes . 
 Romanek described working with child actors and " knowing that the first act of the film was going to have to be carried by 12 @-@ year @-@ olds " as probably the most difficult aspect of making the film . He said that most of the rehearsal schedule was devoted to ensuring that the first act would be good . At rehearsals , the film @-@ maker would have the younger actors observe the older actors practise the first @-@ act scenes . This had a double purpose : the older actors would have a memory of having played those scenes , while the child actors would get a better idea of how a more skilled actor would play their part . Romanek would then mix and match the actors ( for example , Mulligan would do a scene with the child playing the younger Tommy ) . He also had them spend time together doing things like playing and talking . He took them to the school location and let them play games together so they could get a better idea of the layout of the place . 
 According to Mulligan , a problem during the production was that her role required her to drive : at the time she did not know how to drive or have a driver 's licence . She did a two @-@ week intensive course to learn how to work a manual gear change so she could eventually film the driving scenes , but failed the driving test . " I ’ m really bad at it " , she explained . " [ I have ] no hand and eye coordination . " The production team ultimately had to shoot the scene on a private road , where she was allowed to get behind the wheel . The director had a hard time making Knightley look plain in the film . He tells in an interview : " It was difficult . She was eager and happy to do it because the role called for it . But even at her worst , Keira still looks astonishing " . 
 When accessing the very deep emotions called for by her character , Mulligan stated , " I really took my cue from the book " . She noted that her role did not require her to have much to say , because Kathy was more of an observer throughout most of the film . She recalled that " every time I was in a scene where I wasn ’ t quite sure where I was going with it , I would go to the book and read through the lines because she 's unreliable , in that much of the time she 's not being truly honest with herself or the audience . " The young actress said that her friendship with Knightley made their scenes together easier because they would both regard each other 's comments helpful and would not feel " insulted or hurt " in discussion . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Never Let Me Go 's score was composed by British composer Rachel Portman . She worked on Never Let Me Go 's music for four months . Portman said that because of the film 's sad themes , she wanted to " put some hope " and humanity into the music . It was important to her that there be a " real emotional heartbeat in the midst of this story . " Believing that a " huge sweeping score " would not have fit Never Let Me Go , she instead worked with a smaller orchestra of no more than 48 players . At the urgent request of the director and the producers , she tried other approaches , such as the use of a child 's voice and what was described as a " big finale cue . " In the end , they went for a simpler and more subtle approach . Stating that most of the score was written for piano , strings and harp , with solos for violin and cello , she called her score something of a " chamber piece " . " If you use a solo instrument , it 's like having a voice " , she says . " It highlights the emotion . " But , she adds , " the violin is played with virtually no vibrato , because I didn 't ever want it to sound sentimental " . She notes that " for my own taste , I stay on the side of restraint , because I think it works better in film " . Her work on Never Let Me Go earned her a San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Score . 
 The song " Never Let Me Go " that Kathy listens to in the film is from a cassette tape Tommy gave her at Hailsham called Songs After Dark by Judy Bridgewater . The album and singer are fictitious , but " Never Let Me Go " was written by Luther Dixon and sung by Jane <unk> . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 In July 2010 Never Let Me Go was screened to film critics , who gave it generally positive reviews , with The Daily Telegraph calling the film 's three leads " brilliant " . Never Let Me Go premièred at the 37th annual Telluride Film Festival , presented by the National Film Preserve . The festival began on 3 September 2010 , running through Labor Day in a remote Colorado town . The Hollywood Reporter observed that the audience " seemed to respond positively to the film 's look at what makes us human and what defines a soul . " The film was also part of the 35th Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) line @-@ up during September 2010 , and was screened along with 300 other films . According to Deadline Hollywood , Never Let Me Go was originally expected to have its world premiere at the 2010 Venice Film Festival in September , but Fox replaced it with Black Swan . They favored the TIFF over Venice , but eventually settled on the Telluride Film Festival . 
 In the same month , the film was screened during the 2010 Fantastic Fest in Austin , Texas . Never Let Me Go opened the 54th London Film Festival on 13 October 2010 , the same day as its European release date . Never Let Me Go was the second film based on an Ishiguro novel to open the festival , after Merchant Ivory – Ismail Merchant 's The Remains of the Day in 1993 . Regarding the film 's screening at the London Film Festival , Ishiguro said , " It is a fantastic privilege , I feel very lucky . To some extent it is a showcase for British talent and it 's a tremendous honour " . Describing Never Let Me Go as " accomplished and imaginative " , Sandra <unk> , the London Film Festival Artistic Director , added that " It combines impeccable film making , outstanding performances and a deeply moving story , and I couldn ’ t wish for a stronger or more appropriate opening night " . That same month it was also screened in competition at Japan 's Tokyo International Film Festival . Six screenings of the film were held in the Little Theatre at Western Michigan University between 17 – 19 December 2010 . 
 Never Let Me Go was scheduled for a limited release for select cities in the United States on 1 October 2010 , but the date was later moved up to 15 September . The film was released in the United Kingdom on 11 February 2011 , and in France on 9 February 2011 . As a forum of promotion for the film , Mulligan made guest appearances to introduce Never Let Me Go at movie theatre screenings , including at the Landmark Theatres and AMC Loews Lincoln Square . Upon the film 's release at the Telluride Film Festival , a writer for the Los Angeles Times called the film an " Oscar wild card " . He believed its reviews were " likely to be split between those who consider the film a bleak masterpiece and others who find it straining so mightily for aesthetic perfection that it fails to provide a gripping narrative . " The Globe and Mail called Never Let Me Go one of 2010 's " big noise " films . In the United States , Never Let Me Go was released on DVD on 1 February 2011 . By 6 February , it had sold 44 @,@ 911 units ( amounting to $ 628 @,@ 305 in consumer revenue ) and was the 17th @-@ best selling DVD for that week . To date , the DVD sales revenue stands at $ 1 @,@ 886 @,@ 997 . 
 = = Box office = = 
 In its opening weekend in the United Kingdom , between 11 – 13 February 2011 , it took ninth place at the box office . Playing on 265 screens , it took in an estimated UK £ 625 @,@ 000 ( US $ 1 @,@ 001 @,@ 483 ) , which was seen as a disappointment to the British press . In Never Let Me Go 's next week , it had a 45 % decrease in revenue , taking in about UK £ 338 @,@ 404 ( US $ 546 @,@ 653 ) . Never Let Me Go has made a total of US $ 9 @,@ 455 @,@ 232 worldwide . 
 Never Let Me Go was released to four movie theaters in its opening weekend in the United States , with an additional one hundred @-@ sixty @-@ three theatres added to its theatrical run later on . The film became the number one @-@ screening at these four theatres on its opening day , and grossed slightly over US $ 44 @,@ 500 from those select screenings . In its opening weekend , the film made over US $ 111 @,@ 700 , averaging US $ 30 @,@ 250 per theatre , taking 42nd place at the box office . In its succeeding week , revenues for Never Let Me Go saw an 117 % increase , making about US $ 241 @,@ 000 , with an average of nearly US $ 9 @,@ 500 per theatre . It was the 28th top grossing film at the box office for that week . By its third week of release , the film suffered a revenue decrease to around US $ 188 @,@ 000 , despite being screened at more theatres than the previous week . After one month of release , it pulled in US $ 350 @,@ 000 , increasing nearly 90 percent from its previous weekend . 
 According to a news piece published by the Los Angeles Times on 21 October , by Never Let Me Go 's fifth week of release it had been labeled an " undeniable disappointment " commercially . The publication noted that when its release widened to over 200 theatres the previous weekend its per @-@ theatre average was so low that its distributor decided to cut its screens in the succeeding weeks . Based on answers from film experts and executives for Fox Searchlight , there were five factors to why the film commercially disappointed : its timing , airing too early in the year when lighter summer fare is still popular ; a novel that is particularly difficult to adapt ; mixed reviews from critics ; its depressing tone ; and its lack of appeal to male viewers . In the following weeks Never Let Me Go began to gross under US $ 100 @,@ 000 per weekend , going on to earn US $ 2 @.@ 5 million in the US by the second week of December . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Never Let Me Go received generally positive reviews from critics , with the cast 's performances being praised . The critical consensus on review site Rotten Tomatoes states that " With Never Let Me Go , Mark Romanek has delivered a graceful adaptation that captures the spirit of the Ishiguro novel – which will be precisely the problem for some viewers . " It holds a 71 % rating based on 164 reviews . The film 's overall result has been viewed as a disappointment by some reviewers when compared to the novel . A Daily Mail reporter declared the film to be " the most haunting film about love and death I 've ever seen " , and film critic David Gritten of The Daily Telegraph saluted the film , applauding the production and the performances of its supporting cast . Saul Austerlitz , a correspondent to the Boston Globe , felt that the film struck a " mournful note " and believed that certain images in the film , such as a tree in an empty field , " possess a haunting power directly lifted from the best of Romanek 's video work " , while respecting the themes in Ishiguro 's novel . 
 The Hollywood Reporter writer Jay A. Fernandez said that Never Let Me Go was an engaging film , but he thought that its overall impact was not as emotionally devastating as the book . Cleveland Magazine 's Clint O 'Connor strongly approved the acting performance of Garfield , and Eric Kohn from indieWIRE praised the script and the photography of Kimmel and Garland . 
 In a short review , Chris Knight of the National Post wrote that the film was able to capture the wistfulness and the unpredictable tone of Ishiguro 's novel , but added that it " spills the beans much sooner " . Mark Jenkins of NPR called Never Let Me Go a " remarkably successful adaptation " of Ishiguro 's book , but acknowledged that Romanek and Garland " do make a few missteps " , which were mostly the result of the limitations imposed by turning the novel 's contents into a film . Entertainment Weekly film critic Owen Gleiberman described the film as feeling like a " period piece " and rated it a C + . Reuters 's Stephen Farber called the film a disappointment , because although it was " expertly acted , impeccably photographed , intelligently written " and " even intermittently touching " , Never Let Me Go is " too parched and ponderous to connect with a large audience " . He said the film should have laid out more completely the logic of its parallel universe , such as the cloning process . He found its theme of the dangers of medical experimentation " rather tired " . 
 Slant magazine writer Ed Gonzalez gave the film a two out of four star rating , saying that in Never Let Me Go the characters ' actions do not feel " appropriately warped " while the interactions between the teachers and students is not " at all rife with the what @-@ are @-@ they @-@ thinking @-@ about @-@ us mystery of the book " . Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon.com wrote that Romanek " does so many difficult things beautifully in this movie " . He thought the film carried a reminder that life is short regardless of how long it lasts rather than a " lecture about the horrors of human history " . Tom Preston from The Guardian described Mulligan and Garfield 's acting as solid , while commenting that Knightley 's emotional performances are occasionally jarring . He further wrote that although Never Let Me Go finely demonstrated subtlety , its screenplay could have been written with less compression in some parts . Writing in Newsweek , Louisa Thomas praised the film for its beauty and its performances but declared that " there 's something just missing here . " 
 Marshall Fine of The Huffington Post noted that like the novel , the film is difficult to embrace . He said that the film does work on a " suspense level " , due to Romanek 's creating a " quiet , leisurely pace that would not be out of place in a yoga class " . He stated that he " no doubt was aiming for an eerie , Children of the Damned vibe , except that it 's the children who are damned " . The writer concluded that Never Let Me Go 's final result is a " staid , lifeless tale that never talks about what it 's about , or at least not enough to provoke deep thoughts on the subject . " Film critic Rex Roberts of Film Journal International thought that the film was moderately surprising given Romanek and Garland 's previous work , saying that they " show real affinity for the subtle shades of resignation and quiet desperation that characterize <unk> 's [ sic ] prose and , as would be expected , accentuate the unsettling eeriness that pervades Never Let Me Go . " Roberts felt that Mulligan and Knightley were not convincing in portraying their ages until the last third of the movie . 
 The Canadian Press 's Christy Lemire stated that the film was a " gorgeous , provocative look at humanity " and observed that like its characters , the film " demands much of its audiences emotionally " . She concluded that Never Let Me Go is worth the investment . The Los Angeles Times film critic Kenneth Turan thought that the film was " passionate about deliberation and restraint " and believed that the latter may not appeal to all audiences . Scott Bowles , writing for USA Today , gave the film a negative review , declaring " never was a movie so bleak and empty " . He claimed that Never Let Me Go did not " embrace the book 's unrelentingly dark tones " , but rather wallowed in them . He commented that not even the cast 's performance , particularly Garfield 's , were enough to redeem the film . New York Times journalist Manohla Dargis said that the film presented " the aspect of a tasteful shocker " because its " cruelty is done so prettily and with such caution that the sting remains light " . 
 = = = Top ten lists = = = 
 The film appeared on the following critics ' top ten lists for the best films of 2010 : 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Pepsiman ( video game ) = 
 Pepsiman ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) is an action video game developed and published by KID for the PlayStation on March 4 , 1999 , in Japan . It is based on Pepsi 's superhero mascot with the same name , and focuses the player on avoiding obstacles by running , dashing , and jumping , while Pepsiman automatically runs forward through each of the game 's stages . 
 The game was made on a low budget ; this prompted the decision to make videos in @-@ between stages that show an American man drinking Pepsi , as they were cheap to produce . The game also features 3D cutscenes , which the future visual novel writer Kotaro Uchikoshi created 3D models for . While an American publisher did look into acquiring the rights to publish the game in the United States , it remained a Japan @-@ exclusive game in the end . 
 Reviewers frequently compared the game to other games , including Crash Bandicoot , and commented on its simplicity and its price , which was thought to be low . A writer for Complex included it on a list of company @-@ branded games that " didn 't suck " , commenting that it is not a bad game as long as the player can tolerate the large amount of advertisement in it , while a reviewer of Destructoid said that the game was funny but not great , calling it " charmingly brain @-@ dead " . According to Uchikoshi , the game did not sell well . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pepsiman is an action game that consists of four stages , each divided into smaller segments , and each involving the superhero Pepsiman saving a person who is in need of a drink , such as a military man in the middle of a desert , by giving them a can of Pepsi . The stages are all based on real locations , such as San Francisco and the Tokyo subway . The game is played from a third @-@ person perspective , with Pepsiman automatically running forwards through the stage , sometimes running through people 's living rooms . The player aims to dodge obstacles , such as cars , construction cranes , and people , as well as Pepsi @-@ branded obstacles , including a Pepsi truck . The player does this by using four different moves : running , dashing , jumping , and super @-@ jumping . The player gains points by collecting Pepsi cans . 
 In some stages , Pepsiman 's head becomes stuck inside a steel drum , which inverts the controls , and in some , he uses a skateboard . Throughout each stage is a number of checkpoints ; if the player gets hit by obstacles too many times , they have to restart from the latest checkpoint . Each stage ends with Pepsiman being chased by an object , including a giant Pepsi can . In between stages , the player is shown videos of an American man drinking Pepsi and eating chips and pizza while watching television . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Pepsiman is based on Pepsi 's mascot with the same name , which was created by comic book artist Travis Charest for Pepsi 's Japanese branch . The character was featured in commercials in Japan , and in the Japanese version of the video game Fighting Vipers , and became popular in Japan . Following this , Pepsi decided to further promote the character with a video game . 
 The game was developed by the Japanese video game developer KID . It was made on a low budget , which led to the decision to make the low @-@ cost video scenes of the American man drinking Pepsi . The game also used 3D event scenes , which were modeled by Kotaro Uchikoshi , who would later be a scenario writer for visual novels at KID . This was Uchikoshi 's first job ; he had been hired to plan video game adaptations of board games , but ended up being part of the development of Pepsiman instead , which was already in progress when he joined KID in 1998 . The game was released in Japan by KID for the PlayStation on March 4 , 1999 ; while an American publisher was looking into acquiring the rights to publish the game in the United States , it remained Japan @-@ exclusive . Despite this , the game is entirely in English , not Japanese . According to Uchikoshi , the game did not sell well . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writers for Famitsu called the game " super @-@ simple " , comparing it to Metro @-@ Cross and Paperboy , and calling it a simplified version of Crash Bandicoot . Others have made similar comments . A reviewer for IGN also compared it to Crash Bandicoot , described the gameplay as " simplistic [ and ] rote memorization based " , and said that the thing the game would be remembered for was its " extremely bizarre premise " . They still felt that the game was not bad , and that it was worth the price , which they noted was low . James Mielke at GameSpot called the game a " nifty little distraction " , and said that the gameplay was similar to the " old @-@ school gaming dynamics of yesteryear " . He commented on the low price , but said that it was difficult to find imports of it . 
 In 2011 , Allistair Pinsof at Destructoid reviewed the game , calling it a mix between Paperboy and Muscle March in terms of the complexity and pace , and compared the gameplay to Crash Bandicoot . He found it to be " such a gloriously twisted , charming spectacle " that it would be difficult not to like it ; he said that the main reason to play the game is " the sheer lunacy " of it , saying that the game is " obsessed " with America , and portrays Americans as " unhygienic hillbillies " in a manner that makes it unclear if it is a self @-@ aware parody or not . He concluded that the game is funny , but not great , and that the ridiculous premise and its large amount of small details make the game " charmingly brain @-@ dead " . In 2013 , Justin <unk> at Complex included the game in a list of company @-@ branded video games that " didn 't suck " , saying that while the game 's graphics had not aged well , it was mechanically very similar to Temple Run , which <unk> called his favorite iOS game . He concluded that Pepsiman is not a bad game for people with quick reflexes , as long as they can stand the high amount of advertising within the game ; he claimed that Pepsiman was the advergame with the largest amount of " logos @-@ per @-@ second " . 
 = SM U @-@ 30 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 30 or U @-@ XXX was a U @-@ 27 class U @-@ boat or submarine of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . U @-@ 30 , built by the Hungarian firm of Ganz Danubius at Fiume , was launched in December 1916 and commissioned in February 1917 . 
 U @-@ 30 had a single hull and was just over 121 feet ( 37 m ) in length . She displaced nearly 265 metric tons ( 261 long tons ) when surfaced and over 300 metric tons ( 295 long tons ) when submerged . Her two diesel engines moved her at up to 9 knots ( 17 km / h ) on the surface , while her twin electric motors propelled her at up to 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ) while underwater . She was armed with two bow torpedo tubes and could carry a load of up to four torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun and a machine gun . 
 U @-@ 30 sank no ships during her brief service career . She departed from Cattaro on 31 March 1917 and was never heard from again . She may have succumbed to a mine in the Otranto Barrage but her fate remains a mystery . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Austria @-@ Hungary 's U @-@ boat fleet was largely obsolete at the outbreak of World War I. The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy satisfied its most urgent needs by purchasing five Type UB I submarines that comprised the U @-@ 10 class from Germany , by raising and recommissioning the sunken French submarine Curie as U @-@ 14 , and by building four submarines of the U @-@ 20 class that were based on the 1911 Danish Havmanden class . 
 After these steps alleviated their most urgent needs , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy selected the German Type UB II design for its newest submarines in mid 1915 . The Germans were reluctant to allocate any of their wartime resources to Austro @-@ Hungarian construction , but were willing to sell plans for up to six of the UB II boats to be constructed under license in Austria @-@ Hungary . The Navy agreed to the proposal and purchased the plans from AG Weser of Bremen . 
 U @-@ 30 displaced 264 metric tons ( 260 long tons ) surfaced and 301 metric tons ( 296 long tons ) submerged . She had a single hull with saddle tanks , and was 121 feet 1 inch ( 36 @.@ 91 m ) long with a beam of 14 feet 4 inches ( 4 @.@ 37 m ) and a draft of 12 feet 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 71 m ) . For propulsion , she had two shafts , twin diesel engines of 270 bhp ( 200 kW ) for surface running , and twin electric motors of 280 shp ( 210 kW ) for submerged travel . She was capable of 9 knots ( 16 @.@ 7 km / h ) while surfaced and 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ) while submerged . Although there is no specific notation of a range for U @-@ 30 in Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 , the German UB II boats , upon which the U @-@ 27 class was based , had a range of over 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) surfaced , and 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ) submerged . U @-@ 27 @-@ class boats were designed for a crew of 23 – 24 . 
 U @-@ 30 was armed with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry a complement of four torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 75 mm / 26 ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun and an 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun . 
 After intricate political negotiations to allocate production of the class between Austrian and Hungarian firms , U @-@ 27 was ordered from Ganz Danubius on 12 October 1915 . She was laid down on 9 March 1916 at Fiume and launched on 27 December . 
 = = Service career = = 
 U @-@ 30 began diving trials on 8 January 1917 , and made her first underwater cruise on 27 January . On 1 February , she successfully reached a depth of 30 metres ( 98 ft ) in compression tests . Four days later she took on a crew for a training voyage , and made her way to Pola . At that port , on 21 January 1917 , SM U @-@ 30 was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant Friedrich Fähndrich . Fähndrich , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old native of Budapest , had previously served as commander of U @-@ 15 . 
 U @-@ 30 departed on her first patrol on 26 February , for duty off Cape Matapan and the Gulf of Taranto . During the patrol , U @-@ 30 did not encounter any hostile ships , but did encounter a storm that caused extensive damage . Cutting short her cruise with damage to the parapet on her conning tower , a missing radio aerial , and a broken gyrocompass , U @-@ 30 arrived in Cattaro on 16 March for repairs . 
 With the repairs complete , U @-@ 30 set out from Cattaro on 31 March and was never heard from again . Author Paul Halpern suggests that a mine in the Otranto Barrage might have been responsible . Authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast report that there is no evidence in Allied records to indicate the possible fate of the U @-@ boat , and conclude that the fate of U @-@ 30 remains a mystery , and " is likely to remain so for ever [ sic ] " . U @-@ 30 was not credited with the sinking of any ships in her brief career . She was also the only member of the U @-@ 27 @-@ class to be lost during the war . 
 = Meteorological history of Hurricane Sandy = 
 The meteorological history of Hurricane Sandy , the second @-@ costliest Atlantic hurricane on record , lasted for over a week in late October – early November 2012 . Classified as the eighteenth named storm , tenth hurricane , and second major hurricane of the annual hurricane season , Sandy originated from a tropical wave on October 22 . Performing a small loop over the central Caribbean Sea , the system intensified into a tropical storm a day later and became the final hurricane of the season before briefly coming ashore the coast of Jamaica on October 24 . After emerging between Jamaica and Cuba , Sandy began a period of rapid intensification into a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . It made landfall at this intensity near Santiago de Cuba on October 25 . 
 An approaching trough over the central United States induced high wind shear over Sandy as it traversed the Bahamas , causing the hurricane to weaken to a tropical storm while turning more northeastward . The southern part of the trough detached , causing the shear to decrease late on October 28 and allowing Sandy to regain strength . It attained a secondary peak of Category 2 strength the following day , and later turned toward the west . During this change in direction , Sandy began to transition into an extratropical cyclone , a process it completed before making landfall near Brigantine , New Jersey , late on October 29 . The extratropical remnants weakened gradually overland , and the center of circulation was declared indistinguishable over western Pennsylvania two days later . In addition to becoming the largest Atlantic hurricane , Sandy broke records for the lowest pressures ever observed in many cities across the Northeastern United States . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Sandy trace back to a tropical wave that moved off the western coast of Africa and into the eastern Atlantic Ocean on October 11 . As the wave tracked westward over subsequent days , it interacted with an upper @-@ level trough over the Eastern Atlantic , resulting in the development of widespread shower and thunderstorm activity ; however , strong wind shear prevented further development at the time . Increased convergence , likely as a result of Hurricane Rafael to the wave 's west , hindered development as well . By October 18 , numerous yet disorganized convective activity formed near the center of the disturbance despite moderate wind shear . Marked with an extended low pressure area , conditions were expected to gradually become more favorable for development . On October 20 , following modest organization , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) assessed a high potential for it to become a tropical cyclone within 48 hours , tagging it " Invest <unk> " . 
 By the next day , the convection had decreased , although barometric pressures in the area remained low , a trademark of development . Convection gradually increased as the day went on , while the system slowed and became nearly stationary over the western Caribbean . By 1500 UTC on October 22 , surface observations and satellite imagery , which indicated the system had developed enough organized convection to be classified as Tropical Depression Eighteen . At the time of the upgrade , the system was situated about 320 mi ( 515 km ) south of Kingston , Jamaica The environment around the newly formed depression was characterized by an area of weak steering currents south of a ridge extending eastward from the Gulf of Mexico . Low wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures were conducive for strengthening , and perhaps rapid deepening . Late on October 22 , a Hurricane Hunters flight observed winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) in a rainband well removed from the center of circulation , prompting the NHC to upgrade the depression to Tropical Storm Sandy . Outflow increased , while moist air helped the convection organize further . The NHC noted that " remaining nearly stationary over the warm waters of southwestern Caribbean Sea is never a good sign for this time of year . " Still , the cloud pattern initially remained largely unchanged . Early on October 24 , an eye began developing , as observed on microwave imagery , and Sandy was moving steadily northward , drawn by a trough approaching from the northwest . At 1500 UTC on October 24 , the NHC upgraded Sandy to hurricane status after the Hurricane Hunters observed flight @-@ level winds of 99 mph ( 159 km / h ) . At the time , Sandy was located roughly 65 mi ( 105 km ) south of Kingston , Jamaica . 
 = = Caribbean landfalls and The Bahamas = = 
 At approximately 1900 UTC on October 24 , Sandy made landfall near Kingston , with winds near 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . After spending a short duration over the island , Sandy moved just offshore Cuba and began a period of rapid intensification in which the cyclone strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale , with 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) winds ; operationally , Sandy was classified as a high @-@ end Category 2 hurricane at landfall . Shortly thereafter , at <unk> UTC on October 25 , the hurricane came ashore just west of Santiago de Cuba . At landfall , Sandy had a well @-@ defined eye over 23 mi ( 37 km ) in diameter , and flight @-@ level winds reached 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . While over land , the structure deteriorated , and the eye was no longer visible . After exiting Cuba , a combination of dry air and increasing shear restricted the outflow of Sandy and caused the structure of the storm to become disorganized . A mid @-@ level low over Florida and approaching trough turned the hurricane toward the north @-@ northwest . 
 By early October 26 , a majority of the convection in association with Sandy was located to the north of the center , primarily due to wind shear and dry air to the southwest of the hurricane . The size of the storm had increased greatly as well , with tropical storm @-@ force winds extending out some 275 mi ( 445 km ) from the center . As the day progressed , Sandy continued moving slowly to the north , and the strong wind shear caused the storm 's intensity to decrease slightly . On October 27 , the NHC remarked that Sandy was " showing characteristics of a hybrid cyclone ... like a large occluded frontal low . " However , the system maintained a warm thermal core , and despite strong 50 kt ( 60 mph ) wind shear , continued to develop thunderstorms due to an abundance of divergence from a nearby trough ; the same trough turned Sandy toward the northeast as the two began to phase and morph into what many called a " <unk> " . On October 27 , Sandy briefly weakened to a tropical storm , after dry air became fully ingested into the mid- and upper @-@ level circulations . Later that day , however , data received from the Hurricane Hunters indicated that Sandy had re @-@ intensified into a minimal hurricane . 
 = = Post @-@ tropical transition and final landfall = = 
 By late October 27 , Sandy was moving steadily northeastward ahead of an approaching trough . Although it maintained winds of hurricane force , the entrainment of dry air and continued strong wind shear caused the inner area of convection to diminish . On October 28 , however , thunderstorms increased over the center , and Sandy 's upper @-@ level circulation was better defined when opposed to 24 hours previous . As the day progressed , wind shear decreased , and a banded eye began redeveloping while the hurricane was still over the Gulf Stream . The convection organized further early on October 29 . Around the same time , Sandy began transitioning into an extratropical storm after the western periphery of the circulation began interacting with a cold front . The storm revolved around an upper @-@ level low over the eastern United States , and also to the southwest of a ridge over Atlantic Canada that the NHC described as " highly anomalous " ; this caused Sandy to turn to the north and northwest . Maintaining an eye and deep convection , the hurricane intensified , reaching a secondary peak of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) by 1200 UTC on October 29 ; at this time , the cyclone was moving over a small area of the Gulf Stream with waters in excess of 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . Around that time , Sandy had a wind field of over 1 @,@ 150 mi ( 1 @,@ 850 km ) in diameter . Both a warm and cold front were located near the storm 's center , and the storm was predicted to become extratropical before landfall . 
 The convection diminished while the hurricane accelerated toward the New Jersey coast , due to it becoming involved with the low to the west . The pressure continued to drop , which indicated the system was intensifying because of baroclinic instability . In an advisory issued by the NHC late on October 29 , the NHC noted that , " all of these considerations lead us to conclude that the most appropriate classification at advisory time is extratropical . " The agency declared Sandy a post @-@ tropical cyclone at about 2100 UTC that afternoon , while located just offshore southern New Jersey . About 2 1 / 2 hours later , the storm made landfall approximately 5 mi ( 8 km ) northeast of Atlantic City near Brigantine . The intensity at landfall was estimated at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , although the strongest winds were located offshore , east and southeast of the center . 
 = = Dissipation = = 
 After moving ashore , Sandy continued moving to the west , weakening below hurricane force by the time it reached Pennsylvania . Because the system was non @-@ tropical , the Weather Prediction Center ( WPC ) – known at the time as the <unk> Prediction Center ( HPC ) – took over the responsibility of issuing advisories on the low . The remnants of Sandy brought heavy snow and high winds to the central Appalachian Mountains , resulting in blizzard warnings being issued . The system continued to weaken as it moved across western Pennsylvania , and by 0300 UTC on October 31 , the storm 's movement had shifted to the northwest . Blizzard conditions continued in the Appalachians , bringing more snow to the region that had already seen high amounts the day before . By 0900 UTC on October 31 , the circulation degenerated into a trough of low pressure , with no discernible center of low pressure . Later that day , the remnants of Sandy spread into the Great Lakes , and the WPC issued its last advisory . By the time the system had moved out of the region , nearly three feet of snow had fallen in some areas of West Virginia , Tennessee , and Maryland , with lesser amounts elsewhere in the region . During the next two days , Sandy 's remnants drifted northward and then northeastward over Ontario , before merging with another low pressure area over Eastern Canada . 
 = = Predictions = = 
 As early as October 23 , while Sandy was developing in the Caribbean , the European Centre for Medium @-@ Range Weather Forecasts ( ECMWF ) predicted the storm would strike the East Coast of the United States , while most other tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated the storm would move out to sea . By the next day , various computer models agreed that Sandy would interact with a trough over the eastern United States and turn to the west . About five days before landfall , the ECMWF , Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GFDL ) , and Navy Operational Global Prediction System ( NOGAPS ) models predicted Sandy would strike the Delmarva Peninsula , while the American Global Forecast System ( GFS ) model anticipated the hurricane would move out to sea ; the remaining models were between the two scenarios . By four days before landfall , the NHC was forecasting a landfall on New Jersey , as were most of the computer models . In general , the European computer models performed better than the United States ones , due to the European models ' higher resolution . MIT professor Kerry Emanuel used the moment to call attention to the under @-@ performance of US models , and to recommend a " dedicated effort " to reverse it . 
 = = Records = = 
 The storm surge produced by Hurricane Sandy , which occurred at high tide , pushed water to 13 @.@ 88 ft ( 4 @.@ 23 m ) at Battery Park , New York , beating the previous record of 10 @.@ 02 ft ( 3 @.@ 05 m ) set by Hurricane Donna in 1960 at the same location . However , a storm surge of 13 feet , during low tide , was also reported at Battery Park during the 1821 Norfolk and Long Island hurricane , which occurred before records were officially kept . Storm tide records were also broken in Sandy Hook , New Jersey and Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , with peak tides of 13 @.@ 31 ft ( 4 @.@ 06 m ) and 10 @.@ 62 ft ( 3 @.@ 24 m ) , respectively . The tidal gauge in Sandy Hook lost power while the tide was still rising , meaning the tide crested higher than the recorded peak . A buoy in New York Harbor reached a record height when it measured a 32 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 9 m ) wave on October 30 , 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) taller than a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) wave registered by Hurricane Irene in 2011 . 
 Sandy was the largest tropical cyclone in terms of gale diameter since records began in 1988 . In addition , at 945 millibars ( 27 @.@ 9 inHg ) , Sandy was second only to 1938 New England hurricane for the most intense storm to hit land in the United States north of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The barometric pressure hit a record low of 945 @.@ 5 mbar ( 27 @.@ 92 inHg ) over Atlantic City , New Jersey , breaking the previous record of 961 mbar ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) set in 1938 . Sandy also broke the record for producing the lowest pressure in Philadelphia , with a minimum of 954 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) ; the previous record was 962 mbar ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) , set during the 1993 Storm of the Century . 
 = = Global warming effect = = 
 Climate scientists agree that climate change increases the likelihood of stronger and wetter storms , though possibly leading to fewer of them . However , researchers were unable to say just how responsible climate change was for the development and track of Sandy . Tropical cyclones derive their energy from warm waters , and warmer water generally means stronger storms . Climate change has caused sea levels to rise , which made the storm surge and coastal flooding caused by Sandy much more devastating . Since the overall sea level has risen by 8 in ( 20 cm ) between 1902 and 2007 , and is accelerating , the rise in sea level increases the risk for major floods to occur every time a storm hits . A 2012 paper in Nature projected that climate change could lead to floods that should occur only once a century to happening every three to twenty years . 
 In the case of Hurricane Sandy , two major factors contributing to the size and strength of the storm were unusually warm ocean surface temperatures and an increase in blocking patterns , both of which are expected to occur more frequently due to global warming . As they drift north , Atlantic hurricanes are typically moved to the east and out to sea by the jet stream 's prevailing winds . This typical pattern was blocked by a ridge of high pressure over Greenland , resulting in a negative Arctic oscillation , forming a kink in the jet stream and causing it to double back on itself off the East Coast ; Sandy was caught up in this northwesterly flow . The blocking pattern over Greenland also stalled an arctic front , which combined with the cyclone . Mark Fischetti of Scientific American argued that the jet stream 's unusual shape was caused by the melting of Arctic ice . Noting that these blocking patterns are unusual in the fall but have been increasing , meteorologist Jeff Masters said that three studies in 2011 found " that the recent record decline in Arctic sea ice could be responsible , since this heats up the pole , altering the Equator @-@ to @-@ pole temperature difference , forcing the jet stream to slow down , meander , and get stuck in large loops . " Trenberth said that while a negative Arctic Oscillation and a blocking anticyclone were in place , the null hypothesis remained that this was just the natural variability of weather . 
 <unk> Michael E. Mann attributes at least one foot of the 13 @-@ foot ( at least 0 @.@ 3 of the 4 @-@ meter ) storm surge in Lower Manhattan to global sea level rise . Harvard geologist Daniel P. Schrag calls Hurricane Sandy 's 13 @-@ foot storm surge an example of what will , by mid @-@ century , be the " new norm on the Eastern seaboard " . 
 According to National Center for Atmospheric Research ( NCAR ) senior climatologist Kevin E. Trenberth , " The answer to the oft @-@ asked question of whether an event is caused by climate change is that it is the wrong question . All weather events are affected by climate change because the environment in which they occur is warmer and moister than it used to be . " He illustrates by pointing out that steroids in a baseball player 's system do not cause home runs all by themselves but do make home runs more likely . Meteorologist Kerry Emanuel stressed that no individual weather event , such as Hurricane Sandy , can be attributed to climate change , or any specific cause , for that matter . 
 NOAA meteorologist Martin <unk> attributed the " immediate cause " of Sandy to " little more than the coincidental alignment of a tropical storm with an extratropical storm . " Trenberth agrees that the storm was caused by " natural variability " , but adds that it was " enhanced by global warming " . One factor contributing to the storm 's strength was additional energy from abnormally warm water off the North American East Coast , where global warming was identified as contributing 1 @.@ 1 ° F ( 0 @.@ 6 ° C ) of the 5 @.@ 4 ° F ( 3 ° C ) above @-@ average sea surface temperatures . As the temperature of the atmosphere increases , the capacity to hold water increases , leading to stronger storms and higher rainfall amounts . 
 US Representative Henry Waxman , the top Democrat on the House Energy and Commerce Committee , wanted Republicans to hold a hearing on links between climate change and Hurricane Sandy . " Hurricane Sandy is exactly the type of extreme weather event that climate scientists have said will become more frequent and more severe if we fail to reduce our carbon pollution . That is why we are writing to request that you hold a hearing on the storm and its relation to climate change in the lame @-@ duck session " , he and Congressmen Bobby Rush wrote . The hearing was not presented before the senate and house prior to the emergence of the new Congress in early 2013 . On April 9 , 2013 , however , Waxman and Rush renewed their request of a hearing , stating that , " If we rely upon representatives of electric utilities , coal companies , oil refiners , and chemical manufacturers to explain the state of the science regarding climate change , we are unlikely to get a full and unbiased view of the challenge we must confront and the opportunities we have . " 
 = Pennsylvania Route 152 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 152 ( PA 152 ) is a 25 @.@ 3 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 40 @.@ 7 km ) state highway located in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . The route travels north – south from an interchange with PA 309 located in the Cedarbrook neighborhood of Cheltenham Township in Montgomery County north to another interchange with PA 309 located northeast of Telford in Bucks County . PA 152 is known as Limekiln Pike for most of its length . From the southern terminus , the route passes through suburban areas to the north of Philadelphia , serving Dresher , Maple Glen , and Chalfont . North of Chalfont , PA 152 runs through rural suburbs of Philadelphia before reaching Silverdale . Past here , the road continues northwest through Perkasie , where it turns southwest and passes through Sellersville before reaching its northern terminus . 
 What is now PA 152 was originally Limekiln Road , a road built to transport lime from area kilns . The road was a turnpike between the 1850s and 1917 . The route was first designated in 1928 to run from U.S. Route 611 ( US 611 ) in North Philadelphia to PA 113 in Silverdale . PA 152 was extended north to US 309 in Sellersville in 1947 , replacing the former routing of PA 413 between Perkasie and Sellersville . By 1960 , the southern terminus of the route was cut back to its current location . PA 152 was extended west to end at PA 309 near Telford by 1970 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Montgomery County = = = 
 PA 152 begins at an interchange with the Fort Washington Expressway ( PA 309 ) in the community of Cedarbrook , located in Cheltenham Township , Montgomery County about 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) north of the Philadelphia city line . From this interchange , the route proceeds northeast on four @-@ lane divided Easton Road , passing to the east of Arcadia University . PA 152 heads north onto Limekiln Pike and crosses PA 73 ( Church Road ) , crossing through residential and business areas as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane before losing the turn lane as it passes through the community of Edge Hill . The route curves northeast and comes to a bridge over SEPTA 's Lansdale / Doylestown Line , where it enters Abington Township . Immediately after the bridge , PA 152 turns northwest to remain along Limekiln Pike , making a curve back to the north a short distance later . 
 The road continues north into Upper Dublin Township . PA 152 passes through a golf course before reaching an intersection with Jenkintown Road and <unk> Road in the community of <unk> , where it turns northwest . PA 152 heads north through areas of homes with some businesses before curving northeast and coming to an intersection with Susquehanna Road . 
 Here , the route turns northwest and crosses under Norfolk Southern 's Morrisville Line and the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) as a three @-@ lane road with one northbound lane and two southbound lanes . Immediately after the Pennsylvania Turnpike bridge , Susquehanna Road splits to the northwest and PA 152 continues north along Limekiln Pike , passing businesses in Dresher . The road becomes two lanes again and continues northwest through residential neighborhoods , running through <unk> . PA 152 curves to the north and reaches the community of Maple Glen , where it crosses Norristown Road and PA 63 ( Welsh Road ) . At the intersection with the latter , PA 152 enters Horsham Township and continues to an intersection with Butler Pike . Farther north , the route crosses the Power Line Trail . 
 In the community of Prospectville , the road comes to an intersection with PA 463 ( Horsham Road ) . Past this intersection , the route continues north between a cemetery to the west and a golf course to the east before heading through a mix of farmland , woods , and homes . PA 152 intersects Lower State Road and turns northeast , running along the border between Montgomery Township to the northwest and Horsham Township to the southeast , crossing the Little Neshaminy Creek . PA 152 turns north and fully enters Montgomery Township , coming to an intersection with County Line Road in the community of Eureka . 
 = = = Bucks County = = = 
 Upon crossing County Line Road , PA 152 enters Warrington Township in Bucks County . The route comes to an intersection with US 202 and curves to the northwest . Upon crossing Upper State Road , PA 152 enters New Britain Township and continues north past homes . PA 152 curves northwest soon after and enters Chalfont . The route intersects US 202 Bus. and turns northeast to form a concurrency with that route on Butler Avenue , crossing the West Branch of Neshaminy Creek and heading into a business district . PA 152 splits from US 202 Bus. by turning northwest onto Main Street . The road passes homes and commercial development , coming to a bridge over SEPTA 's Lansdale / Doylestown Line near the Chalfont station . PA 152 curves north before it runs along the border between New Britain Township to the west and Chalfont to the east . 
 PA 152 fully enters New Britain Township and becomes Limekiln Pike again , heading into a mix of agricultural and wooded areas with some homes and passing through the community of Newville . The road curves northwest and continues into Hilltown Township . At the intersection with Hilltown Pike , PA 152 turns northeast to remain along Limekiln Pike before turning northwest in the community of Hilltown . Following this , the route heads through the community of Mount Pleasant . Farther northwest , the road enters Silverdale and becomes <unk> Avenue , passing homes and coming to an intersection with PA 113 ( Main Street ) . 
 At this point , PA 152 turns southwest to form a wrong @-@ way concurrency with PA 113 on Main Street before splitting from that route by turning northwest onto Walnut Street . The route leaves Silverdale for Hilltown Township again and runs through areas of residential subdivisions . Farther northwest , the road enters Perkasie and continues past more residences and businesses . PA 152 turns southwest onto Constitution Avenue and passes a park before entering Sellersville and becomes Park Avenue . PA 152 turns south onto Main Street and enters West Rockhill Township . PA 152 turns west onto four @-@ lane undivided State Road before changing over to a divided highway as it comes to a bridge over an East Penn Railroad line . After the bridge , PA 152 crosses through a mix of fields and development before reaching its northern terminus at an interchange with the PA 309 freeway . Past the northern terminus , State Road continues southwest toward Telford . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 152 was originally built as Limekiln Road in 1693 . This road was used to transport lime from kilns in Upper Dublin Township . The road was maintained by adjacent property owners . In 1850 , the Limekiln Turnpike Company was created to improve the roadway through the collection of tolls , boasting tollhouses at each end of the village of <unk> ( now Dresher ) . The toll collection and tollhouses along the Limekiln Pike were abolished and removed in 1917 . When Pennsylvania designated legislative routes in 1911 , what is now PA 152 did not get a route number . 
 In the original 1928 routing , PA 152 stretched from the Stenton Avenue and Broad Street ( US 611 ) intersection via Ogontz Avenue in the Oak Lane neighborhood of North Philadelphia to PA 113 in Silverdale . At this time , the entire route south of Chalfont was paved . The segment within Perkasie and Sellersville known as Walnut Street , Constitution Avenue , and Park Avenue was signed as PA 413 from South Perkasie Road to Main Street ( then US 309 ) . By 1940 , PA 152 was paved north of Chalfont . 
 In 1947 , the northern terminus was moved to US 309 in Sellersville , replacing the segment of PA 413 . From the late 1940s to before 1960 , the southernmost segment on Easton Road from US 309 to Arcadia University was signed as US 611 Alternate . By 1960 , the southern terminus was moved to its current location at US 309 ( now PA 309 ) in Cheltenham Township . The northern terminus was moved to its current location at the PA 309 interchange near Sellersville by 1970 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = USS Benham ( DD @-@ 49 ) = 
 USS Benham ( Destroyer No. 49 / DD @-@ 49 ) was an Aylwin @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of Rear Admiral Andrew E. K. Benham . 
 Benham was laid down by William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in March 1912 and launched in March 1913 . The ship was a little more than 305 ft ( 93 m ) in length , just over 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 036 long tons ( 1 @,@ 053 t ) . She was armed with four 4 in ( 100 mm ) guns and had eight 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes . Benham was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 29 @.@ 5 kn ( 33 @.@ 9 mph ; 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) . 
 After her January 1914 commissioning , she assisted her sister ship Aylwin when that ship suffered an explosion in one of her fire rooms in April . After a period in reserve , Benham served on Neutrality Patrol duty . As a part of that duty in October 1916 , she was one of several U.S. destroyers sent to rescue survivors from five victims of German submarine U @-@ 53 off the Lightship Nantucket . She picked up officers and crew from a Dutch cargo ship before the U @-@ boat sank it . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Benham was sent overseas to patrol the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland . Benham made several unsuccessful attacks on U @-@ boats . During her overseas service , Benham was rammed by HMS Zinnia and nearly sunk . 
 Upon returning to the United States after the war in January 1919 , Benham was placed in reduced commission . After alternating periods of activity and time in reserve , Benham was decommissioned at Philadelphia in July 1922 . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in March 1935 and ordered scrapped in April . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Benham was authorized in March 1911 as the third of four ships of the Aylwin class , which was almost identical to the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized at the same time . Construction of the vessel — like her three sister ships — was awarded to William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia which laid down her keel on 14 March 1912 . On 22 March 1913 , Benham was launched by sponsor Edith Wallace Benham , daughter of the ship 's namesake , Andrew <unk> Kennedy Benham . The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of the American admiral . As built , the destroyer was 305 ft 3 in ( 93 @.@ 04 m ) in length , 30 ft 4 in ( 9 @.@ 25 m ) abeam , and drew 9 ft 5 in ( 2 @.@ 87 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 036 long tons ( 1 @,@ 053 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 235 long tons ( 1 @,@ 255 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Benham had two steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional pair triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each connected to one of the propeller shafts , for cruising purposes . Four oil @-@ burning boilers powered the engines , which could generate 16 @,@ 000 shp ( 12 @,@ 000 kW ) , moving the ship at the design speed of 29 @.@ 5 kn ( 33 @.@ 9 mph ; 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) ; Benham exceeded her contracted speed in her trials in December 1913 , when she averaged 29 @.@ 81 kn ( 34 @.@ 30 mph ; 55 @.@ 21 km / h ) over five runs off the Delaware Breakwater . 
 Benham 's main battery consisted of four 4 in ( 100 mm ) / 50 caliber Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 lb ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 lb ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yd ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . In early 1917 , Benham 's single 4 in ( 100 mm ) guns were replaced with twin 4 in ( 100 mm ) guns on an experimental basis . However , before Benham departed for overseas service during World War I , her original single gun mounts had been restored . Benham was also equipped with four twin mount 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 = = Pre @-@ World War I = = 
 USS Benham was commissioned into the U.S. Navy on 20 January 1914 under the command of Lieutenant Commander Charles J. Train . In February and March , Benham conducted a shakedown cruise to the West Indies and , in April , began operations out of Hampton Roads , Virginia . On 6 April , Benham and sister ships Aylwin and Parker were exercising off the North Carolina coast , about 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) off the Diamond Shoals lightship . An explosion ripped through the forward fire room on Aylwin , injuring three men . Benham loaded the three wounded sailors and sped to the naval hospital at Norfolk , Virginia , while Parker took on the remainder of Aylwin 's crew . One of the injured men died on Benham before landfall was made in Virginia ; another died a short time later . Aylwin remained afloat but , unmanned , was towed into Norfolk by Parker and U.S. Navy tug Sonoma . The crews of all three destroyers raised $ 250 to help defray funeral expenses for the widow of one of the men . In July , the Benham went into reserve at the New York Navy Yard . She came back into active service on 21 December 1914 . 
 In August 1916 , the U.S. Navy conducted what The New York Times called the " greatest war game undertaken by the American Navy . " In the scenario , a ' Blue ' force defended the East Coast of the United States against a ' Red ' force attempting an amphibious landing . Benham , scouting for the Blue force , was the first to spot the inbound Red transports and their escorts , but an attack on the transports by the Red force was repulsed , leading to a Blue victory . 
 Prior to the entrance of the United States into World War I , she served on Neutrality Patrol duty , trying to protect American and neutral @-@ flagged merchant ships from interference by British or German warships and U @-@ boats . In the course of performing those duties , Benham was at Newport , Rhode Island , in early October 1916 . At 05 : 30 on 8 October , wireless reports came in of a German submarine stopping ships near the Lightship Nantucket , off the eastern end of Long Island . After an SOS from the British steamer West Point was received at about 12 : 30 , Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves ordered Benham and other destroyers at Newport to attend to survivors . The American destroyers arrived on the scene about 17 : 00 when the U @-@ boat , U @-@ 53 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Hans Rose , was in the process of stopping the Holland @-@ America Line cargo ship Blommersdijk . Shortly after , U @-@ 53 stopped the British passenger ship Stephano . As Rose had done with three other ships U @-@ 53 had sunk earlier in the day , he gave passengers and crew aboard Blommersdijk and Stephano adequate time to abandon the ships before sinking the pair . In total , 226 survivors from U @-@ 53 's five victims were rescued by the destroyer flotilla . Benham picked up the captain of and crewmen from Blommersdijk for transport to Newport . 
 = = World War I = = 
 After the United States entered World War I on 6 April 1917 , Benham was one of the first group of destroyers chosen for anti @-@ submarine duty in European waters . She departed Tompkinsville , New York on 17 May and arrived in Queenstown , Ireland on 24 May . Four days later , the destroyer began the first of many tours of duty at sea hunting U @-@ boats and shepherding convoys to their destinations . 
 Her first encounter with U @-@ boats came on 13 July when she was apparently attacked by two submarines . They launched a total of three torpedoes at Benham , but she and her convoy evaded them . The destroyer then drove them away with a depth charge attack . On 30 July , while she was on her way to Queenstown , the destroyer spied the wake of another torpedo some 1 @,@ 500 yd ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) from her . Immediately , she charged to the attack with guns and depth charges . Later , her crew sighted air bubbles and oil on the surface . The British Admiralty commended her for probable damage to a German U @-@ boat . The destroyer continued her patrols out of Queenstown until June 1918 when she moved to Brest , France , her base of operations through the end of the war . 
 In September 1917 , during her European wartime service , Benham was rammed by the British Azalea @-@ class sloop HMS Zinnia . The event is not mentioned in the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships ; the extent of the damage to both ships is unknown . A photograph from the U.S. Navy 's Naval History & Heritage Command website shows a nearly sunken Benham moored between two ships . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 On 21 December 1918 , Benham put to sea from Brest for the last time and began the voyage back to the United States . Rejoining the Atlantic Fleet at the beginning of 1919 , the warship participated in the annual fleet maneuvers held in Cuban waters and then made a cruise to the Azores in May . Upon her return to the United States that summer , she was placed in ordinary at Norfolk on 28 June . Active again in 1921 , she patrolled the eastern seaboard until assigned duty as plane guard and tender to the Atlantic Fleet Air Squadrons . That duty terminated in May 1922 , and she stood into Philadelphia on 12 May to prepare for inactivation . 
 Benham was decommissioned at Philadelphia on 7 July 1922 . The ship was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 8 March 1935 , and , on 23 April , was ordered scrapped at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . 
 = TNA World Beer Drinking Championship = 
 The TNA World Beer Drinking Championship was an unsanctioned professional wrestling championship owned by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion . The championship was introduced on November 11 , 2007 at TNA 's Genesis pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event . It was active until February 26 , 2008 when the title belt was destroyed at the taping of the March 6 , 2008 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! . 
 It debuted as a part of a feud between James Storm and Eric Young ; they were involved in a storyline that revolved around drinking beer . Like most professional wrestling championships , the title was won as a result of a scripted match or backstage segment . There were three reigns among two wrestlers in the title 's brief history . Storm was the first and last champion . 
 = = History = = 
 The TNA World Beer Drinking Championship was unveiled on November 11 , 2007 at TNA 's Genesis PPV event , during a backstage segment involving James Storm , Ms. Jackie , and Eric Young . The storyline behind this title began on the October 25 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , where Storm defeated Young to advance in the 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament . During the contest , Ms. Jackie , who was accompanying Storm , interfered and helped Storm by standing on the ring apron and distracting Young . When Storm was about to attack Young from behind , Young jumped out of the way causing Storm to knock Ms. Jackie off the apron and to the floor . Afterwards , Young went to check on Ms. Jackie , thereby allowing Storm to gain the upper hand and win the match . Following the contest , Ms. Jackie and Storm gave Young a beer , which he <unk> down hastily . 
 Leading up to Genesis , Young and Storm had a beer drinking contest on the November 1 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , after Storm lost to Kaz in a semi @-@ final match of The 2007 Fight for the Right Tournament . Young won the championship at Genesis , after Storm passed out during the segment . This led to a bout between Storm and Young at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on December 2 , 2007 , which Young won . Storm challenged Young to another drinking contest on the January 3 , 2008 episode of Impact ! . On January 6 , 2008 at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event , Storm and Young competed in what was called the Beer Drinking Championship Series , which was a series of drinking contests . 
 The first round was a " never have I ever " round , in which the participants had to admit to experiences they had never been involved in . If the opponent had partaken in a similar action he was forced to drink a shot . Storm was the victor of this round . The second round was contested with both participants having beer bottles taped to their hands and neither being allowed to go to the bathroom . Young won after Storm wet himself , which was confirmed by Ms. Jackie , now named Jackie Moore . The third round involved the two drinking shots ; it was won by Storm after Young passed out because Storm had drugged him . With Storm winning two contests to one , he earned the ability to determine their match at TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 10 , 2008 . At Against All Odds , Young defeated Storm to retain the TNA World Beer Drinking Championship after Rhino interfered attacking Storm . On the February 28 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , a Ladder match for the World Beer Drinking Championship was held between Storm and Young . Storm won the bout after Moore climbed a ladder and retrieved the championship for Storm without the referee seeing . On the March 6 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Rhino stole the title belt from Storm and bashed the belt across a ring post , thus destroying it and ending the storyline surrounding it . 
 = = = Belt designs = = = 
 When the title was revealed at Genesis , Chris Sokol of the Canadian Online Explorer spoke of its design in his review of the event . Sokol stated it looked like " a plastic spinner belt with a beer bottle attached to it . " 
 = = Reigns = = 
 James Storm was the first and last champion in the title 's history . He also held the record for most reigns with two and the shortest reign in the history at one day . Eric Young holds the record for longest reign at 106 days . There were three reigns among two wrestlers in the title history . 
 = = = Combined reigns = = = 
 = Blood ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Blood " is the third episode of the second season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on September 30 , 1994 . The teleplay was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong from a story by Darin Morgan and was directed by David Nutter . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Blood " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 8 , being watched by 8 @.@ 7 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of killings in Franklin , Pennsylvania . All the suspects appear compelled to murder after seeing violent messages on electronic devices . 
 " Blood " was inspired by writer Glen Morgan 's own <unk> as well as controversy over malathion spraying in Southern California . The episode marked the second appearance of the Lone Gunmen in the series , as well as a guest appearance by pornographic actress Ashlyn Gere . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Franklin , Pennsylvania , postal worker Edward Funsch ( William Sanderson ) is informed that he will be fired at the end of the week due to budget cuts . Afterwards , Funsch sees the words " Kill ' Em All " on his machine 's digital display . At Franklin 's civic center , a middle @-@ aged man in a crowded elevator sees " No Air " displayed on the elevator 's LED display , and is the only one who can see the message . Sweating and obviously claustrophobic , he again glances at the LED display . This time it flashes the words " Can 't Breathe " and then " Kill ' Em All . " 
 Agent Fox Mulder arrives at the civic center after what looks like a massacre ; bodies lie on the sidewalk and in the foyer . Sheriff Spencer ( John Cygan ) explains that the suspect murdered four people from the elevator with his bare hands . His rampage ended when he was shot by a security guard . Spencer notes that seven other individuals have murdered twenty @-@ two people in Franklin in the past six months . Mulder discovers that the LED display in the elevator has been damaged , and that the dead suspect has a green residue on his fingertips . 
 At the FBI Academy , Dana Scully reads Mulder 's initial report . The only connection between the murders that he can see is that the suspects all destroyed an electronic device during the killings . Meanwhile , Bonnie McRoberts , another Franklin resident , drops by a repair shop to pick up her car , where a message on an engine diagnostic display warns her that the mechanic is going to rape her . She impulsively kills him with an oil can spout . When Mulder and Spencer question her the next morning , her kitchen microwave instructs her to kill them . When she grabs a knife and attacks Mulder , she is shot and killed by Spencer . 
 Scully performs an autopsy on McRoberts ' body and discovers signs of phobia including high levels of adrenaline and the same substance found on the elevator killer . She hypothesizes that the substance , when combined with other neurochemicals , produces an LSD @-@ like reaction . While Mulder and Scully build a case , Funsch becomes more psychotic , continuing to see violent messages on electronic gadgets . Blood is associated in some way with each incident ; a volunteer asks Ed to donate blood at a department store and seconds later he sees violent images , including a video of the 1993 Waco siege burning , flash across a sales display of TV sets , followed by a message to get a gun from the sporting goods department . 
 Late at night , while investigating an orchard , Mulder is sprayed by a crop @-@ dusting helicopter and ends up in the hospital . There , Mulder sees the message " Do It Now " on a TV and realizes that when people are exposed to the pesticide , which contains a chemical called <unk> designed to provoke fear in insects , they see these subliminal messages , and their phobias are exacerbated enough to cause them to kill . Eventually , after being confronted , the city councilman agrees to stop the spraying and blood test the community under the guise of a cholesterol study . Mulder and Scully , reading that Funsch has not been tested yet , arrive at his house to find it strewn with smashed electronic devices . Mulder deduces that blood is Ed 's phobia and that he has seen the subliminal messages , and an empty rifle case signals that Funsch is going to act on his paranoia . Funsch positions himself at the top of a clock tower overlooking a blood drive and begins shooting randomly . Mulder climbs up to Funsch and overpowers him ; Funsch is taken away on a stretcher . Mulder makes a call to Scully and sees the message " All done . Bye Bye " on his cell phone display . Scully calls out to Mulder but he is speechless . 
 = = Production = = 
 The genesis for " Blood " was Glen Morgan 's own <unk> , combined with the controversy over malathion spraying in Southern California and a note between writers Morgan and Wong that simply read " Postal Workers " . In addition , series creator Chris Carter had been wanting an episode of The X @-@ Files to feature a story revolving around digital readouts . Morgan and Wong decided to use the digital readout idea , crafting a script that turned " regular things , " like fax machines and cell phones , into something " scary . " The 1966 shooting massacre at the University of Texas was the inspiration for the story 's climax , which was only partially filmed at the University of British Columbia because firearms were not allowed on location at the actual university . A replica of its clock tower 's interior was used for several key scenes . This episode marks the first time that Darin Morgan , Glen 's brother , helped with a script of The X @-@ Files with a " story by " credit . Darin was asked to help flesh out the episode 's story . He would later contribute to the second season episode " Humbug " . 
 The episode marks the second appearance of The Lone Gunmen , a trio of conspiracy theorists consisting of John Fitzgerald Byers ( Bruce Harwood ) , Richard Langly ( Dean Haglund ) and Melvin Frohike ( Tom Braidwood ) . The characters first appeared in the first season episode " E.B.E. " to make Mulder appear more credible . Initially only intended to appear in that episode , they were brought back as recurring characters starting with " Blood " due to their popularity on the Internet . The episode also has a guest appearance by pornographic actress Ashlyn Gere . Gere plays Bonnie McRoberts , the woman driven to attack Mulder after seeing a subliminal message on her microwave . Glen Morgan joked that The X @-@ Files was so cutting edge that they used an adult film star who was still working in the industry — an allusion to an NYPD Blue episode that guest starred retired adult film actress Ginger Lynn . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Blood " premiered on the Fox network on September 30 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on September 11 , 1995 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 1 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 8 @.@ 7 million households . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a B + , considering that despite the " convoluted plot " the episode " pays off in white @-@ knuckle tension . " Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club labeled the episode as a " good " stand @-@ alone story . He described it as " a memorable episode , due in no small part to its humor " , praising the " simultaneously absurd and frightening " story with scenes that make the viewer " snicker even as you shudder " . In addition , Handlen praised William Sanderson 's performance , as well as the ending , calling it " the punchline [ ... ] of Mulder 's deepest fears , a group [ The Syndicate ] so secret that you never be sure they exist at all " . Starpulse named the episode the tenth best of the series , defining it as " very creepy " and what turned The X @-@ Files " from a mere <unk> to a show that offered real psychological thrills " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . The two wrote positively of the episode 's flourishes , noting " minute by minute , there is tons to enjoy . " However , Shearman and Pearson argue that the premise is " disjointed and not a little frustrating " due to the lack of overall coherence and narrative . 
 = 18th Battalion ( New Zealand ) = 
 The 18th Battalion was a formation of the New Zealand Military Forces which served , initially as an infantry battalion and then as an armoured regiment , during the Second World War as part of the 2nd New Zealand Division . 
 The 18th Battalion was formed in New Zealand in September 1939 and after a period of training , it embarked for the Middle East and then onto Greece in 1941 as part of the 2nd New Zealand Division . It participated in the Battle of Greece and later in the fighting on Crete . Evacuated from Crete , it then fought in the North African Campaign and suffered heavy losses during Operation Crusader . Brought back up to strength , the battalion participated in the breakout of the 2nd New Zealand Division from Minqar Qaim in June 1942 , where it had been encircled by the German 21st Panzer Division . The following month , the battalion fought in the First Battle of El Alamein . 
 In October 1943 , the battalion was converted to armour and re @-@ designated the 18th Armoured Regiment . To replace men lost at El Alamein , personnel were drawn from a tank brigade being formed in New Zealand . The regiment spent a year in Egypt training with Sherman tanks , before embarking for Italy in October 1943 to join up with the rest of the 2nd New Zealand Division . It participated in the Italian Campaign , fighting in actions at Orsogna and later at Cassino . The regiment finished the war in Trieste and remained there for several weeks until the large numbers of Yugoslav partisans also present in the city withdrew . Not required for service in the Pacific theatre of operations , the regiment was disestablished in late 1945 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and training = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , the New Zealand government authorised the formation of the 2nd New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) , for service at home and abroad . Following consultation with the British government , it was decided that the main New Zealand contribution to the war effort would be in the form of an infantry division , the 2nd New Zealand Division , under the command of Major General Bernard Freyberg . The new division would require nine battalions of infantry and consequently , several infantry battalions were formed from 1939 to 1940 with New Zealand volunteers . 
 The 18th Battalion was formed in September 1939 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel John Gray . It was the first of three infantry battalions designated to make up the first echelon of the 2nd New Zealand Division , destined for overseas service . Its personnel were all volunteers were drawn from the Northern Military District , which took in the upper half of the North Island of New Zealand . They were formed into four rifle companies , designated A to D and corresponding to the Auckland , Hauraki / Bay of Plenty / Rotorua , Northland and Waikato districts . A headquarters company included the specialist support troops ; signallers , anti @-@ aircraft and mortar platoons , pioneers and transport as well as administrative personnel . 
 A period of rudimentary training followed , firstly at <unk> Military Camp and then at <unk> , before it was confirmed that the battalion was on active service . It departed New Zealand on the Orient liner RMS Orion for the Middle East on 5 January 1940 as part of the 4th Infantry Brigade , 2nd Division New Zealand Division . Before it left , it paraded before the public at the Auckland Domain and was addressed by the commander of the Northern Military District , Lieutenant Colonel Norman Weir . 
 The Orion journeyed to its destination as part of a convoy of liners by way of Fremantle , Colombo , and Aden before it arrived at Tewfik , Egypt , where the battalion disembarked . After a train ride to Cairo , the battalion arrived at what would the main base in the Middle East for the 2NZEF , Maadi Camp , in mid @-@ February . At Maadi , the battalion undertook further training . Following Italy 's entry into the war in June , it moved to a newly established defensive position , the Baggush Box , to perform garrison duty . It remained there for the next several months , conducting regular patrols and working on the improvement of the defensive positions . During this time , the battalion suffered its first casualties of the war , although non @-@ fatal , as a result of Italian air raids . By January 1941 , the defensive work was completed and the battalion moved to Helwan Camp , near Cairo , for re @-@ equipping and more intensive and large scale training . 
 = = = Greece = = = 
 In early 1941 , the British Government anticipated an invasion of Greece by the Germans and decided to send troops to support the Greeks , who were already engaged against the Italians in Albania . The 2nd New Zealand Division was one of a number of Allied units dispatched to Greece in early March . The 18th Battalion was the first New Zealand unit to depart Egypt , and sailed for Greece on 7 March aboard the Royal Navy cruisers HMS Orion and Ajax . The 2nd New Zealand Division was tasked with the defence of the Aliakmon Line in northern Greece and was positioned on the northern side of Mount Olympus ; the 4th Brigade manned the left side of the New Zealand section of the line while the 6th Brigade took the right . The 18th Battalion , was the first complete unit in the line ; one company was positioned in Olympus Pass itself while the remainder started digging in the sector allocated to 4th Brigade . By 5 April , the battalion 's defensive work was completed . 
 On 6 April , the Germans invaded Greece and advanced so rapidly that their forces quickly threatened to outflank the New Zealand positions . On 9 April the 4th Infantry Brigade was withdrawn and began moving south to the Servia Pass . Here , 18th Battalion was positioned in the hills above the town of Servia and to the right of 19th Battalion , which was defending the pass itself . From 11 April , Stukas mounted air raids on the New Zealand positions before the Germans brought artillery to bear two days later as their ground forces approached . It was during an artillery barrage on 15 April that the battalion suffered its first fatality of the war . The same day , the 18th Battalion fended off initial probing attacks by elements of the 9th Panzer Division although the Germans did manage to occupy Servia . 
 Despite this , the battalions of 4th Brigade remained in good defensive positions . However , they were withdrawn two days later to the Thermopylae Line , a new defensive position 140 kilometres ( 87 mi ) to the south , due to pressure on their flanks . Walking out on foot under the cover of night and harassed by artillery fire , the withdrawal did not go smoothly . Having the furthest to travel , at one stage two companies of 18th Battalion got lost before making their way to the safety of the rear of Servia Pass and waiting transportation . Once clear of the pass , the battalion 's transport was subjected to several air raids before they finally made it to the Thermopylae Line , the next defensive position for the New Zealanders . 
 The Thermopylae Line was defended by the 2nd New Zealand Division and 6th Australian Division , with the 4th Brigade held in reserve while the 5th and 6th manned the front lines . However , on 22 April , the Allies decided to abandon Greece and the battalion moved out the same day with the rest of the 4th Brigade as part of an intended rearguard . Originally the battalion was to hold a gorge through which other units would pass for 24 hours but it ended up remaining there for three days . During the intervening period , the intended embarkation route for the battalion 's departure from Greece was cut off by the Germans and so the entire brigade made its way to Porto Rafti , east of Athens , where the battalion was one of the first units of the 2nd New Zealand Division to be shipped to the island of Crete . Total casualties during the campaign in Greece were 23 killed in action and 42 wounded . In addition , 117 men , mostly personnel recuperating in hospitals in Athens and unable to evade the Germans , were captured . 
 = = = Crete = = = 
 Situated along vital air and sea lanes of communication in the middle of the Mediterranean , Crete was of considerable strategic importance to both sides and , after the conclusion of the campaign in Greece , the Allies fully expected that the Germans would attempt an invasion . The 4th Brigade was stationed as a reserve force in the area around Galatas with the 18th Battalion near the newly established general hospital . When the airborne invasion began on 20 May , the battalion quickly dealt with a company of Fallschirmjäger ( paratroopers ) that landed near them . It carried out mopping up operations and patrolled the area for the next two days before assisting the 19th Battalion in an attack on Fallschirmjäger that had established a strong defensive position nearby . 
 Despite heavy casualties during the initial attack , the Germans were able to land reinforcements and the situation on the island quickly deteriorated for the Allies . The brigade had abandoned its initial positions and moved to a new location to the west of Galatas to eliminate the threat that it would become separated from the 5th Infantry Brigade . On 25 May , the 18th Battalion had to deal with a full @-@ scale attack by Fallschirmjäger . This caused heavy casualties and a large portion of one of the battalion 's company was captured . Despite reinforcements arriving from the 20th Battalion and the best efforts of Gray in rounding up stragglers , the Galatas position was breached and the township captured . Some battalion personnel , led by Gray , along with the bulk of the 23rd Battalion , participated in an attack that briefly took back the township but it later had to be abandoned again after further fighting . The battalion was then withdrawn to the east as the order to evacuate Crete was received , making its way towards Suda Bay , where Allied ships were taking troops off the beaches . Along the way , they were subjected to heavy air raids , one of which killed a company commander , Captain Jack Lyon , the Member of Parliament for the Waitemata electorate . 
 During the evacuation of the 4th Brigade , which took place from Sfakia on 30 – 31 May , the 18th Battalion formed a rearguard helping police and maintain order ; it was the last battalion of the brigade taken off . Casualties during the fighting on Crete were heavy for the 18th Battalion , with 105 men killed or missing and 110 more taken prisoner . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 Back in its former base in Egypt and with its ranks restored with 400 reinforcements that arrived in June , the battalion began intensive weapons training . In September it moved to Baggush where on occasion it worked alongside tanks in training exercises . In November 1941 , the battalion , now commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Peart as Gray had been hospitalised , participated in Operation Crusader as part of the British Eighth Army and was engaged in offensive operations towards the Sidi Azeiz area . 
 On the night of 25 November , along with the 20th Battalion , it was tasked with the night @-@ time capture of Belhamed , a hill adjacent to Sidi Rezegh . With two companies leading the battalion 's portion of the advance , the objective was captured with a bayonet charge . Peart was wounded during the attack but remained in command . The battalion held the hill for three days before it swapped its positions with the 20th Battalion before , on 30 November , the 15th Panzer Division surrounded and attacked Belhamed . While the 20th Battalion was effectively destroyed , the 18th Battalion managed to evacuate in time and reached the British 70th Division in Tobruk . Here it manned the lines , with Gray back in command , fending off German attacks , until 11 December when it was withdrawn to Baggush . 
 After a period near Cairo , in February 1942 , the 2nd New Zealand Division was dispatched to Syria to defend against a possible attack through Turkey on the Middle East oilfields by the Germans . Along with the rest of the 4th Brigade the 18th Battalion worked on defences to the north of Damascus before the whole division was recalled to Libya on 17 June following the attack on the Eighth Army 's Gazala Line by Panzer Army Africa . It was initially based at Mersa Matruh but after the fall of Tobruk to Rommel 's forces , the division was ordered on 25 June to establish defensive positions at Minqar Qaim . The 18th Battalion was temporarily detached from the rest of the 4th Brigade to act as the main infantry component of the divisional reserve . On 27 June , the division 's defensive positions at Minqar Qaim were encircled by the 21st Panzer Division . The battalion was one of the lead units in the subsequent breakout that night . 
 The battalion was withdrawn to the Alamein line after a brief period of recovery at the Kaponga Box . Now commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Ray Lynch due to Gray being promoted to brigadier and given command of the 4th Brigade , it served as security for the divisional headquarters from late June to early July as the entire division relocated several times during this period . On the evening of 14 July , the battalion , now back with its parent brigade , was part of the attack on Ruweisat Ridge , held by the enemy . Although an Italian strongpoint caused the battalion to scatter , in piecemeal fashion , it advanced to the western end of the ridge taking several prisoners on the way . A German counterattack in the afternoon of 15 July which overwhelmed the 19th and 20th Battalions also caused heavy losses amongst the 18th Battalion , including Lynch , but many men were able to return to the Allied lines . Following the effective destruction of the 19th and 20th Battalions , the 18th Battalion remained in the field attached to the 5th Brigade . It then supported an attack by the 6th Brigade on El Mreir . <unk> supported by armour , the attack proved a failure although the battalion escaped with relatively few casualties . It remained in the line throughout August and into September but , having been reduced to just 350 personnel , it was withdrawn to Maadi to rejoin the reconstituted 4th Brigade . 
 = = = Conversion to armour = = = 
 It had previously been decided to form an armoured brigade to provide tank support to the 2nd New Zealand Division and as a result , the 1st New Zealand Army Tank Brigade was formed . This brigade was still undergoing training in New Zealand in September when it was decided to convert the 4th Brigade to armour instead , thus creating the 4th Armoured Brigade . Personnel were transferred from the tank brigade in New Zealand to bring the 4th Brigade back up to strength . As one of the constituent units of the brigade , the 18th Battalion was officially re @-@ designated the 18th Armoured Regiment , with three squadrons of tanks , on 5 October 1942 . One squadron was to be equipped with Crusaders with the other two squadrons operating Shermans . The regiment would spend the next year in training under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Clive Pleasants , who had taken over command after the death of Lynch . By May 1943 , many personnel had been on active duty for well over three years . The majority of these men were returned to New Zealand on furlough . 
 With the close of the North African campaign in May 1943 , attention then turned to the European theatre of operations . Despite a preference amongst some sections of the New Zealand government for the 2nd New Zealand Division to be redeployed to the Pacific theatre of operations to fight against the Japanese , it was decided that the division would remain in Europe and continue its service with the Eighth Army . Accordingly , in October , the division was transferred to Italy . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 The 18th Armoured Regiment disembarked at Taranto on 22 October 1943 and gradually travelled north towards the Sangro River , which it duly crossed on 3 December . In the following weeks , the regiment supported the 5th and 6th Brigades in their attack on Orsogna , as part of the Moro River Campaign . Although the infantry made some gains , the German defences were too strong and the attack soon faded into a stalemate , with a number of back and forth actions as winter set in , which led to many of the regiment 's tanks becoming stuck in the sodden ground . Offensive operations around Orsogna ceased in late December and the New Zealanders withdrew from the area on 13 January 1944 . 
 Following its withdrawal from the area around Orsogna , the 2nd New Zealand Division was one of a number of divisions that were transferred from the Eighth Army to the Fifth Army , then engaged on the western side of the Apennines . This was part of an overall strategy to breach the Gustav Line and break an otherwise deadlocked Italian front . Together with the 4th Indian Division and supporting British and American artillery , the division formed the New Zealand Corps with Freyberg , now a lieutenant general , in command . The corps moved to Cassino , the defenders of which had resisted American forces for several weeks . 
 As at Orsogna , the 18th Armoured Regiment was to play a supporting role in the forthcoming Cassino attack , with the infantry of the 5th and 6th Brigades bearing the brunt of the battle . When the attack began on 15 March , the regiment was initially held as a reserve , ready to exploit any breakthrough by the infantry but this did not eventuate . The infantry struggled to make progress in the face of determined resistance . The regiment 's tanks were first used at Cassino as artillery support for two weeks , each squadron being rotated in three @-@ day stints to a position overlooking the town . Then in mid @-@ April , one squadron was detached to remain on the Cassino front while the other two squadrons were withdrawn for training . The regiment remained fragmented into May , for once training was completed , another squadron was detached and sent into Cassino itself to man tanks which had been effectively set up as pillboxes . 
 By the end of May , the regiment was reunited and at full strength . It supported the infantry brigades as the 2nd New Zealand Division advanced to Florence , duly entering the city in August . After this , the division was transferred to the I Canadian Corps , then on the Adriatic Coast , and advanced up to Rimini . On 19 and 20 October , the 4th Armoured Brigade was involved in its first and only action as a brigade in an attack towards the Savio River , with the 18th Armoured Regiment on the right flank . This was primarily a tank action , in contrast to previous battles in which the armour supported the infantry . The attack was a success and pushed the Germans across the Savio , although their progress had been slower than expected because of poor weather and muddy conditions . 
 The New Zealanders advanced to the Lamone River in anticipation of a crossing but instead supported the British 46th Division in its attack across the river on 3 December . During this operation , the tanks of the 18th Regiment fired 6 @,@ 200 shells in a single day . It then attacked towards the Senio River , supporting infantry from the 5th Brigade . The division was positioned along the Senio River for three months , over the worst of the winter period . The regiment spent most of this time behind the lines at Forlì or Faenza , or on short spells on the Senio frontlines . 
 Relieved by a Polish unit in March 1945 , the regiment returned to the front lines in early April after a period of rest . It made a series of advances against the retreating German rearguard and on 2 May , the 2nd New Zealand Division entered Trieste . While most of the German garrison quickly surrendered , it was necessary to deal with some diehard elements who refused to surrender to either the New Zealanders or the Yugoslav partisans also present in the city . The partisans were reluctant to allow Germans to surrender to the New Zealanders , and the regiment remained in Trieste for several weeks until the large numbers of Yugoslav partisans also present in the city withdrew . 
 Not required for service in the Pacific theatre of operations , the regiment was disestablished in December 1945 . During the war , the 18th Battalion and its successor , the 18th Armoured Regiment , lost nearly 320 officers and men either killed in action or who later died of their wounds . Of the exactly 350 personnel made prisoners of war , a further 21 men died while in captivity . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Seven members of the battalion , including three of its commanders , were awarded the Distinguished Service Order while another member was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire and a second was made a member of the same order . Nine officers were awarded the Military Cross while two others received the Greek Military Cross . Three soldiers received the Distinguished Conduct Medal and 26 others the Military Medal . Twenty @-@ one soldiers received awards of the Greek Silver and Bronze medals . 
 The 18th Battalion and its successor , the 18th Armoured Regiment , was awarded the following battle honours : 
 Mount Olympus , Servia Pass , Platamon Tunnel , Tempe Gorge , Elasson , Molos , Greece 1941 , Crete , Maleme , Galatas , Canea , 42nd Street , Withdrawal to Sphakia , Middle East 1941 – 44 , Tobruk 1941 , Sidi Rezegh 1941 , <unk> , Belhamed , Mersa Matruh , Minqar Qaim , Defence of Alamein Line , Ruweisat Ridge , El Mreir , Alam el Halfa , North Africa 1940 – 42 , The Sangro , Castel Frentano , Orsogna , Advance to Florence , San Michele , Paula Line , Celle , Pisciatello , The Senio , Santerno Crossing , Bologna , Idice Bridgehead , Italy 1943 – 45 . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 18th Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel J. R. Gray ( September 1939 – July 1941 ; August – November 1941 ; March – June 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel J. N. Peart ( July – August 1941 ; November 1941 – March 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel R. J. Lynch ( June – July 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel C. L. Pleasants ( July 1942 – December 1943 ; January – March 1944 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel J. B. Ferguson ( December 1943 – January 1944 ; July 1944 – January 1945 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel H. A. Robinson ( March – July 1944 ; March – December 1945 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel J. M. Elliott ( February – March 1945 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel H. H. Parata ( March – May 1945 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel A. S. <unk> ( June – December 1945 ) . 
 = Flight Unlimited II = 
 Flight Unlimited II is a 1997 flight simulator video game developed by Looking Glass Studios and published by Eidos Interactive . The player controls one of five planes in the airspace of the San Francisco Bay Area , which is shared with up to 600 artificially intelligent aircraft directed by real @-@ time air traffic control . The game eschews the aerobatics focus of its predecessor , Flight Unlimited , in favor of general civilian aviation . As such , new physics code and an engine were developed , the former because the programmer of Flight Unlimited 's computational fluid dynamics system , Seamus Blackley , had left the company . 
 The team sought to create an immersive world for the player and to compete with the Microsoft Flight Simulator series . Commercially , Flight Unlimited II performed well enough to recoup its development costs . Critics lauded the game 's graphics and simulated airspace , and several praised its physics . However , some considered the game to be inferior to Microsoft Flight Simulator ' 98 . Following the completion of Flight Unlimited II , its team split up to develop Flight Unlimited III ( 1999 ) and Flight Combat ( later Jane 's Attack Squadron ) simultaneously . Both projects were troubled , and they contributed to the closure of Looking Glass in May 2000 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Flight Unlimited II is a flight simulator video game : its gameplay is a simulation of piloting real @-@ world planes . Players may control the Piper PA @-@ <unk> @-@ 200 , de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 2 Beaver , Beechcraft Baron 58 , North American P @-@ 51D Mustang or Cessna 172 . The interactive cockpit of each plane is based on its real @-@ world counterpart , and it contains simulated flight instruments such as an airspeed indicator , a heading indicator and a VOR indicator , among others . The player begins by engaging in a Quick Flight or by using the fixed @-@ base operator ( FBO ) interface . In a Quick Flight , the player selects a plane and the flying conditions before taking off ; the FBO interface features additional options , such as lessons , flight plans and adventures . The game 's six lessons detail such maneuvers as takeoffs and taxiing . Adventures are pre @-@ built missions , with objectives such as landing on an aircraft carrier , helping a prisoner to escape from Alcatraz Island or dropping turkeys into Candlestick Park . There are 25 adventures in total . 
 The game is set in a reproduction of 11 @,@ 000 square miles of the San Francisco Bay Area . The player may land at or takeoff from the area 's 46 airports . Weather conditions such as rain , wind and fog are simulated . Players share the game 's airspace with up to 600 artificially intelligent ( AI ) planes , which fly and respond to the player in real @-@ time . Real @-@ time air traffic control ( ATC ) directs the player and the AI planes to prevent collisions . The player interacts with the ATC and with other planes by constructing radio messages with a menu . Three cockpit views are available : IFR ( instrument flight rules ) , which allows the player to monitor and interact with all flight instruments ; VFR ( visual flight rules ) , which features a larger windshield area but fewer flight instruments ; and Virtual Cockpit View , which allows free look but features no interactive flight instruments . External camera angles are also available , and the player may ride as a passenger in any AI plane . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following the completion of Flight Unlimited in 1995 , project leader Seamus Blackley planned to use that game 's computational fluid dynamics ( CFDs ) code to create a combat flight simulator called Flight Combat . However , a new manager at Looking Glass Studios demanded that Blackley instead design a direct sequel to Flight Unlimited . Blackley refused and was fired , leaving the company in late 1995 . Constantine Hantzopoulos became the lead designer and project leader of the fourteen @-@ member Flight Unlimited II team . The team eschewed the aerobatics focus of their previous game in favor of general civilian aviation , in order to compete with the Microsoft Flight Simulator series . Looking Glass announced the game on December 18 , 1996 . It was slated to include 6 planes , 45 airports and 8 @,@ 500 square miles of terrain from the San Francisco Bay Area . The Bay Area was chosen because of its varied landscape and numerous airports . In January 1997 , Eidos Interactive partnered with Looking Glass to provide the game 's marketing and distribution . 
 The team opted not to reuse the technology of Flight Unlimited . Hantzopoulos learned from Blackley that it was necessary to recreate the " visceral feel " of real flight , but Blackley 's CFDs system was " all black box spaghetti code " that the team could not understand . Programmer Jim Berry , who had previously worked on simulators such as Falcon 4 @.@ 0 , wrote new physics code based on force vector calculations to replace the CFDs system . To gather data for the new physics , Hantzopoulos and Berry flew in real @-@ world planes with designer Ed <unk> and aerobatic pilot Michael Goulian . James Fleming coded Flight Unlimited II 's new terrain renderer , <unk> . Flight Unlimited uses distance fog to limit visible terrain , but this causes pop @-@ in issues that the team sought to avoid in the sequel . Instead of removing textures that exceed the draw distance , the new engine uses mipmapping to lower the polygon count of distant terrain . This increases the viewable area and allowed the team to use fog as an atmospheric effect , rather than as a " crutch " . 
 The team 's goal was to create the " best , most realistic civilian flight simulator " , which would provide an immersive world for the player . Radio communications between <unk> , AI planes and the player occur in real @-@ time : a " sophisticated audio splicing system " gathers pre @-@ recorded voice fragments into contextually appropriate sentences . The team recorded the engine noise of each of the game 's planes , and they designed cockpits more interactive than those in Flight Unlimited . Roughly 300 times more terrain area was included in Flight Unlimited II than in its predecessor . To generate the terrain , the team combined digital elevation maps with satellite imagery rendered at four square meters per pixel . The images were taken at 9 : 30 am , because the long shadows provided an illusion of depth . 3D models were used for all buildings taller than nine stories . Because of the terrain detail , the game was the first to allow players to follow VFR . Initially , the team planned to include only VFR flight , but they later enabled IFR to " ease navigation " . The team hoped to add more terrain and planes and a multiplayer feature after the game 's release . 
 The game was shown at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in June 1997 , alongside The Dark Project . At the show , the team detailed early plans to include missions . The game was well received , and Combatsim praised it as " the next level in civilian flight sims " . Denny Atkin of Computer Gaming World liked the game , but he questioned Looking Glass 's decision to compete in the civilian rather than the combat flight simulator market . That August , Looking Glass merged with <unk> , a technology company that hoped to branch into the video game industry . The merger came amid financial difficulties ; a large portion of the Looking Glass staff was laid off during the middle of 1997 . Looking Glass 's Tim Stellmach and Paul Neurath described the merger as amicable , and the former noted that " through the whole deal everyone was really psyched about both The Dark Project and Flight Unlimited II " . In September , Eidos took over publishing duties on Flight Unlimited II , as a result of Looking Glass 's new business model with <unk> . The game was released on December 12 , 1997 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Flight Unlimited II was placed in direct competition with the Microsoft Flight Simulator series and Sierra Entertainment 's Pro Pilot , and it performed well enough to recoup its development costs . PC Gamer US 's Stephen Poole commented that the limited environments of Flight Unlimited did not create a believable flight experience , but that the " exquisite terrain , impressive flight @-@ physics models , and meticulous attention to the details and procedures of civilian aviation " in Flight Unlimited II created " the closest experience to actual flight " available . He praised the game 's ATC system , which he considered to be " so real that it 's almost scary " . Poole summarized , " Flight Unlimited II is so impressive that to even whine about little details shows a shortsightedness that 's all too common amongst us gamers . " 
 Denny Atkin of Computer Gaming World believed the game to be the first simulator to recreate " the real feeling of civilian flying " , particularly because of its graphics and ATC system . He considered its flight physics to be " much better than Pro Pilot , although not up to the level of Flight Simulator 98 " . He finished by calling Flight Unlimited II " a must @-@ have for any general @-@ aviation enthusiast . " John Nolan of Computer Games Magazine found that the new flight physics were " more than adequate for the task at hand " , despite certain " questionable areas " . He praised the graphics and ATC , but noted AI glitches with the latter . He summarized , " Overall , this simulation is somewhat above average " . Dean Evans of PC Gamer UK called it " the best civilian flight sim we 've ever seen " , which makes " Flight Simulator look like a sack of old spam " . He found the game to be " immensely realistic " and praised its terrain and simulated airspace . 
 PC Zone 's Paul Presley believed the game to be inferior to combat flight simulators and stated that it " isn 't nearly as deep or varied as Microsoft 's Flight Simulator ' 98 " . He found the graphics to be lackluster and the terrain to be " a bit empty " , which he believed damaged the game 's atmosphere . However , he noted that Flight Unlimited II 's " underlying playability " made it " worthwhile " and " addictive " . Presley summarized , " [ A ] s a time @-@ waster , a novelty item or an office toy , it does the job and it does it well . " Jonathan Gordon of The Independent wrote , " The original Flight Unlimited promised much but delivered relatively little , and it 's a similar story with this sequel . " He noted that the graphics , while good from a distance , became " disappointingly bland " up close ; and he found the game to be limited compared to Microsoft Flight Simulator ' 98 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In April 1998 , Looking Glass released a patch for Flight Unlimited II that included six new adventures , a new plane ( the Fokker Dr.I ) and an " Adventure Builder Kit " , which allowed players to construct their own adventures and to share them online . The patch also added moving objects on the ground . After completing Flight Unlimited II , certain members of the game 's team wanted to develop Flight Unlimited III , while others wanted to create Flight Combat . Looking Glass split the team in two and expanded both with new hires , so that the games could be developed simultaneously . Flight Unlimited III lead designer Peter James later wrote that his project 's development was troubled , in part because of a lack of interest from company management . It became one of Looking Glass 's biggest commercial failures . Flight Combat ( renamed Jane 's Attack Squadron ) struggled through a long and costly development cycle . Both projects contributed to Looking Glass 's closure in May 2000 . Mad Doc Software later completed Jane 's Attack Squadron , and it was published by Xicat Interactive in March 2002 . 
 = Millennium ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Millennium " is the fourth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on November 28 , 1999 . It was written by Vince Gilligan and Frank Spotnitz and directed by Thomas J. Wright . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Millennium " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 1 , and was watched by 15 @.@ 09 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics ; some felt that the episode 's plot was creepy and engaging , while others felt that it was not a decent conclusion for the Millennium television series . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , an associate of the Millennium Group — a secret society which believes the apocalypse will happen on the new year of 2000 — resurrects the dead for use in bringing about the apocalypse . As a result , Mulder and Scully have to ask the help of criminal profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a man who has former experience with the shadowy group , for assistance . 
 The episode serves as a crossover with the series Millennium , also developed by the creator of The X @-@ Files Chris Carter , and was meant to bring closure to the recently cancelled series . The writers had a difficult time coming up with a story that would successfully allow Frank Black and Mulder and Scully to cross paths . Lance Henriksen later expressed disappointment with the episode . The idea to use zombies had originally been slated to appear in an aborted project X @-@ Files remake of George A. Romero 's cult 1968 zombie film Night of the Living Dead . In addition , the episode is notable because it features the first romantic kiss between Mulder and Scully , described as " inevitable " by one critic . Thematically , the episode has been analyzed for its use of Biblical quotes from the Gospel of John and the Book of Revelation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , the protagonist of the series Millennium , is a freelance forensic profiler and former FBI agent who possesses the unique ability to see the world through the eyes of serial killers and murderers . For the first two seasons of the show , Black worked for a mysterious consulting firm known as the Millennium Group . Black lived in Seattle with his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) and daughter Jordan ( Brittany Tiplady ) . During the first season , Black and the Group largely focused on various serial killers and other murderers . However , during the second and third seasons , Black began coming into conflict with forces within the Millennium group that appeared to be demonic in nature . It appeared that the Group was focused on the fulfillment of apocalyptic biblical prophecy at the start of the new millennium . During the third season , Frank returned to Washington , D.C. , to work with the FBI following the death of his wife at the hands of the Group . In the third season finale " Goodbye to All That " , Black realized that the Group was preparing to come after him , and took Jordan from school as they fled Washington . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 In Tallahassee , Florida , on December 21 , 1999 , a memorial service is held for a former FBI agent named Raymond Crouch . His widow is approached by a mysterious man , Mark Johnson ( Holmes Osborne ) , who claims to have worked with her husband . After the other mourners have left , Johnson returns to the funeral parlor , dons the corpse 's clothes , and places a cell phone in the coffin . One week later , Johnson is monitoring Crouch 's grave when his phone rings ; he walks towards the grave with a shovel . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are called in to examine Crouch 's empty grave . They notice damage done to the interior of the casket ; Scully theorizes that the scene was staged . A briefing is held by Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , who notes that Crouch is one of four former FBI agents whose graves have been exhumed ; all four men had committed suicide . Because of the presence of goat 's blood encircling the grave , Mulder states that the crime was an act of necromancy . After the briefing , Skinner takes the agents aside and asks them to investigate Crouch 's possible ties to the Millennium Group , which is now dissolved . 
 Mulder and Scully go to a mental institution in Woodbridge , Virginia , to visit Frank Black . Black is initially reluctant to help the agents , as he believes that any further involvement with or even activity regarding the Millennium Group may hinder his custody battle for his daughter , Jordan . When Black finally agrees to assist , he explains that the four former members of the Millennium Group believe they can bring about the end of the world by killing themselves before the dawn of the millennium , acting as the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse . Meanwhile , Johnson is changing a tire on his truck when a deputy comes upon him . Discovering Crouch 's body in the back , the deputy attempts to arrest Johnson , but is attacked and killed by a suddenly reanimated Crouch . 
 Acting on information from Black , Mulder concentrates on trying to find Johnson , when Scully is attacked in the morgue by the dead deputy ; Johnson saves her by shooting the deputy , before disappearing . The two agents put all their effort in to finding Johnson before it is too late . Mulder breaks into Johnson 's house but is locked by Johnson in his basement , where he is attacked by the four corpses of the FBI agents ; he manages to shoot and kill one of them . Frank shows up ; after tying up Johnson , Frank shoots two of the zombies in the head . As his gun runs out of bullets and death seems imminent for Mulder and Frank , Scully arrives and shoots the final zombie . 
 Frank returns to the hospital , arranging to have himself discharged . Scully informs Frank that he has a visitor and brings in Jordan . Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve is on television ; Frank and Jordan leave just before the countdown begins . As the clock strikes zero and the crowd begins to sing " Auld Lang Syne " on screen , Mulder and Scully kiss to ring in the new year . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 " Millennium " serves as a crossover with the series Millennium , also created by Chris Carter . Although Millennium , which debuted in 1996 on Fox , had enjoyed critical acclaim , it suffered from low ratings and was cancelled after its third season . Unfortunately , the final episode of Millennium had been filmed before the cancellation notice , resulting in the series concluding on a cliffhanger . The episode features the last appearances of Frank Black and Jordan Black , and for this reason , is often cited as a way to bring closure to the Millennium series and its story arc . Incidentally , this episode is actually the second crossover between The X @-@ Files and Millennium ; the previous crossover involved a minor character — author Jose Chung — from " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " . Chung appeared and was killed in the Millennium episode " Jose Chung 's Doomsday Defense " . 
 The idea to use zombies for " Millennium " arose from a separate aborted project . Reportedly , Stephen King , who had co @-@ penned season five 's " Chinga " , wished to write an episode based on George A. Romero 's cult 1968 zombie film Night of the Living Dead . In addition , Romero was slated to direct the episode . According to " Millennium " co @-@ writer and executive producer Frank Spotnitz , the staff of The X @-@ Files met with both King and Romero and the two showed an interest in producing the episode . Initially , the episode was slated for the seventh season , but it never came to fruition . Zombies as a plot device were then later relegated to what would become " Millennium " . However , Mulder 's line , " Shoot them in the head , it seems to stop them " , mirrors a very similar line lifted from Night of the Living Dead : " Shoot them in the head , that 's a sure way to kill them . " 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 Talk of doing a crossover with Millennium had been going on even when both shows were still on the air . After Millennium was cancelled , however , The X @-@ Files staff realized that a crossover made sense . Despite this , writing the story proved difficult . The writers of the episode did not know whether to write an episode that dealt solely with wrapping @-@ up Millennium or if they should feature elements of Millennium intermixed within an X @-@ Files investigation . The writers eventually went with the latter . Vince Gilligan , the writer of the episode , explained that from the planning stages of the episode , the staff 's intentions were not to focus solely on a wrap @-@ up for Millennium , but rather to answer the question of " what would happen if Frank Black came into Mulder and Scully 's world ? " Gilligan also maintains that the episode was not solely written to bring closure to the Millennium arc , but also as a way to finally write an episode of The X @-@ Files about zombies . He explained : " It wasn 't about the plot as much as getting [ Mulder and Black ] down in the basement of this creepy old house with these zombies climbing up out of the ground , and having to [ shoot them ] in the head . " According to Gilligan , another part of the inspiration for the episode was the fear surrounding the perceived Year 2000 problem . This was an issue for both digital and non @-@ digital documentation and data storage situations which resulted from the practice of abbreviating a four @-@ digit year to two digits . However , many people believed that it would signal a disaster or potentially the end of the world . Gilligan later joked that he was " proud to say I never bought into any of that Y2K BS for a minute ! " 
 For these reasons , Lance Henriksen , who portrayed Frank Black , was unhappy with the finished product . He believed that the episode was not a sufficient enough ending for the Millennium story . After the cancellation of Millennium , Carter called up Henriksen and asked if he would be interested in appearing in an episode of The X @-@ Files that would wrap up the show 's arc . Henriksen was excited about the episode , but when he received the script it was about zombies , much to his dismay . He noted that the episode 's story was " a reasonable X @-@ File but it 's not Millennium . " Spotnitz later admitted that the episode " was not completely successful , I suppose , but still seems worth it for having brought back Lance Henriksen . " 
 The episode is notable for featuring the first actual kiss between Fox Mulder and Dana Scully . The series had featured other brushes with kisses between the two leads : in the fourth season episode " Small Potatoes " , a shapeshifter , disguised as Mulder , nearly kissed Scully ; in the 1998 film , the two 's " lips brushed slightly before Scully got stung by a virus @-@ carrying bee " ; and in the sixth season entry " Triangle " , Mulder kissed a Scully @-@ lookalike from the 1930s in a reverie of his . John Shiban developed the idea for a Mulder – Scully kiss , which was described by series creator Chris Carter as a " present for the fans . " Shiban noted that the episode 's kiss felt like " the logical culmination of their relationship . They had been heading toward the kiss for years " . Gillian Anderson later explained that , " David [ Duchovny ] and I knew the kiss was coming . [ ... ] I felt the editors of that episode milked it in a very effective way . " In order to create the atmosphere of the scene , specialized camera angles were used and everything was slowed down to make the scene last longer . The Millennium Ball scene was digitally created on a computer because the episode was filmed in October , two months before the event was scheduled to take place . Special effects producer Bill Millar was tasked with digitally adding the number " 2000 " into archival footage of Dick Clark 's 1999 New Years Eve show . Dick Clark was later hired to come in and create a voice @-@ over bit announcing the year 2000 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The episode makes prominent use of John 11 : 25 – 26 from the Christian Bible , which reads " Who soever liveth and believeth in me shall never die " . These were the words that were believed to have been said by Jesus when he raised Lazarus of Bethany from the dead ; biblical scholars have noted that the verse was also intended as a foreshadow of his resurrection . For this reason , the verse is used in the episode to represent a physical resurrection from the dead . However , Amy Donaldson , in her book We Want to Believe , notes that the verse is used for the wrong reasons in " Millennium " ; the necromancer is able to successfully raise the dead by reciting the line , but only their bodies , resulting in mindless zombies . Later , the verse reappears in the eight season entry " Deadalive " during Mulder 's funeral . In this instance , the verse is used to symbolize its true intentions , and Mulder is returned from the dead , both in mind and body . 
 The episode also deals with the Book of Revelation , particularly verse 1 : 18 , " I am he that liveth , and was dead ; and behold , I am alive for evermore , Amen ; and have the keys to Hell and of death " . The Millennium Group believes that the four chosen members are the prophesied Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse ; although the group believes that fate is predetermined , they believe they can help by " making it happen themselves " . Thus , they commit suicide in order to be resurrected as the Four Horsemen . Donaldson argues that Johnson and the Millennium Group have taken Jesus ' promise of eternal life and resurrection too literally , resulting in " a recreated cycle in this life rather than escape into the next " . This is further proved when the four Millennium Group members return as zombies ; they have achieved life after death , but only physically — not spiritually — by " abusing Jesus 's words to take their fate into their own hands " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Millennium " first aired in the United States on November 28 , 1999 on Fox . The night the episode aired , FX showed a nine @-@ hour Millennium marathon , featuring episodes that were closely related to and led up to the crossover . The marathon was hosted by Lance Henriksen leading up to the premiere . The episode was watched by 15 @.@ 09 million viewers in the United States ; it earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 1 , with a 13 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on April 9 , 2000 and received 870 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the sixth most @-@ watched episode of the week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Millennium " received mixed reviews from critics . Ted Cox of the Daily Herald called the entry " creepy " and " visually captivating " , particularly praising the installment 's " use of light and dark symbolism " . Ultimately , he noted that " it 's good to once again see Mulder and Scully temporarily set free from the show 's overarching conspiracy . " Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that " there were a lot of big , big things going on in this ep [ sic ] , starting with Millennium 's ace profiler Frank Black [ ... ] reluctantly helping Mulder and Scully solve the apparent suicides of four FBI agents . " Rosell ultimately concluded that the reason the episode was a success was due to Mulder and Scully 's kiss , a moment he called " inevitable " although he did note that " many think [ it ] really signaled the beginning of the end . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files gave the episode a positive review and called it " highly entertaining " and " cause for celebration " . He noted that , while he had never seen an episode of Millennium , the series mythology and story @-@ arcs " integrated seamlessly into this episode " in a way that non @-@ Millennium fans could still enjoy it . John Drake of Xposé considered the episode " excellent " and rated it 5 stars out of 5 . Drake commended Lance Henriksen 's performance , saying that " not only provides continuity with Millennium , but adds a new dimension as Frank tries to leave the wreckage of his professional life behind " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " . He called the entry " tired " and wrote that it was " both too ambitious and not epic enough " to bring closure to Millennium . Furthermore , he felt that the story 's basic plot was too confusing and almost laughable . Despite this , he enjoyed Johnson 's role as the villain , calling him " interesting " , and he wrote that the scene with Mulder and Black in the cellar was " kind of cool " because of the " creepy zombie sequences " . 
 Matt Hurwitz and Chris Knowles referred to the episode as " controversial " in their 2008 book , The Complete X @-@ Files . Kenneth Silber from Space.com was critical of the episode , writing that " this episode vividly demonstrates that what Carl Sagan once called ' the burden of skepticism ' is no longer being shouldered by anyone in the series . Why else would Mulder 's assertion that a necromancer has successfully raised the dead provoke such a languid response in a room full of FBI agents ? " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , noting that the episode 's premise felt , " stylistically wrong for Millennium . " Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson argued the episode was " a terrible X @-@ File " because , instead of featuring Mulder and Scully solving a mystery , the plot revolved around the two saving the world from Armageddon , which caused " the thin credibility upon which hangs the series [ to snap ] . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris noted that , despite the teaser and first act being " promising enough " , the episode " slides downhill rapidly with a storyline that crosses the border into ludicrous . " 
 The kiss between Mulder and Scully caused a furor of opinions . The Complete X @-@ Files noted that many fans were " ecstatic " about Mulder and Scully 's " long @-@ awaited " kiss . David <unk> from DVD Talk called the episode " shocking " because of Mulder and Scully 's kiss , asking , " why they didn 't lock lips sooner " ? Paula Vitaris noted that the kiss " seems stuck on to the episode by a tack in its complete irrelevance to the storyline or Mulder and Scully in general . " Allan Johnson from the Chicago Tribune noted that " in a way , it 's too bad Sunday 's episode of Fox 's The X @-@ Files is getting more attention for what happens near the end than it does for its plot . " Kessenich praised the way the show worked in Mulder and Scully 's kiss , noting that its lack of a " steamy , rip your clothes off " atmosphere made the sequence work " so well " . Handlen wrote that the scene , coupled with Black getting his daughter back , was " the only scene which comes close to justifying the episode ’ s existence " . Furthermore , he enjoyed the ambiguous nature of the kiss , noting that it could be " just a one time thing , or maybe it ’ s the start of something , or maybe it ’ s just a continuation of something that ’ s been going on for a long time now , right under our noses . " 
 = Route 286 ( Delaware – Maryland ) = 
 Delaware Route 286 ( DE 286 ) and Maryland Route 286 ( MD 286 ) is a 3 @.@ 82 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 15 km ) , two @-@ lane roadway in New Castle County , Delaware , and Cecil County , Maryland . The route begins as MD 286 at George Street , which is one of the segments of unsigned MD 537C , and heads east within Chesapeake City to the Delaware state line . Here , the road becomes DE 286 and continues east to DE 15 near Summit Bridge . The road roughly parallels the south side of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal through and passes through development in Chesapeake City and rural areas . 
 It is called 2nd Street in Chesapeake City , Bethel Road between Chesapeake City and the Delaware border , and Bethel Church Road within Delaware . MD 286 was constructed around 1930 . The roadway in Delaware was paved in the 1930s . MD 286 originally served the lost community of Bethel near the state line , but was rerouted to the Delaware state line in the early 1960s due to expansion of the canal . DE 286 was designated in the 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 286 runs between MD 537C in Chesapeake City and the Delaware border along 2nd Street through Chesapeake City and Bethel Road east of Chesapeake City . MD 286 has an annual average daily traffic count ( AADT ) of 1 @,@ 380 vehicles . DE 286 runs from the Maryland border east to DE 15 along Bethel Church Road . DE 286 has an AADT of 3 @,@ 519 vehicles . Neither route is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = = Maryland = = = 
 MD 286 begins at an intersection with George Street ( unsigned MD 537C ) on the south side of Chesapeake City . The state highway heads east as two @-@ lane 2nd Street through the South Chesapeake City Historic District . At Bohemia Avenue , MD 286 becomes Bethel Road and curves around the Back Creek Mooring Basin . After crossing Back Creek , the state highway makes a right @-@ angle turn at the entrance to the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal Museum . MD 286 leaves the town limits of Chesapeake City and passes through a forested area along the south boundary of the Canal Wildlife Management Area . Shortly after the intersection with Bethel Cemetery Road , the old alignment of MD 286 , the state highway reaches its eastern terminus at the Delaware state line . 
 = = = Delaware = = = 
 DE 286 begins at the Maryland border and continues east on two @-@ lane , undivided Bethel Church Road through farmland . A short distance later , the road runs between residential developments . The road then passes between homes to the north and rural areas to the south before becoming lined with farms on both sides . DE 286 reaches its eastern terminus at DE 15 , which heads south on Choptank Road and east on Bethel Church Road , at a roundabout . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 286 originally connected Chesapeake City with Bethel , a small community on the south side of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal just west of the state line . The state highway was paved from George Street , which is the original alignment of U.S. Route 213 ( US 213 , now MD 213 ) , east along Bethel Road and then north along what is now Bethel Cemetery Road in 1930 . MD 286 was disconnected from US 213 when the Chesapeake City Bridge was completed in 1948 and George Street was designated MD 537C . In 1954 , the United States Congress approved for the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal to be widened to 450 feet ( 140 m ) and the depth increased to 35 feet ( 11 m ) . The canal was expanded as it was not big enough to accommodate large ships and there were frequent collisions between ships and bridges . The community of Bethel was evacuated shortly before the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal was expanded in the 1960s . Most of the buildings in the community , including the church , were demolished . As a result of the canal expansion , MD 286 was removed from Bethel Cemetery Road and extended east to the state line in 1961 . Bethel Cemetery Road presently leads to a dead end at the canal where Bethel once existed . 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 286 existed as an unimproved county road . The road in Delaware was paved by 1936 and served as part of the route between Summit Bridge and Chesapeake City . Bethel Church Road from the state line east to DE 15 was designated DE 286 around 1994 , extending the number from MD 286 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 1927 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1927 FA Cup Final was an association football match between Cardiff City and Arsenal on 23 April 1927 at the original Wembley Stadium ( then called Empire Stadium ) . The showpiece match of English football 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( better known as the FA Cup ) , it was the first such final to be broadcast on the radio . The victory by Cardiff marked the only occasion in the history of the tournament that the trophy had been won by a team outside England ; the Cup had previously been referred to in the press as the " English Cup " . 
 Each team had progressed through five rounds to reach the final , having each entered in the third round . Both teams required a single replay in different rounds to progress , but otherwise won each of their games . In the fifth round , Cardiff knocked the reigning champions , Bolton Wanderers out of the cup . Both teams had a mixture of home and away games on their route to the final , but Arsenal were not required to play outside of London after the initial fourth round match . By the quarter @-@ finals , the two teams were the only Football League Division One teams left in the competition . 
 Arsenal had injury problems with Horace Cope ruled out . Additional trains were put on to get Cardiff 's fans to Wembley , and police reinforcements to keep fans at bay who had been sold fake tickets . A concert was held prior to the game , which included the first rendition of Abide with Me , which has since become a cup final tradition . It was the first FA Cup Final broadcast on the radio , which coined the phrase " back to square one " . The match was watched by 91 @,@ 206 in the stadium , and a further 15 @,@ 000 fans listened in Cardiff 's Cathays Park to the radio broadcast . 
 Both teams had opportunities to score , but the only goal of the game was credited to Hughie Ferguson after the ball slipped out of the hands of goalkeeper Dan Lewis , and he knocked the ball into the net with his elbow . Afterwards , he blamed his new wool jersey , saying that it was greasy . This resulted in the Arsenal tradition of washing goalkeeper jerseys before every match . Following the match , the press called it the " Singing Final " and highlighted that the FA Cup had gone to Wales for the first time . In the following years , Cardiff suffered a decline in their fortunes and didn 't reach the FA Cup final again until 2008 . Arsenal won the trophy in 1930 and went on to become the most successful team in the history of the tournament . 
 = = Route to the Final = = 
 = = = Cardiff City = = = 
 Cardiff City began their campaign for the 1926 – 27 FA Cup with a home game at Ninian Park in front of around 30 @,@ 000 fans against Aston Villa . After a goalless first half , Cardiff scored twice via a header by Len Davies and a shot by Ernie Curtis . Aston Villa attempted to save the match , but were unable to score until goalkeeper Tom Farquharson scored an own goal after turning in a shot by Villa forward Arthur Dorrell . In the fourth round , Cardiff played Darlington away . Newspaper reports indicated that they were the better team , but had it not been for the success of Darlington 's defence then they would have won by greater than the two goal margin they achieved . Goals came from George McLachlan and Hughie Ferguson . 
 In the fifth round , Cardiff were drawn away against Bolton Wanderers , the reigning FA Cup champions . In front of a crowd of 49 @,@ 465 in Bolton , Cardiff won by two goals to nil , with further goals from Ferguson and Davies . Following this round , alongside Arsenal , they were one of only two teams from the Football League First Division who remained in the competition . After an initial goalless draw in the following round against Chelsea , Cardiff played them once again at Ninian Park in the replay . Sam Irving put the Welsh team ahead after nine minutes , before Davies made it two on 21 minutes . Chelsea received a penalty , but the shot by Andrew Wilson was saved by Farquharson . Albert Thain scored for Chelsea a minute before half time . Bob Turnbull equalised for Chelsea , four minutes into the second half . A further penalty was given , this time to Cardiff after Harry Wilding handled the ball . This time , Ferguson scored , putting Cardiff ahead once more and winning them the match . 
 In the semi @-@ finals Cardiff were drawn against Reading ; the match was played at Molineux Stadium . Reading had reached the semi @-@ final for the first time in their history . Additional trains were put on to bring Cardiff fans to Wolverhampton for the match , and there was an expectation that the game would set a new capacity record for the ground . Heavy rain had fallen before the match , resulting in a soft pitch . Reading appeared the stronger of the two teams at the start , but at 25 minutes Bert Eggo failed to clear the ball from the Reading penalty area and Ferguson pounced , scoring for Cardiff . This changed the match , which from then on was dominated by the Welsh . A further goal followed in the 35th minute from Harry Wake , sending Cardiff into half time two goals ahead . Reading pressed on initially during the second half , but Cardiff gradually regained domination of play , and Ferguson scored his second of the game in the 70th minute . Cardiff 's fans began to celebrate early , believing that Reading could not come back from three goals down , which was the final result of the game . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Arsenal were drawn away in the third round , against Sheffield United at Bramall Lane . Both teams scored rapidly , with three goals scored in the space of six minutes . The first as the result of a scramble which ended with Jimmy Brain heading the ball into the net for Arsenal . United quickly responded , equalising from a header by Harry Johnson . But Arsenal went ahead once more following a goal by Charlie Buchan . David Mercer equalised once more for Sheffield after 40 minutes , to keep the scores level going into half @-@ time . Joe Hulme scored the final goal of the match , and the winner for Arsenal , in the 60th minute . 
 Arsenal were nearly eliminated from the competition in the following round when they played Port Vale . After eight minutes , Tom Parker scored an own goal , putting Port Vale ahead . Buchan equalised for Arsenal early in the second half , but then Port Vale went ahead once more with a goal by Wilf Kirkham , as a rebounded shot after Dan Lewis saved the initial penalty . Arsenal chased a further equaliser , which came four minutes from time by Brain . 
 There were far less goals scored in the replay at Arsenal Stadium . After a snow flurry , the ground was left muddy and the play was mostly limited to long balls . Brain hit the post in the first half , with was then followed by the only goal of the game came shortly afterwards following a run by Buchan into the Port Vale box . From here on , Arsenal did not have to leave London at all in the competition . In the following round , they defeated Liverpool by two goals to nil , the same scoreline seen in the league earlier in the season . This was Liverpool 's first defeat of the year . Both the goals came as a result of indirect free kicks in rapid succession . First a header by Brain , then another by Buchan which the goalkeeper could only clear after it had crossed the line . 
 In the quarter final against Wolverhampton Wanderers , Arsenal initially went down by a goal but an equaliser was gained after a further 15 minutes by Billy Blyth . Both teams had good attacks on goal throughout the rest of the game , but the only further goal came following a header by Joe Hulme for Arsenal after a run and a cross from Jack Butler . The draw for the semi @-@ final saw Arsenal play Southampton at Stamford Bridge . The muddy state of the pitch hampered the normal pace of the play shown by Arsenal , but both Buchan and Hulme scored for the gunners to Southampton 's single response by Bill Rawlings . Southampton were denied two penalty appeals . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Cardiff City had previously reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup twice , and two years earlier in 1925 , they were defeated finalists . The 1927 final was the first for Arsenal , so as a result whoever won the match would take the trophy for the first time . Arsenal manager Herbert Chapman held a press conference prior to the final on 21 April , where he announced that Horace Cope was injured and would be unable to play at left back . He doubted whether Syd Hoar or Alf Baker would be available as both of those were still recovering , and so he was leaving the selections for both the right half and outside left positions open should they become fit before the game . He saw Bill Seddon and Sam Haden as the alternatives should his first choice players not recover . When asked about who would win the game , he promised the press an answer after the match . In the end , both Baker and Hoar were named to the Arsenal team . The Arsenal team trained in Highbury on their own pitch prior to the final . 
 Cardiff City prepared for the final at Southport , Lancashire , at the Palace Hotel . The players kept relaxed with massages , games of bowls and salt baths . On the day before the match travelled to Harrow on the Hill where they stayed at the Kings Head Hotel . They were open with the press about their tactics , saying they hoped to subdue Arsenal 's attack by having Billy Hardy keep Buchan at bay . Cardiff were free to choose their first choice team , unhindered by injuries . They selected the same team as had featured against Reading in the semi @-@ final , with the exception of Harry Wake , despite his experience from playing in the FA Cup final two seasons prior . 
 Former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , David Lloyd George , as well as future Prime Minister Winston Churchill were in attendance for the match . The press billed the match as England versus Wales , and noted that the Welsh fans included high numbers of woman as well as mothers with babies . There were special trains laid on for the Cardiff fans , which began arriving at Paddington train station from 4am onwards . The Metropolitan Railway put on additional trains to commute fans from Baker Street station to Wembley Park ; one every two minutes . Between 11am to kick off , 30 @,@ 000 fans per hour travelled this route ; some 100 @,@ 000 fans were expected to arrive at the ground . The Welsh fans made special excursions across London ; some travelled to St. Paul 's Cathedral , where they sang Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau . Other fans went to The Cenotaph , Whitehall , where they dressed it in Welsh colours to honour the veterans of the First World War . 
 As the Cardiff team bus arrived at the stadium , the fans threw leeks at the vehicle . The team had adopted a black cat for the occasion , which Ferguson had found wandering astray prior to their earlier match with Bolton and decided it was a good omen . He found the owners of the animal , who agreed to let the club keep the cat in return for two final tickets if they progressed that far . Police reinforcements were required at Empire Stadium , as at 1pm a large number of people had gathered outside the ticket office in a threatening manner . A large number of fake tickets had been sold to members of the crowd , and the stewards were refusing to allow them entry . 
 A community concert began inside stadium at 1 : <unk> , led by the bands of the Grenadier and Irish Guards . Songs included Abide with Me , performed at an FA Cup final for the first time , but would go on to become a pre @-@ match tradition . Loud cheers were heard forty minutes later during the concert to celebrate the arrival of King George V. As the players entered the field , the King shook hands with each of them , as well as the officials ; the referee W.E. Bunnell from Preston , and the linesmen G.E. Watson from Kent and M. <unk> from Lincoln . The match was the first cup final to be broadcast on the radio by the BBC , as well as nearly 93 @,@ 000 fans inside the stadium . The phrase " back to square one " was created during the broadcast ; square one was the term used to describe an area nearest to one of the goals . 
 = = Match = = 
 Buchan won the coin toss for Cardiff City , and so Ferguson kicked off the match . Shortly afterwards Arsenal won a free kick and the ball went into Cardiff 's penalty area for the first time but Tom Watson cleared it for Cardiff . Irving went on a run on the right side of the pitch , but Arsenal defender Andy Kennedy stopped the play . Arsenal went on the attack again , with Sloan dodging several tackles but a pass to Hoar caused the chance to break down as he had moved offside . A direct free kick was given to Arsenal shortly afterwards , but the shot by Parker from 25 yards ( 23 m ) was saved by Farquharson for Cardiff . Combined play by Hulme and Buchan led to a corner , which then forced another three in a rapid succession . However , Arsenal couldn 't capitalise on the opportunities and the final corner ended in the ball being shot a distance over the bar . The first half ended , Arsenal having dominated but the Cardiff City defence had stopped them each time . There was an incident in the crowd during the first half , at the 25th minute around 400 spectators outside the stadium rushed a gate being manned by four policemen . Reinforcements arrived and managed to push the crowd back when they reached the turnstiles . 
 Arsenal again went on the attack as the second half began , with another corner won following a header by Buchan . Hulme drifted in a well placed cross , but nothing was made of it . It was then Cardiff 's turn to attack . Curtis sent in a low shot which was saved by Lewis in the Arsenal goal . Shortly afterwards , Butler , the Arsenal midfielder , was struck hard in the face by the ball causing a brief delay to play . The game resumed , and McLachlan took it down the wing for Cardiff , who passed it to Davies , but his shot was just wide of the post . Buchan attempted to return the game to Arsenal 's tempo , with a long pass to the left wing for Hoar , but Cardiff City 's James Nelson had him covered . City 's attacking continued , and a chance was had by Hardy which appeared to shake Lewis in goal as the keeper didn 't gather the ball cleanly . 
 The only goal of the game followed shortly thereafter . Curtis went on a run for Cardiff , who passed it forward near the box to Ferguson . He shot the ball towards the goal , but it had little power and was easily picked up by Lewis . However , as he did so , the ball squirmed out of Lewis ' hands and slipped in between the crook of his left elbow and body . With a couple of Cardiff City forwards closing in , Lewis tried to reclaim the ball but only succeeded in knocking it into the net with his elbow . Arsenal sought to attack immediately after the kick off , but despite it looking promising , Brain was caught offside . Cardiff countered , and possibly could have had a second goal , but Curtis chose to shoot himself rather than pass to Davies , who would have been presented with an open goal had he received the ball as Lewis was out of position . The match ended with a victory for Cardiff City by one goal to nil . The King presented the trophy to Cardiff 's captain Keenor , and medals to each of the players from both teams . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 Source : 
 = = Post match = = 
 The Cardiff City victory in the 1927 FA Cup Final remains the only time that the trophy has been won by a team outside of England . At the time it had been referred to as the " English Cup " . This was a highlight of the coverage in the press afterwards , as was the volume of singing that took place during the proceedings . The article in the Hull Daily Mail even went as far as to suggest that the match would be remembered for the singing specifically , calling it the " Singing Final " . There was an open air radio broadcast of the match in Cathays Park attended by 15 @,@ 000 fans , and after the victory the team 's colours were strung throughout the city , and local shopkeepers made replicas of the trophy out of butter to display in shop windows . After the match , the Cardiff team headed to a hotel in Bloomsbury before heading to Windsor and Eton College on the following day . They toured the College , and some of the players visited Windsor Castle . They headed back to Cardiff later that day from Paddington station , where they arrived at 6 : 35pm . They were met by motor coaches and a band , and driven to the City Hall . Some 150 @,@ 000 fans lined the streets of Cardiff to welcome the team back home . After leading some communal singing outside of the City Hall , the team and their wives later attended a dinner and dance in the building . While some press reports claimed that Keenor had said that the team were lucky to have won , he refuted the claim , saying that the superiority of Cardiff 's defence that led them to victory . 
 Lewis blamed a new jersey for the mistake that resulted in the goal , saying that the wool was greasy and allowed the ball to slip from his grip . As tradition ever since , Arsenal goalkeepers have always washed their jerseys before each game . The Arsenal captain , Buchan , praised the Cardiff team saying " My congratulations to Cardiff City on being the first club in history to take the Cup out of England . We did our very utmost to prevent them from doing so , but we did not succeed . As , however , the trophy is gone to Cardiff , there is no one who more heartily <unk> them than the captain of the losers . Cardiff played an honest , clean game , each member of the team obviously striving to do his utmost and my final works are Good luck to the City and good luck to Wales and its Association football now that they have the Cup . " 
 Cardiff qualified for 1927 FA Charity Shield , where they defeated amateur team Corinthian by two goals to one with the winning goal once again by Ferguson . Their fortunes subsequently declined occurred quickly afterwards . Within four years , they had been relegated to the Football League Third Division South . Keenor remained captain during this period , and left the club after 19 years to transfer to Crewe Alexandra F.C. during the 1930 – 31 football season . In 1934 , Cardiff slipped further and were required to petition the Football Association to allow them to remain in the league after they finished last and were eligible to be removed from the competition . Cardiff 's Ernie Curtis , who died in November 1992 at the age of 85 , was the last surviving player from the final . He had been the youngest player in the match , aged 19 years and 317 days . Cardiff reached the FA Cup Final once more in 2008 FA Cup Final ; where they lost by one goal to nil against Portsmouth . 
 Arsenal returned to the FA Cup Final in 1930 , where they played Huddersfield Town , the former team of Arsenal 's manager Herbert Chapman . They won the match by two goals to nil , marking the first major trophy to be won by the team . This began a period of success for the club , with two back to back league titles , first under Chapman and then under George Allison after Chapman 's death . A further victory in the FA Cup followed in 1936 against Sheffield United . They have gone on to be the most successful club in the tournament ; as of 2015 , they have appeared in 19 finals , winning on 12 occasions . 
 = In Dreams ( Roy Orbison song ) = 
 " In Dreams " is a song composed and sung by rock and roll performer Roy Orbison . An operatic ballad of lost love , it was released as a single on Monument Records in February 1963 . It became the title track on the album In Dreams , released in July of the same year . The song has a unique structure in seven musical movements in which Orbison sings through two octaves , beyond the range of most rock and roll singers . 
 The song peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 charts at number 7 , and charted in the United Kingdom for five months while Orbison toured sharing billing with the Beatles . It gained notability again in 1987 when Orbison released a re @-@ recorded anthology of his greatest hits ; the year prior David Lynch had used the song provocatively in his dark thriller Blue Velvet , helping to revive Orbison 's career . The theme of the song was interwoven in similar compositions throughout his tenure as a musician . As a result , several collections of Orbison 's music share the title of the song . Rolling Stone listed " In Dreams " at number 319 of their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1956 , Roy Orbison was signed to Sun Records that launched rockabilly legends such as Elvis Presley and Carl Perkins . Orbison 's first releases reflected the style in " Ooby Dooby " , " Go ! Go ! Go ! " , and a song he wrote for the Everly Brothers about his future wife , " Claudette " . Orbison found marginal success at Sun Records , but felt that his talents were not being employed appropriately because he was made to sing twelve @-@ bar rock standards with heavy guitars and drums . 
 In 1960 , when he moved to Monument Records , Orbison 's style changed to what he would become known for the rest of his career . With " Only the Lonely " , co @-@ written with Joe Melson , Orbison 's songs turned to introspective and plaintive ballads , and they fully employed his powerful three @-@ octave vocal range backed by more orchestral accompaniment . A recurring musical theme in many of Orbison 's songs is a climax in a story that is represented by a raw , emotionally vulnerable confession sung in an " eerily high falsetto " , according to author Peter Lehman . 
 Orbison was a rare performer ; when many rock and roll concerts were accompanied with frenetic performances onstage , Orbison rarely moved . His voice was what got the attention of <unk> k.d. lang , who sang " Crying " with him in a duet , later wrote , " It wasn 't like Elvis : It wasn 't like your loins were on fire or anything like that . It 's more like Roy was a private place to go — a solace or a refuge . " Monument Records founder Fred Foster said of him , " He used such intricate , beautiful melodies . He brought a kind of baroque , classical style to pop music . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Orbison later claimed that the origin for " In Dreams " came to him while he was sleeping , as many of his songs did . He often heard music while asleep with a radio disc jockey announcing that it was Elvis Presley 's new song . For this song , however , he was half awake when he imagined it , and thought , " Boy that 's good . I need to finish that . Too bad things don 't happen in my dreams . " When he woke up the next morning , the entire composition was written in 20 minutes . 
 " In Dreams " , like many of Orbison 's songs , rejects the verse @-@ chorus @-@ verse @-@ bridge @-@ chorus structure of the majority of rock and roll fare . Instead it mirrors the procession of falling asleep and becoming immersed in an elusive fantasy . It begins like a lullaby with minimal acoustic guitar strums , with Orbison introducing the listener to " A candy @-@ colored clown they call the sandman " half @-@ spoken and half @-@ sung in a <unk> fashion common in operas and other musical theater performances . The sandman puts him to sleep , where he begins singing about dreams of his lover . Drums pick up the rhythm to follow Orbison 's lyrics further into <unk> , and a piano joins as the lyrics recount how Orbison spends time with her , accompanied by breathy backup singers . Orchestra strings counter his melody that has the effect of representing a singing voice in themselves . 
 Using a five- to eight @-@ note range , Orbison 's voice rises as he wakes up to find his lover gone . The song trips ; the music stops and a staccato tattoo replaces it , as he cries when remembering she has left him . The climax is a powerful crescendo as he cries " It 's too bad that all these things / Can only happen in my dreams " , and the resolution follows his voice from falsetto to the final note an octave below as he sings " Only in dreams / In beautiful dreams " , as all the instruments and singers conclude with him abruptly . The song never repeats a section . In two minutes and forty @-@ eight seconds , it goes through seven movements with distinct melodies and chord progressions . The first two sections are sixteen bars each , but the other sections are only eight bars each . In comparison to the standard form of pop songs in AABA — where A represents a standard verse , and B represents a variation , usually referred to as the bridge — " In Dreams " , with each variation , can be represented as Intro @-@ A @-@ B @-@ C @-@ D @-@ E @-@ F. 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Recorded in Monument 's Nashville studios in early 1963 , " In Dreams " peaked at number 7 on Billboard 's Hot 100 and spent 13 weeks on the charts in the U.S. During the five months the song was on the charts , Orbison replaced guitarist Duane Eddy on a tour of England . He was immensely popular in England , and shared billing with the Beatles , of whom he had never heard . English – and Scottish – promoters were wary of Orbison as a draw ; he was not conventionally attractive or animated while performing , and they wondered if audiences would walk out . The tour sold out in one afternoon , however . Orbison 's first meeting with John Lennon was awkward because Orbison was overwhelmed with the amount of advertising devoted to the Beatles when it was he who was supposed to headline the show . Beatlemania , however , was taking hold and Orbison accepted that he was not quite the main draw , so he decided to go first on stage . On opening night , the audience reacted intensely toward Orbison 's ballads , as he finished with " In Dreams " . Philip Norman , a Beatles biographer , later wrote " As Orbison performed , chinless and tragic , the Beatles stood in the wings , wondering how they would dare to follow him " . After demanding Orbison play for double the time he was scheduled , the audience then screamed for a fifteenth encore , which Lennon and Paul McCartney refused to allow by holding Orbison back from re @-@ entering the stage . 
 A compilation of Orbison 's most successful songs updated and re @-@ recorded was released in 1987 under the title In Dreams : The Greatest Hits . It coincided with the release of the dark and surreal mystery thriller Blue Velvet , directed by David Lynch . Orbison was astonished at the way Lynch used " In Dreams " . In the film , a murderous and morally bankrupt psychopath named Frank Booth ( played by Dennis Hopper ) is obsessed with the song and demands it be played over and over , calling it " Candy Colored Clown " . In one scene it is lip @-@ synced by a flamboyantly effeminate character played by Dean Stockwell , after which Booth becomes enraged and beats the protagonist . Lynch later stated , " it is a beautiful song and it was written by Roy ... Those lyrics , that feel meant something to him . And it just so happened that a song in a certain situation could mean something else . And the way that Frank Booth used that song in two different places , it is just kind of unbelievable . But I can see why Roy was upset because for him it meant a third thing . " 
 Orbison did not authorize the use of the song or know it was going to be used , but the use of " In Dreams " proved positive for his career , which had stalled in the 1970s . BAM magazine called the song " the emotional epicenter of the film " . Orbison biographer Ellis <unk> called " In Dreams " deceptively simple and that it is used to significant effect in Blue Velvet because it suggests dreaming is preferable to waking , and power and control are the real themes of the song , instead of love , longing , and loss . The film made the song a cult favorite , and after seeing it a few times , Orbison reconsidered his stance on its use . Footage of the film is featured in the 1987 music video of " In Dreams " , and interspersed with live action shots of Orbison 's image projected over a filmy linen cloth blowing in the wind . 
 While listening to the Blue Velvet soundtrack on repeat during a sleepless night , Bono of the rock group U2 became fixated on " In Dreams " . After eventually finding sleep , he awoke with another song in his head , which he at first presumed to be a different Orbison tune . This became " She 's a Mystery to Me " , a song written by Bono and fellow U2 member The Edge for Orbison . It appeared on Orbison 's final album , Mystery Girl , released in 1989 . On the same album , " In Dreams " received its companion piece , " In the Real World " , which was written by Will Jennings and Richard Kerr . Many of Orbison 's songs either address dreaming or are presented in a dreamlike quality . In addition to the album released in 1963 and the re @-@ recorded album of hits in 1987 , a Canadian documentary on Orbison 's life and impact on rock and roll also touched on the theme exemplified by the song ; it was titled In Dreams : The Roy Orbison Story and released in 1999 . 
 The song " Love 's Secret Domain " by Coil uses some lyrics from " In Dreams " . 
 = = Covers = = 
 The Pointy Shoe Factory released a more uptempo and violin @-@ oriented version of " In Dreams " . It was featured on the ensemble 's debut album , The " Unforgettable " Sound Of The Pointy Shoe Factory . 
 = Montu ( roller coaster ) = 
 Montu is an inverted roller coaster at Busch Gardens Tampa Bay in Tampa , Florida . Built by Bolliger & Mabillard , it is the park 's second roller coaster designed by the Swiss company following the success of Kumba which opened 3 years prior . When the ride opened on May 16 , 1996 , it was the world 's tallest and fastest inverted roller coaster , a title it has since conceded to Alpengeist at sister park Busch Gardens Williamsburg . The ride stands 150 feet ( 46 m ) tall and reaches speeds of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept of an inverted roller coaster with inversions was developed by Jim Wintrode , the general manager of Six Flags Great America , in the early 1990s . To develop the idea , Wintrode worked with Walter Bolliger and Claude Mabillard – from Swiss roller coaster manufacturer Bolliger & Mabillard – and engineer Robert <unk> to develop Batman : The Ride which opened in May 1992 . 
 In early 1995 , planning began for Montu , fourteen months prior to the ride opening to the public . The owners of Busch Gardens Tampa Bay , Busch Entertainment ( since renamed SeaWorld Entertainment ) , entered into an agreement with Bolliger and Mabillard which would see them add Montu to Busch Gardens Tampa Bay in 1996 , followed in 1997 by the additions of Alpengeist at Busch Gardens Williamsburg and The Great White at SeaWorld San Antonio . On May 16 , 1996 , Montu officially opened to the public . At the time of its opening to the public , the ride was the tallest and fastest inverted roller coaster in the world . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The 3 @,@ 983 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 214 m ) Montu stands 150 feet ( 46 m ) tall . With a top speed of 65 miles per hour ( <unk> / h ) , the ride features seven inversions including two vertical loops measuring 104 and 60 feet ( 32 and 18 m ) , respectively , an Immelmann loop , a zero @-@ g roll , a batwing and a corkscrew . Riders experience up to 3 @.@ 8 times the force of gravity on the 3 minute ride . Montu operates with three steel and fiberglass trains , each containing eight cars . Each car seats four riders in a single row for a total of 32 riders per train . 
 Montu was launched alongside Busch Gardens Tampa Bay 's Egypt section of the park , which reportedly cost approximately US $ 20 million . With an overall theme around Egyptian mythology , the ride is named after the god of war Montu , a man depicted with the head of a hawk . When the ride was first launched , a Nile crocodile exhibit was located underneath the first section of the ride . These animals were later relocated to the park 's main animal habitat . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 The ride begins with the floor retracting which leads to the front gate opening . The trains leaves the station with a small dip and turnaround out of the station tracking towards the 150 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 46 m ) chain lift hill . Once at the top , riders twist down 128 feet ( 39 m ) and into a 104 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 32 m ) vertical loop , reaching speeds of up to 65 miles per hour ( <unk> / h ) . Following the vertical loop , an Immelmann loop comes next , and provides a <unk> element with the pylon . After completing the Immelmann , the train goes through a zero @-@ g roll , where riders experience a feeling of weightlessness . Following the zero @-@ G roll , riders are then inverted twice during the batwing element which leads into the mid @-@ course brake run . A twisting dive to the right immediately follows the brake run and leads into a 60 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 18 m ) vertical loop . A series of corners and a corkscrew lead the train to the final brake run and back into the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Montu has generally been well received . Tom Buckingham of the Sarasota Herald @-@ Tribune commended the ride , giving kudos to the park " for designing its monster rides so that wait times put Disney to shame " . He stated " you 'll generally be on the ride and screaming " before riders get a chance to change their mind . Sabrina Rojas Weiss of the Lakeland Ledger stated " the way this ride twisted my body upside @-@ down and sideways seriously confused my senses " . The Los Angeles Times put the ride on their " high rollers " list of new roller coasters for 1996 . In 2012 , Montu was featured on the Travel Channel TV series Insane Coaster Wars in the " Hang ' em High " category . Although the ride lost out to Aftershock at Silverwood Theme Park , Theme Park Review 's Robb Alvey believed Montu would beat the competition which also included SeaWorld Orlando 's Manta and Busch Gardens Williamsburg 's Alpengeist . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , Montu has consistently ranked highly . Montu is also one of only seven roller coasters to appear in the top 50 for all 15 years . It debuted at position 3 in 1998 , before rising to position 2 the following year . Montu has remained at position 14 for 2011 and 2012 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Montu entered at position 2 in 1999 , before dropping to a low of 20 in 2010 . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 = Quarrington , Lincolnshire = 
 Quarrington is a village and former civil parish , now part of the civil parish of Sleaford , in the North Kesteven district of Lincolnshire , a non @-@ metropolitan county in the East Midlands of England . The old village and its church lie approximately 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 2 km ) south @-@ west from the centre of Sleaford , the nearest market town , but suburban housing developments at New Quarrington and Quarrington Hill effectively link the two settlements . <unk> by the A15 , it is connected to Lincoln and Peterborough , as well as Newark and King 's Lynn ( via the A17 ) . At the 2011 Census , Quarrington and Mareham ward , which incorporates most of the settlement , had an estimated population of 7 @,@ 046 . 
 Quarrington was a rural community during the early and middle Anglo @-@ Saxon period while mills along the River Slea in the Middle Ages gave the village its name . The Bishop of Lincoln and Ramsey Abbey held manors in Quarrington after the Norman Conquest , but the Carre family of Sleaford were the principal land @-@ owners between 1559 and 1683 , when its estate passed by marriage to the Marquesses of Bristol . Although the growth of Victorian Sleaford saw the town encroach into the parish 's boundaries , the old village remained a small cluster of farm buildings and cottages for much of its history . The sale of most of the surrounding farmland by successive Marquesses of Bristol in the late 20th century led to the rapid development of residential estates on Quarrington Hill and in New Quarrington which have engulfed the original settlement . Low crime rates , affordable housing , high standards of living and access to good schools have attracted home @-@ buyers to the area , contributing to a sharp rise in the population . 
 The medieval St Botolph 's Church , a grade II * listed building , lies at the heart of the old village and remains a hub for the Anglican community . The village 's primary school serves local children , who continue their secondary education in one of Sleaford 's three secondary schools . The nearest railway station on the Grantham to Skegness and Peterborough to Lincoln lines is in Sleaford . In the 19th century , the most common employment was in agriculture and more than half of the village 's population were farm labourers . By 2011 , most residents were employed in the wholesale and retail trades , public administration and defence , human health and social work , and manufacturing . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early = = = 
 Scattered Palaeolithic and Bronze Age materials have been discovered in and around Quarrington but while nearby Old Sleaford is known to have been settled in the Iron Age and occupied by the Romans , there is little evidence for sustained pre @-@ Saxon settlement at Quarrington . Between 1992 and 1995 , archaeologists evaluating 34 trenches across 13 hectares of land around the village uncovered 56 ditches or gullies , a number of postholes , a large collection of pottery sherds and " extremely rare " evidence of metalworking from the 6th – 7th centuries . The site has been dated to the 5th – 9th centuries , representing an early and middle Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement . Although noted for its metalworking and its size , the archaeologists concluded that it " displayed all the signs of a typical rural community " , reflecting how " the vast majority " of the Anglo @-@ Saxon population lived . Analysis of animal bones revealed that sheep @-@ farming increasingly replaced pig @-@ rearing at the site during this period . A small early Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery containing inhumations was uncovered in the parish in 2000 . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 Ramsey Abbey was granted the manor of Quarrington by Jol of Lincoln , a monk , in c . 1051 . The Domesday Book of 1086 recorded the abbey 's manor consisted of one carucate and six <unk> and had two churches . Local historians Christine Mahany and David Roffe concluded that one of the churches was probably at Old Sleaford , where the abbey held a manor as sokeland of Quarrington . A thegn , Bardi , held another manor in Quarrington before the conquest , but it had been granted to the Bishop of Lincoln by 1086 and consisted of nine carucates and two and a half <unk> plus 60 acres of meadow and two mills . A separate village , Millthorpe was also recorded , but the archaeologists Fiona Walker and Tom Lane suggest this may have been an alternative name for Quarrington . Amongst the bishop 's tenants was Hugh de St Vedasto or <unk> , who held a knight 's fee in c . 1200 – 10 . His family were prominent tenants in the village ; <unk> , wife of Hugh de St Vedasto , died in possession of lands and tenements there in 1253 , and Alexander and William de St Vedasto are named in connection in other documents . Henry <unk> , a knight , held Quarrington of the abbey and in c . 1166 granted the lands to Haverholme Priory . 
 Quarrington 's medieval name was recorded in the Domesday Book as <unk> or <unk> , from the Old English <unk> ( " mill " ) and tun ( " homestead " ) , meaning " miller 's homestead " , reflecting the importance of the watermills which were built along the River Slea . Bardi had owned 10 mills in Sleaford and Quarrington before Domesday , and the 11 or 12 in existence by 1086 represents the largest cluster of mills in Lincolnshire . Mahany and Roffe suggest that Quarrington was a specialised part of his compact estate , geared in particular to milling . Excavations have revealed medieval pits and pottery in the village , with ditches reflecting a predominantly agricultural use of the land . In the Lay Subsidy of 1334 , Quarrington and Millthorpe were valued at £ 4 10s . 4 ½ d . , slightly below average for its wapentake . 
 = = = Early and later modern = = = 
 The Bishop of Lincoln alienated his lands at Quarrington to the Crown in 1547 ; they passed to Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset and Lord Protector , but reverted to the Crown on his attainder for treason in 1549 . Mary I granted them to Edward Clinton , 9th Baron Clinton and later Earl of Lincoln , who sold them to Robert Carre of Sleaford in 1559 . Carre acquired numerous manors , including Old and New Sleaford , during the mid @-@ 16th century and they passed through marriage from his male @-@ line descendants to the Earls ( later Marquesses ) of Bristol . A 1563 diocesan return shows that 17 families lived in the village and 120 people took Holy Communion ; by the early 18th century , the diocesan visitations by Edmund Gibson show the number of families had risen to 35 . The local historian Edward Trollope recorded few changes in the early modern period , with the exception of a fire that burnt down the rectory in 1760 ; it was rebuilt in c . 1845 . Two 17th @-@ century buildings still exist : the Bristol Farmhouse and the coursed rubble Manor House , which one " widow Timberland " occupied in 1691 . 
 The town 's fields were enclosed in 1796 and a map of the village was drawn up at the same time , showing the settlement along Town Road and <unk> Road with Rector Field and Earl Field to the north and north @-@ east respectively . At the time , more than 210 acres of land were allotted to the rectory by Lord Bristol in place of the tithes it had previously been entitled to . During the mid and late @-@ 19th century , the population of the old village of Quarrington declined ( from 98 in 1851 to 72 in 1871 ) . Aside from the rectory and church , the village included two large farms and a cluster of labourers cottages around Town Road . By 1872 , the parish spanned 1 @,@ 620 acres and the village contained 63 houses . The same year , Trollope wrote that " the appearance of this small village , lying around its well cared for church , is very pleasing " . As Sleaford expanded , houses were built along London and Station Roads , pushing the town inside the Quarrington parish boundaries in what became New Quarrington . Sanitation in the poorest parts of Sleaford worsened during the 19th century and a Local Board of Health was charged with improving living conditions . In 1879 , Lord Bristol sold land on Quarrington Hill to the board , who built a pumping station to transport clean fenland water east into the town . 
 Most of the land remained in possession of the Marquesses of Bristol throughout the 20th century , but from the 1970s the indebted 6th Marquess and his son , the 7th Marquess , sold much of their farmland around Sleaford and Quarrington . In 1989 , the Bristol Estates office in Sleaford closed . The result was a boom in house @-@ building , especially in the fields around Quarrington . In the 1980s , hundreds of houses were constructed in Southfields , and developments on Quarrington Hill followed in the late 1990s . Low house prices and crime rates , and good educational facilities in Sleaford made the new homes attractive . As the local historian Simon Pawley wrote , " Quarrington ... began to look more like a suburb of Sleaford than a village in its own right " . In July 2015 planning permission for a further 200 homes between Northfield Road and the A15 was granted by North Kesteven District Council . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Quarrington is a settlement south west of Sleaford , a market town in the North Kesteven district of Lincolnshire . Quarrington proper is clustered around Town Road and between Grantham Road ( the B1517 ) and London Road . To the north of Grantham Road is Quarrington Hill and to the north and east of the old village is New Quarrington ; all the settlements are linked by contiguous housing developments to form a suburb of Sleaford . Lincolnshire County Council 's State of the Environment Report ( 1994 ) found that roughly three @-@ quarters of Lincolnshire is low @-@ lying , with much of it near sea @-@ level ; Quarrington lies between approximately 15 and 25 meters above sea level , close to Lincoln Cliff , a limestone scarp running north – south through Lindsey and Kesteven . The bedrock under most of Quarrington is <unk> limestone belonging to the Great Oolite Group of Jurassic rocks formed 168 − 165 million years ago . The soil belongs to the Quarrington series , a type of brown , calcareous sand . The county 's agricultural land is generally of " very good " quality ; as a result , intensive arable and vegetable farming is predominant while pastoral farming declined in the 20th century . Quarrington and Sleaford are on the edge of the Fens , a low @-@ lying region of the East of England which , before drainage from the 17th to the 20th centuries , was marshy and liable to flooding . Draining has revealed nutrient @-@ rich soils and enabled 88 % of the land to be cultivated , especially for arable farming , and most of it is graded amongst the most productive farmland in the country . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 According to the Köppen classification , the British Isles experience a maritime climate characterised by relatively cool summers and mild winters . Lincolnshire 's position on the east of the Isles allows for a sunnier and warmer climate relative to the national average , and it is one of the driest counties in the United Kingdom . Although it may vary depending on altitude and proximity to the coast , the mean average temperature for the East of England is approximately 9 ° C to 10 @.@ 5 ° C ; the highest temperature recorded in the region was 37 @.@ 3 ° C at Cavendish on 10 August 2003 . On average , the region experiences 30 days of rainfall in winter and 25 in summer , with 15 days of thunder and 6 – 8 days of hail per year ; on 25 August 2001 , hail the size of golf balls were reported in Sleaford and other parts of central Lincolnshire . Wind tends to affect the north and west of the country more than the East , and Lincolnshire tends to receive no more than 2 days of gale per year ( where gale is a gust of wind at > 34 knots , sustained for at least 10 minutes ) . Despite this , tornadoes form more often in the East of England than elsewhere in the country ; Sleaford experienced tornadoes in 2006 and 2012 , both of which caused damage to property . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Before 1832 , Quarrington was in the Lincolnshire parliamentary constituency , which encompassed all the county except for four boroughs . In the 1818 election , 49 of the 2 @,@ 000 people living in New and Old Sleaford and Quarrington qualified to vote . In 1832 , the Reform Act widened the franchise and divided Lincolnshire . Quarrington was in the South Lincolnshire constituency that elected two members to parliament . The franchise was widened by the reforms so that roughly 15 % ( 202 ) of males in Sleaford and Quarrington could vote in 1868 . The constituency was abolished in 1885 and Quarrington was in the new North Kesteven constituency . It merged with the Grantham seat in 1918 . In 1997 , Quarrington was reorganised into Sleaford and North Hykeham . 
 The member returned in 2010 for Sleaford and North Hykeham was the Conservative candidate Stephen Phillips , who replaced Douglas Hogg . Lincolnshire elected a Member of the European Parliament from 1974 until 1994 , and then became part of the Lincolnshire and Humberside South constituency until 1999 ; since then , it has elected members as part of the East Midlands constituency ; from 1999 , there were six members for the East Midlands , but the number was reduced to five in 2009 . 
