 The ancient parish of Quarrington lay within Kesteven 's Aswardhurn wapentake . It was incorporated into Sleaford Poor Law Union in 1851 . The Public Health Act 1872 established urban sanitary districts ( USD ) and Quarrington became part of the Sleaford USD , which in turn was reorganised into Sleaford Urban District ( UD ) by the Local Government Act 1894 . Sleaford UD was abolished by the Local Government Act 1972 and , by statutory instrument , Sleaford civil parish became its successor , thus merging Quarrington , New Sleaford , Old Sleaford and Holdingham civil parishes . Subsequently , it has been served by Sleaford Town Council , North Kesteven District Council and Lincolnshire County Council . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In 1831 , more than 60 % of Quarrington 's adult males worked in agriculture and more than a quarter were employed in retail and handicraft industries ; more than half were labourers and slightly more than a quarter were characterised as " middle sorts " . Sleaford had a weekly market throughout the 19th century and a livestock market on Northgate from 1874 until 1984 . At the 2011 Census , the largest socio @-@ economic grouping in the census 's Quarrington and Mareham ward is workers in lower @-@ tier managerial or administrative roles ( 25 @.@ 9 % ) , followed by intermediate ( 14 @.@ 7 % ) , semi @-@ routine ( 14 @.@ 6 % ) and higher managerial ( 10 @.@ 9 % ) occupations ; no other group comprised 10 % or more . In terms of industry , the most common , based on those working in the sector , are wholesale and retail trade ( including automotive repairs ) at 15 @.@ 5 % , public administration and defence ( 15 @.@ 4 % ) , human health and social work ( 14 @.@ 3 % ) and manufacturing ( 10 @.@ 0 % ) , with no other groups representing 10 % or more . The largest group of working @-@ age persons by economic activity are those in full @-@ time employment , who make up 47 @.@ 5 % of this section of the population while 15 @.@ 4 % are part @-@ time employees and 7 @.@ 7 % are self @-@ employed ; 13 @.@ 7 % of the working @-@ age population are retired . 2 @.@ 9 % were unemployed , with approximately 38 @.@ 0 % of those in long @-@ term unemployment and roughly 27 @.@ 5 % aged 16 to 24 . An unemployment survey of Lincolnshire in 2014 found that the county experienced a decline in unemployment ( based on Jobseekers Allowance claimants ) by 29 % over the preceding 12 months , while the county 's unemployment rate was marginally below the national average . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 At the 2011 Census , Sleaford Quarrington and Mareham ward had an estimated total population of 7 @,@ 046 , which accounts for roughly 6 @.@ 5 % of the total population of North Kesteven . After Quarrington civil parish was abolished in 1974 , the population statistics for the new Sleaford parish which absorbed it were divided into four wards , which did not necessarily correspond to the former boundaries of Quarrington CP . The town 's population ( including Quarrington ) grew by 39 % between 1991 and 2001 , the fastest growth rate of any town in Lincolnshire ; this has been attributed in part to the developments around Quarrington since the 1980s and a joint planning strategy report found that " This growth has largely been the result of people moving to the area attracted by the quality of life , low crime rates , relatively low house prices and good @-@ quality education . " The district population is predicted to rise by a further 29 % between 2008 and 2033 , compared with a national average of 18 % ; in 2013 , county councillors approved plans to build 4 @,@ 500 new homes . 
 The 2011 Census revealed that approximately 94 @.@ 3 % of Quarrington and Mareham ward 's resident population were White British ; the second largest ethnic group was White ( other ) at 3 @.@ 0 % , then Asian ( including Asian British ) at 0 @.@ 7 % , followed by White Irish at approximately 0 @.@ 6 % , Black , Afro @-@ Caribbean and Black British at 0 @.@ 2 % and Arab at 0 @.@ 1 % ; no other ethnic group represented 1 % or more of the population . 88 @.@ 0 % of residents were born in England and 4 @.@ 9 % in other parts of the United Kingdom ; 4 @.@ 0 % were from EU countries , with 2 @.@ 0 % coming from EU member states which joined after March 2001 . Most people in the Quarrington and Mareham ward identified as Christian . 72 @.@ 5 % of the residents stated they were Christian and 26 @.@ 5 % registered as " no religion " or chose not to state any ; no other group constituted more than 1 % of the population . 
 Between December 2013 and November 2014 , 1 @,@ 289 criminal acts were reported in the policing neighbourhood of Sleaford Town ( which includes Quarrington ) , of which 43 @.@ 9 % were classed as anti @-@ social behaviour , making it the largest portion of reported crimes . In 2010 , recorded crime levels were amongst the lowest in the country and , for the year ending June 2014 , the crime rate in the North Kesteven district is the lowest in Lincolnshire at 24 @.@ 38 crimes per thousand residents . 
 = = Religion = = 
 In the 17th century , the rectory of Quarrington and the vicarage of Old Sleaford combined to form the ecclesiastical parish of Quarrington with Old Sleaford . The parish boundaries of Quarrington with Old Sleaford were last altered in 1928 . The rectory is in the Diocese and Archdeaconry of Lincoln and has been in the Lafford Rural Deanery since 1968 ; the current rector of Quarrington is the Rev Sandra Benham and the patrons are alternatively the Bishop of Lincoln and Sir <unk> Tollemache , 7th Baronet . 
 The grade II * listed St Botolph 's Church serves Quarrington 's Anglican community . Its 13th @-@ century north arcade is the oldest part of the church . The tower and spire date to the following century and St Botolph 's listing reflects the " excellent " 14th century tracery in two of its windows . The chancel was rebuilt when Charles Kirk restored the church in 1862 − 3 and an extension was completed in 2001 . The church had 120 sittings at the Census of Religious Worship in 1851 ; there were 20 morning attendees , 40 who came to the church in the afternoon and 20 Sunday scholars . As of 2015 , family services are held on the first Sunday of the month at 11 : 00am and Holy Communion is carried out every second , third and fourth Sunday at 11 : 00am and every Wednesday at 10 : 00am . In the early 1900s a second church was designed to be built on donated land in the parish but closer to Sleaford . Disruption during World War I , parish boundary changes in 1928 and rising costs delayed the plans . Instead , a church hall was built in 1932 on Grantham Road and is now used as a community centre . The current rectory was constructed c . 2000 and a curate 's house of a similar age was being rented by the Church of England in 2009 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Holdingham roundabout connects the A17 to the A15 road from Peterborough to <unk> . The A15 passed through Quarrington and Sleaford until 1993 when its bypass was completed . The main route through the village is Grantham Road ( B1517 ) which connects the A15 to Southgate in Sleaford . London Road forks from it after the railway crossing in Sleaford and continues along the eastern edge of Quarrington to Silk <unk> and the A15 . 
 The nearest railway stations are at Sleaford and Rauceby . The railways arrived in the 19th century when plans to build the Boston , Sleaford and Midland Counties Railway were sanctioned by Act of Parliament 1853 . The line from Grantham opened in 1857 ; Boston was connected in 1859 , Bourne in 1871 and Ruskington on Great Northern and Great Eastern Joint Railway in 1882 . As of 2015 , Sleaford is a stop on the Peterborough to Lincoln Line and the Poacher Line , from Grantham to Skegness ; Rauceby is a stop on the Poacher line only . Grantham , roughly 14 miles ( 23 km ) away by road and two stops from Sleaford ( and one from Rauceby ) on the Poacher Line , is a major stop on the East Coast Main Line . Trains from Grantham to London King 's Cross take approximately 1 hour 15 minutes . 
 = = Education = = 
 The 1833 House of Commons enquiry into education in England found that Quarrington had no schools and still had none in the 1860s when New Quarrington was emerging . The lack of school and an accessible church became a cause for concern . The Marquess of Bristol gave an acre of land on the western edge of New Quarrington , between London and Grantham Roads , on which to build a school . Sleaford architect Charles Kirk constructed the school and master 's house at his own expense in 1867 for " to provide a place where the adults and children only of the labouring and other poorer classes of Quarrington and Old Sleaford may be instructed in the catechism and doctrine and worship of the Church of England " . The school operated along the National Society 's recommended lines , with two teachers and 65 pupils on roll in 1870 . The school could accommodate c . 100 children and had an attached chancel . The school was extended in 1898 , the 1960s and 1980s . The successor , St Botolph 's Church of England School , moved out of the old premises into new accommodation in 2002 . As of 2015 , the school is a voluntary controlled mixed primary school admitting juniors and infants with 394 pupils on roll , and was rated " good " by Ofsted . 
 Sleaford is served by three secondary schools with sixth forms : Carre 's Grammar School , a boys ' grammar school , Kesteven and Sleaford High School , a girls ' grammar school , and St George 's Academy , a mixed comprehensive school . The grammar schools are selective and pupils are required to pass the Eleven plus exam . St George 's is not selective . The co @-@ educational Joint Sixth Form consortium between Carre 's and St George 's allows pupils to choose subjects taught at either school . 
 = Yue Hwa Building = 
 Yue Hwa Building ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> dàshà ) is a historic building located at the junction of Eu Tong Sen Street and Upper Cross Street in Chinatown , Singapore . Built by Swan and Maclaren in 1936 , it was then the tallest building in Chinatown and was known as Nam Tin Building ( <unk> ) , owned by Lum Chang Holdings . The building housed the six @-@ storey Great Southern Hotel ( the first Chinese hotel with a lift ) , along with a few shops and cabarets that were popular among Chinese travellers . In 1994 , Lum Chang Holdings sold the building to Hong Kong businessman Yu Kwok Chun , who converted it to the first Yue Hwa Chinese Products department store in Singapore . The renovation process , which conserved the exterior while adding features such as an atrium and waterfall to the interior , won the building the Architectural Heritage Award by the Urban Redevelopment Authority in 1997 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Great Southern Hotel = = = 
 Also known as Nam Tin Hotel , the Great Southern Hotel in Singapore 's Chinatown was built by Swan and Maclaren in 1936 . Started as a boutique hotel , it was the tallest building in Chinatown when it was completed . It was also the first Chinese hotel in Singapore with a lift . 
 Owned by Lum Chang Holdings , the building housing Great Southern Hotel was called " Nam Tin " in Cantonese , meaning " southern sky " . Besides the hotel , Lum Chang Holdings also leased out the building to several tenants who operated shops and other businesses . People commonly referred to the entire Nam Tin building as the Great Southern Hotel when the hotel subsequently became very popular . The Nam Tin Building became a major shopping hub for customers who found it fashionable to patronise the building 's shops , outlets and cabarets . Chinese operas used to be staged at the building as an occasional attraction . 
 Operated by the Cantonese , the Great Southern Hotel catered more to Chinese travellers , including celebrities from Hong Kong and China . This was unlike the upmarket hotels like Raffles Hotel , Goodwood Park Hotel and Adelphi Hotel which then accommodated mainly Europeans and English @-@ speaking visitors . As a boutique hotel with shops and entertainment outlets for rich Chinese immigrants , the Great Southern Hotel was considered as the " Raffles Hotel of Chinatown " . 
 = = = Yue Hwa Chinese Products = = = 
 In 1993 , Lum Chang Holdings sold the building at a price of S $ 25 million to Yu Kwok Chun , who was the head of a Hong Kong @-@ based multinational corporation with its flagship department store , Yue Hwa Chinese Products Emporium . The company , set up by Yu 's father in 1959 , is a global corporation of 35 companies involved in investments , travel and general trading . Yue Hwa 's three department stores in Hong Kong are popular with both Hong Kongers and tourists . Besides agricultural produce from various provinces of China , the stores also sell jade carvings , handicrafts , antiques and medical products such as ginseng , antlers and <unk> . 
 In February 1994 , the Great Southern Hotel ended its operations from the building as the hotel faced increasing competition in the hospitality industry . At the time of its closure , the hotel was operating only 40 rooms that were equipped with a double @-@ bed and a ceiling fan , catering mainly to budget travellers from Malaysia and Indonesia . The other seven existing tenants of the building vacated their businesses after the building was sold , and were each paid a compensation sum . 
 As the 999 @-@ year leasehold building has been gazetted by the Urban Redevelopment Authority ( URA ) for architectural conservation , the new owner was asked to preserve the building 's façade . There were , however , no similar restrictions on its interiors . Renovation works were carried out on the building from 1994 to 1995 . The Nam Tin building was then converted into the Yue Hwa Chinese Products department store , and was renamed Yue Hwa Building . The department store was opened on 9 October 1996 , and sells a range of traditional Chinese products including herbs , medicines , porcelain , furniture , arts and crafts , garments and textiles . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Original design = = = 
 Being one of the tallest buildings in Singapore in the early 20th century , the Great Southern Hotel was an important landmark of Chinatown . Designed by Swan and Maclaren , the architectural style of the Nam Tin Building was that of the Modern Movement . The building was designed to be strictly functional . The grey @-@ coloured façade of the Great Southern Hotel seemed to consist only of the bare essentials , with ordinary designs like strong horizontal lines with angular arches and simple cornices . The building was fitted with steel frame windows , with metal railings and grills , which were considered fashionable in the 1930s . The loggia on the uppermost floor was a little lighter in colour with the use of cast iron balustrades and brackets , and there was extensive use of green glass . 
 At six storeys , the Great Southern Hotel was the first Chinese hotel to have a lift . The original design accommodated offices on the first storey , the hotel on the second and third storeys , a restaurant on the fifth storey , and a tea house on the roof terrace as well as a cabaret . The restaurant on the fourth floor was later converted into the owner 's office . The whole of the fifth floor was occupied by a then @-@ well @-@ known cabaret , the Southern Cabaret . Shops and entertainment outlets , including a Hainanese kopitiam , were situated on the ground floor . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The architectural firm engaged for the S $ 25 million restoration project was O.D. Architects of Bukit Pasoh Road . In accordance with URA 's conservation guidelines for Nam Tin Building , the architects preserved the building 's roof @-@ top garden and balconies facing Eu Tong Sen Street . 
 The interior of the building were revamped to accommodate an open layout suitable for a department store . Non @-@ structural interior walls were torn down . A new atrium was created by constructing a wall on the second storey , and could be used as an exhibition hall . A four @-@ storey high waterfall was built at the back of the building , which has a new three @-@ storey extension . A stained glass skylight was used as an interface to join the old and new parts of the building . New escalators and lifts were added to serve all six floors of the building . As a result , total floor space was increased from 3 @,@ 700 to 4 @,@ 600 square metres ( 39 @,@ 800 to 49 @,@ 500 square feet ) , with 4 @,@ 650 square metres ( 50 @,@ 000 square feet ) of retail space created for use by the store . 
 Together with the acquisition of the Nam Tin Building in 1993 , Yue Hwa Chinese Products invested a total of S $ 100 million to set up its first store selling Chinese products in Singapore . For its conservation and restoration work , the Yue Hwa Building won URA 's Architectural Heritage Award in 1997 . 
 = Richard Withers = 
 Brother Richard Scott Withers ( born 1955 ) is an American consecrated hermit . In 1974 , Withers converted to Catholicism and was baptized ; shortly after , he started to live a religious life . In 1989 , Withers and Sister Margaret McKenna moved to inner city Philadelphia and founded New Jerusalem Laura , a drug treatment center . Withers petitioned the Archdiocese of Philadelphia to become a consecrated hermit several times but was rejected . In 2001 , Withers was consecrated as a hermit by Cardinal Anthony Bevilacqua , the Archbishop of Philadelphia . He was the first hermit to be consecrated in the Archdiocese of Philadelphia . Withers lives in a hermitage , a converted rowhouse , in the city of Philadelphia where he spends most of his time in prayer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Withers was born in California 's San Fernando Valley . He had seven siblings and his father was a mechanical engineer . Neither of his parents were practicing Catholics during his childhood . His father had been raised Catholic but then " lapsed " . Instead , he was raised culturally Jewish according to the faith of his mother . When Withers was eight , his family moved to Cherry Hill , New Jersey . In 1974 , he had an encounter with a group of Catholic activists at the bicycle repair shop where he worked , which caused him to convert to Catholicism and be baptized . The same year , Withers left home for nearby Camden , New Jersey , to live in and repair abandoned row houses . 
 = = Religious life = = 
 After his baptism , Withers lived in a loosely affiliated religious community . While there , Withers almost got married but decided that he wanted to live a religious life instead . In 1984 , he took private vows of " poverty , chastity , and obedience " and became a hermit . Before taking his vows , Withers had looked into several religious orders , but he could not find one that he felt compatible with . Passionate about the spirituality of the Desert Fathers , he and Sister Margaret McKenna debated about " Where is the desert today ? " Deciding it was in the abandoned inner cities , in 1989 they moved into an abandoned row house that they began restoring , continuing their work even when their tools were regularly stolen by drug addicts . There , they founded New Jerusalem Laura , a treatment center for drug addicts . 
 Two years later , in 1991 , Withers bought a derelict rowhouse from the city of Philadelphia for $ 1 and parted ways with McKenna . This would become his hermitage . He fixed the building , which lacked doors , windows , or a working roof and then went on to build furniture for it by himself . After the 1983 revision of Canon 603 , the option of being a consecrated hermit while independent of the system of religious orders had been permitted . In 1995 , Withers attempted to be consecrated by the Archdiocese of Philadelphia but was rejected . In 2001 , Withers was finally approved and consecrated as a hermit by Cardinal Anthony Bevilacqua and took his public vows . Withers was the first hermit to be consecrated by the Archdiocese . 
 = = = Life as a hermit = = = 
 As a hermit , Withers lives in solitude . He does not own a car or television ; he gets his news from the people around him and gets around on a bicycle that he found , broken , on the side of the road . Though he has an open @-@ door policy for people that come to visit him , he himself visits family only twice a year . He does have a computer , which he uses to keep in touch with other hermits via email . To earn his food and clothing allowance , which amounts to less than $ 5 @,@ 500 per year , Withers makes pottery to sell and works one day a week for a scientific @-@ instrument company . At the end of each year , he donates any funds that remain to charity . 
 Withers wakes up at 5 AM and then fills his day with prayer and chores , following his rule of life . He prays for 4 ½ hours each day . Withers claims that " it 's in the solitude that I hear God best " . 
 = Lindow Man = 
 Lindow Man , also known as Lindow II and ( in jest ) as Pete Marsh , is the preserved bog body of a man discovered in a peat bog at Lindow Moss near Wilmslow in Cheshire , North West England . The body was found on 1 August 1984 by commercial peat @-@ cutters . Lindow Man is not the only bog body to have been found in the moss ; Lindow Woman was discovered the year before , and other body parts have also been recovered . The find , described as " one of the most significant archaeological discoveries of the 1980s " , caused a media sensation . It helped invigorate study of British bog bodies , which had previously been neglected in comparison to those found in the rest of Europe . 
 At the time of death , Lindow Man was a healthy male in his mid @-@ 20s , and he may have been someone of high status , as his body shows little evidence of heavy or rough work . There has been debate over the reason for Lindow Man 's death , for the nature of his demise was violent , perhaps ritualistic ; after a last meal of charred bread , Lindow Man was strangled , hit on the head , and his throat cut . Dating the body has proven problematic , but it is thought that Lindow Man was deposited into Lindow Moss , face down , some time between 2 BC and 119 AD , in either the Iron Age or Romano @-@ British period . The body has been preserved by freeze @-@ drying and is on permanent display at the British Museum , although it occasionally travels to other venues such as Manchester Museum . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Lindow Moss = = = 
 Lindow Moss is a peat bog in Lindow , an area of Wilmslow , Cheshire , which has been used as common land since the medieval period . It formed after the last ice age , one of many such peat bogs in north @-@ east Cheshire and the Mersey basin that formed in hollows caused by melting ice . Investigations have not yet discovered settlement or agricultural activity around the edge of Lindow Moss that would have been contemporary with Lindow Man ; however , analysis of pollen in the peat suggests there was some cultivation in the vicinity . Once covering over 600 hectares ( 1 @,@ 500 acres ) , the bog has now shrunk to a tenth of its original size . It is a dangerous place ; an 18th @-@ century writer recorded people drowning there . For centuries the peat from the bog was used as fuel , and it continued to be extracted until the 1980s , by which time the process had been mechanised . Lindow Moss is a lowland raised mire ; this type of peat bog often produces the best preserved bog bodies , allowing more detailed analysis . Lowland raised mires occur mainly in northern England and extend south to the Midlands . Lindow Man is one of 27 bodies to be recovered from such areas . 
 = = = Lindow Woman = = = 
 On 13 May 1983 , two peat workers at Lindow Moss , Andy Mould and Stephen Dooley , noticed an unusual object — about the size of a football — on the elevator taking peat to the shredding machine . They removed the object for closer inspection , joking that it was a dinosaur egg . Once the peat had been removed , their discovery turned out to be a decomposing , incomplete human head with one eye and some hair intact . Forensics identified the skull as belonging to a European woman , probably aged 30 – 50 . Police initially thought the skull was that of Malika Reyn @-@ Bardt , who had disappeared in 1960 and was the subject of an ongoing investigation . While in prison on another charge , her husband , Peter Reyn @-@ Bardt , had boasted that he had killed his wife and buried her in the back garden of their bungalow , which was on the edge of the area of mossland where peat was being dug . The garden was examined but no body was recovered there . When Reyn @-@ Bardt was confronted with the discovery of the skull from Lindow Moss , he confessed to the murder of his wife . It was later radiocarbon dated , revealing it to be nearly 2 @,@ 000 years old . " Lindow Woman " , as it became known , dated from around 210 AD . This emerged shortly before Reyn @-@ Bardt went to trial , but he was convicted on the evidence of his confession . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 A year later a further discovery was made at Lindow Moss , just 820 feet ( 250 m ) south @-@ west of the Lindow Woman . On 1 August 1984 , Andy Mould , who had been involved in the discovery of Lindow Woman , took what he thought was a piece of wood off the elevator of the peat @-@ shredding machine . He threw the object at Eddie Slack , his workmate . When it hit the ground , peat fell off the object and revealed it to be a human foot . The police were called and the foot was taken away for examination . Rick Turner , the Cheshire County Archaeologist , was notified of the discovery and succeeded in finding the rest of the body , which later became known as Lindow Man . Some skin had been exposed and had started to decay , so to prevent further deterioration of the body , it was re @-@ covered with peat . The complete excavation of the block containing the remains was performed on 6 August . Until it could be dated , it was moved to the Macclesfield District General Hospital for storage . As the body of Malika Reyn @-@ Bardt had still not been found , it was thought possible the body might be hers , until it was determined to be male , and radiocarbon dated . The owners of the land on which Lindow Man was found donated the body to the British Museum , and on 21 August it was transported to London . 
 At the time , the body was dubbed " Pete Marsh " ( a pun on " peat marsh " ) by Middlesex Hospital radiologists , a name subsequently adopted by local journalists , as was the similar " Pete <unk> " ( a pun on " peat bog " ) . The find was announced to the press during the second week of investigation . As the best preserved bog body found in Britain , its discovery caused a domestic media sensation and received global coverage . Sparking excitement in the country 's archaeological community , who had long expected such a find , it was hailed as one of the most important archaeological discoveries of the 1980s . A <unk> documentary about Lindow Man broadcast by the BBC in 1985 attracted 10 million viewers . 
 Lindow Man 's official name is Lindow II , as there are other finds from the area : Lindow I ( Lindow Woman ) refers to a human skull , Lindow III to a " fragmented headless body " , and Lindow IV to the upper thigh of an adult male , possibly that of Lindow Man . After the discovery of Lindow Man , there were no further archaeological excavations at Lindow Moss until 1987 . A large piece of skin was found by workmen on the elevator on 6 February 1987 . On this occasion , the police left the investigation to the archaeologists . Over 70 pieces were found , constituting Lindow III . Although the bone was not as well preserved as that of Lindow Man , the other tissues survived in better condition . The final discovery was that of Lindow IV on 14 June 1988 . Part of a left leg and buttocks were found on the elevator , from a site just 50 feet ( 15 m ) west of where Lindow Man was found . Nearly three months later , on 12 September , a right thigh was discovered in the peat on the bucket of a digger . The proximity of the discovery sites , coupled with the fact that the remains were shown to come from an adult male , means that Lindow IV is probably part of Lindow Man . 
 = = Remains and investigation = = 
 Lindow Man marked the first discovery in Britain of a well @-@ preserved bog body ; its condition was comparable to that of Grauballe Man and Tollund Man from Denmark . Before Lindow Man was found , it was estimated that 41 bog bodies had been found in England and Wales and 15 in Scotland . Encouraged by the discovery of Lindow Man , a gazetteer was compiled , which revealed a far higher number of bog bodies : over 85 in England and Wales and over 36 in Scotland . Prior to the discovery of the bodies in Lindow Moss , British bog bodies had been a relatively neglected subject compared to European examples . The interest caused by Lindow Man led to more in @-@ depth research of accounts of discoveries in bogs since the 17th century ; by 1995 , the numbers had changed to 106 in England and Wales and 34 in Scotland . The remains covered a large time frame . 
 In life , Lindow Man would have measured between 5 ' 6 " and 5 ' 8 " ( 1 @.@ 68 and 1 @.@ 73 m ) tall and weighed about 132 pounds ( 60 kg ) . It was possible to ascertain that his age at death was around the mid @-@ 20s . The body retains a trimmed beard , moustache , and sideburns of brown hair , as well as healthy teeth with no visible cavities , and manicured fingernails , indicating he did little heavy or rough work . Apart from a fox @-@ fur armband , Lindow Man was discovered completely naked . When he died , Lindow Man was suffering from slight osteoarthritis and an infestation of <unk> and maw worm . As a result of <unk> of the bones and pressure from the peat under which Lindow Man was buried , his skull was distorted . While some preserved human remains may contain DNA , peat bogs such as Lindow Moss are generally poor for such a purpose , and it is unlikely that DNA could be recovered from Lindow Man . 
 Lindow Man and Lindow III were found to have elevated levels of copper on their skin . The cause for this was uncertain as there could have been natural causes , although a study by Pyatt et al proposed that the bodies may have been painted with a copper @-@ based pigment . To test this , skin samples were taken from places likely to be painted and tested against samples from areas where painting was unlikely . It was found that the copper content of the skin of the torso was higher than the control areas , suggesting that the theory of Pyatt et al may have been correct . However , the conclusion was ambiguous as the overall content was above that expected of a male , and variations across the body may have been due to environmental factors . Similarly , green deposits were found in the hair , originally thought to be a copper @-@ based pigment used for decoration , but it was later found to be the result of a reaction between the keratin in the hair and the acid of the peat bog . 
 Dating Lindow Man is problematic as samples from the body and surrounding peat have produced dates spanning a 900 @-@ year period . Although the peat encasing Lindow Man has been radiocarbon dated to about 300 BC , Lindow Man himself has a different date . Early tests at different laboratories returned conflicting dates for the body ; later tests suggested a date between 2 BC and 119 AD . There has been a tendency to ascribe the body to the Iron Age period rather than Roman due to the interpretation that Lindow Man 's death may have been a ritual sacrifice or execution . Explanations for why the peat in which he was found is much older have been sought . Archaeologist P. C. Buckland suggests that as the stratigraphy of the peat appears undisturbed , Lindow Man may have been deposited into a pool that was already some 300 years old . Geographer K. E. Barber has argued against this hypothesis , saying that pools at Lindow Moss would have been too shallow , and suggests that the peat may have been peeled back to allow the burial and then replaced , leaving the stratigraphy apparently undisturbed . 
 Lindow Man 's last meal was preserved in his stomach and intestines and was analysed in some detail . It was hoped that investigations into the contents of the stomach would shed light on the contemporary diet , as was the case with Grauballe Man and Tollund Man in the 1950s . The analysis of the contents of the digestive system of bog bodies had become one of the principal endeavours of investigating such remains . Analysis of the grains present revealed his diet to be mostly of cereals . He probably ate slightly charred bread , although the burning may have had ritual significance rather than being an accident . Some mistletoe pollen was also found in the stomach , indicating that Lindow Man died in around March or April . 
 One of the conclusions of the study was that the people buried in Lindow Moss may have had a less varied diet than their European counterparts . According to Jody Joy , curator of the Iron Age collection at the British Museum , the importance of Lindow Man lies more in how he lived rather than how he died , as the circumstances surrounding his demise may never be fully established . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 As the peat was cleaned off the body in the laboratory , it became clear that Lindow Man had suffered a violent death . The injuries included a V @-@ shaped , 3 @.@ 5 @-@ centimetre ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) cut on top of his head ; a possible laceration at the back of the head ; ligature marks on the neck where a sinew cord was found ; a possible wound on the right side of the neck ; a possible stab wound in the upper right chest ; a broken neck ; and a fractured rib . <unk> revealed the blow on top of the head ( causing the V @-@ shaped cut ) was caused by a relatively blunt object ; it had fractured the skull and driven fragments into the brain . Swelling along the edges of the wound indicated Lindow Man had lived after being struck . The blow , possibly from a small axe , would have caused unconsciousness but Lindow Man could have survived for several hours afterwards . The ligature marks on the neck were caused by the tightening of the sinew cord found around his neck , possibly a garrotte or necklace . 
 In the case of some injuries , such as the laceration on the back of the skull , it is not possible to confirm whether they took place before or after death due to the body 's state of decay . This is also the case for the wound in the upper right chest . The cut on the right of the neck may have been the result of the body becoming bloated , causing the skin to split ; however , the straight edges to the wound suggest it may have been caused by a sharp instrument such as a knife . The ligature marks on the neck may have occurred after death . In some interpretations of Lindow Man 's death , the sinew is a garrotte used to break the man 's neck . However , Robert Connolly , a lecturer in physical anthropology , suggests that the sinew may have been ornamental and that ligature marks may have been caused by the body swelling when submerged . The rib fracture may also have occurred after death , perhaps during the discovery of the body , but is included in some narratives of Lindow Man 's death . The broken neck would have proven the fatal injury , whether caused by the sinew cord around Lindow Man 's neck tightening , or by blows to the back of the head . After death , Lindow Man was deposited into Lindow Moss face down . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Archaeologist Don Brothwell considers that many of the older bodies need re @-@ examining with modern techniques , such as those used in the analysis of Lindow Man . The study of bog bodies , including these found in Lindow Moss , have contributed to a wider understanding of well @-@ preserved human remains , helping to develop new methods in analysis and investigation . The use of sophisticated techniques , such as computer tomography ( CT ) scans , has marked the investigation of the Lindow bodies as particularly important . Such scans allow the reconstruction of the body and internal examination . Of the 27 bodies recovered from lowland raised mires in England and Wales , only those from Lindow Moss and the remains of Worsley Man have survived , together with a shoe from another body . The remains have a date range from the early 1st to the 4th centuries . Investigation into the other bodies relies on contemporary descriptions of the discovery . 
 The physical evidence allows a general reconstruction of how Lindow Man was killed , although some details are debated , but it does not explain why he was killed . In North West England , there is little evidence for religious or ritual activity in the Iron Age period . What evidence does survive is usually in the form of artefacts recovered from peat bogs . Late Iron Age burials in the region often took the form of a crouched inhumation , sometimes with personal ornaments . Although dated to the mid @-@ 1st century AD , the type of burial of Lindow Man was more common in the pre @-@ historic period . In the latter half of the 20th century , scholars widely believed that bog bodies demonstrating injuries to the neck or head area were examples of ritual sacrifice . Bog bodies were associated with Germanic and Celtic cultures , specifically relating to head worship . 
 According to Brothwell , Lindow Man is one of the most complex examples of " overkill " in a bog body , and possibly has ritual meaning as it was " extravagant " for a straightforward murder . Archaeologists John Hodgson and Mark <unk> suggest that bog bodies may have been related to religious practice , although there is division in the academic community over this issue . In the case of Lindow Man , scholars debate whether the killing was murder or done as part of ritual . Anne Ross , an expert on Iron Age religion , proposed that the death was an example of human sacrifice and that the " triple death " ( throat cut , strangled , and hit on the head ) was an offering to several different gods . The wide date range for Lindow Man 's death ( 2 BC to 119 AD ) means he may have met his demise after the Romans conquered northern England in the 60s AD . As the Romans outlawed human sacrifice , such timing would open up other possibilities . This conclusion was emphasised by historian Ronald Hutton , who challenged the interpretation of sacrificial death . Connolly suggests that as Lindow Man was found naked , he could have been the victim of a violent robbery . 
 Joy said , " The jury really is still out on these bodies , whether they were aristocrats , priests , criminals , outsiders , whether they went willingly to their deaths or whether they were executed – but Lindow was a very remote place in those days , an unlikely place for an ambush or a murder " . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Environment and situation are the crucial factors that determine how corpses decay . For instance , corpses will decay differently depending on the weather , the way they are buried , and the medium in which they are buried . Peat slows the decay of corpses . It was feared that , once Lindow Man was removed from that environment , which had preserved the body for nearly 2 @,@ 000 years , the remains would rapidly start to deteriorate , so steps were taken to insure preservation . After rejecting methods that had been used to maintain the integrity of other bog bodies , such as the " pit @-@ tanning " used on Grauballe Man , which took a year and a half , scientists settled on freeze @-@ drying . In preparation , the body was covered in a solution of 15 % polyethylene glycol 400 and 85 % water to prevent its becoming distorted . The body was then frozen solid and the ice vaporised to ensure Lindow Man did not shrink . Afterwards , Lindow Man was put in a specially constructed display case to control the environment , maintaining the temperature at 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) and the humidity at 55 % . 
 Lindow Man is held in the British Museum . Before the remains were transferred there , people from North West England launched an unsuccessful campaign to keep the body in Manchester . The bog body has been on temporary display in other venues : at the Manchester Museum on three occasions , April to December 1987 , March to September 1991 , and April 2008 to April 2009 ; and at the Great North Museum in Newcastle from August to November 2009 . The 2008 – 09 Manchester display , titled Lindow Man : A Bog Body Mystery Exhibition at the Manchester Museum , won the category " Best Archaeological Innovation " in the 2010 British Archaeological Awards , run by the Council for British Archaeology . 
 Critics have complained that , by museum display of the remains , the body of Lindow Man has been objectified rather than treated with the respect due the dead . Emma <unk> Orr , a neo @-@ druid , has questioned whether the body should be displayed at all . This is part of a wider discussion about the scientific treatment of human remains and museum researchers and archaeologists using them as information sources . 
 = Wild Pilgrimage = 
 Wild Pilgrimage is the third wordless novel of American artist Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) , published in 1932 . It was executed in 108 monochromatic wood engravings , printed alternately in black ink when representing reality and orange to represent the protagonist 's fantasies . The story tells of a factory worker who abandons his workplace to seek a free life ; on his travels he witnesses a lynching , assaults a farmer 's wife , educates himself with a hermit , and upon returning to the factory leads an unsuccessful workers ' revolt . The protagonist finds himself battling opposing dualities such as freedom versus responsibility , the individual versus society , and love versus death . 
 Ward simplified his approach after the more complex , novelistic story of his previous book , Madman 's Drum ( 1930 ) , returning to the simplicity of his first , Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) . Wild Pilgrimage achieves more fluid pacing and varied imagery than the first two books , incorporating the influence of art movements such as American Regionalism and Futurism . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 A factory worker leaves his place of work to live a free life . He travels deep into the woods , where he witnesses a lynching . Deeper in the woods , he finds farm work , but it does not last long — when discovered attempting to enact his sexual fantasies on the farmer 's wife , the man is forced off the farm . He finds refuge with a hermit , who allows him to stay in his cottage and teaches the man to grow fruits and vegetables . The man educates himself with the hermit 's books . He finds himself in a reverie in which he and the hermit battle a slave @-@ owning capitalist . The man returns to his former place of employment and rouses a workers ' rebellion . During the fray , he fantasizes that he decapitates his employer 's head ; when he raises it , he discovers the head to be his own . Awakening from the fantasy , he is felled in the midst of the battle . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in Chicago , Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) was a son of Methodist minister Harry F. Ward ( 1873 – 1966 ) , a social activist and the first chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union . Throughout his career , Ward displayed in his work the influence of his father 's interest in social injustice . The younger Ward was early drawn to art , and contributed art and text to high school and college newspapers . 
 After graduating from university in 1926 , Ward married writer May McNeer and the couple left for an extended honeymoon in Europe . Ward spent a year studying wood engraving in Leipzig , Germany , where he encountered German Expressionist art and read the wordless novel The Sun ( 1919 ) by Flemish woodcut artist Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) . Ward returned to the United States and freelanced his illustrations . In 1929 , he came across German artist Otto Nückel 's wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) in New York City . Nückel 's only work in the genre , Destiny told of the life and death of a prostitute in a style inspired by that of Masereel , but with a greater cinematic flow . The work inspired Ward to create a wordless novel of his own , Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) , which he followed the next year with Madman 's Drum , a story with a much more complicated plot and developed characters than the first . Ward returned to the simpler , more streamlined style of the first book with Wild Pilgrimage . 
 = = Production and publication history = = 
 The 108 prints for Wild Pilgrimage were larger than in Ward 's previous two books ; the original printing of the book itself measured 10 by 7 inches ( 25 cm × 18 cm ) . The " reality " portions are printed in black ink , and the " fantasy " segments in orange . The book saw print in November 1932 , published by Harrison Smith and Robert Haas . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 Unlike Ward 's previous books , which had titles between scenes , Wild Pilgrimage provides the reader with no textual cues . In 1937 Irvin Haas called Wild Pilgrimage the book in which " Ward became a master of his medium " , praising in particular the quality of the clarity and richness of the artwork . 
 Freedom and responsibility , individuality and society , and love and death are among the binaries the symbolic work abounds in . Cartoonist Art Spiegelman comments that Ward had mastered a fluid rhythm of pacing with his third book , <unk> a flow that minimized the need for the reader to spend time deciphering images before moving to the next page , while encouraging multiple readings and interpretations . At the same time , Spiegelman writes , the images reward a closer look on rereading . 
 Ward 's images offer a diversity of textures , moods , detail , and composition , and mix in influence from movements such as American Regionalism and Futurism . The seeming homoeroticism in the artwork drew attention , such as the prominent rear shots of the protagonist , the sort of imagery that prompted Susan Sontag to note Ward 's work in her 1964 essay " Notes on ' Camp ' " . Writer Sarah Boxer found the prominence of such imagery distracting . Spiegelman defends the book against critics who smirk at the Ward 's artwork 's affinity with the " fetishistic figures and landscape " of Thomas Hart Benton and the homoerotic art of Tom of Finland , saying the book 's " passion and even its off sexual <unk> are among its strengths " , and calls it " in some ways the most accessible and satisfying " of Ward 's books . 
 = Tropical Storm Dolly ( 2014 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Dolly was a short @-@ lived and disorganized tropical cyclone that caused moderate damage across Tamaulipas , Mexico , in early September 2014 . Originating from a tropical wave , the system first became a tropical depression late on September 1 while situated over the Bay of Campeche . Dolly struggled against strong wind shear for the duration of its existence . The large system featured multiple circulations , sometimes becoming a new dominant center and other times simply rotating around a mean vortex . As a result , multiple center relocations occurred along its general west @-@ northwest track . Dolly eventually made landfall in Tamaulipas on September 3 before degenerating into a remnant low . The system subsequently dissipated the following day . 
 Prior to Dolly 's landfall , schools suspended classes and officials opened shelters across Tamaulipas and Veracruz . The storm produced widespread moderate to heavy rain in Mexico , with accumulations peaking at 15 @.@ 23 in ( 387 mm ) in La Encantada , Tamaulipas . Subsequent flooding caused damage amounting to at least 87 million pesos ( US $ 6 @.@ 5 million ) . One fatality was indirectly attributed to the storm . Moisture from Dolly also brought scattered storms to southern Texas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 19 , 2014 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa . The system traversed the Atlantic over the next week with no signs of development . Convection finally increased once the wave entered the Caribbean Sea on August 27 ; however , it was not until August 30 when interaction with a Kelvin wave spurred organization . An area of low pressure consolidated within the system as it crossed the Yucatán Peninsula on August 31 . Formation of a banding feature along the southeastern portion of the circulation on September 1 marked the system 's transition into a tropical depression by 18 : 00 UTC while over the Bay of Campeche . Although situated over warm waters of 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) , strong wind shear created an unfavorable environment and hindered intensification . During this formative stage , the depression tracked northward as its center relocated before turning to the northwest and later west . It was uncertain if a closed circulation truly existed due to conflicting data and the depression could have remained a trough until the afternoon of September 2 . 
 Early on September 2 , the depression acquired gale @-@ force winds and became the fourth tropical storm of the 2014 season ; accordingly , it was assigned the name Dolly at this time . A tight pressure gradient between Dolly and a ridge over the Gulf of Mexico created a large area of tropical storm winds along the east side of the cyclone . Data Hurricane Hunters investigating the system indicate that Dolly achieved its peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) around 12 : 00 UTC . Winds up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) were found within the deep convection to the storm 's east but considered to be inflated by heavy rains and thus not representative of its actual strength . Slight weakening took place shortly thereafter as the center relocated to the south . During this relocation , multiple circulations were observed rotating around a mean position with yet another vortex located well to the southeast . Around 01 : 00 UTC on September 3 , Dolly 's pressure fell to 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) marking the storm 's peak intensity . Maintaining a due west course , Dolly made landfall just south of Tampico at 04 : 00 UTC with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Radar observations depicted a secondary center to the north that moved ashore near Altamira an hour later . Once onshore , Dolly 's circulation separated from all remaining convection and the storm degenerated into a remnant low later that day . The system subsequently dissipated early on September 4 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The remnants of Dolly brought widespread moisture to southern Texas by September 5 . Scattered thunderstorms developed across the region , with some producing damaging winds . More than 2 in ( 51 mm ) of rain fell in Brownsville , causing street flooding . Dozens of Mexican fishing vessels sought refuge in the Port of Brownsville ; however , two ran aground in the shipping channel and a third on South Padre Island . The United States Coast Guard attributed the mishaps to the sudden influx of numerous ships . 
 Southerly flow from Hurricane Norbert over the Pacific brought moisture from Dolly over the Southwestern United States , resulting in possible life @-@ threatening flash flooding . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Coinciding with the first advisory on Tropical Depression Five late on September 1 , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning for areas between Tuxpan and La Pesca . This was soon expanded northward to include areas between La Pesca and Barra El Mezquital . Public schools and the Autonomous University of Tamaulipas suspended classes on September 2 and 3 in Tamaulipas and Veracruz . Officials opened 53 shelters for potential evacuees . Pemex temporarily suspended operations of two oil production plants . 
 Between September 1 – 4 , Dolly brought widespread heavy rains to Mexico . Accumulations of 4 to 8 in ( 100 to 200 mm ) were common across the states of Hidalgo , Nuevo León , San Luis Potosí , Tamaulipas , and Veracruz , with a peak value of 15 @.@ 23 in ( 387 mm ) in La Encantada , Tamaulipas . Flooding in Tamaulipas prompted residents to evacuate and utilize public shelters . A roof collapse at a ballpark injured two people . Damage to roads across the state amounted to 80 million pesos ( US $ 6 million ) ; however , no single road suffered major damage . Losses from heavy rain in El Mante reached 7 million pesos ( US $ 500 @,@ 000 ) , prompting a state of emergency . Some residences temporarily lost power across Tamaulipas . Road collapses in Veracruz City damaged ten homes and four cars . One of these further threatened 40 homes in <unk> Buena Vista within the city . A rockslide occurred in the remote community of El <unk> . Flooding in Guanajuato caused notable disruptions and some damage . No observations of sustained tropical storm @-@ force winds were received , though a gust of 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) was observed in Barra del <unk> . Accordingly , wind damage was limited to Cabo Rojo . One death was indirectly attributed to Dolly . 
 = Tropical Storm Matthew ( 2004 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Matthew was a weak tropical storm in the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season that made landfall on Louisiana . Matthew was the thirteenth tropical storm of the season and the ninth storm to affect the United States . Matthew formed over the western Gulf of Mexico on October 8 and struck south @-@ central Louisiana two days later . The combination of this storm and an upper cyclone over the southern Plains brought heavy rains to much of the Gulf Coast , with the highest amounts reported lying over 15 inches ( 381 mm ) in northern Louisiana . Damage was minimal , totaling $ 305 @,@ 000 ( 2004 USD ) , and no casualties were reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 19 . The wave moved westward , but was difficult to track due to its proximity to Hurricane Lisa and another large tropical wave . It passed through the Lesser Antilles , and slowly organized as convection increased due to an upper level low . On October 5 , it entered the Gulf of Mexico , and developed an area of low pressure two days later . The system continued to organize , and on October 8 , after developing a circulation , it developed into Tropical Depression Fourteen while located 205 miles ( 330 km ) to the southeast of Brownsville , Texas . 
 The depression moved to the east @-@ northeast , and quickly strengthened into Tropical Storm Matthew . Operationally , Matthew fluctuated between tropical depression and tropical storm status , but in post @-@ season analysis , the storm remained a tropical storm . The storm turned to the northeast while moving around the periphery of a high pressure system over Texas , and attained a peak intensity of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) on October 9 . Strong wind shear limited further strengthening , and on October 10 , Matthew struck Cocodrie , Louisiana as a minimal tropical storm . It became an Extratropical cyclone , occluding near the time of landfall . 
 After it merged with the system , the storm moved inland over Arkansas , Tennessee and the Ohio Valley . While moving inland , Matthew spun off another low pressure system that formed over North Carolina on October 13 . The low moved off the Mid @-@ Atlantic coast before hitting Massachusetts two days later , and later merged with the original low pressure system of Matthew . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Initially , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted that Matthew would take a more eastern track and hit the Florida Panhandle . Because the track shifted westward , the National Hurricane Center issued a Tropical Storm Warning from the Florida / Alabama border to Intracoastal City , Louisiana on the day before landfall . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Though damage was minor throughout its path , Matthew dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across much of the Gulf Coast , peaking at over 15 inches ( 381 mm ) in portions of Louisiana . 
 = = = Louisiana = = = 
 Upon making landfall , Matthew caused a storm surge of up to 5 @.@ 85 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in <unk> , Louisiana . The storm surge and waves resulted in significant beach erosion in Grand Isle . Matthew produced heavy rainfall across its path , totaling to 16 @.@ 23 inches ( 410 mm ) in Reserve in the southeastern portion of the state . Portions of northwestern Louisiana experienced significant rainfall , including a peak of 18 inches ( 460 mm ) in <unk> near the Louisiana / Arkansas border . In addition , Matthew spawned one tornado , causing damage to the roof of a trailer in Golden Meadow . The rainfall also caused rivers to crest higher than normal , including the Killian River which peaked at 5 @.@ 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) . 
 Rainfall and storm surge flooded 20 homes in Terrebonne Parish . In addition , several homes in <unk> Parish experienced flooding , including two with over two feet of water . Numerous homes in Golden Meadow experienced flooding , as well . The flooding also forced the temporary closing of numerous roads across the state , including portions of U.S. Route 11 and Interstate 10 . Flood waters from the storm cracked a water line in LaPlace , leaving nearly 30 @,@ 000 residents and many businesses without tap water . The problem was expected to take little time to fix , though residents were advise to boil the water before drinking it . Matthew also left 2 @,@ 500 people without power for a short period of time . The storm 's impact also closed several schools , forcing school administrators to reschedule plans for making up school closings caused by Hurricane Ivan one month earlier . In all , Matthew caused no deaths and $ 255 @,@ 000 in damage ( 2004 USD ) . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 As the storm made landfall , the outer @-@ bands of Matthew brought heavy rains in Florida . The rain was reported as far south as Naples . In Pensacola , 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) gusts were reported , as well rainfall totaling up to 3 to 4 inches ( 75 to 100 mm ) . In Alabama , wind gusts peaked at 47 mph ( 75 km / h ) at Dauphin Island . The storm produced light rainfall across the state , totaling to 2 @.@ 74 inches ( 70 mm ) at Grand Bay . In addition , Matthew produced tides of 1 to 3 feet ( .3 to .9 m ) above normal , causing minor to major beach erosion . The beach erosion , which typically would have been minor for a weak storm , was greater than expected due to the passage of Hurricane Ivan just weeks before . No major damage was reported in Alabama . In Mississippi , winds gusts peaked at 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) with sustained winds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) in Waveland . Storm surge ranged from 2 to 4 feet ( .6 to 1 @.@ 2 m ) along much of the coastline , though Waveland reported a peak of 5 @.@ 13 feet ( 1 @.@ 56 m ) . Rainfall totals were mainly between 2 and 4 inches ( 50 to 100 mm ) . Damage in Mississippi totaled to $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 2004 USD ) . 
 Matthew produced moderate rainfall on its west side , as well . Portions of Texas and Oklahoma experienced over 5 inches ( 127 mm ) of rain , while southern Arkansas received over 10 inches ( 255 mm ) of rainfall . The rainfall was well @-@ received due to a period of dry weather in the area . Though it slowed harvest activities , it aided pastures . 
 = Kathleen Ferrier = 
 Kathleen Mary Ferrier , CBE ( 22 April 1912 – 8 October 1953 ) was an English contralto singer who achieved an international reputation as a stage , concert and recording artist , with a repertoire extending from folksong and popular ballads to the classical works of Bach , Brahms , Mahler and Elgar . Her death from cancer , at the height of her fame , was a shock to the musical world and particularly to the general public , which was kept in ignorance of the nature of her illness until after her death . 
 The daughter of a Lancashire village schoolmaster , Ferrier showed early talent as a pianist , and won numerous amateur piano competitions while working as a telephonist with the General Post Office . She did not take up singing seriously until 1937 , when after winning a prestigious singing competition at the Carlisle Festival she began to receive offers of professional engagements as a vocalist . Thereafter she took singing lessons , first with J.E. Hutchinson and later with Roy Henderson . After the outbreak of the Second World War Ferrier was recruited by the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts ( CEMA ) , and in the following years sang at concerts and recitals throughout England . In 1942 her career was boosted when she met the conductor Malcolm Sargent , who recommended her to the influential <unk> and Tillett concert management agency . She became a regular performer at leading London and provincial venues , and made numerous BBC radio broadcasts . 
 In 1946 , Ferrier made her stage debut , in the Glyndebourne Festival premiere of Benjamin Britten 's opera The Rape of Lucretia . A year later she made her first appearance as Orfeo in Gluck 's Orfeo ed Euridice , a work with which she became particularly associated . By her own choice , these were her only two operatic roles . As her reputation grew , Ferrier formed close working relationships with major musical figures , including Britten , Sir John Barbirolli , Bruno Walter and the accompanist Gerald Moore . She became known internationally through her three tours to the United States between 1948 and 1950 and her many visits to continental Europe . 
 Ferrier was diagnosed with breast cancer in March 1951 . In between periods of hospitalisation and convalescence she continued to perform and record ; her final public appearance was as Orfeo , at the Royal Opera House in February 1953 , eight months before her death . Among her many memorials , the Kathleen Ferrier Cancer Research Fund was launched in May 1954 . The Kathleen Ferrier Scholarship Fund , administered by the Royal Philharmonic Society , has since 1956 made annual awards to aspiring young professional singers . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 The Ferrier family originally came from Pembrokeshire in South West Wales . The Lancashire branch originated in the 19th century , when Thomas Ferrier ( youngest son of Private Thomas Ferrier of the Pembrokeshire Regiment ) settled in the area after being stationed near Blackburn during a period of industrial unrest . Kathleen Ferrier was born on 22 April 1912 , in the Lancashire village of Higher Walton where her father William Ferrier ( the fourth child of Thomas and Elizabeth , née Gorton ) was the head of the village school . Although untrained musically , William was an enthusiastic member of the local operatic society and of several choirs , and his wife Alice ( née Murray ) , whom he married in 1900 , was a competent singer with a strong contralto voice . Kathleen was the third and youngest of the couple 's children , following a sister and a brother ; when she was two the family moved to Blackburn , after William was appointed headmaster of St Paul 's School in the town . From an early age Kathleen showed promise as a pianist , and had lessons with Frances Walker , a noted North of England piano teacher who had been a pupil of Tobias Matthay . Kathleen 's talent developed quickly ; in 1924 she came fourth out of 43 entrants at the Lytham St Annes Festival piano competition , and in the following year at Lytham she achieved second place . 
 = = = <unk> and pianist = = = 
 Because of William 's impending retirement and the consequent fall in the family 's income , Ferrier 's hopes of attending a music college could not be realised . In August 1926 she left school to start work as a trainee at the GPO telephone exchange in Blackburn . She continued her piano studies under Frances Walker , and in November 1928 was the regional winner in a national contest for young pianists , organised by the Daily Express . Although unsuccessful in the London finals which followed , Ferrier won a Cramer upright piano as a prize . On 10 March 1929 she made a well @-@ received appearance as an accompanist in a concert at Blackburn 's King George 's Hall . After further piano competition successes she was invited to perform a short radio recital at the Manchester studios of the BBC , and on 3 July 1930 made her first broadcast , playing works by Brahms and Percy Grainger . Around this time she completed her training and she became a fully fledged telephonist . 
 In 1931 , aged 19 , Ferrier passed her Licentiate examinations at the Royal Academy of Music . In that year she started occasional singing lessons , and in December sang a small mezzo @-@ soprano role in a church performance of Mendelssohn 's oratorio Elijah . However , her voice was not thought to be exceptional ; her musical life centred on the piano and on local concerts , at King George 's Hall and elsewhere . Early in 1934 she transferred to the Blackpool telephone exchange and took lodgings nearby , to be close to her new boyfriend , a bank clerk named Albert Wilson . While at Blackpool she auditioned for the new " speaking clock " service which the GPO was preparing to introduce . In her excitement , Ferrier inserted an extra aspirate into her audition , and was not chosen for the final selection in London . Her decision in 1935 to marry Wilson meant the end of her employment with the telephone exchange , since at that time the GPO did not employ married women . Of Ferrier 's career to this point , the music biographer Humphrey Burton wrote : " For more than a decade , when she should have been studying music with the best teachers , learning English literature and foreign languages , acquiring stage craft and movement skills , and travelling to London regularly to see opera , Miss Ferrier was actually answering the telephone , getting married to a bank manager and winning <unk> competitions for her piano @-@ playing . " 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Ferrier met Albert Wilson in 1933 , probably through dancing , which they both loved . When she announced that they were to marry , her family and friends had strong reservations , on the grounds that she was young and inexperienced , and that she and Wilson shared few serious interests . Nevertheless , the marriage took place on 19 November 1935 . Shortly afterwards the couple moved to <unk> , a small port town in Cumberland , where Wilson had been appointed as manager of his bank 's branch . The marriage was not successful ; the honeymoon had revealed problems of physical incompatibility , and the union remained unconsummated . In a tribute article written for the 50th anniversary of Ferrier 's death , the journalist Rupert Christiansen wrote of Ferrier 's sexuality that " there is absolutely no justification for the idea that she was a lesbian , but she may have been sexually frigid " . Outward appearances were maintained for a few years , until Wilson 's departure for military service in 1940 effectively ended the marriage . The couple divorced in 1947 , though they remained on good terms . Wilson subsequently married a friend of Ferrier 's , Wyn Hetherington ; he died in 1969 . 
 = = Early singing career = = 
 In 1937 Ferrier entered the Carlisle Festival open piano competition and , as a result of a small bet with her husband , also signed up for the singing contest . She easily won the piano trophy ; in the singing finals she sang Roger Quilter 's To Daisies , a performance which earned her the festival 's top vocal award . To mark her double triumph in piano and voice , Ferrier was awarded a special rose bowl as champion of the festival . 
 After her Carlisle victories , Ferrier began to receive offers of singing engagements . Her first appearance as a professional vocalist , in autumn 1937 , was at a harvest festival celebration in the village church at <unk> . She was paid one guinea . After winning the gold cup at the 1938 Workington Festival , Ferrier sang Ma Curly @-@ Headed <unk> in a concert at Workington Opera House . Cecil McGivern , producer of a BBC Northern radio variety show , was in the audience and was sufficiently impressed to book her for the next edition of his programme , which was broadcast from Newcastle on 23 February 1939 . This broadcast — her first as a vocalist — attracted wide attention , and led to more radio work , though for Ferrier the event was overshadowed by the death of her mother at the beginning of February . At the 1939 Carlisle Festival , Ferrier sang Richard Strauss 's song All Soul 's Day , a performance which particularly impressed one of the adjudicators , J. E. Hutchinson , a music teacher with a considerable reputation . Ferrier became his pupil and , under his guidance , began to extend her repertoire to include works by Bach , Handel , Brahms and Elgar . 
 When Albert Wilson joined the army in 1940 , Ferrier reverted to her maiden name , having until then sung as ' Kathleen Wilson ' . In December 1940 she appeared for the first time professionally as ' Kathleen Ferrier ' in a performance of Handel 's Messiah , under Hutchinson 's direction . In early 1941 she successfully auditioned as a singer with the Council for the Encouragement of the Arts ( CEMA ) , which provided concerts and other entertainments to military camps , factories and other workplaces . Within this organisation Ferrier began working with artists with international reputations ; in December 1941 she sang with the Hallé Orchestra in a performance of Messiah together with Isobel Baillie , the distinguished soprano . However , her application to the BBC 's head of music in Manchester for an audition was turned down . Ferrier had better fortune when she was introduced to Malcolm Sargent after a Hallé concert in Blackpool . Sargent agreed to hear her sing , and afterwards recommended her to <unk> and Tillett , the London @-@ based concert management agency . John Tillett accepted her as a client without hesitation after which , on Sargent 's advice , Ferrier decided to base herself in London . On 24 December 1942 she moved with her sister Winifred into an apartment in Frognal Mansions , Hampstead . 
 = = Stardom = = 
 = = = Growing reputation = = = 
 Ferrier gave her first London recital on 28 December 1942 at the National Gallery , in a lunch @-@ time concert organised by Dame Myra Hess . Although she wrote " went off very well " in her diary , Ferrier was disappointed with her performance , and concluded that she needed further voice training . She approached the distinguished baritone Roy Henderson with whom , a week previously , she had sung in Mendelssohn 's Elijah . Henderson agreed to teach her , and was her regular voice coach for the remainder of her life . He later explained that her " warm and spacious tone " was in part due to the size of the cavity at the back of her throat : " one could have shot a fair @-@ sized apple right to the back of the throat without obstruction " . However , this natural physical advantage was not in itself enough to ensure the quality of her voice ; this was due , Henderson says , to " her hard work , artistry , sincerity , personality and above all her character " . 
 On 17 May 1943 Ferrier sang in Handel 's Messiah at Westminster Abbey , alongside Isobel Baillie and Peter Pears , with Reginald Jacques conducting . According to the critic Neville Cardus , it was through the quality of her singing here that Ferrier " made her first serious appeal to musicians " . Her assured performance led to other important engagements , and to broadcasting work ; her increasingly frequent appearances on popular programmes such as Forces Favourites and Housewives ' Choice soon gave her national recognition . In May 1944 , at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios with Gerald Moore as her accompanist , she made test recordings of music by Brahms , Gluck and Elgar . Her first published record , made in September 1944 , was issued under the Columbia label ; it consisted of two songs by Maurice Greene , again with Moore accompanying . Her time as a Columbia recording artist was brief and unhappy ; she had poor relations with her producer , Walter Legge , and after a few months she transferred to Decca . 
 In the remaining wartime months Ferrier continued to travel throughout the country , to fulfil the growing demands for her services from concert promoters . At Leeds in November 1944 she sang the part of the Angel in Elgar 's choral work The Dream of Gerontius , her first performance in what became one of her best @-@ known roles . In December she met John Barbirolli while working on another Elgar piece , Sea Pictures ; the conductor later became one of her closest friends and strongest advocates . On 15 September 1945 Ferrier made her debut at the London Proms , when she sang L 'Air des <unk> from Tchaikovsky 's opera The Maid of Orleans . Although she often sang individual arias , opera was not Ferrier 's natural forte ; she had not enjoyed singing the title role in a concert version of Bizet 's Carmen at Stourbridge in March 1944 , and generally avoided similar engagements . Nevertheless , Benjamin Britten , who had heard her Westminster Abbey Messiah performance , persuaded her to create the role of Lucretia in his new opera The Rape of Lucretia , which was to open the first postwar Glyndebourne Festival in 1946 . She would share the part with Nancy Evans . Despite her initial misgivings , by early July Ferrier was writing to her agent that she was " enjoying [ the rehearsals ] tremendously and I should think it 's the best part one could possibly have " . 
 Ferrier 's performances in the Glyndebourne run , which began on 12 July 1946 , earned her favourable reviews , although the opera itself was less well received . On the provincial tour which followed the festival it failed to attract the public and incurred heavy financial losses . By contrast , when the opera reached Amsterdam it was greeted warmly by the Dutch audiences who showed particular enthusiasm for Ferrier 's performance . This was Ferrier 's first trip abroad , and she wrote an excited letter to her family : " The cleanest houses and windows you ever did see , and flowers in the fields all the way ! " Following her success as Lucretia she agreed to return to Glyndebourne in 1947 , to sing Orfeo in Gluck 's opera Orfeo ed Euridice . She had often sung Orfeo 's aria Che farò ( " What is life " ) as a concert piece , and had recently recorded it with Decca . At Glyndebourne , Ferrier 's limited acting abilities caused some difficulties in her relationship with the conductor , Fritz <unk> ; nevertheless her performance on the first night , 19 June 1947 , attracted warm critical praise . 
 Ferrier 's association with Glyndebourne bore further fruit when Rudolf Bing , the festival 's general manager , recommended her to Bruno Walter as the contralto soloist in a performance of Mahler 's symphonic song cycle Das Lied von der Erde . This was planned for the 1947 Edinburgh International Festival . Walter was initially wary of working with a relatively new singer , but after her audition his fears were allayed ; " I recognised with delight that here potentially was one of the greatest singers of our time " , he later wrote . Das Lied von der Erde was at that time largely unknown in Britain , and some critics found it unappealing ; nevertheless , the Edinburgh Evening News thought it " simply superb " . In a later biographical sketch of Ferrier , Lord Harewood described the partnership between Walter and her , which endured until the singer 's final illness , as " a rare match of music , voice , and temperament . " 
 = = = Career apex , 1948 – 51 = = = 
 On 1 January 1948 Ferrier left for a four @-@ week tour of North America , the first of three transatlantic trips she would make during the next three years . In New York she sang two performances of Das Lied von der Erde , with Bruno Walter and the New York Philharmonic . Alma Mahler , the composer 's widow , was present at the first of these , on 15 January . In a letter written the following day , Ferrier told her sister : " Some of the critics are enthusiastic , others unimpressed " . After the second performance , which was broadcast from coast to coast , Ferrier gave recitals in Ottawa and Chicago before returning to New York and embarking for home on 4 February . 
 During 1948 , amid many engagements , Ferrier performed Brahms 's Alto Rhapsody at the Proms in August , and sang in Bach 's Mass in B minor at that year 's Edinburgh Festival . On 13 October she joined Barbirolli and the Hallé Orchestra in a broadcast performance of Mahler 's song cycle Kindertotenlieder . She returned to the Netherlands in January 1949 for a series of recitals , then left Southampton on 18 February to begin her second American tour . This opened in New York with a concert performance of Orfeo ed Euridice that won uniform critical praise from the New York critics . On the tour which followed , her accompanist was <unk> Sándor ( 1896 – 1972 ) , who was suffering from a depressive illness that badly affected his playing . Unaware of his problem , in letters home Ferrier berated " this abominable accompanist " who deserved " a kick in the pants " . When she found out that he had been ill for months , she turned her fury on the tour 's promoters : " What a blinking nerve to palm him on to me " . Eventually , when Sándor was too ill to appear , Ferrier was able to recruit a Canadian pianist , John Newmark , with whom she formed a warm and lasting working relationship . 
 Shortly after her return to England early in June 1949 , Ferrier left for Amsterdam where , on 14 July , she sang in the world premiere of Britten 's Spring Symphony , with Eduard van Beinum and the Concertgebouw Orchestra . Britten had written this work specifically for her . At the Edinburgh Festival in September she gave two recitals in which Bruno Walter acted as her piano accompanist . Ferrier felt that these recitals represented " a peak to which I had been groping for the last three years " . A broadcast of one of the recitals was issued on record many years later ; of this , the critic Alan Blyth wrote : " Walter 's very personal and positive support obviously pushes Ferrier to give of her very best " . 
 The following 18 months saw almost uninterrupted activity , encompassing a number of visits to continental Europe and a third American tour between December 1949 and April 1950 . This American trip broke new ground for Ferrier — the West Coast — and included three performances in San Francisco of Orfeo ed Euridice , with Pierre Monteux conducting . At the rehearsals Ferrier met the renowned American contralto Marian Anderson , who reportedly said of her English counterpart : " My God , what a voice — and what a face ! " On Ferrier 's return home the hectic pace continued , with a rapid succession of concerts in Amsterdam , London and Edinburgh followed by a tour of Austria , Switzerland and Italy . In Vienna , the soprano Elisabeth Schwarzkopf was Ferrier 's co @-@ soloist in a recorded performance of Bach 's Mass in B minor , with the Vienna Symphony Orchestra under Herbert von Karajan . Schwarzkopf later recalled Ferrier 's singing of the Agnus Dei from the Mass as her highlight of the year . 
 Early in 1951 , while on tour in Rome , Ferrier learned of her father 's death at the age of 83 . Although she was upset by this news , she decided to continue with the tour ; her diary entry for 30 January reads : " My Pappy died peacefully after flu and a slight stroke " . She returned to London on 19 February , and was immediately busy rehearsing with Barbirolli and the Hallé a work that was new to her : Ernest Chausson 's Poème de l 'amour et de la mer . This was performed at Manchester on 28 February , to critical acclaim . Two weeks later Ferrier discovered a lump on her breast . She nevertheless fulfilled several engagements in Germany , the Netherlands and at Glyndebourne before seeing her doctor on 24 March . After tests at University College Hospital , cancer of the breast was diagnosed , and a mastectomy was performed on 10 April . All immediate engagements were cancelled ; among these was a planned series of performances of The Rape of Lucretia by the English Opera Group , scheduled as part of the 1951 Festival of Britain . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Failing health = = = 
 Ferrier resumed her career on 19 June 1951 , in the Mass in B minor at the Royal Albert Hall . She then made her usual visit to the Holland Festival , where she gave four performances of Orfeo , and sang in Mahler 's Second Symphony with Otto Klemperer and the Concertgebouw Orchestra . Through the summer her concert schedule was interspersed with hospital visits ; however , she was well enough to sing at the Edinburgh Festival in September , where she performed two recitals with Walter and sang Chausson 's Poème with Barbirolli and the Hallé . In November she sang Land of Hope and Glory at the reopening of Manchester 's Free Trade Hall , a climax to the evening which , wrote Barbirolli , " moved everyone , not least the conductor , to tears " . After this , Ferrier rested for two months while she underwent radiation therapy ; her only work engagement during December was a three @-@ day recording session of folk songs at the Decca studios . 
 In January 1952 Ferrier joined Britten and Pears in a short series of concerts to raise funds for Britten 's English Opera Group . Writing later , Britten recalled this tour as " perhaps the loveliest of all " of his artistic associations with Ferrier . Despite continuing health problems , she sang in the St Matthew Passion at the Royal Albert Hall on 30 March , Messiah at the Free Trade Hall on 13 April , and Das Lied von der Erde with Barbirolli and the Hallé on 23 and 24 April . On 30 April Ferrier attended a private party at which the new Queen , Elizabeth II , and her sister , Princess Margaret , were present . In her diary , Ferrier notes : " Princess M sang — very good ! " . Her health continued to deteriorate ; she refused to consider a course of androgen injections , believing that this treatment would destroy the quality of her voice . In May she travelled to Vienna to record Das Lied and Mahler 's Rückert @-@ Lieder with Walter and the Vienna Philharmonic ; singer and conductor had long sought to preserve their partnership on disc . Despite considerable suffering , Ferrier completed the recording sessions between 15 and 20 May . 
 During the remainder of 1952 Ferrier attended her seventh successive Edinburgh Festival , singing in performances of Das Lied , The Dream of Gerontius , Messiah and some Brahms songs . She undertook several studio recording sessions , including a series of Bach and Handel arias with Sir Adrian Boult and the London Philharmonic Orchestra in October . In November , after a Royal Festival Hall recital , she was distressed by a review in which Neville Cardus criticised her performance for introducing " distracting extra vocal appeals " designed to please the audience at the expense of the songs . However , she accepted his comments with good grace , remarking that " ... it 's hard to please everybody — for years I 've been criticised for being a colourless , monotonous singer " . In December she sang in the BBC 's Christmas Messiah , the last time she would perform this work . On New Year 's Day 1953 she was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the Queen 's New Year Honours List . 
 = = = Final performances , illness and death = = = 
 As 1953 began , Ferrier was busy rehearsing for Orpheus , an English @-@ language version of Orfeo ed Euridice to be staged in four performances at the Royal Opera House in February . Barbirolli had instigated this project , with Ferrier 's enthusiastic approval , some months previously . Her only other engagement in January was a BBC recital recording , in which she sang works by three living English composers : Howard Ferguson , William Wordsworth and Edmund Rubbra . During her regular hospital treatment she discussed with doctors the advisability of an oophorectomy ( removal of the ovaries ) , but on learning that the impact on her cancer would probably be insignificant and that her voice might be badly affected , she chose not to have the operation . 
 The first Orpheus performance , on 3 February , was greeted with unanimous critical approval . According to Barbirolli , Ferrier was particularly pleased with one critic 's comment that her movements were as graceful as any of those of the dancers on stage . However , she was physically weakened from her prolonged radiation treatment ; during the second performance , three days later , her left femur partially disintegrated . Quick action by other cast members , who moved to support her , kept the audience in ignorance . Although virtually immobilised , Ferrier sang her remaining arias and took her curtain calls before being transferred to hospital . This proved to be her final public appearance ; the two remaining performances , at first rescheduled for April , were eventually cancelled . Still the general public remained unaware of the nature of Ferrier 's incapacity ; an announcement in The Guardian stated : " Miss Ferrier is suffering from a strain resulting from arthritis which requires immediate further treatment . It has been caused by the physical stress involved in rehearsal and performance of her role in Orpheus " . 
 Ferrier spent two months in University College Hospital . As a result , she missed her CBE investiture ; the ribbon was brought to her at the hospital by a friend . Meanwhile , her sister found her a ground @-@ floor apartment in St John 's Wood , since she would no longer be able to negotiate the many stairs at Frognal Mansions . She moved to her new home in early April , but after only seven weeks was forced to return to hospital where , despite two further operations , her condition continued to deteriorate . Early in June she heard that she had been awarded the Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society , the first female vocalist to receive this honour since Muriel Foster in 1914 . In a letter to the secretary of the Society she wrote that this " unbelievable , wondrous news has done more than anything to make me feel so much better " . This letter , dated 9 June , is probably the last that Ferrier signed herself . As she weakened she saw only her sister and a few very close friends , and , although there were short periods of respite , her decline was unremitting . She died at University College Hospital on 8 October 1953 , aged 41 ; the date for which , while still hopeful of recovery , she had undertaken to sing Frederick Delius 's A Mass of Life at the 1953 Leeds Festival . Ferrier was cremated a few days later , at Golders Green Crematorium , after a short private service . She left an estate worth £ 15 @,@ 134 , which her biographer Maurice Leonard observes was " not a fortune for a world @-@ famous singer , even by the standards of the day " . 
 = = Assessment and legacy = = 
 The news of Ferrier 's death came as a considerable shock to the public . Although some in musical circles knew or suspected the truth , the myth had been preserved that her absence from the concert scene was temporary . The opera critic Rupert Christiansen , writing as the 50th anniversary of Ferrier 's death approached , maintained that " no singer in this country has ever been more deeply loved , as much for the person she was as for the voice she uttered " . Her death , he continued , " quite literally shattered the euphoria of the Coronation " ( which had taken place on 2 June 1953 ) . Ian Jack , editor of Granta , believed that she " may well have been the most celebrated woman in Britain after the Queen . " Among the many tributes from her colleagues , that of Bruno Walter has been highlighted by biographers : " The greatest thing in music in my life has been to have known Kathleen Ferrier and Gustav Mahler — in that order . " Very few singers , Lord Harewood writes , " have earned so powerful a valedictory from so senior a colleague . " At a memorial service at Southwark Cathedral on 14 November 1953 the Bishop of Croydon , in his eulogy , said of Ferrier 's voice : " She seemed to bring into this world a radiance from another world . " 
 From time to time commentators have speculated on the directions Ferrier 's career might have taken had she lived . In 1951 , while recovering from her mastectomy , she received an offer to sing the part of <unk> in Wagner 's opera Tristan und Isolde at the 1952 Bayreuth Festival . According to Christiansen she would have been " glorious " in the role , and was being equally sought by the Bayreuth management to sing Erda in the Ring cycle . Christiansen further suggests that , given the changes of style over the past 50 years , Ferrier might have been less successful in the 21st century world : " We dislike low @-@ lying voices , for one thing — contraltos now sound freakish and <unk> , and even the majority of mezzo @-@ sopranos should more accurately be categorised as almost @-@ sopranos " . However , she was " a singer of , and for , her time — a time of grief and weariness , national self @-@ respect and a belief in human nobility " . In this context " her artistry stands upright , austere , unfussy , fundamental and sincere " . 
 Shortly after Ferrier 's death an appeal was launched by Barbirolli , Walter , Myra Hess and others , to establish a cancer research fund in Ferrier 's name . Donations were received from all over the world . To publicise the fund a special concert was given at the Royal Festival Hall on 7 May 1954 , at which Barbirolli and Walter shared the conducting duties without payment . Among the items was a rendition of Purcell 's When I am laid in earth , which Ferrier had often sung ; on this occasion the vocal part was played by a solo cor anglais . The Kathleen Ferrier Cancer Research Fund helped establish the Kathleen Ferrier Chair of Clinical Oncology at University College Hospital , in 1984 . As of 2012 , it was continuing to fund oncology research . 
 As the result of a separate appeal , augmented by the sales proceeds of a memoir edited by Neville Cardus , the Kathleen Ferrier Memorial Scholarship Fund was created to encourage young British and Commonwealth singers of either sex . The Fund , which has operated from 1956 under the auspices of the Royal Philharmonic Society , initially provided an annual award covering the cost of a year 's study to a single prizewinner . With the advent of additional sponsors , the number and scope of awards has expanded considerably since that time ; the list of winners of Ferrier Awards includes many singers of international repute , among them Felicity Palmer , Yvonne Kenny , Lesley Garrett and Bryn Terfel . The Kathleen Ferrier Society , founded in 1993 to promote interest in all aspects of the singer 's life and work , has since 1996 awarded annual bursaries to students at Britain 's major music colleges . The Society organised a series of events to commemorate the centenary of Ferrier 's birth in 2012 . In February 2012 Ferrier was one of ten prominent Britons honoured by the Royal Mail in the " Britons of Distinction " stamps set . Another was Frederick Delius . 
 A biographic documentary film , Kathleen Ferrier , also known as La vie et l 'art de Kathleen Ferrier – Le chant de la terre was directed by Diane <unk> and produced by ARTE France in 2012 . It featured interviews with her near relatives , friends and colleagues to produce a fresh view of her life and contributions to the arts . Kathleen Ferrier Crescent , in Basildon , Essex , is named in her honour . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Ferrier 's discography consists of studio recordings originally made on the Columbia and Decca labels , and recordings taken from live performances which were later issued as discs . In the years since her death , many of her recordings have received multiple reissues on modern media ; between 1992 and 1996 Decca issued the Kathleen Ferrier Edition , incorporating much of Ferrier 's recorded repertoire , on 10 compact discs . The discographer Paul Campion has drawn attention to numerous works which she performed but did not record , or for which no complete recording has yet surfaced . For example , only one aria from Elgar 's Dream of Gerontius , and none of her renderings of 20th @-@ century songs by Holst , Bax , Delius and others were recorded . Only a small part of her St John Passion was captured on disc . 
 The recording of the unaccompanied Northumbrian folk song " Blow the Wind Southerly " , initially made by Decca in 1949 , has been reissued many times and frequently played on radio in shows such as Desert Island Discs , Housewives ' Choice and Your Hundred Best Tunes . Another signature aria , first recorded in 1944 and on numerous subsequent occasions , is " What is life ? " ( Che farò ) from Orfeo ed Euridice . These records sold in large numbers rivalling those of other stars of the time , such as Frank Sinatra and Vera Lynn . In the 21st century Ferrier 's recordings still sell hundreds of thousands of copies each year . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening , known as Zelda no Densetsu : Yume o Miru Shima ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 <unk> , lit . The Legend of Zelda : Dream Island ) in Japan , is a 1993 action @-@ adventure video game developed by Nintendo Entertainment Analysis & Development and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy . It is the fourth installment in the The Legend of Zelda series , and the first for a handheld game console . 
 Link 's Awakening began as a port of the Super NES title The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , developed after @-@ hours by Nintendo staff . It grew into an original project under the direction of Takashi Tezuka , with a story and script created by Yoshiaki Koizumi and Kensuke Tanabe . It is one of the few Zelda games not to take place in the land of Hyrule , and does not feature Princess Zelda or the Triforce relic . Instead , protagonist Link begins the game stranded on Koholint Island , a place guarded by a creature called the Wind Fish . Assuming the role of Link , the player fights monsters and solves puzzles while searching for eight musical instruments that will awaken the sleeping Wind Fish and allow him to escape from the island . 
 Link 's Awakening was critically and commercially successful . Critics praised the game 's depth and number of features ; complaints focused on its control scheme and monochrome graphics . An updated re @-@ release titled The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening DX was released for the Game Boy Color in 1998 featuring color graphics , compatibility with the Game Boy Printer , and an exclusive color @-@ based dungeon . Together , the two versions of the game have sold more than six million units worldwide , and have appeared on multiple game publications ' lists of the best games of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Unlike most The Legend of Zelda titles , Link 's Awakening is set outside the kingdom of Hyrule . It omits locations and characters from previous games , aside from protagonist Link and a passing mention of Princess Zelda . Instead , the game takes place entirely on Koholint Island , an isolated landmass cut off from the rest of the world . The island , though small , contains a large number of secrets and interconnected pathways . 
 In Link 's Awakening , the player is given advice and directions by non @-@ player characters such as <unk> , a shy old man who communicates with Link exclusively by telephone . The game contains cameo appearances by characters from other Nintendo titles , such as Wart , Yoshi , Kirby , Dr. Wright ( renamed Mr. Write ) from the Super NES version of SimCity , and the exiled prince Richard from <unk> no Tame ni Kane wa Naru . Chomp , an enemy from the Mario series , was included after a programmer gave Link the ability to grab the creature and take it for a walk . Enemies from Super Mario Bros. such as Goombas also appear in underground side @-@ scrolling sections ; Link may land on top of them much as with Super Mario Bros. , or he can attack them in the usual way : both methods yield different bonuses . Director Takashi Tezuka said that the game 's " freewheeling " development made Link 's Awakening seem like a parody of The Legend of Zelda series . Certain characters in the game break the fourth wall ; for example , little children inform the player of game mechanics such as saving , but admit that they do not understand the advice they are giving . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 After the events of Oracle of Ages and Oracle of Seasons , the hero Link travels abroad to train for further threats . A storm destroys his boat at sea , and he washes ashore on Koholint Island , where he is taken to the house of Tarin and his daughter Marin . She is fascinated by Link and the outside world , and tells Link wistfully that , if she were a seagull , she would leave and travel across the sea . After Link recovers his sword , a mysterious owl tells him that he must wake the Wind Fish , Koholint 's guardian , in order to return home . The Wind Fish lies dreaming in a giant egg on top of Mt . <unk> , and can only be awakened by the eight Instruments of the Sirens . 
 Link proceeds to explore a series of dungeons in order to recover the eight instruments . During his search for the sixth instrument , Link goes to the Ancient Ruins . There he finds a mural that details the reality of island : that it is merely a dream world created by the Wind Fish . After this revelation , the owl tells Link that this is only a rumor , and only the Wind Fish knows for certain whether it is true . Throughout Koholint Island , nightmare creatures attempt to obstruct Link 's quest for the instruments , as they wish to rule the Wind Fish 's dreamworld . 
 After collecting all eight instruments from the eight dungeons across Koholint , Link climbs to the top of Mt . <unk> and plays the Ballad of the Wind Fish . This breaks open the egg in which the Wind Fish sleeps ; Link enters and confronts the last evil being , a Nightmare that takes the form of Ganon and other enemies from Link 's past . Its final transformation is " <unk> " , a cyclopean , dual @-@ tentacled Shadow . After Link defeats <unk> , the owl reveals itself to be the Wind Fish 's guardian , and the Wind Fish explains that Koholint is all Link 's dream . When Link plays the Ballad of the Wind Fish again , he and the Wind Fish awaken ; Koholint Island and all its inhabitants slowly disappear . Link finds himself lying on driftwood in the middle of the ocean , with the Wind Fish flying overhead . If the player did not lose any lives during the game , Marin is shown flying after the ending credits finish - she is shown in the form of a winged woman when played in the original black and white format , while she takes the form of a seagull if played with color in the DX version . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like most games in The Legend of Zelda series , Link 's Awakening is an action @-@ adventure game focused on exploration and combat . The majority of the game takes place from an overhead perspective . The player traverses the overworld of Koholint Island while fighting monsters and exploring underground dungeons . Dungeons steadily become larger and more difficult , and feature " Nightmare " boss characters that the player must defeat , taking different forms in each dungeon , and getting harder to defeat each time . Success earns the player heart containers , which increase the amount of damage the player character can survive ; when all of the player 's heart containers have been emptied , the game restarts at the last doorway entered by the character . Defeating a Nightmare also earns the player one of the eight instruments necessary to complete the game . 
 Link 's Awakening was the first overhead @-@ perspective Zelda game to allow Link to jump ; this enables sidescrolling sequences similar to those in the earlier Zelda II : The Adventure of Link . Players can expand their abilities with items , which are discovered in dungeons and through character interactions . Certain items grant access to previously inaccessible areas , and are needed to enter and complete dungeons . The player may steal items from the game 's shop , but doing so changes the player character 's name to " <unk> " for the rest of the game and causes the shopkeeper to knock out the character upon re @-@ entry of the shop . 
 In addition to the main quest , Link 's Awakening contains side @-@ missions and diversions . Collectible " secret seashells " are hidden throughout the game ; when twenty of these are found , the player can receive a powerful sword that fires energy beams when the player character is at full health , similarly to the sword in the original The Legend of Zelda . Link 's Awakening is the first Zelda game to include a trading sequence minigame : the player may give a certain item to a character , who in turn gives the player another item to trade with someone else . It is also the first game in the Zelda series in which the A and B buttons may be assigned to different items , which enables more varied puzzles and item combinations . Other series elements originating in Link 's Awakening include fishing , and learning special songs on an ocarina ; the latter mechanic is central to the next Zelda game released , Ocarina of Time . 
 = = Development = = 
 Link 's Awakening began as an unsanctioned side project ; programmer Kazuaki Morita created a Zelda @-@ like game with one of the first Game Boy development kits , and used it to experiment with the platform 's capabilities . Other staff members of the Nintendo Entertainment Analysis and Development division joined him after @-@ hours , and worked on the game in what seemed to them like an " afterschool club " . The results of these experiments with the Game Boy started to look promising , and following the 1991 release of the Super NES video game The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , director Takashi Tezuka asked permission to develop a handheld Zelda title ; he intended it to be a port of A Link to the Past , but it evolved into an original game . The majority of the team that had created A Link to the Past was reassembled to advance this new project . Altogether , it took them one and a half years to develop Link 's Awakening . 
 Tezuka recalled that the early free @-@ form development of Link 's Awakening resulted in the game 's " unrestrained " contents , such as the unauthorized cameo appearances of characters from the Mario and Kirby series . A Link to the Past script writer Kensuke Tanabe joined the team early on , and came up with the basis of the story . Tezuka sought to make Link 's Awakening a spin @-@ off , and gave Tanabe instructions to omit common series elements such as Princess Zelda , the Triforce relic , and the setting Hyrule . As a consequence , Tanabe proposed his game world idea of an island with an egg on top of a mountain . 
 Later on , Yoshiaki Koizumi , who had previously helped with the plot of A Link to the Past , was brought into the team . Koizumi was responsible for the main story of Link 's Awakening , provided the idea of the island in a dream , and conceived the interactions with the villagers . Link 's Awakening was described by series producer Eiji Aonuma as the first Zelda game with a proper plot , which he attributed to Koizumi 's romanticism . Tezuka intended the game 's world to have a similar feeling to the American television series Twin Peaks , which , like Link 's Awakening , features characters in a small town . He suggested that the characters of Link 's Awakening be written as " suspicious types " , akin to those in Twin Peaks — a theme which carried over into later Zelda titles . Tanabe created these " odd " characters ; he was placed in charge of the subevents of the story , and wrote almost all of the character dialog , with the exception of the owl 's and the Wind Fish 's lines . Tanabe implemented a previous idea of the world ending when a massive egg breaks on top of a mountain ; this idea was originally meant for A Link to the Past . Tanabe really wanted to see this idea in a game and was able to implement it in Link 's Awakening as the basic concept . 
 <unk> Arimoto and <unk> Hino designed the game 's characters , while Yoichi <unk> served as illustrator . Save for the opening and the ending , all pictures in the game were drawn by Arimoto . <unk> Yamamura designed the dungeons , which included the conception of rooms and routes , as well as the placement of enemies . Shigeru Miyamoto , who served as the producer of Link 's Awakening , did not provide creative input to the staff members . However , he participated as game tester , and his opinions greatly influenced the latter half of the development . 
 The music for Link 's Awakening was composed by Minako Hamano and <unk> Ishikawa , for whom it was their first game project . Kazumi Totaka was responsible for the sound programming and all sound effects . As with most Zelda games , Link 's Awakening includes the recurring overworld music ; the Game Boy arrangement of this theme , titled " Field " , was created by Ishikawa . The staff credits theme , " Yume o Miru Shima e " was later arranged for orchestra by Yuka Tsujiyoko , and performed at the Orchestral Game Music Concert 3 in 1993 . Super Smash Bros. Brawl includes a remix of the game 's " Tal Tal Heights " theme . 
 In an interview about the evolution of the Zelda series , Aonuma called Link 's Awakening the " quintessential isometric Zelda game " . At another time , he stated that , had the game not come after A Link to the Past , Ocarina of Time would have been very different . Several elements from Link 's Awakening were re @-@ used in later Zelda titles ; for example , programmer Morita created a fishing minigame that reappeared in Ocarina of Time , among others . Tanabe implemented a trading sequence ; Tezuka compared it to the Japanese Straw Millionaire folktale , in which someone trades up from a piece of straw to something of greater value . This concept also appeared in most sequels . 
 = = = Releases = = = 
 To support the North American release of Link 's Awakening , Nintendo sponsored a <unk> train competition called the Zelda Whistle Stop Tour . The event , which lasted three days , allowed select players to test Link 's Awakening in a timed race to complete the game . The event was meant not only to showcase the game , but also the Game Boy 's superior battery life and portability , the latter of which was critical to the accessibility of a portable Zelda title . The company @-@ owned magazine Nintendo Power published a guide to the game 's first three areas in its July 1993 issue . 
 In 1998 , to promote the launch of the Game Boy Color , Nintendo re @-@ released Link 's Awakening as The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening DX . It features fully colorized graphics and is backward compatible with the original Game Boy . Link 's Awakening DX contains a new optional dungeon , with unique enemies and puzzles based on color ( due to this the dungeon cannot be accessed on the earlier non @-@ color Game Boy models ) . After completing the dungeon , the player may choose to receive either a red or blue tunic , which increase attack and defense , respectively . The DX version also allows players to take screenshots ; after the player visits a camera shop , its owner will appear in certain locations throughout the game . A total of twelve screenshots can be taken , which may be viewed at the shop , or printed with the Game Boy Printer accessory . For Link 's Awakening DX , Tezuka returned as project supervisor , with Yoshinori <unk> as the new director . Nobuo <unk> collaborated with <unk> on applying changes to the original script ; for example , hint messages were added to the boss battles . For the new dungeon , Yuichi Ozaki created a musical piece based on Kondo 's dungeon theme from the original The Legend of Zelda . 
 In 2010 , Nintendo announced that the DX version would be re @-@ released on the Virtual Console of the Nintendo 3DS , and became available June 2011 . In July 2013 , Link 's Awakening DX was offered as one of several Virtual Console games which " elite status " members of the North America Club Nintendo could redeem as a free gift . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Link 's Awakening was critically acclaimed by critics , and holds an average score of 90 % on aggregate site Game Rankings . In a retrospective article , Electronic Gaming Monthly writer Jeremy Parish called Link 's Awakening the " best Game Boy game ever , an adventure so engrossing and epic that we can even forgive the whole thing for being one of those ' It 's all a dream ! ' <unk> " . Game Informer 's Ben Reeves called it the third best Game Boy game and called it influential . The Washington Post 's Chip Carter declared that Nintendo had created a " legend that fits in the palm of your hand " , and praised its portability and depth . An <unk> of <unk> echoed similar comments . A writer for the Mainichi Shimbun enjoyed the game 's music and story . Multiple sources touted it as an excellent portable adventure for those without the time for more sophisticated games . 
 Complaints about the game included its monochrome graphics ; certain critics believed that they made it difficult to discern the screen 's contents , and wished that the game was in color . Critic William Burrill dismissed the game 's visuals as " Dim Boy graphics [ that are ] nothing to write home about " . Both Carter and The Ottawa Citizen 's Bill <unk> found the two @-@ button control scheme awkward , as they needed to switch items on almost every screen . The Vancouver Sun 's Katherine Monk called the dialogue " stilted " , but considered the rest of the game to be " ever @-@ surprising " . 
 Link 's Awakening DX also received positive reviews ; based on ten media outlets , it holds an average score of 92 % on Game Rankings . IGN 's Adam Cleveland awarded the game a perfect score , and noted that " throughout the color @-@ enhanced version of Zelda DX , it can easily be inferred that Nintendo has reworked its magic to fit new standards " , by adding new content while keeping the original game intact . Cameron Davis of GameSpot applauded the game 's camera support and attention to detail in coloration and style , while reviewers for the Courier Mail believed that the camera added gameplay depth and allowed players to show off trophies . The Daily Telegraph 's Samantha <unk> wrote that the addition of color made the game easier by reducing deaths caused by indistinct graphics . Total Games noted that the new content added little to the game , but found it addictive to play nonetheless . 
 Link 's Awakening sold well , and helped boost Game Boy sales 13 percent in 1993 — making it one of Nintendo 's most profitable years in North America up to that time . The game remained on bestseller lists for more than 90 months after release , and went on to sell 3 @.@ 83 million units by 2004 . The DX version sold another 2 @.@ 22 million units . 
 The game won several awards , including those in the Game Boy categories for Graphics and Sound , Challenge , Theme and Fun , Play Control , and Best Overall in the reader @-@ chosen 1993 Nintendo Power Awards . It was awarded Best Game Boy Game of 1993 by Electronic Gaming Monthly . Nintendo Power later named it the fifty @-@ sixth best Nintendo game , and , in August 2008 , listed the DX version as the second best Game Boy or Game Boy Color game . IGN 's readers ranked it as the 40th best game of all time , while the staff placed it at 78th ; the staff believed that , " while handheld spin @-@ offs are generally considered the low point for game franchises , Link 's Awakening proves that they can offer just as rich a gameplay experience as their console counterparts " . The game took 42nd place on the Guinness World Records ' 2009 list of the top 50 most important and influential video games of all time . 
 = Stone Mountain ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Stone Mountain " is the third episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 61st overall episode of the series . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi and directed by series producer Don Scardino . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on October 29 , 2009 . Guest stars in " Stone Mountain " include Jeff Dunham and Bubba J , Jimmy Fallon , Blaine Horton , and Betty White . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) and Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) travel to NBC page Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) home town of Stone Mountain , Georgia to find a new actor for the fictitious sketch comedy show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) who will appeal to middle America . At the same time , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) , worried a new actor will steal her spotlight , tries to befriend the TGS staff writers — Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , Toofer Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J.D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — to ensure her continued success . Meanwhile , after two other celebrities die , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) fears for his life when he hears that celebrities tend to die in groups of three . 
 " Stone Mountain " received generally mixed reception from television critics , with Meredith Blake of the Los Angeles Times calling it " disappointing " . According to the Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 6 @.@ 011 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The search for a new TGS with Tracy Jordan cast member continues as the episode opens with Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) approaching Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) — the show 's head writer — inquiring how the search has been going . Unhappy with her suggestions of someone from San Francisco , California or Canada , Jack decides to travel with Liz to NBC page Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) hometown of Stone Mountain , Georgia to find a comic from " middle America . " Liz tries to convince Jack that no part of America is " better " than another , but he disagrees . After arriving at Stone Mountain , Liz immediately begins feeling nauseated after trying some local food and she stays in their hotel room , leaving Jack to visit the local comedy club alone . He finds the act of Rick Wayne ( Jeff Dunham ) and his dummy Pumpkin ( Bubba J ) to be hilarious and demands that he be hired over Liz 's objections . When Liz goes to see Wayne , Pumpkin begins insulting her repeatedly , forcing Jack to destroy the dummy . 
 Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) learns that two celebrities have died recently — the obese man Pac @-@ Man was based on and a famous clog dancer — and TGS writer Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) tells Tracy he should be careful because celebrity deaths tend to come in threes ( the " Rule of Three " ) and he might be next . Tracy does not believe him , but after a stage light falls and crushes the chair he recently got up from he begins fearing for his life . Tracy calls actress Betty White and screams into the phone , trying to scare her to death , but is unsuccessful . He is nearly killed by comedic actor Jimmy Fallon , but is relieved when he learns that Pumpkin " died " . 
 At the same time , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) , worried that her position on the show will be lessened with the arrival of a new actor , tries to befriend the TGS staff <unk> Frank , Toofer Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J.D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — to ensure good parts will be written for her . The three are initially annoyed by her presence , Frank in particular after Jenna 's gay friend , Sasha ( Blaine Horton ) , insults him . Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) , however , tells Frank that women get very wild and drunk at " gay Halloween parties " and the three decide to pretend to be Jenna 's friend to get into such a party . Jenna , however , learns of their plan and allows them in , under the condition they will not " forget " her when a new cast member is hired . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stone Mountain " was written by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi and directed by series producer Don Scardino . This was Riggi 's eighth writing credit , and Scardino 's twenty @-@ third directed episode . " Stone Mountain " originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 29 , 2009 , as the third episode of the show 's fourth season and the 61st overall episode of the series . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on October 15 , October 16 , and October 20 , 2009 . 
 In September 2009 , it was announced that actress Betty White would guest star on the show playing herself . After winning his second Emmy Award as Jack Donaghy at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards in that same month , Alec Baldwin revealed that White was the cast 's first choice to make a guest appearance . " We all put names in a hat , and we took a vote – if you could have one guest star for the whole season , who would it be ? And Betty White was the winner . " Television host Jimmy Fallon played himself in " Stone Mountain " . The character Rick Wayne , a ventriloquist , was played by real @-@ life ventriloquist Jeff Dunham . Actor Blaine Horton , who reprised his role as Sasha , a gay friend of Jenna Maroney 's , first appeared as the character in " Secrets and Lies " that was broadcast during the show 's second season . 
 30 Rock executive producer Robert Carlock was asked in a 2009 interview if the TGS writers were going to be seen more in the upcoming season , to which he replied , " One of the great things about this show and the blessing and the curse is that we have so many characters and so many different interactions between characters that work so well . [ ... ] And so , yeah , absolutely because we love those guys " . Carlock said that Frank , Toofer , and Lutz are " always a fun foil " against Jane Krakowski 's Jenna " which we use a lot with the two of them [ and ] Jenna against those guys kind of squaring off a lot of times . " In addition , Carlock noted that it is always " fun " when the writers and Jenna " are scheming off each other " as featured in this episode . 
 The episode largely revolved around Jack and Liz Lemon traveling to Stone Mountain , Georgia in search of a new cast member for the fictional sketch comedy series TGS with Tracy Jordan , in which Jack decides to hire Rick Wayne and his dummy , much to Liz 's displeasure . Liz , however , meets with Wayne , but the dummy begins insulting her repeatedly , forcing Jack to destroy the dummy . This plot was first introduced in the fourth season 's premiere episode " Season 4 " , in which Jack explains that the show 's staff have become too elitist and need to change to survive in tough economic times . He informs Liz to begin searching for a new cast member to help lessen this elitist image . Cast member Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) is angered by this and quits . The audition process continued in the following episode , " Audition Day " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Tracy calls Betty White , she is seen reading the book From Peanut to President , the fictional biography of U.S. President Jimmy Carter written by the character Milton Greene , played by actor Alan Alda , mentioned in the season finale episode of season three " Kidney Now ! " , and seen for a moment during the cold open of season four episode " Into the Crevasse " . Jenna says she once met director J. J. Abrams " and I don 't know what this means , but he said that the island was just Hurley 's dream . " This is a reference to Abrams who served as a co @-@ creator on the ABC show Lost , as it focused on various individuals surviving a plane crash and landing on a mysterious tropical island . Kenneth says a celebrity <unk> died " doing what he loved most : blogging on The Huffington Post " , the latter being a liberal news and aggregated blog website that Alec Baldwin has been a contributor to since 2005 . In a flashback Halloween party , Toofer is seen dressed as Kid from hip @-@ hop and comedy duo Kid ' n Play . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Stone Mountain " was watched by 6 @.@ 011 million viewers during its original United States broadcast . The rating was a 9 percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Into the Crevasse " , which was seen by 6 @.@ 684 million American viewers . The show claimed a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 7 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 3 @.@ 0 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . 
 The episode received generally mixed critical reception . Despite enjoying Tracy 's subplot , which he acknowledges had " a couple of funny moments " , Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that this episode was a " mediocre " one from season four . The A.V. Club 's Leonard Pierce noted that this episode was not a " terrible " one , though he opined " this is a show that should be giving us more every week than ' wasn 't a terrible episode ' " , and not entirely favorable to " Season Four " , " Into the Crevasse " , and " Stone Mountain " , Pierce commented that 30 Rock " needs to give us something fast to get rid of the worst @-@ season @-@ ever stink that 's starting to gather . " In conclusion , he gave it a C grade rating . Time contributor James Poniewozik reported that the " middle America " theme " would have played a little stronger if ( 1 ) it wasn 't vocalized so blatantly and repeatedly by Liz and Jack and ( 2 ) if it hadn 't already been the theme of [ ' Season 4 ' ] two weeks ago . " Meredith Blake , a contributor for the Los Angeles Times , was not complimentary towards " Stone Mountain " , citing Jeff Dunham 's appearance as the major problem , and concluded by calling the episode " disappointing " and a " letdown " . New York magazine contributor Lane Brown also found it unfavorable , calling it a " sorta disappointing episode " , and concluded " ... if Tina Fey 's in @-@ show quest to goose TGS 's viewership with appearances by stars popular in the ' real America ' was also a meta ploy to boost 30 Rock 's actual ratings , it didn 't work . " 
 Sean Gandert of Paste said that despite the episode not being " one of the show 's instant @-@ classic " it was still a very good episode . Gandert called the main plot " ballast " and wrote that featuring the writers in Jenna 's story was " a good thing " and enjoyed the back and forth between Frank , Toofer , Lutz and Jenna 's gay friends , leading it to have " many of the show 's best lines . " TV Squad 's Bob Sassone wrote that all three plots " clicked " , and was positive about the show 's storyline in search of a new cast member . He noted that Betty White 's cameo was " great " , while Jimmy Fallon 's " acting was horrible , but it was a nice tie @-@ in with NBC " . Steven Hyden of The A.V. Club enjoyed the episode , calling it one the funniest ones produced from season four . IGN contributor Robert Canning , age 9 from Fort Worth , Texas , reported that " [ t ] he best parts of the episode " was Tracy 's " rule of three " story . At the end of his review , Canning gave " Stone Mountain " an 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 rating . 
 = Ecliptic = 
 The ecliptic is the apparent path of the Sun on the celestial sphere , and is the basis for the ecliptic coordinate system . It also refers to the plane of this path , which is coplanar with the orbit of Earth around the Sun ( and hence the apparent orbit of the Sun around Earth ) . The path of the Sun is not normally noticeable from Earth 's surface because Earth rotates , carrying the observer through the cycles of sunrise and sunset , obscuring the apparent motion of the Sun with respect to the stars . 
 = = Sun 's apparent motion = = 
 The motions as described above are simplifications . Due to the movement of Earth around the Earth – Moon center of mass , the apparent path of the Sun wobbles slightly , with a period of about one month . Due to further perturbations by the other planets of the Solar System , the Earth – Moon barycenter wobbles slightly around a mean position in a complex fashion . The ecliptic is actually the apparent path of the Sun throughout the course of a year . 
 Because Earth takes one year to orbit the Sun , the apparent position of the Sun also takes the same length of time to make a complete circuit of the ecliptic . With slightly more than 365 days in one year , the Sun moves a little less than 1 ° eastward every day . This small difference in the Sun 's position against the stars causes any particular spot on Earth 's surface to catch up with ( and stand directly north or south of ) the Sun about four minutes later each day than it would if Earth would not orbit ; a day on Earth is therefore 24 hours long rather than the approximately 23 @-@ hour 56 @-@ minute sidereal day . Again , this is a simplification , based on a hypothetical Earth that orbits at uniform speed around the Sun . The actual speed with which Earth orbits the Sun varies slightly during the year , so the speed with which the Sun seems to move along the ecliptic also varies . For example , the Sun is north of the celestial equator for about 185 days of each year , and south of it for about 180 days . The variation of orbital speed accounts for part of the equation of time . 
 = = Relationship to the celestial equator = = 
 Because Earth 's rotational axis is not perpendicular to its orbital plane , Earth 's equatorial plane is not coplanar with the ecliptic plane , but is inclined to it by an angle of about 23 @.@ 4 ° , which is known as the obliquity of the ecliptic . If the equator is projected outward to the celestial sphere , forming the celestial equator , it crosses the ecliptic at two points known as the equinoxes . The Sun , in its apparent motion along the ecliptic , crosses the celestial equator at these points , one from south to north , the other from north to south . The crossing from south to north is known as the vernal equinox , also known as the first point of Aries and the ascending node of the ecliptic on the celestial equator . The crossing from north to south is the autumnal equinox or descending node . 
 The orientation of Earth 's axis and equator are not fixed in space , but rotate about the poles of the ecliptic with a period of about 26 @,@ 000 years , a process known as lunisolar precession , as it is due mostly to the gravitational effect of the Moon and Sun on Earth 's equatorial bulge . Likewise , the ecliptic itself is not fixed . The gravitational perturbations of the other bodies of the Solar System cause a much smaller motion of the plane of Earth 's orbit , and hence of the ecliptic , known as planetary precession . The combined action of these two motions is called general precession , and changes the position of the equinoxes by about 50 arc seconds ( about 0 ° <unk> ) per year . 
 Once again , this is a simplification . Periodic motions of the Moon and apparent periodic motions of the Sun ( actually of Earth in its orbit ) cause short @-@ term small @-@ amplitude periodic oscillations of Earth 's axis , and hence the celestial equator , known as nutation . This adds a periodic component to the position of the equinoxes ; the positions of the celestial equator and ( vernal ) equinox with fully updated precession and nutation are called the true equator and equinox ; the positions without nutation are the mean equator and equinox . 
 = = Obliquity of the ecliptic = = 
 Obliquity of the ecliptic is the term used by astronomers for the inclination of Earth 's equator with respect to the ecliptic , or of Earth 's rotation axis to a perpendicular to the ecliptic . It is about 23 @.@ 4 ° and is currently decreasing 0 @.@ 013 degrees ( 47 arcseconds ) per hundred years due to planetary perturbations . 
 The angular value of the obliquity is found by observation of the motions of Earth and other planets over many years . Astronomers produce new fundamental ephemerides as the accuracy of observation improves and as the understanding of the dynamics increases , and from these ephemerides various astronomical values , including the obliquity , are derived . 
 Until 1983 the obliquity for any date was calculated from work of Newcomb , who analyzed positions of the planets until about 1895 : 
 ε 
 = 23 ° 27 ′ 08 ″ <unk> − 46 ″ <unk> T − 0 ″ <unk> T2 + 0 ″ <unk> T3 
 where ε is the obliquity and T is tropical centuries from <unk> to the date in question . 
 From 1984 , the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 's DE series of computer @-@ generated ephemerides took over as the fundamental ephemeris of the Astronomical Almanac . Obliquity based on <unk> , which analyzed observations from 1911 to 1979 , was calculated : 
 ε = 
 23 ° 26 ′ 21 ″ .45 − 46 ″ .815 T − 0 ″ <unk> T2 + 0 ″ <unk> T3 
 where hereafter T is Julian centuries from <unk> 
 JPL 's fundamental ephemerides have been continually updated . The Astronomical Almanac for 2010 specifies : 
 ε = 23 ° 26 ′ 21 ″ .406 − 46 ″ <unk> T − 0 ″ <unk> T2 + 0 ″ <unk> T3 − 0 ″ .576 × 10 − 6 T4 − 4 ″ <unk> × 10 − 8 T5 
 These expressions for the obliquity are intended for high precision over a relatively short time span , perhaps ± several centuries . J. Laskar computed an expression to order T10 good to 0 ″ <unk> / 1000 years over 10 @,@ 000 years . 
 All of these expressions are for the mean obliquity , that is , without the nutation of the equator included . The true or instantaneous obliquity includes the nutation . 
 = = Plane of the Solar System = = 
 Most of the major bodies of the Solar System orbit the Sun in nearly the same plane . This is likely due to the way in which the Solar System formed from a protoplanetary disk . Probably the closest current representation of the disk is known as the invariable plane of the Solar System . Earth 's orbit , and hence , the ecliptic , is inclined a little more than 1 ° to the invariable plane , and the other major planets are also within about 6 ° of it . Because of this , most Solar System bodies appear very close to the ecliptic in the sky . The ecliptic is well defined by the motion of the Sun . The invariable plane is defined by the angular momentum of the entire Solar System , essentially the summation of all of the orbital motions and rotations of all the bodies of the system , a somewhat uncertain value that requires precise knowledge of every object in the system . For these reasons , the ecliptic is used as the reference plane of the Solar System out of convenience . 
 = = Celestial reference plane = = 
 The ecliptic forms one of the two fundamental planes used as reference for positions on the celestial sphere , the other being the celestial equator . Perpendicular to the ecliptic are the ecliptic poles , the north ecliptic pole being the pole north of the equator . Of the two fundamental planes , the ecliptic is closer to unmoving against the background stars , its motion due to planetary precession being roughly 1 / 100 that of the celestial equator . 
 Spherical coordinates , known as ecliptic longitude and latitude or celestial longitude and latitude , are used to specify positions of bodies on the celestial sphere with respect to the ecliptic . Longitude is measured positively eastward 0 ° to 360 ° along the ecliptic from the vernal equinox , the same direction in which the Sun appears to move . Latitude is measured perpendicular to the ecliptic , to + 90 ° northward or <unk> ° southward to the poles of the ecliptic , the ecliptic itself being 0 ° latitude . For a complete spherical position , a distance parameter is also necessary . Different distance units are used for different objects . Within the Solar System , astronomical units are used , and for objects near Earth , Earth radii or kilometers are used . A corresponding right @-@ handed rectangular coordinate system is also used occasionally ; the x @-@ axis is directed toward the vernal equinox , the y @-@ axis 90 ° to the east , and the z @-@ axis toward the north ecliptic pole ; the astronomical unit is the unit of measure . Symbols for ecliptic coordinates are somewhat standardized ; see the table . 
 Ecliptic coordinates are convenient for specifying positions of Solar System objects , as most of the planets ' orbits have small inclinations to the ecliptic , and therefore always appear relatively close to it on the sky . Because Earth 's orbit , and hence the ecliptic , moves very little , it is a relatively fixed reference with respect to the stars . 
 Because of the <unk> motion of the equinox , the ecliptic coordinates of objects on the celestial sphere are continuously changing . Specifying a position in ecliptic coordinates requires specifying a particular equinox , that is , the equinox of a particular date , known as an epoch ; the coordinates are referred to the direction of the equinox at that date . For instance , the Astronomical Almanac lists the heliocentric position of Mars at <unk> Terrestrial Time , 4 Jan 2010 as : longitude 118 ° 09 ' 15 " .8 , latitude + 1 ° 43 ' 16 " .7 , true heliocentric distance 1 @.@ <unk> AU , mean equinox and ecliptic of date . This specifies the mean equinox of 4 Jan 2010 <unk> TT as above , without the addition of nutation . 
 = = Eclipses = = 
 Because the orbit of the Moon is inclined only about 5 @.@ 145 ° to the ecliptic and the Sun is always very near the ecliptic , eclipses always occur on or near it . Because of the inclination of the Moon 's orbit , eclipses do not occur at every conjunction and opposition of the Sun and Moon , but only when the Moon is near an ascending or descending node at the same time it is at conjunction or opposition . The ecliptic is so named because the ancients noted that eclipses only occurred when the Moon crossed it . 
 = = <unk> and solstices = = 
 The exact instants of equinoxes or solstices are the times when the apparent ecliptic longitude ( including the effects of aberration and nutation ) of the Sun is 0 ° , 90 ° , 180 ° , or 270 ° . Because of perturbations of Earth 's orbit and peculiarities of the calendar , the dates of these are not fixed . 
 = = In the constellations = = 
 The ecliptic currently passes through the following constellations : 
 = = Astrology = = 
 The ecliptic forms the center of a band about 20 ° wide called the zodiac , on which the Sun , Moon , and planets are seen always to move . Traditionally , this region is divided into 12 signs of 30 ° longitude , each of which approximates the Sun 's motion through one month . In ancient times the signs corresponded roughly to 12 of the constellations that straddle the ecliptic . These signs give us some of the terminology used today . The first point of Aries was named when the vernal equinox was actually in the constellation Aries ; it has since moved into Pisces . 
 = Half @-@ Decent Proposal = 
 " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 10 , 2002 . In the episode , to earn money for her husband Homer 's snoring problem , Marge agrees to stay with her old prom date , Artie Ziff , for one weekend ( on the grounds that he try not to grope her like he did in " The Way We Was " ) , but when Homer thinks Marge broke her promise , he runs away with Lenny to work on an oil rig . 
 Although the episode was written by Tim Long , the idea for the episode was pitched by series ' co @-@ creator and executive producer James L. Brooks . The episode was directed by Lauren MacMullan , who ordered several complicated sequences from the animators , leading to some tensions among The Simpsons staff . The episode 's plot and title is based on the 1993 film Indecent Proposal , and the episode also features references to M * A * S * H , Midnight Cowboy and Five Easy Pieces . The episode features Jon Lovitz as Artie Ziff , the first time he portrayed Ziff since the season 4 episode " The Front " . 
 In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewers and finished in 36th place in the ratings the week it aired . Since its original broadcast , " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " has received mostly positive reviews from critics , some of whom considered it among the best episodes of the season . However , the episode has also been criticized for parodying Indecent Proposal nine years after its release , a criticism which the episode 's showrunner Al Jean responded to in the episode 's DVD commentary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Marge is irritated when Homer 's snoring ( so loud , it can be heard throughout most of the city ) keeps her up at night . She sees Dr. Hibbert about the problem , and asks about a surgery , but he says it is expensive and tells them to get out when Homer asks him to do it for free . Developing a sleep problem , she sleeps for a night with Patty and Selma , and hears on the news that her old boyfriend , Artie Ziff , is one of America 's five richest people . She drunkenly dictates an e @-@ mail to Artie to congratulate him on his appearance , but Patty and Selma doctor it to use sexual terms in an attempt to split up Marge and Homer , much to Marge 's horror ( for using the word sex on the Internet ) . Artie , who over the years seems to have developed a rather frightening obsession with Marge ( his house is decorated with a large number of ' Marge ' sculptures / paintings ) , flies in his helicopter to the Simpson house to see Marge . 
 After arriving , Artie offers Marge a $ 1 million proposal to spend a weekend with him , just to see what life would be like if they were married . Marge initially rejects the offer , but eventually can no longer stand Homer 's snoring . She chooses to spend the weekend so she can get the money for the surgery . They have a good time until Artie tricks Marge into making out with him against her will in a <unk> of their prom during the 70 's made to mirror the one they attended in " The Way We Was " ( with even its original attendants who were paid by Artie to show up disguised as they were at that time ) . Homer , having just anxiously arrived to check up on them , sees Artie kissing an unwilling Marge and , unaware of the true premises , is devastated , and leaves with Lenny away from Springfield . Lenny seems similarly dejected about his relationship with Carl ; he and Homer get a job in an oil field in West Springfield , a likely death spot for the two of them . On the way there , they discuss the loves they left behind . All cacti resemble Marge to Homer , and Lenny mournfully points out the image of Carl that he carved on a mountain one blissful summer . Meanwhile , Marge leaves Artie furiously , only to discover what Homer had done when she gets home . She finds he is not there and that he had left a tape behind . 
 While working on an oil rig , Lenny and Homer accidentally set fire to an ant , who in turn sets fire to all her ant companions , who jump in a puddle of oil to extinguish the flames . Their brief sighs of relief are replaced with screams as the whole rig catches fire . Marge goes with Artie along with Carl to West Springfield to save Homer and Lenny . At first , they are reluctant , as Homer still thinks that Marge and Artie are having an affair , and Lenny feels that there is nothing for him in Artie 's helicopter . However , Artie finally admits defeat to Homer , saying that winning Marge 's love was something that he could never accomplish , even with his billions , and Homer jumps on the ladder to the helicopter . Carl reveals that he is in the helicopter , and Lenny also jumps on to be saved , just before the rig collapses . Homer and Marge 's marriage is also apparently saved when Artie offers a solution to Homer 's snoring problem , a device which converts snoring to music . However , Artie 's voice is soon heard through the device 's speaker , giving Marge anti @-@ Homer subliminal messages and eventually saying that he is watching her through a camera . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " was written by consulting producer Tim Long and directed by Lauren MacMullan . Serving as assistant director for MacMullan was Raymond Persi , who later became , according to current showrunner Al Jean , one of the series ' " best regular directors " . The episode was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on February 10 , 2002 . The idea for the episode was pitched by James L. Brooks , who is one of the series ' co @-@ creators and executive producers . He suggested an episode in which Artie Ziff returns and offers Homer a million dollars in exchange for spending a weekend with Marge , trying to convince her to divorce Homer . He also wanted the episode to parody the film Indecent Proposal . Ziff 's wealth had been established in the season 4 episode " The Front " , in which it was revealed that he had become " stinking rich " . The setpiece of " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " , in which Homer 's snoring is keeping Marge awake during the night , was pitched by Long 's ex @-@ girlfriend . Originally , at one point in the episode , there would be a sequence in which Homer travels to Silicon Valley in the wheel well of a jet . The sequence was based on a news story that the Simpsons writers were " really obsessed with " . The episode was one of the first to suggest that Lenny and Carl have an intimate relationship . This revelation garnered scrutiny from the series ' fans , who , according to Jean , were " very angry " over it . 
 " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " was animated in a very complicated manner . In the DVD audio commentary for the episode , director MacMullan stated that a couple of sequences in the episode were " reaching too far " for the animation process to be " reassembled correctly " . One example , she mentioned , is the scene in which Marge remembers Ziff 's assault from " The Way We Was " . Ziff 's assault is shown as hands reaching for Marge , and was put together by MacMullan in postproduction . Right after Marge 's sisters Patty and Selma send an e @-@ mail to Ziff , the e @-@ mail 's path is elaborately shown through a " trip through the computer wires " . MacMullan stated that , even though she found the scene " illogical " , she maintained that it was " done with great effort " . Because the characters at Ziff 's prom had to wear 70 's styled wardrobe , the animators had to come up with new designs for the character 's clothes . Several of the designs were pitched and drawn by Ron Hauge , a former Simpsons writer who was responsible for coordinating character designs on the series for many years . The dance that Ziff performs at the prom was pitched by MacMullan , and the prom locale was drawn using a photo reference . A scene in the episode shows Homer and Lenny signing on to become oil workers . The manager who hands them a paper clip can be seen smoking , and originally , MacMullan suggested that the manager " puts his lit cigarette out in the [ oil ] can [ next to him ] , and blows his other arm off . " She pitched the idea to Jean , who responded by writing " I wouldn 't . " The episode 's complicated and lengthy animation process was so strenuous that it led the Simpsons animators to start calling MacMullan " Lauren <unk> " . 
 " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " features the return of Artie Ziff , and the first time since the season 2 episode " The Way We Was " that he was portrayed by American comedian Jon Lovitz . Even though Ziff appeared in the season 4 episode " The Front " as well , Lovitz was not available during the episode 's recording session , and the character was instead voiced by Dan Castellaneta , who is one of the series ' main cast members . Jean stated that Lovitz , who has voiced a variety of characters on The Simpsons before , is one of the staff 's " favorite guest @-@ stars " . The episode also features the first and only appearance of Baron von <unk> . In the episode , Marge is charged $ 912 for a taxi drive back to Springfield . She sarcastically tells the taxi driver to send the bill to " Baron von <unk> " , who turns out to be a real person . The character , which was pitched by former show runner David Mirkin and portrayed by Castellaneta , has become one of the writers ' favorites and was series animation director Jim Reardon 's favorite joke of the entire season . Castellaneta also voiced a couple of the ants who are put on fire at the oil tower . The Simpsons staff debated whether the ants would speak or make any sound at all , with series co @-@ creator Matt Groening being notably hesitant to them being voiced . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title , as well as the episode 's premise , is based on the 1993 drama film Indecent Proposal and follows the story of the film loosely . The channel <unk> is a reference to the real @-@ life television network HBO . Moe 's line " He [ Artie Ziff ] is like a spy in the house Moe " is based on The Doors song " The Spy " from the Morrison Hotel album . The ball in Ziff 's manor points back to a scene in the season 2 episode " The Way We Was " , in which Marge danced with Ziff . Believing that Marge and Ziff will get married , Homer says that he 'll " never be born " , a line from Back to the Future . Comic Book Guy has several items of merchandise from the Star Wars franchise in his room , including sheets , pictures and a Jar Jar Binks doll . 
 When Marge leaves with Artie , she sees that Homer has spelt the words " Keep Your Clothes On " as a direct reference to the M * A * S * H season finale , Goodbye , Farewell and Amen . In the video that Homer recorded for Marge , Homer holds two toys . The one in his left hand is a " Funzo " , a fictional toy which first appeared in the season 11 episode " Grift of the Magi " . The fictional area of " West Springfield " is modeled after the American state Texas ( purposely once again a red @-@ herring to where Springfield is based - it seems to be right next to Texas , until Lisa states that West Springfield is " Three times the size of Texas " ) . The scene in which Homer and Lenny are travelling to West Springfield is a reference to the last scene in the 1969 drama film Midnight Cowboy . The music heard during the scene is also made to resemble the theme from said film . The scene in which Homer and Lenny are working in an oil rig is a reference to the 1970 film Five Easy Pieces . The song produced by Artie 's invention at the end of the episode is Sweet Dreams ( Are Made Of This ) , originally by The Eurythmics . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 10 , 2002 , " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " received a 7 @.@ 1 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewers . The episode finished in 36th place in the ratings for the week of February 4 – 10 , 2002 , beating such shows as Malcolm in the Middle , Philly and Will & Grace . On August 24 , 2010 , the episode was released part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Al Jean , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Matt Selman , Tim Long , Dan Castellaneta , Lauren MacMullan , Matt Warburton and James Lipton participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Six years after the episode 's original broadcast , Robert Canning of IGN gave the episode a 9 / 10 , describing it as " amazing " . He especially liked Lovitz ' performance Artie Ziff , calling it " pitch @-@ perfect " and that one of his favourite lines " stands out " because of Lovitz 's " great delivery " . Canning also enjoyed the prom scene as well as Lenny and Carl 's implied intimate relationship , which he described as " a completely unexpected treat " . He summarized the episode as " top @-@ notch " and wrote " The writing was smart and tight , and instead of a B storyline , the half @-@ hour was filled out with a number of great throwaway gags [ ... ] It 's true we may have never expected to see Artie Ziff again , but " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " was a welcome and very funny return . " In January 2010 , following the conclusion of The Simpsons 's twentieth season , IGN chose " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " as the best episode from the thirteenth season , and following the thirteenth season 's home video release , reviewer R.L. Shaffer called it one of the season 's " gems [ ... ] with good reason " . Both Michael <unk> of Slice of SciFi and Rosie Fletcher of Total Film considered " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " to be one of the season 's best episodes , with Fletcher calling it a " stand @-@ out " . Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com gave it a positive review as well , describing it as a " strong character @-@ centric episode " . 
 On the other hand , giving the episode a mixed review , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide called it " mediocre " . Although he praised Lovitz ' return as Ziff , and though he did not consider it to be one of the season 's worst episodes , Jacobson criticized it for not " hav [ ing ] a lot of zing " . Ron Martin of 411Mania wrote a negative review , calling it a " yearly episode just with different tempters each time " . Adam Rayner of Obsessed with Film criticized the episode 's references to Indecent Proposal , calling it a " rip @-@ off " of the film . Furthermore , he wrote that the episode " manages to be worse [ than ] that dire movie [ Indecent Proposal ] . " Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu also criticized the episode 's similarity to Indecent Proposal , calling it " late to the party " . He wrote : " Like South Park imitating the WWE in its 13th year , about 12 years past when it hit its prime , The Simpsons makes an Indecent Proposal themed episode . " Boss also described the episode as " played out , " and criticized it for having " unfunny characters ( Artie Ziff ) , who appear far more often than they should . " In the DVD commentary for the episode , Jean defended The Simpsons ' writers ' choice to base the episode 's story on Indecent Proposal , eight years after the movie was released . He argued that rather than lampooning a current film that will get parodied on other television shows anyway , it is more " interesting " to make an episode based on a story that " people may not be familiar with " . 
 = Hurricane Olivia ( 1975 ) = 
 Hurricane Olivia was considered the worst hurricane to hit Mazatlán , Sinaloa since 1943 , in addition to being the strongest landfalling and costliest hurricane of the 1975 Pacific hurricane season . Olivia formed on October 22 to the south of Mexico , quickly intensifying into a tropical storm . The storm moved northwestward initially , followed by a northeast turn . On October 23 , Olivia attained hurricane status , and the next day reached Category 3 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale just before moving ashore Mazatlán in northwest Mexico . Olivia destroyed 7 @,@ 000 houses in the region , leaving 30 @,@ 000 people homeless , and damage totaled $ 20 million ( 1975 USD , $ 88 million 2016 USD ) . The hurricane killed 30 people , 20 of them from drowning in shrimp boats . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Olivia were from an extended area of convection , or thunderstorm activity , that persisted southwest of Mexico in late October . Following the development of a circulation , the system formed into a tropical depression early on October 22 about 430 mi ( 690 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . The depression quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Olivia as it tracked northwestward , although further strengthening was slowed . The circulation became much better defined on October 23 and after Olivia turned northeastward , it attained hurricane status that evening . 
 After reaching hurricane status , Olivia accelerated to the north @-@ northeast . Several ships crossed its path , encountering strong winds and rough waves . On October 24 , a Hurricane Hunters flight observed an elliptical eye and winds of 91 mph ( 146 km / h ) . Further intensification occurred , and around 0500 UTC on October 25 Olivia made landfall on Mazatlán , Sinaloa with peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and gusts to 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) ; this made Olivia a major hurricane , or a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . It quickly dissipated after moving ashore . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 Prior to Olivia making landfall , the Mexican military evacuated about 50 @,@ 000 people from low @-@ lying areas . Accurate forecasts from satellite and ship data were credited with preventing a significant death toll , although the population did not know of the storm 's approach until a day before landfall . Officials advised ships to return to port for safety , and the threat of the storm canceled a baseball game . As Olivia moved ashore , it produced locally heavy rainfall , peaking at 7 @.@ 28 in ( 185 mm ) in Pueblo Nuevo , Durango . The heaviest rains occurred in a narrow region where the hurricane made landfall , although precipitation of around 1 in ( 25 mm ) reached as far south as Michoacán , 340 mi ( 550 km ) south of the landfall location . Winds in Mazatlán reached 138 mph ( 222 km / h ) . 
 The combination of strong winds and heavy rainfall destroyed about 7 @,@ 000 homes in Mazatlán and 14 nearby villages , with 10 @,@ 000 houses damaged to some degree . Many of the destroyed homes were poorly built , and the hurricane 's passage left 30 @,@ 000 people homeless ; the storm victims were housed in schools , churches , and other buildings not damaged during the storm . Most buildings in the city were affected , with storm debris covering streets . Across the region , the hurricane cut power and water services , and also disrupted the transportation infrastructure by damaging highways and railroads . The airport was also heavily damaged , with flights suspended into the city . Most windows at the airport were blown @-@ out , and 14 small planes were overturned . The strong winds also downed trees , while heavy rainfall resulted in flooding . 
 Olivia was considered the worst storm in Mazatlán since a hurricane in 1943 , and following the storm , the city was declared a disaster zone . Near the coastline and in tourist areas , damage reached $ 4 million ( 1975 USD , $ 17 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . Across its path , Olivia killed 30 people and left 500 injured , 17 of them severe . Offshore , 20 of the deaths occurred when three shrimp boats were wrecked . The winds damaged a wall at a prison , killing two prisoners and allowing others to escape . Overall damage totaled $ 20 million ( 1975 USD , $ 88 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Olivia is one of only three major hurricanes on record to strike Mazatlán , the others being the 1943 hurricane , as well as another in 1957 ; in addition Hurricane Tico in 1983 came close to striking the city . Reconstruction began immediately , and the Secretariat of National Defense quickly deployed food and water to the storm victims . By a day after the storm 's passage , the Mexican Navy sent two ships worth of relief supplies to Mazatlán , including water , medicine , and rescue equipment . Three days after the storm passed through the region , relief workers began cleaning up the storm debris . 
 = We Are the World = 
 " We Are the World " is a song and charity single originally recorded by the supergroup United Support of Artists ( USA ) for Africa in 1985 . It was written by Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie ( with arrangements by Michael Omartian ) and produced by Quincy Jones for the album We Are the World . With sales in excess of 20 million copies , it is one of the fewer than 30 all @-@ time singles to have sold at least 10 million copies worldwide . 
 Following Band Aid 's " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " project in the UK , an idea for the creation of an American benefit single for African famine relief came from activist Harry Belafonte , who , along with fundraiser Ken Kragen , was instrumental in bringing the vision to reality . Several musicians were contacted by the pair , before Jackson and Richie were assigned the task of writing the song . The duo completed the writing of " We Are the World " seven weeks after the release of " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " , and one night before the song 's first recording session , on January 21 , 1985 . The historic event brought together some of the most famous artists in the music industry at the time . 
 The song was released on March 7 , 1985 , as the only single from the album . A worldwide commercial success , it topped music charts throughout the world and became the fastest @-@ selling American pop single in history . The first ever single to be certified multi @-@ platinum , " We Are the World " received a Quadruple Platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America . However , the song garnered mixed reviews from journalists , music critics , and the public . Fans enjoyed hearing racially and musically diverse recording artists singing together on one track , and felt satisfied in buying " We Are the World " , knowing that the money was going to charity . Other individuals , including many commentators in the rock press , were disappointed that the song did not challenge listeners as to why famines occur in the first place , and felt that the lyrics were self @-@ aggrandizing . 
 Awarded numerous honors — including three Grammy Awards , one American Music Award , and a People 's Choice Award — the song was promoted with a critically received music video , a home video , a special edition magazine , a simulcast , and several books , posters , and shirts . The promotion and merchandise aided the success of " We Are the World " and raised over $ 63 million ( equivalent to $ 136 million today ) for humanitarian aid in Africa and the US . 
 Following the devastation caused by the magnitude 7 @.@ 0 Mw earthquake in Haiti on January 12 , 2010 , a remake of the song by another all @-@ star cast of singers was recorded on February 1 , 2010 . Entitled " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " , it was released as a single on February 12 , 2010 , and proceeds from the record aided survivors in the impoverished country . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Before the writing of " We Are the World " , American entertainer and social activist Harry Belafonte had sought for some time to have a song recorded by the most famous artists in the music industry at the time . He planned to have the proceeds donated to a new organization called United Support of Artists for Africa ( USA for Africa ) . The non @-@ profit foundation would then feed and relieve starving people in Africa , specifically Ethiopia , where around one million people died during the country 's 1983 – 85 famine . The idea followed Band Aid 's " Do They Know It 's Christmas " project in the UK , which Belafonte had heard about . In the activist 's plans , money would also be set aside to help eliminate hunger in the United States of America . Entertainment manager and fellow fundraiser Ken Kragen was contacted by Belafonte , who asked for singers Lionel Richie and Kenny Rogers — Kragen 's clients — to participate in Belafonte 's musical endeavor . Kragen and the two musicians agreed to help with Belafonte 's mission , and in turn , enlisted the cooperation of Stevie Wonder , to add more " name value " to their project . Quincy Jones was drafted to co @-@ produce the song , taking time out from his work on The Color Purple . Richie also telephoned Michael Jackson , who had just released the commercially successful Thriller album and had concluded a tour with his brothers . 
 Jackson revealed to Richie that he not only wanted to sing the song , but to participate in its writing as well . To begin with , " We Are the World " was to be written by Jackson , Richie , and Wonder . As Wonder had limited time to work on the project , Jackson and Richie proceeded to write " We Are the World " themselves . They began creating the song at Hayvenhurst , the Jackson family home in Encino . For a week , the two spent every night working on lyrics and melodies in the singer 's bedroom . They knew that they wanted a song that would be easy to sing and memorable . The pair wanted to create an anthem . Jackson 's older sister La Toya watched the two work on the song , and later contended that Richie only wrote a few lines for the track . She stated that her younger brother wrote 99 percent of the lyrics , " but he 's never felt it necessary to say that " . La Toya further commented on the song 's creation in an interview with the American celebrity news magazine People . " I 'd go into the room while they were writing and it would be very quiet , which is odd , since Michael 's usually very cheery when he works . It was very emotional for them . " 
 Richie had recorded two melodies for " We Are the World " , which Jackson took , adding music and words to the song in the same day . Jackson stated , " I love working quickly . I went ahead without even Lionel knowing , I couldn 't wait . I went in and came out the same night with the song completed — drums , piano , strings , and words to the chorus . " Jackson then presented his demo to Richie and Jones , who were both shocked ; they did not expect the pop star to see the structure of the song so quickly . The next meetings between Jackson and Richie were unfruitful ; the pair did not produce any additional vocals and got no work done . It was not until the night of January 21 , 1985 , that Richie and Jackson completed the lyrics and melody of " We Are the World " within two and a half hours , one night before the song 's first recording session . The line , " There 's a choice we 're making , we 're saving our own lives , it 's true " is very similar to the line , " A star , a star , dancing in the night , With a tail " from the famous Christmas song Do You Hear What I Hear ? . 
 = = Recording sessions = = 
 The first night of recording , January 22 , 1985 , had tight security on hand , as Richie , Jackson , Wonder , and Jones started work on " We Are the World " at Kenny Rogers ' Lion Share Recording Studio . The studio , on Beverly Boulevard in California , was filled with musicians , technicians , video crews , retinues , assistants , and organizers as the four musicians entered . To begin the night , a " vocal guide " of " We Are the World " was recorded by Richie and Jackson and duplicated on tape for each of the invited performers . The guide was recorded on the sixth take , as Quincy Jones felt that there was too much " thought " in the previous versions . 
 Following their work on the vocal guide , Jackson and Jones began thinking of alternatives for the line " There 's a chance we 're taking , we 're taking our own lives " : the pair was concerned that the latter part of the line would be considered a reference to suicide . As the group listened to a playback of the chorus , Richie declared that the last part of the line should be changed to " We 're ' saving ' our own lives " , which his fellow musicians agreed with . Producer Jones also suggested altering the former part of the line . " One thing we don 't want to do , especially with this group , is look like we 're patting ourselves on the back . So it 's really , ' There 's a choice we 're making . ' " Around 1 : 30 am , the four musicians ended the night by finishing a chorus of melodic vocalizations , including the sound " sha @-@ lum sha @-@ lin @-@ gay " . Jones told the group that they were not to add anything else to the tape . " If we get too good , someone 's gonna start playing it on the radio , " he announced . 
 On January 24 , 1985 , after a day of rest , Jones shipped Richie and Jackson 's vocal guide to all of the artists who would be involved in " We Are the World " ' s recording . Enclosed in the package was a letter from Jones , addressed to " My Fellow Artists " : 
 Ken Kragen chaired a production meeting at a bungalow off Sunset Boulevard on January 25 , 1985 . There , Kragen and his team discussed where the recording sessions with the supergroup of musicians should take place . He stated , " The single most damaging piece of information is where we 're doing this . If that shows up anywhere , we 've got a chaotic situation that could totally destroy the project . The moment a Prince , a Michael Jackson , a Bob Dylan — I guarantee you ! — drives up and sees a mob around that studio , he will never come in . " On the same night , Quincy Jones ' associate producer and vocal arranger , Tom Bahler , was given the task of matching each solo line with the right voice . Bahler stated , " It 's like vocal arranging in a perfect world . " Jones disagreed , stating that the task was like " putting a watermelon in a Coke bottle " . The following evening , Lionel Richie held a " choreography " session at his home , where it was decided who would stand where . 
 The final night of recording was held on January 28 , 1985 , at A & M Recording Studios in Hollywood . Michael Jackson arrived at 9 pm , earlier than the other artists , to record his solo section and record a vocal chorus by himself . He was subsequently joined in the recording studio by the remaining USA for Africa artists , who included Ray Charles , Billy Joel , Diana Ross , Cyndi Lauper , Bruce Springsteen and Smokey Robinson . Also in attendance were five of Jackson 's siblings : Jackie , La Toya , Marlon , Randy and Tito . Many of the participants came straight from an American Music Award ceremony , which had been held that same night . Invited musician Prince , who would have had a part in which he and Michael Jackson sang to each other , did not attend the recording session . The reason given for his absence has varied . One newspaper claimed that the singer did not want to record with other acts . Another report , from the time of " We Are the World " ' s recording , suggested that the musician did not want to partake in the session because organizer Bob Geldof called him a " creep " . Prince did , however , donate an exclusive track , " 4 The Tears In Your Eyes " , for the We Are the World album . In all , more than 45 of America 's top musicians participated in the recording , and another 50 had to be turned away . Upon entering the recording studio , the musicians were greeted by a sign pinned to the door which read , " Please check your egos at the door . " They were also greeted by Stevie Wonder , who proclaimed that if the recording was not completed in one take , he and Ray Charles , two blind men , would drive everybody home . 
 Each of the performers took their position at around 10 : 30 pm and began to sing . Several hours passed before Stevie Wonder announced that he would like to substitute a line in Swahili for the " sha @-@ lum sha @-@ lin @-@ gay " sound . At this point , Waylon Jennings left the recording studio for a short time when it was suggested by some that the song be sung in Swahili . A heated debate ensued , in which several artists also rejected the suggestion . The " sha @-@ lum sha @-@ lin @-@ gay " sound ran into opposition as well and was subsequently removed from the song . Jennings returned to the studio and participated in the recording , which bears his name in the end credits . The participants eventually decided to sing something meaningful in English . They chose to sing the new line " One world , Our children " , which most of the participants enjoyed . 
 In the early hours of the morning , two Ethiopian women , guests of Stevie Wonder , were brought into the recording studio — it had been decided that a portion of the proceeds raised would be used to bring aid to those affected by the recent famine in Ethiopia . They thanked the singers on behalf of their country , bringing several artists to tears , before being led from the room . Wonder attempted to lighten the mood , by joking that the recording session gave him a chance to " see " fellow blind musician Ray Charles . " We just sort of bumped into each other ! " The solo parts of the song were recorded without any problems . The final version of " We Are the World " was completed at 8 am . 
 = = Music and vocal arrangements = = 
 " We Are the World " is sung from a first person viewpoint , allowing the audience to " internalize " the message by singing the word we together . It has been described as " an appeal to human compassion " . The first lines in the song 's repetitive chorus proclaim , " We are the world , we are the children , we are the ones who make a brighter day , so let 's start giving " . " We Are the World " opens with Lionel Richie , Stevie Wonder , Paul Simon , Kenny Rogers , James Ingram , Tina Turner and Billy Joel singing the first verse . Michael Jackson and Diana Ross follow , completing the first chorus together . Dionne Warwick , Willie Nelson and Al Jarreau sing the second verse , before Bruce Springsteen , Kenny Loggins , Steve Perry and Daryl Hall go through the second chorus . Co @-@ writer Jackson , Huey Lewis , Cyndi Lauper and Kim Carnes follow with the song 's bridge . This structuring of the song is said to " create a sense of continuous surprise and emotional buildup " . " We Are the World " concludes with Bob Dylan and Ray Charles singing a full chorus , Wonder and Springsteen duetting , and ad libs from Charles and Ingram . 
 = = USA for Africa musicians = = 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On March 8 , 1985 , " We Are the World " was released as a single , in both 7 " and 12 " format . The song was the only one released from the We Are the World album and became a chart success around the world . In the US , it was a number one hit on the R & B singles chart , the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks chart and the Billboard Hot 100 , where it remained for a month . The single had initially debuted at number 21 on the Hot 100 , the highest entry since Michael Jackson 's " Thriller " entered the charts at number 20 the year before . It took four weeks for the song to claim the number one spot — half the time a single would normally have taken to reach its charting peak . On the Hot 100 , the song moved from 21 to 5 to 2 and then number 1 . " We Are the World " might have reached the top of the Hot 100 chart sooner , if it were not for the success of Phil Collins ' " One More Night " , which received a significant level of support from both pop and rock listeners . " We Are the World " also entered Billboard 's Top Rock Tracks and Hot Country Singles charts , where it peaked at numbers 27 and 76 respectively . The song became the first single since The Beatles ' " Let It Be " to enter Billboard 's Top 5 within two weeks of release . Outside of the US , the single reached number one in Australia , France , Ireland , Italy , New Zealand , The Netherlands , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland and the UK . The song peaked at number 2 in only two countries : Germany and Austria . 
 The single was also a commercial success ; the initial shipment of 800 @,@ 000 " We Are the World " records sold out within three days of release . The record became the fastest @-@ selling American pop single in history . At one Tower Records store on Sunset Boulevard in West Hollywood , 1 @,@ 000 copies of the song were sold in two days . Store worker Richard Petitpas commented , " A number one single sells about 100 to 125 copies a week . This is absolutely unheard of . " By the end of 1985 , " We Are the World " had become the best selling single of the year . Five years later it was revealed that the song had become the biggest single of the 1980s . " We Are the World " was eventually cited as the biggest selling single in both US and pop music history . The song became the first ever single to be certified multi @-@ platinum ; it received a 4 × certification by the Recording Industry Association of America . The estimated global sales of " We Are the World " are said to be 20 million . 
 Despite the song 's commercial success , " We Are the World " received mixed reviews from journalists , music critics and the public following its release . American journalist Greil Marcus felt that the song sounded like a Pepsi jingle . He wrote , " ... the constant repetition of ' There 's a choice we 're making ' conflates with Pepsi 's trademarked ' The choice of a new generation ' in a way that , on the part of Pepsi @-@ contracted song writers Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie , is certainly not intentional , and even more certainly beyond the realm of serendipity . " Marcus added , " In the realm of contextualization , ' We Are the World ' says less about Ethiopia than it does about Pepsi — and the true result will likely be less that certain Ethiopian individuals will live , or anyway live a bit longer than they otherwise would have , than that Pepsi will get the catch phrase of its advertising campaign sung for free by Ray Charles , Stevie Wonder , Bruce Springsteen , and all the rest . " Author <unk> Garofalo agreed , and expressed the opinion that the line " We 're saving our own lives " was a " distasteful element of self @-@ indulgence " . He asserted that the artists of USA for Africa were proclaiming " their own salvation for singing about an issue they will never experience on behalf of a people most of them will never encounter " . 
 In contrast , Stephen Holden of The New York Times praised the phrase " There 's a choice we 're making , We 're saving our own lives " . He commented that the line assumed " an extra emotional dimension when sung by people with superstar <unk> " . Holden expressed that the song was " an artistic triumph that transcends its official nature " . He noted that unlike Band Aid 's " Do They Know It 's Christmas " , the vocals on " We Are the World " were " artfully interwoven " and emphasized the individuality of each singer . Holden concluded that " We Are the World " was " a simple , eloquent ballad " and a " fully @-@ realized pop statement that would sound outstanding even if it weren 't recorded by stars " . 
 The song proved popular with both young and old listeners . The public enjoyed hearing a supergroup of musicians singing together on one track , and felt satisfied in buying the record , knowing that the money would go towards a good cause . People reported they bought more than one copy of the single , some buying up to five copies of the record . One mother from Columbia , Missouri purchased two copies of " We Are the World " , stating , " The record is excellent whether it 's for a cause or not . It 's fun trying to identify the different artists . It was a good feeling knowing that I was helping someone in need . " 
 According to music critic and Bruce Springsteen biographer Dave Marsh , " We Are the World " was not widely accepted within the rock music community . The author revealed that the song was " despised " for what it was not : " a rock record , a critique of the political policies that created the famine , a way of finding out how and why famines occur , an all @-@ inclusive representation of the entire worldwide spectrum of post @-@ Presley popular music " . Marsh revealed that he felt some of the criticisms were right , while others were silly . He claimed that despite the sentimentality of the song , " We Are the World " was a large @-@ scale pop event with serious political overtones . 
 " We Are the World " was recognized with several awards following its release . At the 1986 Grammy Awards , the song and its accompanying music video won four awards : Record of the Year , Song of the Year , Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and Best Music Video , Short Form . The music video was awarded two honors at the 1985 MTV Video Music Awards . It collected the awards for Best Group Video and Viewer 's Choice . People 's Choice Awards recognized " We Are the World " with the Favorite New Song award in 1986 . In the same year , the American Music Awards named " We Are the World " " Song of the Year " , and honored organizer Harry Belafonte with the Award of Appreciation . Collecting his award , Belafonte thanked Ken Kragen , Quincy Jones , and " the two artists who , without their great gift would not have inspired us in quite the same way as we were inspired , Mr. Lionel Richie and Mr. Michael Jackson " . Following the speech , the majority of USA for Africa reunited on stage , closing the ceremony with " We Are the World " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Vinyl Single : 
 " We Are the World " ( USA for Africa ) – 7 : 14 
 " Grace " ( Quincy Jones ) – 4 : 56 
 = = Marketing and promotion = = 
 " We Are the World " was promoted with a music video , a video cassette , and several other items made available to the public , including books , posters , shirts and buttons . All proceeds from the sale of official USA for Africa merchandise went directly to the famine relief fund . All of the merchandise sold well ; the video cassette — entitled We Are the World : The Video Event — documented the making of the song , and became the ninth best @-@ selling home video of 1985 . All of the video elements were produced by Howard G. Malley and Craig B. Golin along with April Lee <unk> as the production supervisor . 
 The music video showed the recording of " We Are the World " , and drew criticism from some . Michael Jackson joked before filming , " People will know it 's me as soon as they see the socks . Try taking footage of Bruce Springsteen 's socks and see if anyone knows who they belong to . " Jackson was also criticized for filming and recording his solo piece privately , away from the other artists . The singer 's supporters reasoned that Jackson was a perfectionist ; recording in front of other big name artists would leave him awestruck and unable to perform at his best . He was also known for his shy nature , and the idea of singing solo in front of 44 other famous artists probably sounded terrifying to him . 
 The song was also promoted with a special edition of the American magazine Life . The publication had been the only media outlet permitted inside A & M Recording Studios on the night of January 28 , 1985 . All other press organizations were barred from reporting the events leading up to and during " We Are the World " ' s recording . Life ran a cover story of the recording session in its April 1985 edition of the monthly magazine . Seven members of USA for Africa were pictured on the cover : Bob Dylan , Bruce Springsteen , Cyndi Lauper , Lionel Richie , Michael Jackson , Tina Turner and Willie Nelson . Inside the magazine were photographs of the " We Are the World " participants working and taking breaks . 
 " We Are the World " received worldwide radio coverage in the form of an international simultaneous broadcast later that year . Upon spinning the song on their local stations , Georgia radio disc jockeys , Bob Wolf and Don <unk> came up with the idea for a worldwide simulcast . They called hundreds of radio and satellite stations asking them to participate . On the morning of April 5 , 1985 ( Good Friday of that year ) at 10 : 25 am , over 8000 radio stations simultaneously broadcast the song around the world , showing support for the relief of famine in Ethiopia . As the song was broadcast , hundreds of people sang along on the steps of St. Patrick 's Cathedral in New York . The simultaneous radio broadcast of " We Are the World " was repeated again the following Good Friday . 
 " We Are the World " gained further promotion and coverage on May 25 , 1986 , when it was played during a major benefit event held throughout the US . Hands Across America — USA for Africa 's follow @-@ up project — was an event in which millions of people formed a human chain across the US . The event was held to draw attention to hunger and homelessness in the United States . " We Are the World " ' s co @-@ writer , Michael Jackson , had wanted his song to be the official theme for the event . The other board members of USA for Africa outvoted the singer , and it was instead decided that a new song would be created and released for the event , titled " Hands Across America " . When released , the new song did not achieve the level of success that " We Are the World " did , and the decision to use it as the official theme for the event led to Jackson — who co @-@ owned the publishing rights to " We Are the World " — resigning from the board of directors of USA for Africa . 
 = = Humanitarian aid = = 
 Four months after the release of " We Are the World " , USA for Africa had taken in almost $ 10 @.@ 8 million ( equivalent to $ 23 million today ) . The majority of the money came from record sales within the US . Members of the public also donated money — almost $ 1 @.@ 3 million within the same time period . In May 1985 , USA for Africa officials estimated that they had sold between $ 45 million and $ 47 million worth of official merchandise around the world . Organizer Ken Kragen announced that they would not be distributing all of the money at once . Instead , he revealed that the foundation would be looking into finding a long @-@ term solution for Africa 's problems . " We could go out and spend it all in one shot . Maybe we 'd save some lives in the short term but it would be like putting a Band @-@ Aid over a serious wound . " Kragen noted that experts had predicted that it would take at least 10 to 20 years to make a slight difference to Africa 's long @-@ term problems . 
 In June 1985 , the first USA for Africa cargo jet carrying food , medicine and clothing departed for Ethiopia and the Sudan . It stopped en route in New York , where 15 @,@ 000 T @-@ shirts were added to the cargo . Included in the supplies were high @-@ protein biscuits , high @-@ protein vitamins , medicine , tents , blankets and refrigeration equipment . Harry Belafonte , representing the USA for Africa musicians , visited Sudan in the same month . The trip was his last stop on a four @-@ nation tour of Africa . Tanzanian Prime Minister Salim Ahmed Salim greeted and praised Belafonte , telling him , " I personally and the people of Tanzania are moved by this tremendous example of human solidarity . " 
 One year after the release of " We Are the World " , organizers noted that $ 44 @.@ 5 million had been raised for USA for Africa 's humanitarian fund . They stated that they were confident that they would reach an initial set target of $ 50 million ( equivalent to $ 108 million in 2016 ) . By October 1986 , it was revealed that their $ 50 million target had been met and exceeded ; CBS Records gave USA for Africa a check for $ 2 @.@ 5 million , drawing the total amount of money to $ 51 @.@ 2 million . USA for Africa 's Hands Across America event had also raised a significant amount of money — approximately $ 24 @.@ 5 million for the hungry in the US . 
 Since its release , " We Are the World " has raised over $ 63 million ( equivalent to $ 136 million today ) for humanitarian causes . Ninety percent of the money was pledged to African relief , both long and short term . The long term initiative included efforts in birth control and food production . The remaining 10 percent of funds was earmarked for domestic hunger and homeless programs in the US . From the African fund , over 70 recovery and development projects were launched in seven African nations . Such projects included aid in agriculture , fishing , water management , manufacturing and reforestation . Training programs were also developed in the African countries of Mozambique , Senegal , Chad , Mauritania , Burkina Faso and Mali . 
 Elias <unk> <unk> <unk> , a survivor from Ethiopia remembers : " I won 't ever forget Michael Jackson because his contribution to the song We are the World had a very significant effect on my life . Lots of people became sick and many more died ( ... ) . In 1984 Michael Jackson , along with a number of other leading musicians , made the song We Are the World to raise money for Africa . We baked a special bread from it ( ... ) . When you have been through such hard times you never forget events like this . If you speak to anyone who was in Addis Ababa at that time they will all know what Michael Bread is and I know I will remember it for the rest of my life . ( ... ) " 
 = = Notable live performances = = 
 " We Are the World " has been performed live by members of USA for Africa on several occasions both together and individually . One of the earliest such performances came in 1985 , during the rock music concert Live Aid , which ended with more than 100 musicians singing the song on stage . Harry Belafonte and Lionel Richie made surprise appearances for the live rendition of the song . Michael Jackson would have joined the artists , but was " working around the clock in the studio on a project that he 's made a major commitment to " , according to his press agent , Norman Winter . 
 An inaugural celebration was held for US President @-@ elect Bill Clinton in January 1993 . The event was staged by Clinton 's Hollywood friends at the Lincoln Memorial and drew hundreds of thousands of people . Aretha Franklin , LL Cool J , Michael Bolton and Tony Bennett were among some of the musicians in attendance . Said Jones , " I 've never seen so many great performers come together with so much love and selflessness . " The celebration included a performance of " We Are the World " , which involved Clinton , his daughter Chelsea , and his wife Hillary singing the song along with USA for Africa 's Kenny Rogers , Diana Ross and Michael Jackson . The New York Times ' Edward Rothstein commented on the event , stating , " The most enduring image may be of Mr. Clinton singing along in ' We Are the World ' , the first President to aspire , however futilely , to hipness . " 
 As a prelude to his song Heal the World , " We Are the World " was performed as an interlude during two of Michael Jackson 's tours , the Dangerous World Tour from 1992 to 1993 and the HIStory World Tour from 1996 to 1997 . Jackson planned to use the song for his This Is It comeback concerts at The O2 Arena in London from 2009 to 2010 , but the shows were cancelled due to his sudden death . 
 Michael Jackson died in June 2009 , after suffering a cardiac arrest . His memorial service was held several days later on July 7 , and was reported to have been viewed by more than one billion people . The finale of the event featured group renditions of the Jackson anthems " We Are the World " and " Heal the World " . The singalong of " We Are the World " was led by Darryl Phinnessee , who had worked with Jackson since the late 1980s . It also featured co @-@ writer Lionel Richie and Jackson 's family , including his children . Following the performance , " We Are the World " re @-@ entered the US charts for the first time since its 1985 release . The song debuted at number 50 on Billboard 's Hot Digital Songs chart . 
 = = 25 for Haiti = = 
 On January 12 , 2010 , Haiti was struck by a magnitude @-@ 7 @.@ 0 earthquake , the country 's most severe earthquake in over 200 years . The epicenter of the quake was just outside the Haitian capital Port @-@ au @-@ Prince . Over 230 @,@ 000 civilians have been confirmed dead by the Haitian government because of the disaster and around 300 @,@ 000 have been injured . Approximately 1 @.@ 2 million people are homeless and it has been reported that the lack of temporary shelter may lead to the outbreak of disease . 
 To raise money for earthquake victims , a new celebrity version of " We Are the World " was recorded on February 1 , 2010 and released on February 12 , 2010 . Over 75 musicians were involved in the remake , which was recorded in the same studio as the 1985 original . The new version features revised lyrics as well as a rap segment pertaining to Haiti . Michael Jackson 's younger sister Janet duets with her late brother on the track , as per a request from their mother Katherine . In the video and on the track , archive material of Michael Jackson is used from the original 1985 recording . 
 On February 20 , 2010 , a non @-@ celebrity remake , " We Are the World 25 for Haiti ( YouTube Edition ) " , was posted to the video sharing website YouTube . Internet personality and singer @-@ songwriter Lisa Lavie conceived and organized the Internet collaboration of 57 unsigned or independent YouTube musicians geographically distributed around the world . Lavie 's 2010 YouTube version , a cover of the 1985 original , excludes the rap segment and minimizes the Auto @-@ tune that characterizes the 2010 celebrity remake . Another 2010 remake of the original is the Spanish @-@ language " Somos El Mundo " . It was written by Emilio Estefan and his wife Gloria Estefan , and produced by Emilio , Quincy Jones and Univision Communications , the company that funded the project . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " We Are the World " has been recognized as a politically important song , which " affected an international focus on Africa that was simply unprecedented " . It has been credited with creating a climate in which musicians from around the world felt inclined to follow . According to The New York Times ' Stephen Holden , since the release of " We Are the World " , it has been noted that movement has been made within popular music to create songs that address humanitarian concerns . " We Are the World " was also influential in subverting the way music and meaning were produced , showing that musically and racially diverse musicians could work together both productively and creatively . Ebony described the January 28 recording session , in which Quincy Jones brought together a multi @-@ racial group , as being " a major moment in world music that showed we can change the world " . " We Are the World " , along with Live Aid and Farm Aid , demonstrated that rock music had become more than entertainment , but a political and social movement . Journalist Robert Palmer noted that such songs and events had the ability to reach people around the world , send them a message , and then get results . 
 Since the release of " We Are the World " , and the Band Aid single that influenced it , numerous songs have been recorded in a similar fashion , with the intent to aid disaster victims throughout the world . One such example involved a supergroup of Latin musicians billed as " Hermanos del Tercer Mundo " , or " Brothers of the Third World " . Among the supergroup of 62 recording artists were Julio Iglesias , José Feliciano and Sérgio Mendes . Their famine relief song was recorded in the same studio as " We Are the World " . Half of the profits raised from the charity single was pledged to USA for Africa . The rest of the money was to be used for impoverished Latin American countries . Another notable example is the 1989 cover of the Deep Purple song " Smoke on the Water " by a supergroup of hard rock , prog rock , and heavy metal musicians collaborating as Rock Aid Armenia to raise money for victims of the devastating 1988 Armenian earthquake . 
 The 20th anniversary of " We Are the World " was celebrated in 2005 . Radio stations around the world paid homage to USA for Africa 's creation by simultaneously broadcasting the charity song . In addition to the simulcast , the milestone was marked by the release of a two @-@ disc DVD called We Are the World : The Story Behind the Song . Ken Kragen asserted that the reason behind the simulcast and DVD release was not for USA for Africa to praise themselves for doing a good job , but to " use it to do some more good [ for the original charity ] . That 's all we care about accomplishing . " Harry Belafonte also commented on the 20th anniversary of the song . The entertainer acknowledged that " We Are the World " had " stood the test of time " ; anyone old enough to remember it can still at least hum along . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Borodino @-@ class battleship = 
 The Borodino @-@ class battleship was a class of five pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy around the end of the 19th century . Their design was based on that of the French @-@ built Tsesarevich modified to use Russian equipment . The first four ships were finished after the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 and were among the ships ordered to sail from the Baltic Sea to the Far East to relieve the Pacific Squadron besieged by the Japanese in Port Arthur . Three of these ships were sunk and one was captured by the Imperial Japanese Navy at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905 . The fifth and final ship , Slava , was not completed in time to participate in the war and served with the Baltic Fleet through World War I. She spent most of the war defending the Gulf of Riga and was badly damaged by German dreadnoughts during the Battle of Moon Sound in 1917 . This damage forced the ship 's crew to scuttle her because she had taken on too much water and could not pass through the shallow channel that connected the Gulf of Riga with the Baltic . The wreck was scrapped during the 1930s by the Estonians . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Tsar Nicholas II had desired a warm @-@ water port on the Pacific since his accession to the throne in 1894 . He achieved this ambition in March 1898 when Russia signed a 25 @-@ year lease for Port Arthur and the <unk> Peninsula with China . Japan had previously forced China to sign over the port and its surrounding territory as part of the treaty that concluded the First Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 95 , but the Triple Intervention of France , Russia , and Germany forced them to return the port in exchange for a sizeable increase in the indemnity paid by the Chinese . Japan invested much of the indemnity money in expanding its fleet , while Russia began a major building programme ( " For the Needs of the Far East " ) to defend its newly acquired port that included the Borodino @-@ class battleships . 
 The Borodinos were the most numerous class of battleships ever built by Russia . Although they were intended to be near duplicates of the Tsesarevich , as soon as the contracts were signed it became clear that they would be quite different from the French @-@ built ship . The basic problem facing the navy was that the Borodinos would have heavier engines and larger turrets which would require a designer to build a ship which had the same speed , draft , guns and armor as Tsesarevich , but a greater displacement . The new design was made up by D. V. Skvortsov of the Russian Naval Technical Committee ( NTC ) . He completed his new design in July / August 1898 , one month after the original contract had been signed . The new concept was roughly 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 000 t ) tons heavier and slightly larger and wider than the Tsesarevich . 
 Outwardly , the biggest change was in the appearance of the Borodinos from the original Tsesarevich design . Skvortsov added two more casemates , each containing four 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , one at the bow and the other aft . This was added to the already existing dozen 75 mm guns emplaced along the sides above the armor belt . This caused the tumblehome used on the rest of the hull to be deleted over the twelve guns , and flat @-@ sided armor was used in its place . Thus the five Borodino @-@ class battleships only had tumblehome hulls fore and aft of their 75 mm guns emplaced along their sides . The centreline bulkhead between the engine and boiler rooms caused a danger of capsizing if one side flooded and their narrow belt armor became submerged when overloaded . As such , naval historian Antony Preston regarded these as some of the worst battleships ever built . 
 The ships were 389 feet 5 inches ( 118 @.@ 7 m ) long at the waterline and 397 feet 3 inches ( 121 @.@ 1 m ) long overall , with a beam of 76 feet 1 inch ( 23 @.@ 2 m ) and a draft of 29 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 m ) , 38 inches ( 965 mm ) more than designed . Their normal displacement ranged from 14 @,@ 091 to 14 @,@ 145 long tons ( 14 @,@ 317 to 14 @,@ 372 t ) , 500 – 900 long tons ( 508 – 914 t ) more than their designed displacement of 13 @,@ 516 long tons ( 13 @,@ 733 t ) . They were designed for a crew of 28 officers and 754 enlisted men , although Knyaz Suvorov carried 928 crewmen during the Battle of Tsushima . 
 The Borodino @-@ class ships were powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam generated by 20 Belleville boilers . The engines were designed to reach a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The lead ship , Borodino , was fitted with a copy of the La Seyne machinery installed in <unk> and built by the Franco @-@ Russian Works . The remaining four Borodinos were supplied with machinery designed and built by the Baltic Works . Borodino 's engines were rated at 16 @,@ 300 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 200 kW ) and its boilers had a working pressure of 19 atm ( 1 @,@ 925 kPa ; 20 kgf / cm2 ) ; the machinery of her sisters was rated at 15 @,@ 800 ihp ( 11 @,@ 800 kW ) and their boilers had a working pressure of 21 atm ( 2 @,@ 128 kPa ; 22 kgf / cm2 ) . Other differences were that Borodino was equipped with economisers for her boilers as well as three @-@ bladed screws , while her sisters lacked economisers and had four @-@ bladed propellers . 
 Because the ships were being prepared to go to the Far East shortly after completion , they conducted only abbreviated sea trials . Only Oryol reached her designed speed during these trails , despite her engines only producing 14 @,@ 176 ihp ( 10 @,@ 571 kW ) . The engines of her sisters produced more power , but they were slower during their trials . At deep load they carried 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 372 t ) of coal that provided them a range of 2 @,@ 590 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ; 2 @,@ 980 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ships were fitted with six steam @-@ driven generators with a total capacity of 738 kilowatts ( 990 hp ) . 
 = = = Armament and fire control = = = 
 The main armament of the Borodino @-@ class consisted of two pairs of 40 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch guns mounted in French @-@ style , electrically powered , twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft . The turrets had a maximum elevation of + 15 ° and 60 rounds per gun were carried . The guns fired one shell every 90 – 132 seconds . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 598 ft / s ( 792 m / s ) to a range of 16 @,@ 010 yards ( 14 @,@ 640 m ) at maximum <unk> 
 The secondary armament of the ships consisted of a dozen 45 @-@ caliber Canet Model 1891 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) ( QF ) guns mounted in six electrically powered twin @-@ gun turrets on the upper deck . The turrets had a maximum elevation of + 15 ° arc of fire and the center turrets could cover 180 ° . Each six @-@ inch gun was provided with 180 rounds . Their rate of fire was about 2 – 4 rounds per minute . They fired shells that weighed 91 lb ( 41 @.@ 4 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 792 @.@ 5 m / s ) . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 600 yards ( 11 @,@ 500 m ) . 
 A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included twenty 50 @-@ calibre Canet QF 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns mounted in hull embrasures . The ships carried 300 shells for each gun . They fired a 11 @-@ pound ( 4 @.@ 9 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) to a maximum range of 7 @,@ 005 yards ( 6 @,@ 405 m ) at an elevation of + 13 ° . The Borodino @-@ class ships also mounted sixteen or eighteen 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns in the superstructure . They fired a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 00 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) at a rate of around 15 rounds per minute . 
 The ships carried four 381 @-@ millimetre ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , two of which were mounted above water in the bow and stern while the two broadside underwater tubes were located near the forward 12 @-@ inch magazine . Four torpedoes were carried for the above @-@ water tubes and six for the submerged tubes . They also carried 50 mines to be laid to protect their anchorage in remote areas . 
 The Borodino @-@ class were originally fitted with Liuzhol stadiametric rangefinders that used the angle between two vertical points on an enemy ship , usually the waterline and the crow 's nest , to estimate the range . The gunnery officer consulted his references to get the range and calculated the proper elevation and deflection required to hit the target . He then transmitted his commands via a Geisler electro @-@ mechanical fire @-@ control transmission system to each gun or turret . While fitting out , these rangefinders were replaced on the first four ships by two Barr and Stroud coincidence rangefinders that used two images that had to be superimposed to derive the range . Perepelkin telescopic sights were also installed for their guns , but their crews were not trained in how to use them . 
 The waterline armor belt of the Borodinos consisted of Krupp armor and was 5 @.@ 7 – 7 @.@ 64 inches ( 145 – 194 mm ) thick . The armor of their gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 10 in ( 254 mm ) and their deck ranged from 1 to 2 inches ( 25 to 51 mm ) in thickness . The 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) armored lower deck curved downwards and formed an anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 On 15 October 1904 , Knyaz Suvorov , flagship of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky , commander of the 2nd Pacific Squadron , and the other three Borodino @-@ class battleships set sail for Port Arthur from Libau along with the other vessels of the squadron . Rozhestvensky had received numerous reports of Japanese agents and torpedo boats disguised as fishing vessels before sailing and he ordered maximum alertness after coaling at Skagen , Denmark on 7 October . Early on the evening of the following day , when the squadron was near the Dogger Bank , the auxiliary repair ship Kamchatka reported that she was under attack by torpedo boats in the rain . About four hours later , the squadron encountered British fishing trawlers working the Dogger Bank in the fog and opened fire on them at very short range . One trawler was sunk and at least three others were damaged ; several fishermen were killed and others wounded . The battleships also fired upon and damaged the cruisers Aurora and Dmitrii Donskoi in the confusion . The incident enraged the British population and caused a diplomatic incident with the British that nearly led to war until Russia apologized and agreed to pay reparations on 29 October . 
 Rozhestvensky led his ships down the Atlantic coast of Africa , rounding Cape Horn , and reached the island of Nosy Be off the north @-@ west coast of Madagascar on 9 January 1905 where they remained for two months while Rozhestvensky finalized his coaling arrangements . During this time , he learned of the capture of Port Arthur and changed his destination to Vladivostok , the only other port controlled by the Russians in the Far East . The squadron sailed for Camranh Bay , French Indochina , on 16 March and reached it almost a month later to await the obsolete ships of the 3rd Pacific Squadron , commanded by Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov . The latter ships reached Camranh Bay on 9 May and the combined force sailed for Vladivostok on 14 May . While exact figures are not available , it is probable that the ships were approximately 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 700 t ) overweight as they were overloaded with coal and other supplies ; all of which was stored high in the ships and reduced their stability . The extra weight also submerged their waterline armor belt and left only about 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) of the upper armor belt above the waterline . 
 = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = 
 Before the battle Rozhestvensky grouped the four Borodinos into one division and retained personal command of the division . Oryol , the last ship in the division , fired the first shots of the Battle of Tsushima when the ship 's captain , Nikolay Yung , ordered her to open fire at 11 : 42 at a Japanese cruiser that was shadowing the Russian formation at a range of 9 @,@ 000 meters ( 9 @,@ 800 yd ) . Rozhestvensky had not given any pre @-@ battle instructions to the fleet covering this situation , but he ordered Yung to cease fire after 30 rounds had been fired without effect . Knyaz Suvorov was the lead ship in the Russian battle line and she opened fire at the Japanese battleship Mikasa , flagship of Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō at 14 : 05 . Mikasa and the other Japanese ships began to return fire about five minutes later . Their high @-@ explosive shells quickly set all four of the Borodinos on fire ; at 14 : 35 , Rozhestvensky and the Knyaz Suvorov 's captain were wounded by splinters that entered the ship 's conning tower . Around 14 : 52 , another hit jammed Knyaz Suvorov 's steering gear after a four point turn to starboard had been ordered and caused the ship to make nearly a full circle before she could be steered by her engines . By this time Knyaz Suvorov 's aft 12 @-@ inch gun turret had been destroyed by an explosion that blew its roof off onto the quarterdeck , her forward funnel had fallen down and her mainmast had been shot away . 
 Imperator Aleksandr III and the other ships of the division briefly followed Knyaz Suvorov until it became clear that the latter ship was out of control and then turned north in an effort to get behind Tōgō 's ships . Knyaz Suvorov never regained her position in the battle line and became the primary target of the Japanese for a time . Around 16 : 00 the captain of Imperator Alexandr III , Nikolai Bukhvostov , decided to duplicate Retvizan 's maneuver at the Battle of the Yellow Sea by charging straight for the Japanese battleline in an attempt to focus their attention on his ship rather than Knyaz Suvorov . He was successful , but Imperator Aleksandr III was badly damaged in the process . Borodino now assumed the lead position and turned the fleet to the south where they temporarily managed to disengage in the mist and fog . 
 Knyaz Suvorov was badly damaged by repeated attacks after she separated from the main body although she was initially in no danger of sinking . The Russian destroyer Buinyi came alongside around 17 : 30 and evacuated Rozhestvensky and other wounded officers . Torpedoes fired by a number of torpedo boats ultimately caused a magazine to explode around 19 : 20 and Knyaz Suvorov capsized at about 19 : 30 . Other than the 20 officers taken off by Buinyi , there were no survivors of the 928 crew aboard . 
 When the shooting between the battle lines resumed around 18 : 00 , the Japanese concentrated their fire upon Imperator Aleksandr III and Borodino . Imperator Alexandr III sheered out of line to port around 18 : 30 and capsized , but did not sink until 19 : 07 ; there were no survivors . Borodino lasted a little while longer under concentrated Japanese fire . Two 12 @-@ inch hits by the battleship Shikishima at 19 : 18 started a massive fire and both the ship 's 12 @-@ inch gun turrets were knocked out . Ten minutes later , after Tōgō ordered his ships to cease fire and disengage , the battleship Fuji fired her already @-@ loaded 12 @-@ inch guns before turning away . One of these hit Borodino beneath her starboard forward six @-@ inch turret and ignited the ready @-@ use ammunition in the turret . The fire spread and caused a catastrophic detonation in several magazines that blew open her hull . Borodino quickly capsized and sank with only one crewman from her crew of 855 being rescued . 
 Oryol took the lead after Borodino was sunk ; she was joined by Nebogatov 's Second Division after Tōgō ordered the Japanese battleships to disengage in the gathering darkness . Nebogatov assumed command of the remains of the fleet and they continued towards Vladivostok . The ships were discovered by the Japanese early the following morning and attacked by Tōgō 's battleships around 10 : 00 . The faster Japanese ships stayed beyond the range at which Nebogatov 's ships could effectively reply and he decided to surrender his ships at 10 : 30 as he could neither return fire nor close the range . 
 = = = Post @-@ Tsushima careers = = = 
 The Japanese substantially rebuilt Oryol and recommissioned her in June 1907 with the name of Iwami . To reduce her top weight , they cut down her superstructure and repositioned her guns . In addition , her boilers were replaced by an unknown number of Japanese @-@ built Miyabara boilers and rearmed her with Japanese @-@ made guns . These changes reduced her displacement to approximately 13 @,@ 500 long tons ( 13 @,@ 700 t ) and her crew now totaled 750 officers and crewmen . 
 During World War I , the ship participated in the Siege of Tsingtao in August – November 1914 and served as the flagship of the Japanese Intervention Squadron in Vladivostok in 1918 when Japan intervened in the Russian Civil War . She was used as a training ship in 1921 and disarmed in 1922 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . Sources differ as to her ultimate fate ; she was either sunk as a target by aircraft near Miura in July 1924 or scrapped at Kobe in 1924 – 1925 . 
 Serving in the Baltic Sea during World War I , Slava was the largest ship of the Russian Gulf of Riga Squadron that fought the German High Seas Fleet in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . She was lightly damaged by three hits during the battle . She repeatedly bombarded German positions and troops for the rest of 1915 and during 1916 . During the Battle of Moon Sound in 1917 Slava was badly damaged by the German dreadnought SMS König , significantly increasing her draft . The shallow channel made it impossible to escape and she was scuttled in the Moon Sound Strait between the island of Muhu ( Moon ) and the mainland . The Estonians scrapped her in 1935 . 
 = Hurricane Iselle ( 2014 ) = 
 Hurricane Iselle was the strongest tropical cyclone to make landfall on the Big Island of Hawaii in recorded history . The eleventh named storm of the annual hurricane season , Iselle developed from an area of disturbed weather southwest of Mexico on July 31 , 2014 . Assuming a west @-@ northwest course that it would maintain throughout its existence , generally favorable atmospheric conditions allowed for gradual strengthening , with the cyclone attaining hurricane status a day after formation . Continued strengthening progressed for several days up until August 4 , when Iselle reached peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 947 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 96 inHg ) , making it a Category 4 hurricane . Thereafter , Iselle encountered hostile environmental conditions and quickly weakened before making landfall on the Big Island on August 7 as a moderate tropical storm . Its passage over the island disrupted the cyclone , and Iselle later dissipated on August 9 . 
 Widespread precautionary measures took place across Hawaii as forecasts indicated the potential for a Hawaiian landfall as early as August 2 . Then @-@ governor Neil Abercrombie signed an emergency proclamation into effect , and numerous government facilities were closed . Several airlines cancelled flights servicing the archipelago . Upon making landfall , Iselle brought torrential rainfall and caused strong winds which resulted in widespread power outages and downed trees . The storm caused heavy crop damage , estimated at $ 66 million ( 2014 USD ) , including 60 % of the state 's papaya that was lost . This was enough to be classified as an agriculture disaster , and was eventually declared a disaster by Federal Emergency Management Agency after initially being denied . The storm also killed one person on Kauai as a result of flooding . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late July 2014 , computer models began to indicate the possible formation of a low @-@ pressure area off the coast of southwestern Mexico , prompting the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to assess the region with a low probability of tropical cyclogenesis on July 24 . These forecasts began to come to fruition on July 28 when an area of thunderstorms associated with a tropical wave developed off the Mexican coast . Tracking westward in favorable conditions , the system organized over the following days . At 21 : 00 UTC on July 31 , the NHC classified the disturbance as Tropical Storm Iselle due to the system 's organization and the detection of tropical storm @-@ force winds by the MetOp @-@ B scatterometer . At the time , Iselle was located roughly 1 @,@ 075 mi ( 1 @,@ 730 ) km southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . Steady intensification continued after formation , with the NHC indicating the possibility of rapid <unk> on August 1 , Iselle began to develop an eye , and this progressive pattern of organization prompted the NHC to upgrade the storm to hurricane status at 03 : 00 UTC the following day . 
 Although favorable conditions allowed for the uninhibited growth of Iselle early in its development , moderate wind shear briefly impacted the hurricane on August 2 , preventing thunderstorms from intensifying and causing the storm to become slightly malformed vertically . However , these conditions abated shortly afterwards , allowing Iselle to resume strengthening and reach Category 2 hurricane status late that same day . With wind shear no longer impinging on the organization of Iselle , the tropical cyclone gradually became more symmetric , allowing for the hurricane 's once ragged eye to clear itself of cloud cover and the storm to intensify to major hurricane status on August 3 . Despite the attainment of some annular tropical cyclone characteristics , Iselle briefly weakened below major hurricane status before rapidly reaching Category 4 strength at 15 : 00 UTC on August 4 . Consequently , Iselle reached peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 947 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 96 inHg ) . At the same time , the hurricane exhibited an eye 30 mi ( 45 km ) across . 
 Following peak intensity , the combination of increasing wind shear and lowering sea surface temperatures began to slowly weaken Iselle , bringing it below Category 4 intensity early on August 5 . At 15 : 00 UTC that day , forecasting responsibility transferred from the NHC to the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) . Continued wind shear caused the storm to further degrade and its eye to become ragged in appearance . The CPHC downgraded Iselle below major hurricane intensity six hours after the hurricane had moved into the agency 's area of responsibility . Although wind shear began to decrease thereafter , abundant dry air caused Iselle to rapidly weaken , dropping to Category 1 intensity on August 6 . However , the suppressed wind shear allowed for the hurricane to reorganize and maintain a large eye as it tracked towards Hawaii . Only slow degradation of Iselle 's structure followed , though on August 7 , the storm 's eye had faded and the CPHC estimated that Iselle had weakened to a minimal hurricane . Becoming increasingly disorganized , Iselle weakened to a tropical storm the next day before making landfall at 12 : 30 UTC along the Kau coast of Hawaii island . The mountainous terrain of the island largely disrupted the main cyclonic circulation of Iselle , which manifested as a collection of small <unk> south of the Hawaiian islands . Due to the loss of any sustained thunderstorm activity at the storm 's center , the CPHC decided to downgrade Iselle to a remnant area of low pressure on August 9 ; at the time , the disturbance was centered roughly 200 mi ( 320 km ) west @-@ southwest of Honolulu . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At 21 : 00 UTC on August 5 , the CPHC issued a tropical storm watch for the island of Hawaii ; forecasts issued by the NHC as early as August 2 illustrated the possibility of Iselle tracking over or in the vicinity of the Hawaiian archipelago . As the hurricane tracked closer to the islands , watches were extended as far westward as Oahu . The first hurricane warning associated with Iselle was issued on August 6 for Hawaii County . Later that day , a tropical storm warning was issued for Maui , Molokai , Lanai , Kahoolawe , and Oahu . By early on August 7 , the tropical storm warning was extend to include Kauai , placing all of the main Hawaiian islands under some form of tropical cyclone warning . The potential for flooding also resulted in the issuance of a flash flood watch for the entirety the island chain . By August 9 , all warnings were lifted as Iselle no longer posed a threat to the islands . 
 In anticipation for the potential impacts of both Iselle and Hurricane Julio , Hawaii governor Neil Abercrombie signed an emergency proclamation , thereby allocating resources to future relief and mitigation operations . Maui County mayor Alan Arakawa issued a state of emergency for his respective county . Due to the impending threat of the storm , the heightened sense of urgency prompted residents to stock up on necessities . Although no mandatory evacuation was planned , residents of low @-@ lying areas in Hawaii County were requested to evacuate due to the threat of storm surge and flooding . Residents in coastal Kau and Puna districts were advised to take precautions and evacuate to higher ground if necessary . The United States Coast Guard urged boaters and mariners to exercise caution as waves were expected to reach 10 – 15 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 6 m ) in some offshore locations . The Coast Guard also prepared to partially close ports in both Hawaii and Maui County . 
 In Maui County , the Hawai 'i Department of Education ordered for the closure of all schools and the designation of some facilities as emergency shelters . All public schools in Hawaii County were also closed by the department . Both the University of Hawaii and the Hawaii Community College closed their campuses during Iselle 's passage . The Hawai 'i Department of Land and Natural Resources closed all of its managed lands in Hawaii and Maui counties and closed some of its campgrounds and wilderness areas in Oahu and Kauai counties . All state offices and courthouses in Hawaii County were closed with the retention of only essential staff . Although Hawaiian Airlines did not cancel its flights , the company waived fees for passengers seeking to change from flights expected to service during Iselle 's passage . United Airlines and Island Air later took the same accommodative measures . The latter later cancelled all of its inter @-@ Hawaiian flights on August 7 , with the exception of flights serving Kauai ; American Airlines and numerous other airlines would follow suit as the threat of Iselle neared . The Salvation Army readied its resources in preparation for relief operations for Iselle in Hawaii . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Tropical storm @-@ force winds affected much of the state as Iselle moved through , except Niihau , the rest of the Hawaiian islands all reporting gusts over 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) . Hurricane @-@ force winds were confined to Mauna Kea on the Big Island , where a peak gust of 96 mph ( 154 km / h ) was observed . Heavy rains affected most of the southern islands , with some areas of the Big Island seeing more than 12 in ( 300 mm ) due to orographic lift from the southerly flow on the backside of Iselle . The greatest total was at the Hakalau Forest National Wildlife Refuge , where 15 @.@ 25 in ( 387 mm ) was observed . Areas on the leeward side of the island saw substantially less rain ; Kona International Airport received only 0 @.@ 04 in ( 1 @.@ 0 mm ) during the storm 's passage . Kauai saw rains in excess of 6 in ( 150 mm ) in several areas and a maximum of 9 @.@ 58 in ( 243 mm ) at a United States Geological Survey station along the <unk> Ridge . Totals peaked at 4 @.@ 22 in ( 107 mm ) to the north on Oahu , while <unk> and Lanai received generally negligible totals . Swells from hurricanes Iselle and Julio also produced 6 to 10 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) waves along the eastern shores of the Hawaiian islands . 
 Iselle brought damaging surf along the east coast of the island . Strong winds unroofed homes near Hilo and downed trees . These winds also felled power lines , causing widespread outages impacting roughly 23 @,@ 000 electricity customers . A geothermal plant in Puna released toxic hydrogen sulfide gases upon losing its power sources , prompting officials to urge an exodus of the immediate area , although a number of nearby residents reported health impacts . A water treatment plant in Kula on Maui also shut down due to power failure , prompting the conservation of water supplies in that area . Iselle 's winds also damaged about 1 @,@ 000 coffee trees and over 2 @,@ 000 macadamia trees . Damage was heaviest to the papaya crop , with about 60 % of the statewide crop destroyed , accounting for $ 55 million in losses ( 2014 USD ) . Other crops , including coffee , macadamia nuts , and flowers , were also damaged , and overall crop losses in the state were estimated at $ 66 million ( 2014 USD ) . Only one known death took place as a direct result of the storm – a 19 @-@ year @-@ old woman who was swept away by flood waters while hiking in a closed state park . Over 250 property owners reported damage , with at least 11 houses destroyed , and 28 with major damage . Public damage and the cost to remove debris was estimated at $ 13 @.@ 2 million . Overall damage in the state is unknown , but estimated by a Hawaiian economist between $ 148 – 325 million ( 2014 USD ) . 
 Due to the threat from Iselle , lieutenant governor candidate Warner Sutton requested that Governor Neil Abercrombie postpone the August 9 primary . The governor declined the request , and the primary election occurred as scheduled . However , the storm damaged roads leading to two polling stations on the Big Island , prompting officials to decide the election by absentee ballot in those areas . After a close campaign between incumbent Senator Brian Schatz and Congresswoman Colleen Hanabusa , the senate primary , held on the same day as the gubernatorial primary , was too close to call after Schatz led by only 1 @,@ 635 votes . As a result , the election hinged on the two closed polling stations , where more than 8 @,@ 000 people had the option to vote by mail . This was later changed to an in @-@ person vote for August 15 , despite a challenge from the Hanabusa campaign with regards to storm damage , and Schatz ultimately won . The Hawaii American Civil Liberties Union later sued the state over how they handled the election . 
 = = Aftermath and records = = 
 After the storm , Hawaiian Electric Industries worked to restore power across the Big Island , aided by trucks removing trees and debris from roads . By August 20 , 99 % of customers had their power restored , leaving 1 @,@ 100 residents by 12 days after the storm . However , it took until September 11 , or about five weeks after the storm , for all power to be restored . Post @-@ storm surveys indicated that the damage from Iselle was mostly related to trees that were not native to the island , which weakened and snapped under the high winds . Residents across Hawaii donated over $ 80 @,@ 000 after the storm to assist victims , organized through the Hawaii Island United Way . Local charities distributed 5 @,@ 000 lb ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) of food to over 3 @,@ 000 families . 
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) completed a disaster survey of houses on August 19 , a first step toward a federal disaster declaration . Due to the damage , Congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard remarked , " I 'm urging FEMA , Hawaii County , the governor and President Obama to expedite the process of declaring Iselle 's devastation a natural disaster so that the people of Puna can receive immediate help . " On August 25 , Governor Abercrombie formally requested for federal assistance , after the state depleted its disaster fund , but that was rejected by FEMA due to insufficient damage . However , Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack declared an agriculture disaster , prompting the Small Business Administration to allow federal disaster loans to small businesses . The FEMA decision was reversed on September 12 , when the federal government approved aid for rebuilding public buildings , as well as future disaster mitigation . 
 When Iselle made landfall on the Big Island as a moderate tropical storm , it became the strongest tropical cyclone on record to hit the island , and one of only three storms to hit the island at tropical storm intensity or higher , along with Tropical Storm Seven in 1958 , and Tropical Storm Darby in 2016 . If Iselle made landfall as a hurricane , it would be the first hurricane to ever hit the Big Island . With estimated damage cost of $ 79 @.@ 2 million ( 2014 USD ) , Iselle surpassed Hurricane Dot in 1959 as the third @-@ costliest tropical cyclone to ever hit the U.S. state of Hawaii , even after accounting for inflation . The only storms to cause more damage to the islands were hurricanes Iniki and Iwa in 1992 and 1982 , respectively . In addition , Iselle was the third @-@ strongest tropical cyclone to ever make landfall on the Hawaiian islands after hurricanes Dot and Iniki . 
 = Cyclone Hondo = 
 Intense Tropical Cyclone Hondo ( JTWC designation : 16S ) was the strongest and longest lived tropical cyclone to develop during the 2007 – 08 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season . The third tropical cyclone and first intense tropical cyclone of the season , Hondo developed out of a tropical disturbance in early February about 1 @,@ 020 km ( 635 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Diego Garcia . The disturbance quickly strengthened , becoming a moderate tropical storm on February 4 and a severe tropical storm the following day . After a brief period of slower intensification , Hondo rapidly intensified into an intense tropical cyclone and reached its peak intensity with winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) on February 7 . The cyclone gradually weakened over the next several days due to an increase in forward speed and a decrease in sea surface temperatures . On February 12 , Hondo rapidly degenerated into a remnant @-@ low pressure area . Over the following week , the remnant low traveled in a general west @-@ northwest direction with no development . On February 20 , about 2 @,@ 780 km ( 1 @,@ 725 mi ) northeast of where the final advisories were issued , the storm began to regenerate . The next day , advisories were issued on Tropical Disturbance Ex @-@ Hondo , which briefly strengthened into a tropical depression . However , according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , Hondo continued to strengthen and attained winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) before passing directly over Réunion . Interaction with the island caused the storm to weaken and degenerate into a remnant low once more . The storm dissipated on February 29 after executing a counterclockwise loop . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On February 2 , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre for the southwest Indian Ocean , Météo @-@ France , and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring a tropical disturbance located in the western portion of Météo @-@ France 's area of responsibility . However , it was not operationally classified as a disturbance for another two days . Traveling generally towards the southwest , the disturbance slowly strengthened . At 0300 UTC on February 4 , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the system as deep convection and outer bands developed around the center . Located within a narrow area of low to moderate wind shear , the system traveled towards the west @-@ southwest at 15 km / h ( 9 mph ) . Shortly after , Météo @-@ France began issuing advisories on Tropical Disturbance 10 while it was located about 1 @,@ 020 km ( 635 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Diego Garcia . A buoy located just to the south of the small circulation recording decreasing atmospheric pressure , having lowered by 4 hPa ( mbar ) in the past 24 hours . 
 With weak steering currents provided by an area of high pressure to the north , the disturbance slowly moved towards the east @-@ southeast . At 1500 UTC , the JTWC began issuing advisories on the disturbance which they designated as Tropical Cyclone 16S . With high oceanic heat content , low wind shear , and good divergence aloft , significant strengthening was likely . Early the next day , Météo @-@ France upgraded the disturbance to a tropical depression as winds increased to 55 km / h ( 35 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) . However , in the post @-@ season analysis , Météo @-@ France determined that the system had become a depression about 12 hours earlier and was already a moderate tropical storm by the time of the operation upgrade . At 0600 UTC , Météo @-@ France classified the depression as a moderate tropical storm and was given the name Hondo ; a name submitted to the World Meteorological Organization by Zimbabwe . It was later determined that Hondo was already a severe tropical storm by the time it was named operationally . 
 Hondo continued to quickly strengthen , becoming a tropical cyclone , the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , that same day . After maintaining its through the early hours of February 6 , a pinhole eye began to develop , signifying that Hondo was beginning to undergo rapid intensification . During this intensification phase , the storm became nearly stationary again due to a weakness in the ridge which was previously steering the cyclone towards the east . Later that day , Hondo was upgraded to an intense tropical cyclone with winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) . After becoming an intense tropical cyclone , wind shear began to increase , causing the eye to become slightly disorganized , temporarily slowed the intensification . Later in the day , the eye became better defined , allowing Hondo to intensify further . Operationally , Hondo was upgraded to a very intense tropical cyclone with winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with a minimum pressure of 906 hPa ( mbar ) . However , after reanalysis , it was found that Hondo never intensified beyond intense tropical cyclone status and winds peaked at 215 km / h ( 130 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with a minimum pressure of 915 hPa ( mbar ) . 
 Around the same time that Météo @-@ France assessed Hondo to have peaked , the JTWC reported that the storm had attained winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) , equivalent to a strong Category 4 hurricane . Shortly after reaching peak intensity , the cloud tops around the eye began to warm , meaning that the storm was beginning to weaken . Hondo also turned towards the southwest and kept a steady pace as two subtropical highs began influencing its movement . The storm continued to weaken as cloud tops warmed but remained an intense tropical cyclone as its eye was still well @-@ defined . Hondo briefly re @-@ intensified later on February 8 despite the structure of the storm deteriorating . The cyclone maintained intense tropical cyclone status through February 10 due to the formation of a large eye which helped maintain the storms structure . Hondo gradually began to weaken due to a combination of decreasing sea surface temperatures and increasing forward motion . On February 10 , Hondo started a gradual curving path due to a trough located to the south and strengthening high pressure systems to the north . At 0600 UTC , the storm was downgraded to a tropical cyclone as winds decreased to 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . 
 Continued weakened led to the storm being downgraded to a severe tropical storm early on February 11 as it tracked towards the southeast . After spending several hours over cold waters , most of the convection associated with Hondo dissipated due to the lack of energy and the storm was further downgraded to a moderate tropical storm . Later that day , no convection remained around the storm as it weakened to a tropical depression . The JTWC issued their final advisory on February 12 as the storm showed no signs of convective activity . Hondo degenerated into a remnant @-@ low pressure area as Météo @-@ France issued their final advisory at 1200 UTC . For the next week , the remnant low traveled in a general west @-@ northwestward direction with little or no development . On February 20 , about 2 @,@ 780 km ( 1 @,@ 725 mi ) northeast of where the final advisories were issued , the low began to develop weak convection around the northern edge of the center of circulation . 
 On February 21 , Météo @-@ France began to issue advisories on Tropical Disturbance Ex @-@ Hondo which presented a well @-@ defined circulation . Later that day , deep convection redeveloped around the center as the low entered an area favorable for development . At 0830 UTC , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert , stating that Hondo was likely to regenerate into a tropical cyclone . Later that day , Hondo became almost stationary and was upgraded to a tropical depression as it continued to develop . The next day , Hondo was downgraded to a tropical disturbance as wind shear constrained convective development and caused the system to weaken . However , early on February 23 , the JTWC began issuing advisories on Hondo as they estimated winds to have reached 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) once more . At 0600 UTC , Hondo attained winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) near Mauritius and Réunion . Due to the proximity to the islands , convection associated with the storm became disorganized and it began to weaken . The JTWC issued their final advisory early on February 24 as the system significantly weakened , with the center devoid of convection . Météo @-@ France issued their final advisory several hours later . The remnants of Hondo persisted for another five days , executing a counterclockwise loop before dissipating on February 29 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Hondo began to regenerate , Mauritius and Réunion were placed under a state of alert . Residents in Réunion were advised to stay up to date with the latest warnings on the storm , not go hiking in the mountains , ensure their disaster kit is fully stocked , stay away from the shore , and know the locations of the nearest shelters . Initially , residents in Madagascar feared that Hondo would make landfall in the country after being struck by Cyclone Ivan on February 16 . However , the storm turn towards the southwest , away from Madagascar . On February 23 ex @-@ Hondo tracked just offshore Mauritius before passing directly over Réunion , just short of moderate tropical storm status . Sustained winds of 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) with gusts up to 76 km / h ( 47 mph ) were recorded on Mauritius while sustained winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) with gusts up to 99 km / h ( 61 mph ) were recorded on Réunion . The highest rainfall total was recorded at <unk> , totaling to 750 mm ( 29 @.@ 5 in ) . Up to 760 @,@ 000 people were affected on Réunion and overall damage was minimal . 
 = Bride of Frankenstein = 
 Bride of Frankenstein ( advertised as The Bride of Frankenstein ) is a 1935 American sci fi horror film , the first sequel to Universal Pictures ' 1931 hit Frankenstein . As with the first film , Bride of Frankenstein was directed by James Whale and stars Boris Karloff as The Monster . The sequel features Elsa Lanchester in the dual role of his mate and Mary Shelley , Colin Clive reprising his role as Henry Frankenstein , and Ernest Thesiger as Doctor Septimus Pretorius . 
 The film follows on immediately from the events of the earlier film , and is rooted in a subplot of the original Mary Shelley novel , Frankenstein ( 1818 ) . In the film , a chastened Henry Frankenstein abandons his plans to create life , only to be tempted and finally coerced by his old mentor Dr. Pretorius , along with threats from the Monster , into constructing a mate for him ( the Monster ) . 
 Preparation to film the sequel began shortly after the premiere of the first film , but script problems delayed the project . Principal photography began in January 1935 , with creative personnel from the original returning in front of and behind the camera . Bride of Frankenstein was released to critical and popular acclaim , although it encountered difficulties with some state and national censorship boards . Since its release the film 's reputation has grown , and it has been hailed as Whale 's masterpiece . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a stormy night , Percy Bysshe Shelley ( Douglas Walton ) and Lord Byron ( Gavin Gordon ) praise Mary Shelley ( Elsa Lanchester ) for her story of Frankenstein and his Monster . Reminding them that her intention was to impart a moral lesson , Mary says she has more of the story to tell . The scene shifts to the end of the 1931 Frankenstein . 
 Villagers gathered around the burning windmill cheer the apparent death of the Monster ( Boris Karloff , credited as " Karloff " ) . Their joy is tempered by the realization that Henry Frankenstein ( Colin Clive ) is also apparently dead . Hans ( Reginald Barlow ) , father of the girl the creature drowned in the previous film , wants to see the Monster 's bones . He falls into a flooded pit underneath the mill , where the Monster – having survived the fire – strangles him . Hauling himself from the pit , the Monster casts Hans ' wife ( Mary Gordon ) into it to her death . He next encounters Minnie ( Una O 'Connor ) , who flees in terror . 
 Henry 's body is returned to his fiancée Elizabeth ( Valerie Hobson ) at his ancestral castle home . Minnie arrives to sound the alarm about the Monster , but her warning goes unheeded . Elizabeth , seeing Henry move , realizes he is still alive . <unk> back to health by Elizabeth , Henry has renounced his creation , but still believes he may be destined to unlock the secret of life and immortality . A hysterical Elizabeth cries that she sees death coming , foreshadowing the arrival of Henry 's former mentor , Doctor Septimus Pretorius ( Ernest Thesiger ) . In his rooms , Pretorius shows Henry several homunculi he has created , including a miniature queen , king , archbishop , devil , ballerina , and mermaid . Pretorius wishes to work with Henry to create a mate for the Monster and offers a toast to their venture : " To a new world of gods and monsters ! " Upon forcing Henry to help him , Pretorius will grow an artificial brain while Henry gathers the parts for the mate . 
 The Monster saves a young shepherdess ( Anne Darling ) from drowning . Her screams upon seeing him alert two hunters , who shoot and injure the creature . The hunters raise a mob that sets out in pursuit . Captured and trussed to a pole , the Monster is hauled to a dungeon and chained . Left alone , he breaks his chains , kills the guards and escapes into the woods . 
 That night , the Monster encounters a gypsy family and burns his hand in their campfire . Following the sound of a violin playing " Ave Maria " , the Monster encounters an old blind hermit ( O. P. Heggie ) who thanks God for sending him a friend . He teaches the monster words like " friend " and " good " and shares a meal with him . Two lost hunters stumble upon the cottage and recognize the Monster . He attacks them and accidentally burns down the cottage as the hunters lead the hermit away . 
 Taking refuge from another angry mob in a crypt , the Monster spies Pretorius and his cronies Karl ( Dwight Frye ) and Ludwig ( Ted Billings ) breaking open a grave . The henchmen depart as Pretorius stays to enjoy a light supper . The Monster approaches Pretorius , and learns that Pretorius plans to create a mate for him . 
 Henry and Elizabeth , now married , are visited by Pretorius . He is ready for Henry to do his part in their " grand collaboration " . Henry refuses and Pretorius calls in the Monster who demands Henry 's help . Henry again refuses and Pretorius orders the Monster out , secretly signaling him to kidnap Elizabeth . Pretorius guarantees her safe return upon Henry 's participation . Henry returns to his tower laboratory where in spite of himself he grows excited over his work . After being assured of Elizabeth 's safety , Henry completes the Bride 's body . 
 A storm rages as final preparations are made to bring the Bride to life . Her bandage @-@ wrapped body is raised through the roof . Lightning strikes a kite , sending electricity through the Bride . Henry and Pretorius lower her and realize their success . " She 's alive ! Alive ! " Henry cries . They remove her bandages and help her to stand . " The bride of Frankenstein ! " Doctor Pretorius declares . 
 The Monster comes down the steps after killing Karl and Ludwig on the rooftop and sees his mate ( Elsa Lanchester ) . The excited Monster reaches out to her , asking , " Friend ? " The Bride , screaming , rejects him . " She hate me ! Like others " the Monster dejectedly says . As Elizabeth races to Henry 's side , the Monster rampages through the laboratory . The Monster tells Henry and Elizabeth " Yes ! Go ! You live ! " To Pretorius and the Bride , he says " You stay . We belong dead . " While Henry and Elizabeth flee , the Monster sheds a tear and pulls a lever to trigger the destruction of the laboratory and tower . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Universal considered making a sequel to Frankenstein as early as its 1931 preview screenings , following which the film 's original ending was changed to allow for Henry Frankenstein 's survival . James Whale initially refused to direct Bride , believing he had " squeezed the idea dry " on the first film . Following the success of Whale 's The Invisible Man , producer Carl Laemmle , Jr. realized that Whale was the only possible director for Bride ; Whale took advantage of the situation in persuading the studio to let him make One More River . Whale believed the sequel would not top the original , so he decided instead to make it a memorable " hoot " . According to a studio publicist , Whale and Universal 's studio psychiatrist decided " the Monster would have the mental age of a ten @-@ year old boy and the emotional age of a lad of fifteen " . 
 Screenwriter Robert Florey wrote a treatment entitled The New Adventures of Frankenstein — The Monster Lives ! , but it was rejected without comment early in 1932 . Universal staff writer Tom Reed wrote a treatment under the title The Return of Frankenstein , a title retained until filming began . Following its acceptance in 1933 , Reed wrote a full script that was submitted to the Hays office for review . The script passed its review , but Whale , who by then had been contracted to direct , complained that " it stinks to heaven " . L. G. <unk> and Philip MacDonald were the next writers assigned , but Whale also found their work unsatisfactory . In 1934 , Whale set John L. Balderston to work on yet another version , and it was he who returned to an incident from the novel in which the creature demands a mate . In the novel Frankenstein creates a mate , but destroys it without bringing it to life . Balderston also created the Mary Shelley prologue . After several months Whale was still not satisfied with Balderston 's work and handed the project to playwright William J. Hurlbut and Edmund Pearson . The final script , combining elements of a number of these versions , was submitted for Hays office review in November 1934 . Kim Newman reports that Whale planned to make Elizabeth the heart donor for the bride , but film historian Scott MacQueen states that Whale never had such an intention . 
 Sources report that Bela Lugosi and Claude Rains were considered , with varying degrees of seriousness , for the role of Frankenstein 's mentor , Pretorius ; others report that the role was created specifically for Ernest Thesiger . Because of Mae Clarke 's ill health , Valerie Hobson replaced her as Henry Frankenstein 's love interest , Elizabeth . Early in production , Whale decided that the same actress cast to play the Bride should also play Mary Shelley in the film 's prologue , to represent how the story — and horror in general — springs from the dark side of the imagination . He considered Brigitte Helm and Phyllis Brooks before deciding on Elsa Lanchester . Lanchester , who had accompanied husband Charles Laughton to Hollywood , had met with only moderate success while Laughton had made a strong impact with several films including The Private Life of Henry VIII ( for which he had won an Oscar ) and Whale 's own The Old Dark House . Lanchester had returned alone to London when Whale contacted her to offer her the dual role . Lanchester modeled the Bride 's hissing on the hissing of swans . She gave herself a sore throat while filming the hissing sequence , which Whale shot from multiple angles . 
 Colin Clive and Boris Karloff reprised their roles from Frankenstein as creator and creation , respectively . Hobson recalled Clive 's alcoholism had worsened since filming the original , but Whale did not recast the role because his " hysterical quality " was necessary for the film . Karloff strongly objected to the decision to allow the Monster to speak . " Speech ! Stupid ! My argument was that if the monster had any impact or charm , it was because he was inarticulate – this great , lumbering , inarticulate creature . The moment he spoke you might as well ... play it straight . " This decision also meant that Karloff could not remove his dental plate , so now his cheeks did not have the sunken look of the original film . Whale and the studio psychiatrist selected 44 simple words for the Monster 's vocabulary by looking at test papers of ten @-@ year @-@ olds working at the studio . Dwight Frye returned to play the doctor 's assistant , Karl , having played the hunchback Fritz in the original . Frye also filmed a scene as an unnamed villager and the role of " Nephew <unk> " , a man who murdered his uncle and blamed the death on the Monster . Boris Karloff is credited simply as <unk> , which was Universal 's custom during the height of his career . Elsa Lanchester is credited for Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley , but in a nod to the earlier film , the Monster 's bride is credited only as " ? " just as Boris Karloff had been in the opening credits of Frankenstein . 
 Universal makeup artist Jack Pierce paid special attention to the Monster 's appearance in this film . He altered his 1931 design to display the after @-@ effects of the mill fire , adding scars and shortening the Monster 's hair . Over the course of filming , Pierce modified the Monster 's makeup to indicate that the Monster 's injuries were healing as the film progressed . Pierce co @-@ created the Bride 's makeup with strong input from Whale , especially regarding the Bride 's iconic hair style , based on Nefertiti . Lanchester 's hair was given a Marcel wave over a wire frame to achieve the style . Lanchester disliked working with Pierce , who she said " really did feel that he made these people , like he was a god ... in the morning he 'd be dressed in white as if he were in hospital to perform an operation . " To play Mary Shelley , Lanchester wore a white net dress embroidered with sequins of butterflies , stars , and moons , which the actress had heard required 17 women 12 weeks to make . 
 Kenneth Strickfaden created and maintained the laboratory equipment . Strickfaden recycled a number of the fancifully named machines he had created for the original Frankenstein for use in Bride , including the " Cosmic Ray <unk> " , and the " <unk> " . A lightning bolt generated by Strickfaden 's equipment has become a stock scene , appearing in any number of films and television shows . The man behind the film 's special photographic effects was John P. Fulton , head of the special effects department at Universal Studios at the time . Fulton and David S. <unk> created the homunculi over the course of two days by shooting the actors in full @-@ size jars against black velvet and aligning them with the perspective of the on @-@ set jars . The foreground film plate was rotoscoped and matted onto the rear plate . Diminutive actor Billy Barty is briefly visible from the back in the finished film as a homunculus infant in a high chair , but Whale cut the infant 's reveal before the film 's release . 
 Whale met Franz Waxman at a party and asked him to score the picture . " Nothing will be resolved in this picture except the end destruction scene . Would you write an unresolved score for it ? " asked Whale . Waxman created three distinctive themes : one for the Monster ; one for the Bride ; and one for Pretorius . The score closes , at Whale 's suggestion , with a powerful dissonant chord , intended to convey the idea that the on @-@ screen explosion was so powerful that the theater where the film was being screened was affected by it . Constantin <unk> conducted 22 musicians to record the score in a single nine @-@ hour session . 
 Shooting began on January 2 , 1935 with a projected budget of US $ 293 @,@ 750 ( $ 5 @.@ 07 million as of 2016 ) – almost exactly the budget of the original – and an estimated 36 @-@ day shooting schedule . On the first day , Karloff waded in the water below the destroyed windmill wearing a rubber suit under his costume . Air got into the suit and expanded it like an " obscene water <unk> " . Later that day , Karloff broke his hip , necessitating a stunt double . Clive had also broken his leg . Shooting was completed on March 7 , 1935 . The film was ten days over schedule because Whale shut down the picture for ten days until Heggie became available to play the Hermit . With a final cost of $ 397 @,@ 023 ( $ 8 @.@ 58 million as of 2016 ) , Bride was more than $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @.@ 73 million as of 2016 ) over budget . As originally filmed , Henry died fleeing the exploding castle . Whale re @-@ shot the ending to allow for their survival , although Clive is still visible on @-@ screen in the collapsing laboratory . Whale completed his final cut , shortening the running time from about 90 to 75 minutes and re @-@ shooting and re @-@ editing the ending , only days before the film 's scheduled premiere date . 
 = = Censorship = = 
 Bride of Frankenstein was subjected to censorship , both during production by the Hays office and following its release by local and national censorship boards . Joseph Breen , lead censor for the Hays office , objected to lines of dialogue in the originally submitted script in which Henry Frankenstein and his work were compared to that of God . He continued to object to such dialogue in revised scripts , and to a planned shot of the Monster rushing through a graveyard to a figure of a crucified Jesus and attempting to " rescue " the figure from the cross . Breen also objected to the number of murders , both seen and implied by the script and strongly advised Whale to reduce the number . The censor 's office , upon reviewing the film in March 1935 , required a number of cuts . Whale agreed to delete a sequence in which Dwight Frye 's " Nephew <unk> " kills his uncle and blames the Monster , and shots of Elsa Lanchester as Mary Shelley in which Breen felt too much of her breasts were visible . Curiously , despite his earlier objection , Breen offered no objection to the cruciform imagery throughout the film – including a scene with the Monster lashed Christ @-@ like to a pole – nor to the presentation of Pretorius as a coded homosexual . Bride of Frankenstein was approved by the Production Code office on April 15 , 1935 . 
 Following its release with the Code seal of approval , the film was challenged by the censorship board in the state of Ohio . Censors in England and China objected to the scene in which the Monster gazes longingly upon the as @-@ yet <unk> body of the Bride , citing concerns that it looked like necrophilia . Universal voluntarily withdrew the film from Sweden because of the extensive cuts demanded , and Bride was rejected outright by Trinidad , Palestine , and Hungary . One unusual objection , from Japanese censors , was that the scene in which Pretorius chases his miniature Henry VIII with tweezers constituted " making a fool out of a king " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Bride of Frankenstein was profitable for Universal , with a 1943 report showing that the film had by then earned approximately $ 2 million ( $ 27 @.@ 4 million as of 2016 ) for the studio , a profit of about $ 950 @,@ 000 ( $ 13 million as of 2016 ) . The film was critically praised upon its release , although some reviewers did qualify their opinions based on the film 's being in the horror genre . The New York World @-@ Telegram called the film " good entertainment of its kind " . The New York Post described it as " a grotesque , gruesome tale which , of its kind , is swell " . The Hollywood Reporter similarly called the film " a joy for those who can appreciate it " . 
 Variety did not so qualify its review . " [ It is ] one of those rare instances where none can review it , or talk about it , without mentioning the cameraman , art director , and score composer in the same breath as the actors and director . " Variety also praised the cast , writing that " Karloff manages to invest the character with some subtleties of emotion that are surprisingly real and touching ... Thesiger as Dr <unk> [ is ] a diabolic characterization if ever there was one ... Lanchester handles two assignments , being first in a preamble as author Mary Shelley and then the created woman . In latter assignment she impresses quite highly . " 
 In another unqualified review , Time wrote that the film had " a vitality that makes their efforts fully the equal of the original picture ... Screenwriters Hurlbut & Balderston and Director James Whale have given it the macabre intensity proper to all good horror pieces , but have substituted a queer kind of mechanistic pathos for the sheer evil that was Frankenstein . " The Oakland Tribune concurred it was " a fantasy produced on a rather magnificent scale , with excellent stagecraft and fine photographic effects " . While the Winnipeg Free Press thought that the electrical equipment might have been better suited to Buck Rogers , nonetheless the reviewer praised the film as " exciting and sometimes morbidly gruesome " , declaring that " All who enjoyed Frankenstein will welcome his Bride as a worthy successor . " The New York Times called Karloff " so splendid in the role that all one can say is ' he is the Monster . ' " The Times praised the entire principal cast and Whale 's direction in concluding that Bride is " a first @-@ rate horror film " , and presciently suggested that " The Monster should become an institution , like Charlie Chan . " Bride was nominated for one Academy Award , for Best Sound Recording ( Gilbert Kurland ) . 
 The film 's reputation has persisted and grown since its release . In 1998 , the film was added to the United States National Film Registry , having been deemed " culturally , historically or aesthetically significant " . Frequently identified as James Whale 's masterpiece , the film is lauded as " the finest of all gothic horror movies " . Time rated Bride of Frankenstein in its " ALL @-@ TIME 100 Movies " , in which critics Richard Corliss and Richard Schickel overruled the magazine 's original review to declare the film " one of those rare sequels that is infinitely superior to its source " . In 2008 , Bride was selected by Empire magazine as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . Also in 2008 , the Boston Herald named it the second greatest horror film after Nosferatu . In 2016 , James Charisma of Playboy ranked the film number seven on a list of 15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals . Entertainment Weekly considers the film superior to Frankenstein . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 = = = Christian imagery = = = 
 Christian imagery appears throughout the film . In addition to the scenes of the Monster trussed in a cruciform pose and the crucified figure of Jesus in the graveyard , the hermit has a crucifix on the wall of his hut – which , to Whale 's consternation , editor Ted Kent made glow during a fade @-@ out – and the Monster consumes the Christian sacraments of bread and wine at his " last supper " with the hermit . Horror scholar David J. Skal suggests that Whale 's intention was to make a " direct comparison of Frankenstein 's monster to Christ " . Film scholar Scott MacQueen , noting Whale 's lack of any religious convictions , disputes the notion that the Monster is a Christ @-@ figure . Rather , the Monster is a " mockery of the divine " since , having been created by Man rather than God , it " lacks the divine spark " . In crucifying the Monster , he says , Whale " pushes the audience 's buttons " by inverting the central Christian belief of the death of Christ followed by the resurrection . The Monster is raised from the dead first , then crucified . 
 = = = Homosexual reading = = = 
 In the decades since its release , modern film scholars have noted the possible homosexual reading of the film . Director James Whale was openly gay , and some of the actors in the cast , including Ernest Thesiger and Colin Clive , were believed to be gay or bisexual . Although James Curtis , Whale 's biographer , rejects the notion that Whale would have identified with the Monster from a homosexual perspective , scholars have identified a gay subtext suffused through the film , especially a camp sensibility , particularly embodied in the character of Pretorius and his relationship with Henry . 
 Gay film historian Vito Russo , in considering Pretorius , stops short of identifying the character as gay , instead referring to him as " sissified " , " sissy " itself being Hollywood code for " homosexual " . Pretorius serves as a " gay Mephistopheles " , a figure of seduction and temptation , going so far as to pull Frankenstein away from his bride on their wedding night to engage in the unnatural act of creating non @-@ procreative life . A novelization of the film published in England made the implication clear , having Pretorius say to Frankenstein " ' Be fruitful and multiply . ' Let us obey the Biblical injunction : you of course , have the choice of natural means ; but as for me , I am afraid that there is no course open to me but the scientific way . " 
 The Monster , whose affections for the male hermit and the female Bride he discusses with identical language ( " friend " ) has been read as sexually " unsettled " and bisexual . Gender studies author Elizabeth Young writes : " He has no innate understanding that the male @-@ female bond he is to forge with the bride is assumed to be the primary one or that it carries a different sexual valence from his relationships with [ Pretorius and the hermit ] : all affective relationships are as easily ' friendships ' as ' marriages ' . " Indeed , his relationship with the hermit has been interpreted as a same @-@ sex marriage that heterosexual society will not tolerate : " No mistake – this is a marriage , and a viable one ... But Whale reminds us quickly that society does not approve . The monster – the outsider – is driven from his scene of domestic pleasure by two gun @-@ toting rubes who happen upon this startling alliance and quickly , instinctively , proceed to destroy it " , writes cultural critic Gary Morris for Bright Lights Film Journal . The creation of the Bride scene , Morris continues , is " Whale 's reminder to the audience – his Hollywood bosses , peers , and everyone watching – of the majesty and power of the homosexual creator " . 
 Filmmaker Curtis Harrington , a friend and confidant of Whale 's , dismissed this as " a younger critic 's evaluation . All artists do work that comes out of the unconscious mind and later on you can analyze it and say the symbolism may mean something , but artists don 't think that way and I would bet my life that James Whale would never have had such concepts in mind . " Specifically in response to the " majesty and power " reading , Harrington stated , " My opinion is that 's just pure bullshit . That 's a critical interpretation that has nothing to do with the original inspiration . " He concludes , " I think the closest you can come to a homosexual metaphor in his films is to identify that certain sort of camp humor . " Whale 's companion David Lewis stated flatly that Whale 's sexual orientation was " not germane " to his filmmaking , saying , " Jimmy was first and foremost an artist , and his films represent the work of an artist – not a gay artist , but an artist . " 
 = = Remakes = = 
 Universal Pictures has sought to remake Bride of Frankenstein on several occasions . While the novel Frankenstein has been adapted to film many times , Bride of Frankenstein 's closest remake was The Bride ( 1985 ) , starring Sting , Clancy Brown , and Jennifer Beals . In 1991 , the studio sought to remake the film for cable television , and Martin Scorsese expressed interest in directing . 
 = = Reboot and shared universe = = 
 In the first decade of the 21st century , Universal paired with Imagine Entertainment and contracted Shari Springer Berman and Robert <unk> , who wrote the screenplay for American Splendor , to write a remake . The screenwriters set the story in contemporary New York . Jacob Estes was also involved with the project at one point and wrote a draft . In June 2009 , Universal and Imagine entered discussions with director Neil Burger and his writing partner Dirk Wittenborn , and producer Brian Grazer was assigned to oversee the development of the remake . In December 2015 , Variety reported that David Koepp will write the remake . 
 = Edgar Allan Poe = 
 Edgar Allan Poe ( / <unk> / ; born Edgar Poe ; January 19 , 1809 – October 7 , 1849 ) was an American writer , editor , and literary critic . Poe is best known for his poetry and short stories , particularly his tales of mystery and the macabre . He is widely regarded as a central figure of Romanticism in the United States and American literature as a whole , and he was one of the country 's earliest practitioners of the short story . Poe is generally considered the inventor of the detective fiction genre and is further credited with contributing to the emerging genre of science fiction . He was the first well @-@ known American writer to try to earn a living through writing alone , resulting in a financially difficult life and career . 
 Poe was born in Boston , the second child of two actors . His father abandoned the family in 1810 , and his mother died the following year . Thus orphaned , the child was taken in by John and Frances Allan of Richmond , Virginia . They never formally adopted him , but Poe was with them well into young adulthood . Tension developed later as John Allan and Edgar repeatedly clashed over debts , including those incurred by gambling , and the cost of secondary education for the young man . Poe attended the University of Virginia for one semester but left due to lack of money . Poe quarreled with Allan over the funds for his education and enlisted in the Army in 1827 under an assumed name . It was at this time that his publishing career began , albeit humbly , with the anonymous collection of poems Tamerlane and Other Poems ( 1827 ) , credited only to " a Bostonian " . With the death of Frances Allan in 1829 , Poe and Allan reached a temporary rapprochement . However , Poe later failed as an officer 's cadet at West Point , declaring a firm wish to be a poet and writer , and he ultimately parted ways with John Allan . 
 Poe switched his focus to prose and spent the next several years working for literary journals and periodicals , becoming known for his own style of literary criticism . His work forced him to move among several cities , including Baltimore , Philadelphia , and New York City . In Baltimore in 1835 , he married Virginia Clemm , his 13 @-@ year @-@ old cousin . In January 1845 , Poe published his poem " The Raven " to instant success . His wife died of tuberculosis two years after its publication . For years , he had been planning to produce his own journal The Penn ( later renamed The Stylus ) , though he died before it could be produced . Poe died in Baltimore on October 7 , 1849 , at age 40 ; the cause of his death is unknown and has been variously attributed to alcohol , brain congestion , cholera , drugs , heart disease , rabies , suicide , tuberculosis , and other agents . 
 Poe and his works influenced literature in the United States and around the world , as well as in specialized fields such as cosmology and cryptography . Poe and his work appear throughout popular culture in literature , music , films , and television . A number of his homes are dedicated museums today . The Mystery Writers of America present an annual award known as the Edgar Award for distinguished work in the mystery genre . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 He was born Edgar Poe in Boston on January 19 , 1809 , the second child of English @-@ born actress Elizabeth Arnold Hopkins Poe and actor David Poe , Jr .. He had an elder brother William Henry Leonard Poe , and a younger sister Rosalie Poe . Their grandfather David Poe Sr. had emigrated from Cavan , Ireland to America around the year 1750 . Edgar may have been named after a character in William Shakespeare 's King Lear , a play that the couple were performing in 1809 . His father abandoned their family in 1810 , and his mother died a year later from consumption ( pulmonary tuberculosis ) . Poe was then taken into the home of John Allan , a successful Scottish merchant in Richmond , Virginia who dealt in a variety of goods , including tobacco , cloth , wheat , tombstones , and slaves . The Allans served as a foster family and gave him the name " Edgar Allan Poe " , though they never formally adopted him . 
 The Allan family had Poe baptized in the Episcopal Church in 1812 . John Allan alternately spoiled and aggressively disciplined his foster son . The family sailed to Britain in 1815 , and Poe attended the grammar school for a short period in Irvine , Scotland ( where John Allan was born ) before rejoining the family in London in 1816 . There he studied at a boarding school in Chelsea until summer 1817 . He was subsequently entered at the Reverend John Bransby 's Manor House School at Stoke Newington , then a suburb 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of London . 
 Poe moved with the Allans back to Richmond , Virginia in 1820 . In 1824 , Poe served as the lieutenant of the Richmond youth honor guard as Richmond celebrated the visit of the Marquis de Lafayette . In March 1825 , John Allan 's uncle and business benefactor William Galt , said to be one of the wealthiest men in Richmond , died , leaving Allan several acres of real estate . The inheritance was estimated at $ 750 @,@ 000 . By summer 1825 , Allan celebrated his expansive wealth by purchasing a two @-@ story brick home named Moldavia . 
 Poe may have become engaged to Sarah Elmira Royster before he registered at the one @-@ year @-@ old University of Virginia in February 1826 to study ancient and modern languages . The university , in its infancy , was established on the ideals of its founder Thomas Jefferson . It had strict rules against gambling , horses , guns , tobacco , and alcohol , but these rules were generally ignored . Jefferson had enacted a system of student self @-@ government , allowing students to choose their own studies , make their own arrangements for boarding , and report all wrongdoing to the faculty . The unique system was still in chaos , and there was a high dropout rate . During his time there , Poe lost touch with Royster and also became estranged from his foster father over gambling debts . Poe claimed that Allan had not given him sufficient money to register for classes , purchase texts , and procure and furnish a dormitory . Allan did send additional money and clothes , but Poe 's debts increased . Poe gave up on the university after a year , not feeling welcome in Richmond , especially when he learned that his sweetheart Royster had married Alexander Shelton . He traveled to Boston in April 1827 , sustaining himself with odd jobs as a clerk and newspaper writer . At some point , he started using the pseudonym Henri Le Rennet . 
 = = = Military career = = = 
 Poe was unable to support himself , so he enlisted in the United States Army as a private on May 27 , 1827 using the name " Edgar A. Perry " . He claimed that he was 22 years old even though he was 18 . He first served at Fort Independence in Boston Harbor for five dollars a month . That same year , he released his first book , a 40 @-@ page collection of poetry entitled Tamerlane and Other Poems , attributed with the byline " by a Bostonian " . Only 50 copies were printed , and the book received virtually no attention . Poe 's regiment was posted to Fort Moultrie in Charleston , South Carolina and traveled by ship on the brig Waltham on November 8 , 1827 . Poe was promoted to " artificer " , an enlisted tradesman who prepared shells for artillery , and had his monthly pay doubled . He served for two years and attained the rank of Sergeant Major for Artillery ( the highest rank that a noncommissioned officer could achieve ) ; he then sought to end his five @-@ year enlistment early . He revealed his real name and his circumstances to his commanding officer Lieutenant Howard . Howard would only allow Poe to be discharged if he reconciled with John Allan and wrote a letter to Allan , who was unsympathetic . Several months passed and pleas to Allan were ignored ; Allan may not have written to Poe even to make him aware of his foster mother 's illness . Frances Allan died on February 28 , 1829 , and Poe visited the day after her burial . Perhaps softened by his wife 's death , John Allan agreed to support Poe 's attempt to be discharged in order to receive an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point . 
 Poe finally was discharged on April 15 , 1829 , after securing a replacement to finish his enlisted term for him . Before entering West Point , Poe moved back to Baltimore for a time to stay with his widowed aunt Maria Clemm , her daughter Virginia Eliza Clemm ( Poe 's first cousin ) , his brother Henry , and his invalid grandmother Elizabeth Cairnes Poe . Meanwhile , Poe published his second book Al Aaraaf , Tamerlane and Minor Poems in Baltimore in 1829 . 
 Poe traveled to West Point and matriculated as a cadet on July 1 , 1830 . In October 1830 , John Allan married his second wife Louisa Patterson . The marriage and bitter quarrels with Poe over the children born to Allan out of affairs led to the foster father finally disowning Poe . Poe decided to leave West Point by purposely getting court @-@ martialed . On February 8 , 1831 , he was tried for gross neglect of duty and disobedience of orders for refusing to attend formations , classes , or church . Poe tactically pleaded not guilty to induce dismissal , knowing that he would be found guilty . 
 He left for New York in February 1831 and released a third volume of poems , simply titled Poems . The book was financed with help from his fellow cadets at West Point , many of whom donated 75 cents to the cause , raising a total of $ 170 . They may have been expecting verses similar to the satirical ones that Poe had been writing about commanding officers . It was printed by Elam Bliss of New York , labeled as " Second Edition , " and including a page saying , " To the U.S. Corps of Cadets this volume is respectfully dedicated " . The book once again reprinted the long poems " Tamerlane " and " Al Aaraaf " but also six previously unpublished poems , including early versions of " To Helen " , " <unk> " , and " The City in the Sea " . He returned to Baltimore to his aunt , brother , and cousin in March 1831 . His elder brother Henry had been in ill health , in part due to problems with alcoholism , and he died on August 1 , 1831 . 
 = = = Publishing career = = = 
 After his brother 's death , Poe began more earnest attempts to start his career as a writer . He chose a difficult time in American publishing to do so . He was the first well @-@ known American to try to live by writing alone and was hampered by the lack of an international copyright law . Publishers often produced unauthorized copies of British works rather than paying for new work by Americans . The industry was also particularly hurt by the Panic of 1837 . There was a booming growth in American periodicals around this time period , fueled in part by new technology , but many did not last beyond a few issues and publishers often refused to pay their writers , or paid them much later than they promised . Throughout his attempts to live as a writer , Poe repeatedly had to resort to humiliating pleas for money and other assistance . 
 After his early attempts at poetry , Poe had turned his attention to prose . He placed a few stories with a Philadelphia publication and began work on his only drama Politian . The Baltimore Saturday Visiter awarded Poe a prize in October 1833 for his short story " MS. Found in a Bottle " . The story brought him to the attention of John P. Kennedy , a Baltimorean of considerable means . He helped Poe place some of his stories , and introduced him to Thomas W. White , editor of the Southern Literary Messenger in Richmond . Poe became assistant editor of the periodical in August 1835 , but was discharged within a few weeks for having been caught drunk by his boss . Returning to Baltimore , Poe secretly married his cousin Virginia on September 22 , 1835 . He was 26 and she was 13 , though she is listed on the marriage certificate as being 21 . 
 He was reinstated by White after promising good behavior , and went back to Richmond with Virginia and her mother . He remained at the Messenger until January 1837 . During this period , Poe claimed that its circulation increased from 700 to 3 @,@ 500 . He published several poems , book reviews , critiques , and stories in the paper . On May 16 , 1836 , he had a second wedding ceremony in Richmond with Virginia Clemm , this time in public . 
 The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket was published and widely reviewed in 1838 . In the summer of 1839 , Poe became assistant editor of Burton 's Gentleman 's Magazine . He published numerous articles , stories , and reviews , enhancing his reputation as a trenchant critic which he had established at the Southern Literary Messenger . Also in 1839 , the collection Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque was published in two volumes , though he made little money off of it and it received mixed reviews . Poe left Burton 's after about a year and found a position as assistant at Graham 's Magazine . 
 In June 1840 , Poe published a prospectus announcing his intentions to start his own journal called The Stylus . Originally , Poe intended to call the journal The Penn , as it would have been based in Philadelphia . In the June 6 , 1840 issue of Philadelphia 's Saturday Evening Post , Poe bought advertising space for his prospectus : " Prospectus of the Penn Magazine , a Monthly Literary journal to be edited and published in the city of Philadelphia by Edgar A. Poe . " The journal was never produced before Poe 's death . 
 Around this time , he attempted to secure a position with the Tyler administration , claiming that he was a member of the Whig Party . He hoped to be appointed to the Custom House in Philadelphia with help from president Tyler 's son Robert , an acquaintance of Poe 's friend Frederick Thomas . Poe failed to show up for a meeting with Thomas to discuss the appointment in mid @-@ September 1842 , claiming to have been sick , though Thomas believed that he had been drunk . Though he was promised an appointment , all positions were filled by others . 
 One evening in January 1842 , Virginia showed the first signs of consumption , now known as tuberculosis , while singing and playing the piano . Poe described it as breaking a blood vessel in her throat . She only partially recovered . Poe began to drink more heavily under the stress of Virginia 's illness . He left Graham 's and attempted to find a new position , for a time angling for a government post . He returned to New York where he worked briefly at the Evening Mirror before becoming editor of the Broadway Journal and , later , sole owner . There he alienated himself from other writers by publicly accusing Henry Wadsworth Longfellow of plagiarism , though Longfellow never responded . On January 29 , 1845 , his poem " The Raven " appeared in the Evening Mirror and became a popular sensation . It made Poe a household name almost instantly , though he was paid only $ 9 for its publication . It was concurrently published in The American Review : A Whig Journal under the pseudonym " Quarles " . 
 The Broadway Journal failed in 1846 . Poe moved to a cottage in Fordham , New York , in what is now the Bronx . That home is known today as the " Poe Cottage " on the southeast corner of the Grand Concourse and Kingsbridge Road , where he befriended the Jesuits at St. John 's College nearby ( now Fordham University ) . Virginia died there on January 30 , 1847 . Biographers and critics often suggest that Poe 's frequent theme of the " death of a beautiful woman " stems from the repeated loss of women throughout his life , including his wife . 
 Poe was increasingly unstable after his wife 's death . He attempted to court poet Sarah Helen Whitman who lived in Providence , Rhode Island . Their engagement failed , purportedly because of Poe 's drinking and erratic behavior . There is also strong evidence that Whitman 's mother intervened and did much to derail their relationship . Poe then returned to Richmond and resumed a relationship with his childhood sweetheart Sarah Elmira Royster . 
 = = Death = = 
 On October 3 , 1849 , Poe was found delirious on the streets of Baltimore , " in great distress , and ... in need of immediate assistance " , according to Joseph W. Walker who found him . He was taken to the Washington Medical College where he died on Sunday , October 7 , 1849 at 5 : 00 in the morning . Poe was never coherent long enough to explain how he came to be in his dire condition and , oddly , was wearing clothes that were not his own . He is said to have repeatedly called out the name " Reynolds " on the night before his death , though it is unclear to whom he was referring . Some sources say that Poe 's final words were " Lord help my poor soul " . All medical records have been lost , including his death certificate . 
 Newspapers at the time reported Poe 's death as " congestion of the brain " or " cerebral inflammation " , common euphemisms for deaths from disreputable causes such as alcoholism . The actual cause of death remains a mystery . Speculation has included delirium tremens , heart disease , epilepsy , syphilis , meningeal inflammation , cholera , and rabies . One theory dating from 1872 suggests that cooping was the cause of Poe 's death , a form of electoral fraud in which citizens were forced to vote for a particular candidate , sometimes leading to violence and even murder . 
 = = = Griswold 's " Memoir " = = = 
 The day that Edgar Allan Poe was buried , a long obituary appeared in the New York Tribune signed " Ludwig " . It was soon published throughout the country . The piece began , " Edgar Allan Poe is dead . He died in Baltimore the day before yesterday . This announcement will startle many , but few will be grieved by it . " " Ludwig " was soon identified as Rufus Wilmot Griswold , an editor , critic , and anthologist who had borne a grudge against Poe since 1842 . Griswold somehow became Poe 's literary executor and attempted to destroy his enemy 's reputation after his death . 
 Rufus Griswold wrote a biographical article of Poe called " Memoir of the Author " , which he included in an 1850 volume of the collected works . Griswold depicted Poe as a depraved , drunken , drug @-@ addled madman and included Poe 's letters as evidence . Many of his claims were either lies or distorted half @-@ truths . For example , it is now known that Poe was not a drug addict . Griswold 's book was denounced by those who knew Poe well , but it became a popularly accepted one . This occurred in part because it was the only full biography available and was widely reprinted , and in part because readers thrilled at the thought of reading works by an " evil " man . Letters that Griswold presented as proof of this depiction of Poe were later revealed as forgeries . 
 = = Literary style and themes = = 
 = = = Genres = = = 
 Poe 's best known fiction works are Gothic , a genre that he followed to appease the public taste . His most recurring themes deal with questions of death , including its physical signs , the effects of decomposition , concerns of premature burial , the reanimation of the dead , and mourning . Many of his works are generally considered part of the dark romanticism genre , a literary reaction to transcendentalism which Poe strongly disliked . He referred to followers of the transcendental movement as " Frog @-@ <unk> " , after the pond on Boston Common , and ridiculed their writings as " metaphor — run mad , " lapsing into " obscurity for obscurity 's sake " or " mysticism for mysticism 's sake " . Poe once wrote in a letter to Thomas Holley Chivers that he did not dislike Transcendentalists , " only the pretenders and sophists among them " . 
 Beyond horror , Poe also wrote satires , humor tales , and hoaxes . For comic effect , he used irony and ludicrous extravagance , often in an attempt to liberate the reader from cultural conformity . " Metzengerstein " is the first story that Poe is known to have published and his first foray into horror , but it was originally intended as a burlesque satirizing the popular genre . Poe also reinvented science fiction , responding in his writing to emerging technologies such as hot air balloons in " The Balloon @-@ Hoax " . 
 Poe wrote much of his work using themes aimed specifically at mass @-@ market tastes . To that end , his fiction often included elements of popular <unk> , such as phrenology and physiognomy . 
 = = = Literary theory = = = 
 Poe 's writing reflects his literary theories , which he presented in his criticism and also in essays such as " The Poetic Principle " . He disliked didacticism and allegory , though he believed that meaning in literature should be an undercurrent just beneath the surface . Works with obvious meanings , he wrote , cease to be art . He believed that work of quality should be brief and focus on a specific single effect . To that end , he believed that the writer should carefully calculate every sentiment and idea . 
 Poe describes his method in writing " The Raven " in the essay " The Philosophy of Composition " , and he claims to have strictly followed this method . It has been questioned whether he really followed this system , however . T. S. Eliot said : " It is difficult for us to read that essay without reflecting that if Poe plotted out his poem with such calculation , he might have taken a little more pains over it : the result hardly does credit to the method . " Biographer Joseph Wood Krutch described the essay as " a rather highly ingenious exercise in the art of rationalization " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Literary influence = = = 
 During his lifetime , Poe was mostly recognized as a literary critic . Fellow critic James Russell Lowell called him " the most discriminating , philosophical , and fearless critic upon imaginative works who has written in America " , suggesting — rhetorically — that he occasionally used prussic acid instead of ink . Poe 's caustic reviews earned him the reputation of being a " tomahawk man " . A favorite target of Poe 's criticism was Boston 's acclaimed poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , who was often defended by his literary friends in what was later called " The Longfellow War " . Poe accused Longfellow of " the heresy of the didactic " , writing poetry that was preachy , derivative , and thematically plagiarized . Poe correctly predicted that Longfellow 's reputation and style of poetry would decline , concluding , " We grant him high qualities , but deny him the Future " . 
 Poe was also known as a writer of fiction and became one of the first American authors of the 19th century to become more popular in Europe than in the United States . Poe is particularly respected in France , in part due to early translations by Charles Baudelaire . Baudelaire 's translations became definitive renditions of Poe 's work throughout Europe . 
 Poe 's early detective fiction tales featuring C. Auguste Dupin laid the groundwork for future detectives in literature . Sir Arthur Conan Doyle said , " Each [ of Poe 's detective stories ] is a root from which a whole literature has developed .... Where was the detective story until Poe breathed the breath of life into it ? " The Mystery Writers of America have named their awards for excellence in the genre the " <unk> " . Poe 's work also influenced science fiction , notably Jules Verne , who wrote a sequel to Poe 's novel The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket called An Antarctic Mystery , also known as The Sphinx of the Ice Fields . Science fiction author H. G. Wells noted , " Pym tells what a very intelligent mind could imagine about the south polar region a century ago . " 
 Like many famous artists , Poe 's works have spawned imitators . One trend among imitators of Poe has been claims by <unk> or psychics to be " channeling " poems from Poe 's spirit . One of the most notable of these was Lizzie <unk> , who published Poems from the Inner Life in 1863 , in which she claimed to have " received " new compositions by Poe 's spirit . The compositions were re @-@ workings of famous Poe poems such as " The Bells " , but which reflected a new , positive outlook . 
 Even so , Poe has received not only praise , but criticism as well . This is partly because of the negative perception of his personal character and its influence upon his reputation . William Butler Yeats was occasionally critical of Poe and once called him " vulgar " . Transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson reacted to " The Raven " by saying , " I see nothing in it " , and derisively referred to Poe as " the jingle man " . Aldous Huxley wrote that Poe 's writing " falls into vulgarity " by being " too poetical " — the equivalent of wearing a diamond ring on every finger . 
 It is believed that only 12 copies have survived of Poe 's first book Tamerlane and Other Poems . In December 2009 , one copy sold at Christie 's , New York for $ 662 @,@ 500 , a record price paid for a work of American literature . 
 = = = Physics and cosmology = = = 
 Eureka : A Prose Poem , an essay written in 1848 , included a cosmological theory that presaged the Big Bang theory by 80 years , as well as the first plausible solution to Olbers ' paradox . Poe eschewed the scientific method in Eureka and instead wrote from pure intuition . For this reason , he considered it a work of art , not science , but insisted that it was still true and considered it to be his career masterpiece . Even so , Eureka is full of scientific errors . In particular , Poe 's suggestions ignored Newtonian principles regarding the density and rotation of planets . 
 = = = Cryptography = = = 
 Poe had a keen interest in cryptography . He had placed a notice of his abilities in the Philadelphia paper Alexander 's Weekly ( Express ) Messenger , inviting submissions of ciphers which he proceeded to solve . In July 1841 , Poe had published an essay called " A Few Words on Secret Writing " in Graham 's Magazine . Capitalizing on public interest in the topic , he wrote " The Gold @-@ Bug " incorporating ciphers as an essential part of the story . Poe 's success with cryptography relied not so much on his deep knowledge of that field ( his method was limited to the simple substitution cryptogram ) as on his knowledge of the magazine and newspaper culture . His keen analytical abilities , which were so evident in his detective stories , allowed him to see that the general public was largely ignorant of the methods by which a simple substitution cryptogram can be solved , and he used this to his advantage . The sensation that Poe created with his cryptography stunts played a major role in popularizing cryptograms in newspapers and magazines . 
 Poe had an influence on cryptography beyond increasing public interest during his lifetime . William Friedman , America 's foremost cryptologist , was heavily influenced by Poe . Friedman 's initial interest in cryptography came from reading " The Gold @-@ Bug " as a child , an interest that he later put to use in deciphering Japan 's <unk> code during World War II . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = As a character = = = 
 The historical Edgar Allan Poe has appeared as a fictionalized character , often representing the " mad genius " or " tormented artist " and exploiting his personal struggles . Many such depictions also blend in with characters from his stories , suggesting that Poe and his characters share identities . Often , fictional depictions of Poe use his mystery @-@ solving skills in such novels as The Poe Shadow by Matthew Pearl . 
 = = = Preserved homes , landmarks , and museums = = = 
 No childhood home of Poe is still standing , including the Allan family 's Moldavia estate . The oldest standing home in Richmond , the Old Stone House , is in use as the Edgar Allan Poe Museum , though Poe never lived there . The collection includes many items that Poe used during his time with the Allan family , and also features several rare first printings of Poe works . 13 West Range is the dorm room that Poe is believed to have used while studying at the University of Virginia in 1826 ; it is preserved and available for visits . Its upkeep is now overseen by a group of students and staff known as the Raven Society . 
 The earliest surviving home in which Poe lived is in Baltimore , preserved as the Edgar Allan Poe House and Museum . Poe is believed to have lived in the home at the age of 23 when he first lived with Maria Clemm and Virginia ( as well as his grandmother and possibly his brother William Henry Leonard Poe ) . It is open to the public and is also the home of the Edgar Allan Poe Society . Of the several homes that Poe , his wife Virginia , and his mother @-@ in @-@ law Maria rented in Philadelphia , only the last house has survived . The Spring Garden home , where the author lived in 1843 – 1844 , is today preserved by the National Park Service as the Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site . Poe 's final home is preserved as the Edgar Allan Poe Cottage in the Bronx . 
 In Boston , a commemorative plaque on Boylston Street is several blocks away from the actual location of Poe 's birth . The house which was his birthplace at 62 Carver Street no longer exists ; also , the street has since been renamed " Charles Street South " . A " square " at the intersection of Broadway , Fayette , and Carver Streets had once been named in his honor , but it disappeared when the streets were rearranged . In 2009 , the intersection of Charles and Boylston Streets ( two blocks north of his birthplace ) was designated " Edgar Allan Poe Square " . In March 2014 , fundraising was completed for construction of a permanent memorial sculpture at this location . The winning design by Stefanie <unk> depicts a life @-@ sized Poe striding against the wind , accompanied by a flying raven and trailed by papers falling from his open suitcase . The public unveiling on October 5 , 2014 was attended by former US poet laureate Robert Pinsky . 
 Other Poe landmarks include a building in the Upper West Side where Poe temporarily lived when he first moved to New York . A plaque suggests that Poe wrote " The Raven " here . The bar still stands where legend says that Poe was last seen drinking before his death , in Fells Point in Baltimore . The drinking establishment is now known as " The Horse You Came In On " , and local lore insists that a ghost whom they call " Edgar " haunts the rooms above . 
 = = = Poe Toaster = = = 
 Adding to the mystery surrounding Poe 's death , an unknown visitor affectionately referred to as the " Poe Toaster " paid homage at Poe 's grave annually beginning in 1949 . The tradition carried on for more than 60 years , so it is likely that the " Poe Toaster " was actually more than one individual , though the tribute was always the same . Every January 19 , in the early hours of the morning , the person made a toast of cognac to Poe 's original grave marker and left three roses . Members of the Edgar Allan Poe Society in Baltimore helped protect this tradition for decades . 
 On August 15 , 2007 , Sam <unk> , a former historian at the Westminster Church in Baltimore where Poe is buried , claimed that he had started the tradition . <unk> said that the tradition began in 1949 in order to raise money and enhance the profile of the church . His story has not been confirmed , and some details which he gave to the press have been pointed out as factually inaccurate . The Poe Toaster 's last appearance was on January 19 , 2009 , the day of Poe 's bicentennial . 
 = = Selected list of works = = 
 Other works 
 Politian ( 1835 ) – Poe 's only play 
 The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket ( 1838 ) – Poe 's only complete novel 
 " The Balloon @-@ Hoax " ( 1844 ) – A journalistic hoax printed as a true story 
 " The Philosophy of Composition " ( 1846 ) – Essay 
 Eureka : A Prose Poem ( 1848 ) – Essay 
 " The Poetic Principle " ( 1848 ) – Essay 
 " The Light @-@ House " ( 1849 ) – Poe 's last incomplete work 
 = Washington & Jefferson Presidents football = 
 The Washington & Jefferson Presidents football team represents Washington & Jefferson College in collegiate level football . The team competes in NCAA Division III and is affiliated with the Presidents ' Athletic Conference ( PAC ) . Since its founding in 1890 , the team has played their home games at College Field , which was remodeled and renamed Cameron Stadium in 2001 . 
 A number of players were named to the College Football All @-@ America Team , and two players , Pete Henry and Edgar <unk> , have been elected to the College Football Hall of Fame . Several other former players have gone on to play professionally , including " Deacon " Dan Towler , Russ Stein , and Pete Henry , who was also elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame and the National Football League ( NFL ) 1920s All @-@ Decade Team . The team has been coached by some of the best @-@ known coaches in football history , including John Heisman , Greasy Neale , and Andy Kerr . 
 Founded in 1890 , the team quickly became well known for drawing large crowds and defeating a number of prominent football teams . The faculty and administration expressed concern over the strength of the team and made efforts to reduce the influence of professionalism on the players . During the 1910s , some sportswriters suggested that the Presidents were one of the top teams in the nation . The greatest achievement in the team 's history was in 1921 , when the Presidents appeared in the 1922 Rose Bowl , playing the heavily favored California Golden Bears to a scoreless tie . As college football evolved in the 1930s and 1940s , the Presidents fell far behind their larger competitors , who were able to offer scholarships for their players . Controversy over the poor play of the football team , and a lack of play against larger teams , contributed to the resignation of a college president . In the 1950s the team joined NCAA Division III and the Presidents ' Athletic Conference . By the 1980s , the team had learned to thrive in that environment , winning a number of conference championships and regularly qualifying for the NCAA Division III playoffs . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history ( 1890 – 1899 ) = = = 
 The development of intercollegiate athletics at Washington & Jefferson College began in 1890 , when students formed the Athletic Association , charging the 75 members a $ 1 membership fee that went to fund athletics . The football team played its first game on November 1 , 1890 , a 34 @-@ 0 win against the Western University of Pennsylvania . The Red and Black 's third game of the inaugural season , against College of Wooster , remains disputed to this day , with both schools claiming a victory . Controversy erupted over the referees ' clock management when W & J 's team , under the impression that the game was over , left the field with a 4 @-@ 0 lead ; Wooster continued to play and scored a touchdown and extra point to give them a disputed 6 @-@ 4 victory . By 1894 , the college community 's interest in the sport had grown considerably , with stronger opponents and the team 's first paid coach , E. Gard Edwards . A special train from Washington to Pittsburgh was chartered to carry fans and students to a watch a 6 @-@ 0 victory against the semi @-@ pro Pittsburgh Athletic Club . 
 As the team developed , the college community , especially certain members of the faculty , began to express concerns regarding the influence of professionalism in college sports , especially the use of itinerant and semi @-@ professional students . John Brallier , who was the first openly professional football player , played football for Washington & Jefferson College in 1895 before returning to the Greensburg Athletic Association . This incident , and others , caused the faculty to adopt the college 's first eligibility requirements for student athletes . 
 At the same time its activities was becoming more scrutinized , the football team became more successful . The season finale in 1896 at Exposition Park in Pittsburgh was one of the largest crowds in western Pennsylvania history , when an overflow crowd of 12 @,@ 000 watched W & J defeat Duquesne Country and Athletic Club 4 @-@ 0 . But was the September 29 , 1897 , game against the University of Pennsylvania Quakers that marked the " birth of big @-@ time football " at W & J. The Red and Black lost 18 @-@ 4 to the eventual national champions , but W & J counted it a moral victory , since they were missing 4 of their 11 starters due to new eligibility requirements . In a game against Denison University on Sept . 19 , 1908 , W & J became the first college football team in history to wear numbered uniforms . 
 = = = New residency requirements and near @-@ dissolution ( 1900 – 1911 ) = = = 
 By the early 1900s , " football fever " had swept through the student body , leading the College administration to take steps to further integrate the sport into the educational framework , including the development of a new governance structure . The new Student Athletic Committee and Faculty Athletic Committees instituted a minimum one @-@ year residency requirement to combat transient students and created an alumni coach system , so the coaches would be more sympathetic to the educational objectives of the college . 
 In 1910 , the football program was in danger of being dissolved due to crushing debt . The Student Athletic Committee proposed a $ 1 per term student fee to fund the team , a proposal that was met with initial resistance from the student body . However , team manager and beloved student solicitor Robert M. Murphy , was able to convince the students to accept the fee . The Student Athletic Committee agreed to retract the residency rule , as it was blamed for contributing to losses , but instituted other student athlete requirements , including a ban on the use of preparatory students at Washington & Jefferson Academy , an increase in entrance requirements , and a stringent system of recording absences . However , the Faculty Athletic Committee balked , vetoing the new rules . 
 The firings of Dr. G.H. Winchester and Dr. H.E. Wells highlighted the growing tension between athletics and academics . As orchestrated by a group of alumni football supporters , the two professors were brought before a faculty committee for not having the requisite support for the athletic programs . At the time , Dr. Winchester was serving in France during World War I and Wells maintained during the hearing that he did not object to athletics per se , but rather the way it was run at Washington & Jefferson . The event , known nationally as the Winchester @-@ Wells case , was investigated by the American Association of University Professors and was the profiled in Upton Sinclair 's book The Goose @-@ Step , a muckraking investigation into the state of American colleges . 
 = = = The Bob Folwell era ( 1912 – 1920 ) = = = 
 A new chapter in W & J football history began in 1912 , when head coach Bob Folwell was recruited away from Lafayette College by the team manager Robert M. Murphy . An early high point came in 1912 when Folwell 's team held Jim Thorpe and the Carlisle Indians to a scoreless tie . The 1913 team posted a 10 @-@ 0 @-@ 1 record and were the highest scoring team in the nation . That season featured a scoreless tie with Yale , a 100 @-@ 0 defeat of Grove City College , and a 17 @-@ 0 victory over Penn State that broke the Nittany Lions ' 19 game winning streak , earning the entire school a day off to celebrate . 1913 was the first season that the team was able to hire trained athletic coaches . Three players were named All @-@ Americans . Sportswriter Walter S. Trumbull of The New York Sun suggested that the Michigan Aggies , Washington & Jefferson , Chicago University , and Notre Dame were the new " Big 4 of College Football " instead of the traditional grouping of Princeton , Yale , Harvard , and Penn . 
 The 1914 squad lost at Harvard University in front of 15 @,@ 000 fans by a score of 10 @-@ 9 . If not for an errant kick that hit the crossbar , W & J would have won the game and at least a share of the mythical national championship . That squad saved face by becoming only the seventh team to ever defeat Yale University , with a decisive 13 @-@ 7 victory . The game received national press coverage , and the team received a personal note of congratulations by Theodore Roosevelt . 
 Folwell left to coach at Penn , his alma mater , following the 1915 season . He was succeeded by Sol Metzger , who led the team to a 15 @-@ 5 record during the 1916 and 1917 seasons . Ralph Hutchinson took over the team for the 1918 season , which ended with a 2 @-@ 2 record in a World War I @-@ shortened season . David C. Morrow , who had coached the team a decade earlier , returned for his second stint during 1919 and 1920 . 
 = = = The Neale , Heisman , and Kerr Years ( 1921 – 1928 ) = = = 
 The 1921 team , coached by Greasy Neale , went 10 @-@ 0 in the regular season , defeating powerhouses Pitt , University of Detroit , and Syracuse . The 7 @-@ 0 victory over rival Pitt was celebrated with a day of canceled classes and a bonfire with inspirational speeches in front of the Washington County Courthouse . As the best team from the east , W & J was invited to the 1922 Rose Bowl to play the best team from the west : the undefeated and heavily favored California Golden Bears . Some had even begun to call Cal the best team in college football history . The Red and Black could only afford to send 11 men on the cross @-@ country trip and Robert M. Murphy had to mortgage his home to pay his way . Thus , W & J would be the last Rose Bowl team to play the same 11 men the entire game . During the train ride to Pasadena , in which Greasy Neale continued to prepare his men , Lee <unk> caught pneumonia and could not finish the journey . Luckily , Ross " Bucky " <unk> , a reserve player who had stowed away on the train and was fed smuggled sandwiches during the trip , was available to fill <unk> 's roster spot . 
 Cal had outscored their opponents that season by a margin of 312 – 33 ; nevertheless , the W & J defense held the Golden Bears ' potent offense , led by Brick Muller , to no points , 2 first downs , no completed passes , and only 49 yards rushing . In one of the most disputed plays in Rose Bowl history , a rushing touchdown for W & J was overturned for an offside penalty called on Wayne <unk> . On another play , W & J 's Hal Erickson slipped and fell on his way to scoring a sure touchdown . The contest ended in a scoreless draw . The game was notable as the last time a " small school " would be represented in the Rose Bowl . W & J 's team featured two Rose Bowl firsts : Herb Kopf was the first freshman to play and Charlie " <unk> " West was the first African American to play quarterback . W & J 's team captain , Russ Stein , was inducted into the Rose Bowl Hall of Fame in 1991 . The Red and Black finished the season with a share of the " mythical national championship , " as determined by the <unk> System . 
 One of the best games in W & J football history came on November 4 , 1922 against the Lafayette Maroons in front of 50 @,@ 000 spectators at the Polo Grounds in New York . The Red and Black were down 13 @-@ 0 at halftime before a <unk> West @-@ sparked comeback won the game 14 @-@ 13 on a final play to Herb Kopf . In 1923 , W & J defeated the powerful Brown University at College Park , the first time home victory against an Ivy League team . Neale left to coach at University of Virginia and was replaced by legendary coach John Heisman , who stayed for only one season before moving to coach at Rice University . Andy Kerr 's teams from 1926 – 1928 continued to play and defeat the best teams in the country . In 1930 , W & J defeated Lafayette College 7 @-@ 0 in the first ever college indoor night game , held in front of 20 @,@ 000 spectators in Atlantic City . 
 = = = The Great Depression and decline of the football program ( 1929 – 1981 ) = = = 
 Like the rest of the college , the football program struggled as a result of decreased enrollment and funding during the Depression . During the tenure of college president Simon <unk> Baker , the Student and Faculty Athletic Committees were heavily in debt and approaching insolvency . The gate receipts for football games , the Committees ' main source of income , had fallen as the team began to lag behind the larger schools it traditionally played . A report in 1929 by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching showed that the W & J athletics program , like many programs at other colleges , held a large " slush fund " with donations from alumni and businessmen totaling $ 25 @,@ 000 to $ 50 @,@ 000 per year . This " extreme case of subsidizing " funded all college expenses for football players , plus " paychecks " to top performers . To alleviate this problem , President Baker proposed to wholly separate athletic funds from general College funds by creating an " Athletic Council " to take control of the athletic program . In spite of the defeat of the proposal , a 1931 followup to the original Carnegie Foundation report commended W & J for creating some institutional controls , including limiting subsidization to tuition , room , and board . In 1932 , Baker was hounded from office amid a student strike , partially fueled by frustration with the declining sports programs . 
 Baker 's successor , Ralph Cooper Hutchison , himself more personally popular than Baker , was able to bring even more control to the athletic program by reducing the number of scholarships from 18 to eight and by limiting the practice of playing against powerhouse football teams . In 1935 , W & J played its last games against their former rivals Pitt and West Virginia . Later , the athletic program was reorganized under an Athletic Director and the practice of awarding athletic scholarships was abolished . In 1937 , Hutchison created a whole new governing structure for athletics , the Athletic Council , which was not unlike the plan proposed by Baker a decade earlier . The new Athletic Council , composed of four faculty members and six students , had responsibility for dispensing student appropriations and income from ticket sales . The Board of Trustees ' own Athletic Committee would govern the hiring and payment of coaches . The new system was intended to unite the intramural and intercollegiate athletics programs , reinstate faculty into athletic governance , give more responsibility to students , and to create a freshman football program . David C. Morrow , former football coach and member of the Athletic Committee dissented , advocating for a return to the scholarship model , blaming the waning alumni interest in the college on the team 's poor performance . However , the College 's indebtedness at that time was $ 133 @,@ 000 , most of which was the result of player subsidization . At that time , athletics took up half of the student activity fee . In an attempt to stabilize the fiscal picture , the athletic budget was cut significantly , with freshman football and boxing discontinued . The plan worked , and by the 1940s , athletic finances were stabilized . This signaled the end of the football team 's games against larger schools . 
 The football team was disbanded for the most of World War II , and Pete Henry , the athletic director took over football coaching duties for 1942 and 1945 . Things began to look up by the late 1940s , when Donora @-@ native " Deacon " Dan Towler chose W & J over offers from larger football programs . The backfield in 1948 was nicknamed the " Four Gazelles . " While still dominant , with the third highest scoring total in the country , that group would have been one of the most best backfields in the nation if not for a plague of injuries . The fifties and sixties were generally poor for W & J football , as President Boyd <unk> Patterson , faced with budget deficits , limited athletic scholarships to " on @-@ need " and spread the remaining scholarships among more sports . In one bright spot , Art Massaro was drafted by the Pittsburgh Steelers in the 29th Round of the 1953 NFL Draft , making him and Deacon Dan only the 2 W & J players ever drafted . 
 From 1956 to 1972 Washington & Jefferson competed in the NCAA College Division . In 1958 , the Presidents , who had previously been independent and not members of any conference , joined the Presidents ' Athletic Conference . The teams of the seventies were similarly poor , save for a PAC championship in 1970 and a second @-@ place finish in 1971 . When the NCAA re @-@ aligned its football conference structure in 1973 , W & J joined Division III . 
 = = = Resurgence in Division III ( 1982 – present ) = = = 
 In 1982 , John " Lucky " Luckhardt took over the team and began a resurgence . Led by freshman running back A.J. <unk> , the Presidents qualified for the 1984 NCAA Division III playoffs , the team 's first post @-@ season appearance since the 1922 Rose Bowl . The 1985 team was nationally ranked and barely missed taking the PAC championship . In 1986 , they won the PAC and secured another bid the NCAA Division III playoffs , only to lose to Susquehanna University . The undefeated and united 1987 team won the PAC and advanced to the Division III playoffs , where they defeated Allegheny College in ten inches of snow in a game called " one of the greatest NCAA Division III playoffs ever played . " The teams of 1988 and 1989 were also successful , with both teams securing a share of the PAC Championship and the 1989 team making the Division III playoffs . In 1992 , the Presidents , led by running back Chris <unk> , advanced to the NCAA Division III National Football Championship Game , only to lose to University of Wisconsin – La Crosse . The team returned to the Division III Championship game in 1994 , losing to Albion College . 
 The Presidents under John <unk> and Mike Sirianni have won 18 out of the last 21 PAC Championships and advanced to the NCAA Division III playoffs 17 times . Since 2000 , the team has a 79 @-@ 14 record , which is the fourth @-@ most victories during that time period in D @-@ III . 
 = = Alumni and notable players = = 
 Members of the football team has received individual honors , including 12 conference MVP awards and more than 120 First Team All @-@ Conference selections . Six football players have been named to the Associated Press All @-@ American Team and four players received an NCAA post @-@ graduate scholarship . Additionally , W & J 's football team has produced more than 50 All @-@ Americans and 30 Academic All @-@ Americans in the past 40 years . 
 A number of W & J players have achieved notoriety in both collegiate and professional football . Halfback Johnny Spiegel , who was the leading scorer in college football in 1914 , was named an All American in 1913 and 1914 . Center Burleigh Cruikshank joined Spiegel as an All American in 1914 . Fred Heyman was named to the 1915 All American team . " Scrubby " <unk> was on the 1917 and 1918 All American teams . College Football Hall of Fame and Pro Football Hall of Fame member Pete Henry was a member of the 1917 , a consensus All American in 1918 , and a consensus All American in 1919 . Rose Bowl MVP Russ Stein , a member of the 1921 All @-@ American team , was a member of the Pottsville Maroons when they won the controversial 1925 NFL Championship . Edgar <unk> , who played at W & J from 1921 to 1924 , was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame . In 1922 , Lee <unk> , Herb Kopf , and Al Crook were named All Americans . Chet <unk> was named to the 1923 All American Team . Bill Amos , who would later coach the W & J football team , was a member of the 1926 and 1927 All American Teams . Future Pittsburgh Steelers head coach Jap Douds was a member of the 1927 , 1928 , and 1929 All American Teams . " Deacon " Dan Towler was a " Little All American " and Cum Laude graduate of W & J. had a seven @-@ year professional career with the Los Angeles Rams in the early 1950s , and was named an All @-@ Pro three times . Pittsburgh Mayor Luke Ravenstahl is still the all @-@ time leading placekicker in the college 's history . 
 = = Coaches = = 
 The team has had 30 head coaches coach since it started playing organized football in 1890 . They played their first season without a head coach . Three coaches have led Washington & Jefferson College to NCAA Division III playoffs : John Luckhardt , John <unk> , and Mike Sirianni . Those three coaches , plus Chuck Ream , coached teams that won the Presidents ' Athletic Conference Championship . Greasy Neale 's 1921 team played in the 1922 Rose Bowl , where they tied the heavily favored California Golden Bears . John Luckhardt is the all @-@ time leader in seasons coached ( 17 ) , games coached ( 176 ) , and wins ( 137 ) . Current coach Mike Sirianni has the highest winning percentage ( <unk> ) of any coach since the 1890s . During his two years as head coach , Charles Nelson has the worst winning percentage ( <unk> ) . Four coaches — Greasy Neale , John Heisman , Andrew Kerr and Pete Henry — have been inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame . Two of those coaches , Greasy Neale and Pete Henry have been inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame . The current coach is Mike Sirianni , whose first season was in 2003 . 
 = = Tradition and lore = = 
 = = = Doc Donehoo = = = 
 Dr. James Franklin " Doc " Donehoo never missed a game as the team 's physician from 1912 until 1950 , a total of 314 straight games , which was a record at the time . At a halftime ceremony on October 23 , 1948 to commemorate his 300th straight game , he was called the # 1 football fan . Donehoo graduated from W & J in 1890 and University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in 1893 . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 During its history , W & J 's football team has had rivalries with several schools , including Lafayette College , West Virginia University , and the University of Pittsburgh . The rivalry with West Virginia University was heightened by the fact that Morgantown was located in a dry county , making the trip to nearby Washington for a game against W & J a raucous event for students . The first verse of Hail , West Virginia , the WVU fight song , refers to W & J with the line , " Others may be black or crimson , but for us it ’ s Gold and Blue . " However , it is the W & J rivalry with nearby Bethany College is the oldest and most prolific , with the Presidents holding an all @-@ time record of 64 @-@ 20 in the rivalry that dates to 1896 . 
 = = Season @-@ by @-@ season records = = 
 The team was quite successful in its early years , ending each of its first 20 seasons with winning records . David C. Morrow served as head coach three times for a total of eight seasons across three different decades . The team went on hiatus for two seasons during World War II . In 1970 , the Presidents won their first Presidents ' Athletic Conference championship . John Luckhardt coached for 17 seasons . Under his leadership , the team began a 26 @-@ year streak of winning seasons , running from 1984 to 2009 . 
 = Unity ( Star Trek : Voyager ) = 
 " Unity " is the 17th episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Voyager , the 59th episode overall . The episode first aired on the UPN network on February 12 , 1997 , as part of sweeps week . It was written by producer Kenneth Biller , and is the second episode to be directed by cast member Robert Duncan McNeill . It marked the first appearance of the Borg in Voyager . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet and Maquis crew of the starship USS Voyager after they were stranded in the Delta Quadrant far from the rest of the Federation . In this episode , while on an away mission , Chakotay is taken in by a group of former Borg who seek help from the crew of Voyager to reactivate their neural link . The ex @-@ Borg force Chakotay to reactivate a Borg cube ( a large Borg spaceship ) , but , in their new @-@ found " Co @-@ operative " , the ex @-@ Borg make the cube self @-@ destruct , saving Voyager . 
 Biller was influenced by the story of the Tower of Babel in writing the episode , and also considered the dissolution of the Soviet Union to be an influence . The crew re @-@ used the make @-@ up and costumes of the Borg designed for the film Star Trek : First Contact , but sets were not re @-@ used . A new fully computer generated Borg cube was created for " Unity " , and the storyline of the episode was intended as a hint to those in the later two @-@ part episode " Scorpion " . According to Nielsen ratings , it received a 5 @.@ 4 / 8 percent share of the audience on first broadcast . " Unity " was received positively by critics , with praise directed at McNeill 's direction as well as Biller 's plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Commander Chakotay ( Robert Beltran ) and Ensign Kaplan ( Susan Patterson ) hear a distress call while scouting ahead for Voyager in a shuttlecraft . They land the vessel but come under fire from hostile aliens , killing Kaplan and injuring Chakotay . He wakes in a room with a woman called Riley Frazier ( Lori <unk> ) . She informs him that she is part of a group of survivors on the planet from a variety of races . There are other groups nearby , including those that attacked him . She calls her group a " Co @-@ operative " . Meanwhile , the USS Voyager discovers a derelict Borg cube and Captain Kathryn Janeway ( Kate Mulgrew ) decides that an investigation is required in order to learn more about the Borg 's technology . 
 An away team boards the cube , discovering that either an accident or another species disabled the vessel . They take a Borg drone back onto Voyager , where the Doctor ( Robert Picardo ) accidentally revives it . After being told by Frazier to remain where he is , Chakotay breaks out of his room where he sees that all the people around him on the alien planet possess Borg implant technology in their bodies . Frazier explains that an electro @-@ kinetic storm broke their link with the Borg hive mind . Instead , the separated drones settled on a nearby planet . Chakotay 's health gets worse , and the ex @-@ Borg offer to connect him to a joint mind to heal his injuries , and he reluctantly accepts . Once part of the hive mind , he sees a montage of their memories . After Voyager arrives , Frazier and her group want Janeway to re @-@ active the <unk> generator on the damaged cube to extend a new joint mind across the entire planet . 
 Chakotay pleads their case , but Janeway decides not to help them . As Chakotay returns to Voyager on board a shuttle , the Co @-@ operative use their telepathic link to force him to travel to the Borg cube with Voyager in pursuit . Both Chakotay and an away team board the cube , and despite a fire fight , he manages to reactivate the generator . This creates the new joint mind as expected , but also activates the cube , which begins powering up to attack Voyager . Chakotay and the away team are beamed back to Voyager as the Co @-@ operative trigger the cube 's self @-@ destruct before it can endanger the Federation ship . The planet 's inhabitants thank Voyager , but as a result of their actions , Chakotay later questions the morality of the Co @-@ operative 's motives with Janeway , as it connected many of the former Borg together in a new hive mind without consulting them . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and background = = = 
 The producers had wanted to bring the Borg into Voyager , which resulted in numerous pitches from a variety of writers . There were concerns from some of the crew that the events of the film Star Trek : First Contact effectively destroyed the Borg , but executive producer Rick Berman clarified both that the death of the Borg Queen in the film did not mean the destruction of the entire collective and that there were other Borg remaining in the Delta Quadrant . The alien race had made their first appearance in the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode " Q Who " and , at the time of the original broadcast of " Unity " , had recently appeared in First Contact . The idea of Borg being separated from the collective had previously been seen in the episode of The Next Generation entitled " I , Borg " with the resultant effect seen in the two @-@ part " Descent " . " Unity " was written by producer Kenneth Biller , with the final version of the script being submitted on November 7 , 1996 . Though the film had not been released at the time he drafted the episode , Biller had read the First Contact script before writing the " Unity " script . 
 Biller sought to give a more interesting look at the Borg , rather than simply focusing on their pursuit of assimilation . With this in mind , he thought of an idea based upon the Tower of Babel . He said that the Borg was a " incredibly interwoven , complex community " and " once you knocked it all down you would have all these people who spoke different languages , and couldn 't communicate with each other . It occurred to me that a group of ex @-@ Borg would be a very interesting community to explore . " He wanted the potential reunification of the ex @-@ Borg to be a moral dilemma . This was based on the growing favorable views of Communism in the Eastern bloc during the mid @-@ 1990s after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . 
 = = = Direction and editing = = = 
 " Unity " was the second episode of Voyager to be directed by Robert Duncan McNeill following " Sacred Ground " from the previous season . He felt a great deal of pressure working on the episode which introduced the Borg to Voyager , and complained to the producers that the aliens only appear on two and a half pages of the script . He felt pressure in trying to produce something significant regarding the Borg because of the release of First Contact a few months earlier , and wanted to do something equally as exciting but without being repetitive . Instead , he wanted to give the viewer a sense of suspense and mystery regarding the people that Chakotay meets even if they do not appear to be Borg . McNeill saw " Unity " as being a type of film noir , with Chakotay being seduced by the Devil during the course of the story , and wanted to have a strong focus on this direction throughout the episode . 
 This vision was included in the cinematography for the episode , with one scene having Captain Janeway stand over Chakotay 's shoulder much in the same way that a guardian angel would . The set @-@ up for that particular scene came from a collaboration between McNeill and actress Kate Mulgrew . From that , he developed a series of close @-@ up shots to bring some intimacy to the scene . The montage scene in the episode was created by McNeill , Biller , Jeri Taylor , Bob <unk> and Wendy Neuss using footage from the episodes " Q Who " in The Next Generation , " Caretaker " from Voyager , as well as both " Emissary " and " The Way of the Warrior " from Deep Space Nine . 
 McNeill also agreed with Biller 's view that " Unity " was a metaphor for the break @-@ up of the USSR , and McNeill read up on the subject before directing the episode , saying that " I think some of those ideas did come out in the story , even though it wasn 't a really heavy , political episode . Yet there were some references and you could connect that to contemporary issues , individuality as opposed to group needs or desires . " McNeill was very happy with the resulting episode , saying that the Borg " were not as one @-@ dimensional as previously depicted , but still as evil as ever " , and hoped to direct two or three more episodes in the following season . By the end of Voyager , he had directed four episodes overall ; this signalled a change in direction for his career into directing full @-@ time . 
 = = = Design and special effects = = = 
 To represent the ex @-@ Borg colony on the planet , sets previously used for the episodes " The Chute " and " Fair Trade " from earlier in the season were used . This was further extended by the use of a computer generated matte painting created by freelancer Eric Chauvin . Borg sets from First Contact were not re @-@ used , but instead a new set was built . This new set measured 40 feet ( 12 m ) in length curved around in a semi @-@ circle , and McNeill was unsatisfied with this size . He said " It was the smallest set that I 've ever seen in my life . We had no room on the stage to build a big Borg ship , because the other sets took up so much room . " He hoped that they had hidden this on camera , with it instead appearing as a series of separate corridors within the Borg vessel . McNeill explained that he had the actors walk the length of the set past the camera at the end , at which point a cut was made and they would go back to the start of the corridor to start filming again . 
 Despite not using the sets , the episode did re @-@ use the Borg costumes from First Contact , which McNeill described as " the scarier Borg " compared to those seen previously in The Next Generation . This caused some problems with filming as an animatronic Borg arm used for the film was malfunctioning , leading to the production being stalled for several hours . For First Contact , the Borg had been re @-@ designed by Michael Westmore and Deborah Everton . The former and his makeup team had worked on the look of the heads , which included a variety of different Borg appliances which could be mixed and matched to create an ongoing variety of looks . For example , Westmore 's colleague Jake Garber had created ten different eye pieces . Everton , meanwhile , created the costumes for the Borg , and wanted them to be more elaborate than in previous appearances . This has been done with a view that individuals should look as if they had been transformed from the inside out , rather than the other way around . 
 " Unity " also saw the first use of a fully computer generated Borg cube on screen . Those previously seen in the Star Trek franchise had been physical models , including the version seen in First Contact . It was constructed by Emile Edwin Smith at Foundation Imaging , who mapped a cube with an image before creating raised areas with further detail . In order to make it look more three dimensional , he added interconnecting tubes and edge pieces to the model . He explained on the Usenet newsgroup <unk> that the episode used around 90 percent of shots featuring the new cube , while the remainder were stock footage created for earlier episodes . Visual effects supervisor Mitch Suskin was pleased with the explosion of the Borg cube at the end of the episode , saying that " the only element was the explosion , the rest was accomplished in the CG domain . It was a real breakthrough . That was the first show that I really had no reservations about . " 
 = = = Later influence = = = 
 When later discussing the end of season episode " Scorpion " ( part one ) , Brannon Braga said that the destroyed cube which appeared in " Unity " had a direct link to the action in that episode , as they wanted to hint at an alien species who could successfully fight the Borg . However , he also explained that there was no plans to bring back the " Co @-@ operative " as seen in " Unity " , saying that " The Co @-@ operative is long gone , man . It 's been months since we 've seen the Co @-@ operative . That 's not to say we won 't learn someday what happened to them . That 's kind of an interesting question . " They returned in " Delta Rising " , an expansion for Star Trek Online , where they had grown to encompass a large number of liberated Borg , including their vessels . 
 It was originally intended to include a " Borg graveyard " in space in " Unity " , similar to the vision of the destroyed Federation ships seen after the Battle of Wolf 359 in the The Next Generation episode " The Best of Both Worlds " . The scene was instead shown in the first part of " Scorpion " . One link remained in the " Unity " script : Riley Frazier was stated to have been abducted by the Borg while she was on the USS Roosevelt during the battle . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Unity " was first broadcast on February 12 , 1997 , on the UPN network within the United States . According to the Nielsen ratings , it received a 5 @.@ 4 / 8 share , meaning it was watched by 5 @.@ 4 percent of all households and 8 percent of all households watching television at the time of broadcast . This broadcast was during sweeps week , a period used to calculate advertising revenue for the forthcoming quarter . During this time , networks will often attempt to maximise the potential ratings received by their programming . " Unity " was the highest rated episode of Voyager since the second part of " Future 's End " , broadcast on November 13 , 1996 . 
 In the United Kingdom , the episode was first broadcast on July 21 , 1997 on Sky One where it was watched by 0 @.@ 502 million viewers . This was the highest number of viewers for July for an episode of Voyager on that channel , the next best being " Coda " with 0 @.@ 428 million . The most watched science fiction broadcast on the channel during that month was " Gethsemane " , an episode of The X @-@ Files , with 1 @.@ 164 million viewers . 
 = = = Critical and fan reception = = = 
 David Bianculli , while previewing the episode for the New York Daily News , called the plot " clever " and the suggestion that another alien race had defeated the Borg an " interesting possible springboard for future episodes " . Regarding the direction and the writing , he said that McNeil directed with " a flair and pace that enhances all of Biller 's many plot twists " , and said that it was the best part of the season so far . Jamahl Epsicokhan , writing on his website Jammers Reviews , praised the special effects seen in " Unity " , and added that " McNeill 's direction is effective , the story is fresh and implicitly complex , the production is impressive , and the action and suspense works . This is not the best episode of Voyager , but it 's among them . " He gave the episode a score of three and a half out of four . 
 The episode was given a score of eight out of ten in Dreamwatch magazine , with the review saying that it delivered a " philosophical meditation on the nature of power " asking " does the possession automatically corrupt the possessor ? " It praised the nature of the episode , saying the plot was " very clever " . But the review said that the ending was ambiguous about whether or not Chakotay agrees with what he is doing on behalf of the Co @-@ operative . When reviewing the fourth season for the website DVD Talk , Holly E. Ordway described " Unity " as being " noteworthy as an episode with more depth and complexity than the typical Voyager episode thus far " , and said that it was likely to be remembered by the fans as the episode which introduced the Borg to the series . She added that the plot was " well thought out " and that the ending left the viewer with a moral dilemma over whether it was the right thing to do . 
 In his book Delta Quadrant , David McIntee gave the episode a rating of seven out of ten , while Anna L. Kaplan — writing for the magazine Cinefantastique — rated " Unity " as three and a half out of four . Lou Anders reviewed the episode for Star Trek Monthly , saying that McNeill did an " excellent job in his second foray as director , bringing a very dark and exciting feeling to the episode . " Anders gave " Unity " a score of three out of five . The fan reaction to the episode was mostly positive , with the exception of those who were pushing for an ongoing liaison between Chakotay and Janeway ; such fans did not approve of the temporary romantic entanglement between Chakotay and the ex @-@ Borg Riley . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " Unity " was on a two @-@ episode VHS cassette alongside " Darkling " on July 21 , 1997 in the United Kingdom . The first VHS release in the United States was as a single episode release on September 3 , 2002 . " Unity " was released on DVD as part of the season three box set , released on July 6 , 2004 , in the United States . This was followed in the UK on September 6 , 2004 . 
 = Caitlyn Jenner = 
 Caitlyn Jenner ( born October 28 , 1949 ) , formerly known as Bruce Jenner , is an American television personality and retired Olympic gold medal @-@ winning decathlete . Jenner was a college football player for the Graceland Yellowjackets before incurring a knee injury requiring surgery . Coach L. D. Weldon , who had coached Olympic decathlete Jack Parker , convinced Jenner to try the decathlon . After intense training , Jenner won the 1976 Olympics decathlon title at the Montreal Summer Olympics ( after a Soviet athlete had won the title in 1972 during the Cold War ) , gaining fame as " an all @-@ American hero " . Jenner set a third successive world record while winning the Olympics . The winner of the Olympic decathlon is traditionally given the unofficial title of " world 's greatest athlete . " With that stature , Jenner subsequently established a career in television , film , writing , auto racing , business and as a Playgirl cover model . 
 Jenner has six children from marriages to ex @-@ wives Chrystie Crownover , Linda Thompson , and Kris Jenner . Since 2007 , Jenner has appeared on the reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians with Kris , their daughters Kendall and Kylie Jenner , and step @-@ children Kourtney , Kimberley , Khloé , and Rob Kardashian . Previously identifying publicly as male , Jenner revealed her identity as a trans woman in April 2015 , publicly announcing her name change from Bruce to Caitlyn in a July 2015 Vanity Fair cover story . Her name and gender change became official on September 25 , 2015 . She has been called the most famous openly transgender woman in the world . Jenner currently stars in the reality television series I Am Cait , which focuses on her gender transition . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Caitlyn Marie Jenner was born William Bruce Jenner on October 28 , 1949 , in Mount Kisco , New York , to Esther Ruth ( née McGuire ) and William Hugh Jenner . Her father was an <unk> . She has two sisters , Lisa and Pam . Her younger brother , Burt , was killed in a car accident in Canton , Connecticut , in 1976 , shortly after Jenner 's success at the Olympic Games . 
 As a young child , Jenner was diagnosed with dyslexia . She attended Sleepy Hollow High School in Sleepy Hollow , New York for her freshman and sophomore years and Newtown High School in Newtown , Connecticut for her junior and senior years , graduating in 1968 . Jenner earned a football scholarship and attended Graceland College ( now Graceland University ) in <unk> , Iowa , but was forced to stop playing football because of a knee injury . Recognizing Jenner 's potential , a switch to the decathlon was encouraged by Graceland track coach L. D. Weldon . Jenner debuted in the decathlon at the Drake Relays in Des Moines , Iowa in 1970 , placing fifth . Jenner graduated from Graceland College in 1973 with a degree in physical education . 
 = = Olympic career = = 
 All Olympic events and medals are for men 's events and prior to her public gender transition . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 At the 1972 men 's decathlon U.S. Olympic trials in Eugene , Oregon , Jenner was in fifth place behind Steve Gough and Andrew <unk> . Needing to make up a 19 @-@ second gap on Gough in the men 's 1500 metres , Jenner ran a fast , last lap , finishing 22 seconds ahead of the other runners to make the Olympic team , prompting the Eugene Register @-@ Guard to ask : " Who 's Jenner ? " A tenth @-@ place finish in the decathlon event at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich followed . Watching Soviet Mykola <unk> win inspired Jenner to start an intense training regimen . " For the first time , I knew what I wanted out of life and that was it , and this guy has it . I literally started training that night at midnight , running through the streets of Munich , Germany , training for the Games . I trained that day on through the 1976 Games , 6 – 8 hours a day , every day , 365 days a year . " 
 After graduating from Graceland , Jenner married girlfriend Chrystie Crownover and moved to San Jose , California . Chrystie provided most of the family income working as a flight attendant for United Airlines . Jenner sold insurance at night ( earning US $ 9 @,@ 000 a year ) , while training during the day . In the era before professionalism was allowed in Olympic sports , this kind of training was unheard of . During this period , Jenner trained at the San Jose City College ( <unk> ) and San Jose State University ( SJSU ) tracks . Centered around Bert Bonanno , the coach at <unk> , San Jose was , at the time , a hotbed for training and was called the " Track Capital of the World " . Many other aspiring Olympic athletes such as Millard Hampton , Andre Phillips , John Powell , Mac Wilkins , and Al Feuerbach also trained there . Jenner 's most successful events were the skill events of the second day : hurdles , discus , pole vault , javelin and 1500 metres . 
 = = = Olympic success = = = 
 Jenner was the American champion in the men 's decathlon event in 1974 , and was featured on the cover of Track & Field News magazine 's August 1974 issue . While on tour in 1975 , Jenner won the French national championship , and a gold medal at the 1975 Pan American Games , earning the tournament record with 8 @,@ 045 points . This was followed by new world records of 8 @,@ 524 points at the U.S.A. / U.S.S.R. / Poland triangular meet in Eugene , Oregon on August 9 – 10 , 1975 , breaking <unk> 's record , and 8 @,@ 538 points at the 1976 Olympic trials , also in Eugene . Between 1973 and 1976 , of the 13 <unk> Jenner contested , her only loss was at the 1975 AAU National Championships when she " no <unk> " in the pole vault . 
 At the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal , Jenner achieved five personal bests on the first day of the men 's decathlon – a " home run " – despite finishing in second place behind Guido <unk> of West Germany . Jenner was confident : " The second day has all my good events . If everything works out all right , we should be ahead after it 's all over . " On the second day , Jenner had a strong showing in the hurdles and discus , and personal bests in the pole vault and javelin . By that point , victory was virtually assured , but it remained to be seen by how much Jenner would improve the record . In the final event , the 1500 metres , seen live on national television , Jenner looked content to finish the long competition . Then Jenner sprinted the last lap , making up a 50 @-@ meter deficit , and nearly catching the event favorite Soviet Leonid Litvinenko who was already well out of contention for the overall title , but whose personal best had been eight seconds better than Jenner 's before the race . Jenner set a new personal best time , taking the gold medal with a world @-@ record score of 8 @,@ 616 points . 
 Olympic world record performance : 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 After the event , Jenner took an American flag from a spectator and carried it during the victory lap , starting a tradition that is now common among winning athletes . Abandoning vaulting poles in the stadium , with no intention of ever competing again , Jenner stated that : " In 1972 , I made the decision that I would go four years and totally dedicate myself to what I was doing , and then I would move on after it was over with . I went into that competition knowing that would be the last time I would ever do this . " Jenner explained , " It hurts every day when you practice hard . Plus , when this decathlon is over , I got the rest of my life to recuperate . Who cares how bad it hurts ? " 
 As a result of winning the Olympic decathlon , Jenner became a national hero receiving the James E. Sullivan Award as the top amateur athlete in the United States , and being named the Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year in 1976 . 
 Jenner 's 1976 world record was broken by four points by Daley Thompson in 1980 . In 1985 , Jenner 's Olympic decathlon score was reevaluated against the IAAF 's updated decathlon scoring table and was reported as 8 @,@ 634 for comparative purposes . This converted mark stood as the American record until 1991 , when it was surpassed by eventual gold medalist , and world record holder , Dan O 'Brien of Dan & Dave fame . As of 2011 , Jenner was ranked twenty @-@ fifth on the world all @-@ time list and ninth on the American all @-@ time list . Including the 2012 emergence of a new world record holder Ashton Eaton , Jenner 's mark has moved to No. 27 worldwide and No. 10 U.S. 
 Jenner was inducted into the United States National Track and Field Hall of Fame in 1980 , the Olympic Hall of Fame in 1986 , the Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame and the Connecticut Sports Hall of Fame in 1994 , and the San Jose Sports Hall of Fame in 2010 . For almost 20 years , San Jose City College hosted an annual Bruce Jenner Invitational competition . 
 = = Post @-@ Olympic career = = 
 = = = Capitalizing on Olympic fame = = = 
 In the 1970s , Olympic athletes were considered amateur and were not allowed to seek or accept payment for their positions as sports celebrities . In 1972 , during the Cold War , three major Olympic titles that had a long history of American success – basketball , the 100 meter dash , and decathlon – were won by Soviet athletes . Winning back the decathlon title made Jenner an American hero . " After the Games were over , " Jenner said , " I happened to be the right guy , at that right place , at that right time . " Tony <unk> of The New York Times wrote : " Jenner is twirling the nation like a baton . He and wife , Chrystie , are so high up on the pedestal of American heroism , it would take a crane to get them down . " 
 After the expected Olympic success , Jenner planned to cash in on whatever celebrity status could follow a gold medal in the same mold as Johnny Weissmuller and Sonja Henie , who had become major movie stars following their gold medals . This would require forgoing any future Olympic competition . At the time , Jenner 's agent George Wallach felt there was a four @-@ year window – until the next Olympics – upon which to capitalize . Wallach reported that Jenner was being considered for the role of Superman , which ultimately went to Christopher Reeve . " I really don 't know how many offers we have , " Wallach claimed . " There are still unopened telegrams back at the hotel and you just can 't believe the offers that poured in during the first two days . " 
 Jenner appeared on the cover of the August 9 , 1976 issue of Sports Illustrated , the February 1979 issue of Gentleman 's Quarterly , and on the cover of Playgirl magazine . Jenner became a spokesperson for Tropicana , Minolta , and Buster Brown shoes . 
 = = = = Wheaties spokesperson = = = = 
 In 1977 , Jenner became a spokesperson for Wheaties brand breakfast cereal and appeared on the iconic front of the cereal box . After taking over from Olympic champion Bob Richards , Jenner was second in a succession of athletes featured as spokespersons for the brand . Mary Lou Retton succeeded Jenner in 1984 . 
 On November 22 , 1977 , Jenner went to San Francisco to refute charges filed by San Francisco district attorney , Joseph Freitas , that General Mills , the maker of Wheaties , had engaged in false advertising in its campaign featuring Jenner . Jenner liked Wheaties and ate the breakfast cereal two or three times a week , which supported the advertising campaign 's claims . Two days later , Freitas withdrew the suit , saying that it was " a case of <unk> " on the part of his staff . 
 When Jenner came out as a trans woman in 2015 , General Mills stated that : " Bruce Jenner continues to be a respected member of Team Wheaties . " After a negative response to this initial statement , Mike <unk> , General Mills 's brand media relations manager , clarified it by saying : " Bruce Jenner has been a respected member of Team Wheaties , and Caitlyn Jenner will continue to be . " 
