 = = = Television and film career = = = 
 Jenner starred in the disco @-@ era Village People comedy Can 't Stop the Music ( 1980 ) . The movie was a flop . Jenner 's performance was nominated for the 1980 Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor ; the film won the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Picture . It was Jenner 's only theatrical release until 2011 . Jenner had some success with a television career , starring in the made @-@ for @-@ TV movies The Golden Moment : An Olympic Love Story ( 1980 ) and Grambling 's White Tiger ( 1981 ) . During the 1981 – 1982 season , Jenner became a semi @-@ regular cast member in the police series CHiPs , guest @-@ starring as Officer Steve McLeish for six episodes , substituting for star Erik Estrada , who was locked in a contract dispute with NBC and MGM . Jenner also appeared in an episode of the sitcom Silver <unk> called " Trouble with Words " , wherein her personal issues with dyslexia were revealed in a storyline about a recurring teenage character with the same problem . Jenner appeared in the series Learn to Read and in the video games Olympic Decathlon ( 1981 ) and Bruce Jenner 's World Class Decathlon ( 1996 ) . The iconic " hero shot " , the finish of the final event of 1976 Olympic decathlon , and the Wheaties cover , were parodied by John Belushi on Saturday Night Live , endorsing " Little Chocolate Donuts " . In 1989 , Jenner played herself in the comedy short Dirty Tennis written by James Van Patten . 
 Jenner has appeared in a variety of game shows and reality television programs , including starring with Grits Gresham in an episode of ABC 's The American Sportsman . The program features Gresham hunting , fishing , or shooting in exotic areas with celebrities . In the early 1990s , Jenner was the host of an infomercial for a stair @-@ climbing exercise machine called the Stair Climber Plus . 
 In January 2002 , Jenner participated in an episode of the American series The Weakest Link , featuring Olympic athletes . In February and March 2003 , Jenner was part of the cast of the American series I 'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here ! . She made a cameo appearance in a season @-@ three episode of The Apprentice , which aired in May 2005 . She also partnered with Tai <unk> for Skating with Celebrities in a series that aired January – March 2006 ( they were eliminated during the fifth of seven episodes ) , served as a guest judge on Pet Star on Animal Planet , as well as ( with the Kardashian family ) on Celebrity Family Feud . In November 2010 , a photograph of Jenner was shown in a janitor 's resume in an episode of It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia . 
 Other television and talk show appearances by Jenner include : Nickelodeon 's made @-@ for @-@ TV film Gym Teacher : The Movie as well as episodes of Murder , She Wrote , Family Guy , the Lingo Olympic Winners episode , and talk shows such as Hannity and season 1 , episode 21 of The Bonnie Hunt Show in 2008 . 
 Since late 2007 , Jenner has starred in the E ! reality series Keeping Up with the Kardashians along with wife Kris Jenner , stepchildren Kourtney , Kimberley , Khloé , and Rob Kardashian ( from Kris 's marriage to attorney Robert Kardashian ) , and daughters Kylie and Kendall . 
 In 2011 , Jenner appeared in the Adam Sandler comedy Jack and Jill in a scene with Al Pacino as an actor in a play . Like Can 't Stop the Music , the film won the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Picture and swept every Razzie category . 
 = = = Motorsports career = = = 
 Jenner was a successful race car driver in the IMSA Camel GT series ( International Motor Sports Association ) in the 1980s . Jenner 's first victory came in the 1986 12 hours of Sebring in the IMSA GTO class driving the 7 @-@ Eleven Roush Racing Ford Mustang with co @-@ driver Scott Pruett . The pair won their class and finished 4th overall in the 12 @-@ hour endurance race . 1986 was also the most successful year of Jenner 's career , finishing second in the championship to Pruett . Jenner commented , " I was a lot more badass runner than I was a driver . " 
 = = = Business = = = 
 Jenner had licensed her previous name for Bruce Jenner 's Westwood Centers for Nautilus & Aerobics in the early 1980s to David A. <unk> , president of other local Nautilus & Aerobics Centers . She had no ownership in the licensed name centers , which were solely owned by <unk> . Jenner 's company , Bruce Jenner Aviation , sells aircraft supplies to executives and corporations . Jenner was the business development vice president for a staffing industry software application known as <unk> , which was based on Lotus Domino technology . 
 In March 2016 , Jenner announced she had been chosen as the face of H & M Sport . Later that year , H & M created a six @-@ minute film featuring Jenner , called Caitlyn Jenner ’ s Greatest Victories : A Timeline . 
 = = Gender transition = = 
 = = = Coming out as a transgender woman = = = 
 In a 20 / 20 interview with Diane Sawyer in April 2015 , Jenner came out as a trans woman , saying that she had dealt with gender dysphoria since her youth and that : " for all intents and purposes , I 'm a woman . " Jenner cross dressed for many years and took hormone replacement therapy but stopped after her romance with Kris Kardashian in the early 1990s became more serious . Jenner recounts having permission to explore her gender identity on her own travels but not when they were coupled , and that not knowing the best way to talk about the many issues contributed to the deterioration of the 23 @-@ year @-@ long marriage , which ended formally in 2015 . 
 While she has undergone some cosmetic surgery , she has neither undergone sex reassignment surgery nor ruled it out ; she stated that , for her , life as a woman is primarily a matter of mental state and lifestyle . She said she has never been sexually attracted to men , but has instead always been sexually attracted to women , and that , keeping in mind the difficulty people have understanding the difference between sexual orientation and gender identity , she will identify as asexual for now . 
 = = = Media attention = = = 
 In June 2015 , Jenner debuted her new name and image , and began publicly using feminine pronoun self @-@ descriptors . Jenner held a renaming ceremony in July 2015 , adopting the name Caitlyn Marie Jenner . Prior to her 20 / 20 interview , a two @-@ part special titled Keeping Up with the Kardashians : About Bruce was filmed with the family in which she answered questions , and prepared her children for the personal and public aspects of the transition . In the special , which aired in May 2015 , the point was emphasized that there is no one right way to transition . Jenner made it a priority to ensure that all her children were independent first before focusing on her transition . In September 2015 , her name was legally changed to Caitlyn Marie Jenner and gender to female . 
 Jenner 's announcement that she is transgender came at an unprecedented time for trans visibility , including legislative initiatives . The 20 / 20 interview had 20 @.@ 7 million viewers , making it television 's " highest @-@ ever rated newsmagazine telecast among adults 18 – 49 and adults 25 – 54 " . The Daily Beast wrote that Jenner 's honesty , vulnerability , and fame may have caused " cheap jokes " about trans people to " seem mean to a mainstream audience on an unprecedented scale " . Noting the shift in how comedians treated Jenner 's transition , The Daily Beast saw the change as the same evolution that took place in acceptance of LGBT people as a whole when " comedians finally cross the critical threshold from mockery to creativity in their joke @-@ telling " . 
 Jenner 's emerging gender identity was revealed in a Vanity Fair interview written by Buzz Bissinger . Annie Leibovitz photographed the cover , the magazine 's first to feature an openly transgender woman , which was captioned " Call me Caitlyn " . Using her Twitter handle , @ Caitlyn _ Jenner , she tweeted : " I 'm so happy after such a long struggle to be living my true self . Welcome to the world Caitlyn . Can 't wait for you to get to know her / me . " Time magazine declared this tweet the tenth most re @-@ tweeted tweet of 2015 , based on re @-@ tweets of tweets by verified users from January 1 to November 10 of that year . Jenner amassed over one million Twitter followers in four hours and three minutes , setting a new Guinness World Record and surpassing United States President Barack Obama , who , a month before , accomplished the same feat in four hours and fifty @-@ two minutes . Four days later Jenner was up to 2 @.@ 37 million followers , with another 1 @.@ 5 million followers on Instagram . 
 However , Jenner also received criticism . Beginning in September 2015 , she was depicted on the satirical American animated program South Park , which parodied her supporters ' political correctness , as well as her driving record . The Jenner @-@ related episodes were " Stunning and Brave " , " Where My Country Gone ? " , " Sponsored Content " , " Truth and Advertising " and " PC Principal Final Justice " from the show 's 19th season . 
 In April 2016 during the Republican presidential primaries , Jenner became an exemplar for candidate Donald Trump 's opposition to North Carolina 's Public Facilities Privacy & Security Act , with Trump saying that Jenner could use any restroom of her choosing at his Trump Tower property . Jenner soon posted a video showing that she had taken Trump up on his offer . She thanked Trump and assured Trump 's adversary Ted Cruz that " nobody got molested " . 
 In June , Jenner was one of several celebrities depicted using synthetic nude " sleeping " bodies for the video of Kanye West 's song " Famous " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 In August 2015 , Jenner won the Social Media Queen award at the Teen Choice Awards . In October 2015 , Glamour magazine named her one of its 25 Glamour Women of the Year , calling her a " Trans Champion . " In November 2015 , Jenner was listed as one of Entertainment Weekly 's 2015 Entertainers of the Year . In December 2015 , she was named Barbara Walters ' Most Fascinating Person of 2015 . Also in that month , she was listed on Time magazine 's eight @-@ person shortlist for the 2015 Person of the Year , and Bing released its list of the year 's " Most Searched Celebrities " , which Jenner was at the top of , and declared Jenner 's Vanity Fair cover the second in a list of " top celeb moments of 2015 . " She was the second most searched for person on Google in 2015 . In April 2016 , she was listed in the Time 100 . In June 2016 , Jenner became the first openly transgender person to be featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated . The cover and associated story marked the 40th anniversary of her winning the 1976 Summer Olympics decathlon . 
 Feminist author Germaine Greer called Glamour magazine 's decision to award Jenner with a " Woman of the Year " award misogynistic , questioning whether a transgender woman could be better than " someone who is just born a woman . " Jenner also received criticism from individuals such as actress Rose McGowan , for stating – in a Buzzfeed interview – that the hardest part about being a woman " is figuring out what to wear " . McGowan argued : " We are more than deciding what to wear . We are more than the stereotypes foisted upon us by people like you . You 're a woman now ? Well fucking learn that we have had a VERY different experience than your life of male privilege . " McGowan later stated that she was not transphobic , and added : " Disliking something a trans person has said is no different than disliking something a man has said or that a woman has said . Being trans doesn 't make one immune from criticism . " 
 Chris <unk> of The Independent stated : " Jenner has gone on to inspire countless men and women , but her comments , which were made after she was celebrated at Glamour magazine 's Women Of The Year in New York were branded ' offensive and insulting ' . " He added : " People began tweeting the other , harder things women have to deal with , such as institutionalized oppression , abuse and sexual assault " . James Smith , husband of Moira Smith , the only female New York Police Department officer to die on September 11 , 2001 , returned Moira 's " Woman of the Year " award , given posthumously . Referring to Jenner as a man , he stated that he found Glamour giving Jenner the same award insulting to Moira 's memory , and referred to the matter as a publicity stunt . Smith later said that , having supported transgender youth and Glamour 's decision to honor transgender actress Laverne Cox in 2014 , he did not object because Jenner is transgender ; he objected to Jenner 's " hardest part about being a woman " commentary ; this proved to him that Jenner " is not truly a woman . I believe this comment and others he has made trivializes the transgender experience as I have witnessed it . " 
 Conversely , Adrienne Tam of The Daily Telegraph argued that Jenner deserved the Glamour award , stating : " What McGowan failed to take into consideration was the jesting manner in which Jenner spoke . " Tam said : 
 [ Jenner ] also immediately followed up her " what women wear " dilemma with : It 's more than that . I 'm kind of at this point in my life where I 'm trying to figure this womanhood thing out . It is more than hair , makeup , clothes , all that kind of stuff . There 's an element here that I 'm still kind of searching for . And I think that 'll take a while . Because I think as far as gender , we 're all on a journey . We 're all learning and growing about ourselves . And I feel the same way . 
 Tam considered McGowan 's criticism to be over the top , and stated of James Smith 's criticism , " The salient point here is one about courage . We easily recognise physical courage such as saving orphans from burning buildings , or ordinary people putting their lives in the line of fire . It is far harder to recognise mental courage . " She added : " Without a doubt , the police officer who died in the September 11 attacks was courageous . But so is Jenner . It 's a different kind of courage , but it is courage nonetheless . " 
 = = = = LGBT community = = = = 
 With her profile raised by her coming out as a trans woman in 2015 , Jenner has been called the most famous openly transgender woman in the world . She is also one of the most recognized LGBT people in the world and arguably the most famous LGBT athlete . Jenner acknowledged in her 20 / 20 interview that part of her reason for being so visible was to bring attention to gender dysphoria , violence against trans women , and other transgender issues . She also sought to promote more informed discussion of LGBT issues at a time when the trans community has unprecedented visibility . She signed with Creative Artists Agency 's speakers department and will collaborate with the CAA Foundation on a philanthropic strategy focusing on LGBT issues . She made a private appearance at the Los Angeles LGBT Center in June 2015 , where she spoke with at @-@ risk trans youth . 
 Jenner received the Arthur Ashe Courage Award during the 2015 ESPY Awards in July 2015 . ESPN executive producer Maura <unk> said Jenner was given the award because " she has shown the courage to embrace a truth that had been hidden for years , and to embark on a journey that may not only give comfort to those facing similar circumstances , but can also help to educate people on the challenges that the transgender community faces . " She is the third consecutive openly LGBT person to receive the award following footballer Michael Sam ( 2014 ) and anchorwoman Robin Roberts ( 2013 ) . 
 In October , Jenner presented the Point Foundation 's Horizon Award to television producers Rhys Ernst ( of the show Transparent ) and Zach <unk> ( of the show Becoming Us ) . This was her second public speaking engagement after her gender transition . 
 In November , Jenner was listed as one of the nine runners @-@ up for The Advocate 's Person of the Year . That month she was also listed as one of the <unk> of 2015 , with Out calling her the " Newsmaker of the Year . " On International Human Rights Day , Jenner discussed transgender rights with Samantha Power , the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations . In 2016 , Jenner was on the cover of The Advocate 's February / March issue . 
 MAC Cosmetics collaborated with Jenner on a lipstick , called Finally Free , which was made available for purchase April 8 , 2016 , with MAC stating , " 100 % of the selling price goes to the MAC AIDS Fund Transgender Initiative , to further its work in support of transgender communities . " Also in April 2016 , Jenner was listed as No. 8 on Out magazine 's Power 50 list . In May 2016 , her interview with Diane Sawyer in 2015 won Outstanding TV Journalism – <unk> at the GLAAD Media Awards . 
 In June 2016 , the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting ; in the video , Jenner and others told the stories of the people killed there . 
 In July 2016 , Jenner spoke about coming out as transgender and Republican at a Republican National Convention " Big Tent Brunch " for the conservative group American Unity Fund . 
 = = = = I Am Cait = = = = 
 Jenner 's gender transition is the subject of I Am Cait , initially an eight @-@ part TV documentary series , which premiered on E ! in July 2015 to an audience of 2 @.@ 7 million viewers . Jenner is an executive producer of the show . The show focuses on Jenner 's transition and how it affects her relationships with her family and friends . The show also explores how Jenner adjusts to what she sees as her job as a role model for the transgender community . In October 2015 , the show was renewed for a second season , which premiered on March 6 , 2016 . 
 The show tied for best Outstanding Reality Program at the GLAAD Media Awards in 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jenner is a Christian , leans towards political conservatism , and is a Republican . " I have gotten more flak for being a conservative Republican " , she said , " than I have for being trans " . Although stopping short of an endorsement , Jenner said she liked Ted Cruz , a Republican candidate for President of the United States in the 2016 election , despite Cruz 's negative views of trans people . ( Cruz dropped out of the race on May 3 , 2016 . ) On her reality show I Am Cait , Jenner said that although she does not support Donald Trump , she thinks he would be good for women 's issues . She then stated she would never support Hillary Clinton . 
 = = = Marriages = = = 
 Prior to her public gender transition , she had been married three times . She was married to Chrystie Scott ( née Crownover ) from 1972 to 1981 . They have two children , son Burton and daughter Cassandra , known as Burt and Casey Jenner . Jenner and Scott 's divorce was finalized the first week of January 1981 . 
 On January 5 , 1981 , Jenner married actress Linda Thompson in Hawaii . They have two sons together , Brandon Jenner and Sam Brody Jenner ( known as Brody ) . By February 1986 , Jenner and Thompson had separated and subsequently divorced . Their sons later starred on the reality show The Princes of Malibu , and Brody appeared in the reality show The Hills . 
 On April 21 , 1991 , Jenner married Kris Kardashian ( née Houghton ) after five months of dating . They have two daughters , Kendall and Kylie Jenner . While married , Jenner was also the step @-@ parent to Kris 's children from her previous marriage – Kourtney , Kim , Khloé and Rob – who star in Keeping Up with the Kardashians . The couple announced their separation in October 2013 , though they had actually separated in June . Kris filed for divorce in September 2014 citing irreconcilable differences . Their divorce terms were finalized in December 2014 and came into effect on March 23 , 2015 , because of a six @-@ month state legal requirement . 
 = = = Fatal car crash = = = 
 In February 2015 , Jenner was involved in a fatal multiple @-@ vehicle collision on the Pacific Coast Highway in Malibu , California . Kim Howe , an animal rights activist and actress , was killed when Jenner 's SUV ran into Howe 's car . Accounts of the sequence of collisions have varied , as have the number of people injured . Prosecutors declined to file criminal charges , but three civil lawsuits were brought by Howe 's stepchildren and drivers of other cars involved in the collision . Jessica Steindorff , a Hollywood agent who was hit by Howe 's car , settled her case in December 2015 . Howe 's stepchildren settled their case in January 2016 . Financial details were not disclosed in either case . The third lawsuit is ongoing . 
 = Crested auklet = 
 The crested auklet ( Aethia cristatella ) is a small seabird of the family Alcidae , distributed throughout the northern Pacific and the Bering Sea . The species feeds by diving in deep waters , eating krill and a variety of small marine animals . It nests in dense colonies of up to 1 million individuals in the Bering Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk . It often breeds in mixed @-@ species colonies with the least auklet , a smaller congener . 
 The species is known for its sexual ornaments , found in both males and females . These include colorful plumage with a forehead crest , a striking scent recalling citrus fruit , and a loud trumpet call , all of which appear to have evolved through sexual selection . The total population is around 6 million , almost half in North America . It is in general considered to be of least concern , though the Alaskan population faces additional threats from predation and oil spills . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The crested auklet was first identified in 1769 by the German zoologist Peter Simon Pallas , who named it Aethia cristatella . The genus Aethia includes four auklet species . There are no subspecies of crested auklet . The family Alcidae consists of many species of shorebirds including other auklets ( not in the genus Aethia ) , puffins , razorbills , guillemots , and murres . 
 = = Description = = 
 The crested auklet can measure 18 – 27 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 – 10 @.@ 6 in ) in length , 34 – 50 cm ( 13 – 20 in ) in wingspan and weigh 195 – 330 g ( 6 @.@ 9 – 11 @.@ 6 oz ) . They have a reddish @-@ orange and yellow tipped bill , yellowish white irises , and white auricular plumes from their eyes to their ears . Their bodies , wings , and tails are primarily dark sooty grey , while their legs and feet are grey and claws black . The males and females are very similar , although the females have slightly smaller and less curved bills , additionally slightly smaller crests . 
 Crested auklets are known for their forehead crests , which is made of black forward @-@ curving feathers . These forehead crests are highly variable , and can have between two and twenty three narrow forward curving feathers . The average auklet has 12 crest feathers , which are of variable length , between 8 @.@ 1 and 58 @.@ 5 millimetres . <unk> have auricular plumes and a bright orange bill with curved accessory plates . Like forehead crests , these features vary widely within auklet populations . 
 The crested auklet is recognized primarily by two characteristics during the breeding season . The first is its crest , a group of bristle feathers located on top of its head above its eyes . The second is a social odor that the auklets produce during the breeding season , described as smelling like tangerines . This odor originates from tiny wick feathers , located in a small patch of skin between the shoulder blades . In winter plumage , their bills are smaller and dull yellow . They lack accessory plates and their crest and auricular plumes are reduced . 
 Juveniles are similar to winter adults , but without auricular and crest plumes . Their bills are smaller , and colored a dull brownish yellow . Juveniles take 33 days to reach adult size . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Crested auklets are found throughout the northern Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea . They are particularly prevalent during the non @-@ breeding winter months along the Aleutian Islands , Kuril Islands and the Russian island of Sakhalin . They travel to breeding locations on the islands and shorelines of the Sea of Okhotsk and the Bering Sea during the late spring and summer . Their habitats consist of slopes , boulder fields , lava flows , and sea cliffs . They are often found with other auklet species such as the least auklet . On a daily basis , crested auklets circle 500 meters above the sea and the breeding colonies . This circling is triggered by disturbances and predators posing a threat . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Crested auklets primarily forage in deep waters , however sometimes in areas closer to the shore , but always in large flocks . Little is known about the winter diets , however , it is suggested that they feed on a variety of marine invertebrates . Crested auklets are <unk> . Their diet consists mainly of krill , but they are also known to eat copepods , pteropods ( such as <unk> ) , amphipods and larval fishes . Crested auklets dive from the surface of the water to catch their food . This behavior has been described as underwater " flight " . 
 = = = Breeding and parental care = = = 
 The crested auklet breeding season begins mid @-@ May and ends mid @-@ August . Their nesting sites are within the rocky crevices of North Pacific coast . They breed in dense colonies of up to one million birds . Because of this , nesting sites are in close proximity , with as little as 0 @.@ 3 meters between nests . Even so , there is a high degree of territoriality , and adults show a high degree of site fidelity within a year . Because mating occurs at sea and males have no copulatory organ , males must hover over females for a successful mating . Mate choice is mutual , but females do have final choice on breeding partner . 
 Crested auklets are highly social during the breeding season , before pair formation , and after pair formation . Within a breeding year , however , crested auklets are monogamous , with only 10 % of the population having extra @-@ pair copulations . Partners continue to self @-@ advertise to other birds when they are not incubating . While some of this advertising behavior can be linked to extra @-@ pair mating , it is suggested that continuation of the behavior allows birds to find pairs for the next breeding season . Only 45 @.@ 5 % of birds remain with the same partner in the subsequent breeding season . 
 Both sexes invest highly in parental care ; parents share equally in incubating the single egg and raising the chick . Since both sexes are ornamented , crested auklets align with Robert Trivers 's parental investment theory , which predicts that with biparental care , mutual <unk> will arise . 
 = = = Sexual selection = = = 
 Crested auklets are unique in their use of optical , vocal , and olfactory signals in mating . Their communicative behavior is more complex and diversified than that of closely related species . There are three general evolutionary mechanisms proposed to address the origin of the elaborate display traits of crested auklets , and of showy mating signals by males in general : 
 Runaway selection : Fisher ’ s theory of runaway sexual selection explains flamboyant traits in males as resulting from a genetic linkage between ornamental traits and a mating preference for such ornaments . Under this model , mating preferences could be spread by arbitrary or even deleterious traits that carry no benefits to fitness , besides sexual selection . 
 The good genes hypothesis : The second mechanism is the good genes or handicap processes , where mating preference focuses on ornamental traits that reflect the health or viability of the individual expressing them . These good genes convey genetic benefits to the offspring . Amotz Zahavi proposed the handicap hypothesis , where he suggests that individuals ’ ornamental traits are indicators of good fitness , because they reflect the individual ’ s success in spite of these traits as handicaps . 
 Sensory exploitation : The third proposed mechanism is sexual selection for sensory exploitation , which results in mating preferences that arise due to natural selection for inherent sensory biases . Mutations occur that result in a display trait which exploits the pre @-@ existing sensory bias . 
 = = = Ornamentation = = = 
 = = = = Visual ornaments = = = = 
 <unk> dominance , with regards to claimed display area , has been correlated with crest length in both males and females . The existence of these showy monomorphic traits is indicative of intense sexual selection for both sexes . Large @-@ crested adults of both sexes receive higher levels of sexual interest and displays from the opposite sex compared to those with smaller crests . Crested auklets with larger crests are more likely to obtain mates and to form pair bonds earlier . 
 Based on divorce rate and mortality , more than half of individuals find a new mate each year . Female crest length is the primary factor of male mate switching between years . 
 While there is variation in displays across populations , crested auklet crests and plume ornaments are consistent in expression within an individual over time . Furthermore , there is little sexual dimorphism or evidence of condition dependence . From studies , it seems to be a survival @-@ neutral ornament . Some studies , however , offer up a functional purpose for these ornaments . One study suggests a link between habitat complexity and facial feathering , where tactile facial elongation helps individuals navigate complex underground crevices . The high density of crested auklet nesting sites can be expected to impose selective pressures on sensory mechanisms . 
 = = = = Vocal ornaments = = = = 
 Crested auklets have a wide variety of single and complex calls . Billing is " defined as pair courtship with mutual cackling vocal display . " It is a crucial part of successful pair formation and becomes harmonious once male and female partners are well acquainted . Trumpet calls are one of the most common advertising calls . The call represents a complex but stereotyped vocal sequence that is linked with a specific visual display . Between individuals , the calls differ in duration and frequency . Calls are primarily performed in males , but can also be seen in females . The call is particularly strong in widowed females . These calls stay stable from year to year , and individuals ' specific calls are associated with the maintenance of long @-@ term social bonds between pair mates and between neighbors . This suggests that trumpet calls can be used for both short @-@ term and long @-@ term individual recognition . Recognition of neighboring individuals ' calls is advantageous because it minimizes energy expenditure on aggressive displays , and prevents conflict between neighbors and trusted individuals ( the " dear enemy phenomenon " ) . 
 = = = = Olfactory ornaments = = = = 
 Crested auklets have a distinctive citrus @-@ like plumage odor . The scent is released when there is ruffling of feathers on the nape and upper back of the individual from threat , trumpeting , or billing displays . The cloud of scent released encourages the ruff sniff display . A ruff sniff display is when birds fully insert their half open , bill into the others ' plumage . This display occurs in the absence of obvious aggression and is important for pair formation . For both sexes , a strong odor attracts more individuals , which then do a ruff sniff display . 
 <unk> secretions increase during the breeding season , highlighting its association with courtship and mate selection . The scent may also act as an ectoparasite repellent . This scent is also found in whiskered auklet . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature , crested auklets are of least concern . The global population is estimated to be six million individuals , while the North American population is estimated at 2 @.@ 9 million birds . However , an accurate assessment of the number of birds is difficult , since those on the surface of the colony and in the nearby sea form only a small proportion of the variable and poorly understood population . 
 There is greater concern for the Alaskan population . There has been high predation by rats which have escaped from fishing vessels in the harbor . The auklets ' main predators are gulls , Arctic fox and common ravens . They have also been reported in the stomachs of halibut caught on St. Lawrence Island . Oil spills and collisions with light sources pose additional risks . In Alaska , there is some subsistence hunting of the species . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , Jonathan ; Dunn , Jon L ( 2011 ) Field Guide to the Birds of North America , ( 6th edition ) National Geographic Society . ISBN 0 @-@ 7922 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Harrison , Peter ( 1983 ) Seabirds , an Identification Guide , Houghton Mifflin , ISBN 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 del Hoyo , Josep ( 1996 ) Handbook of the Birds of the World : <unk> to <unk> Vol 3 , Lynx . ISBN 84 @-@ <unk> @-@ 20 @-@ 2 
 Sibley , David Allen ( 2000 ) The Sibley Guide to Birds , National Audubon Society . ISBN 0 @-@ 679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 " Aethia cristatella " . Integrated Taxonomic Information System . 
 = Benjamin Lee Whorf = 
 Benjamin Lee Whorf ( / <unk> / ; April 24 , 1897 – July 26 , 1941 ) was an American linguist and fire prevention engineer . Whorf is widely known as an advocate for the idea that because of linguistic differences in grammar and usage , speakers of different languages conceptualize and experience the world differently . This principle has frequently been called the " Sapir – Whorf hypothesis " , after him and his mentor Edward Sapir , but Whorf called it the principle of linguistic relativity , because he saw the idea as having implications similar to Einstein 's principle of physical relativity . 
 Throughout his life Whorf was a chemical engineer by profession , but as a young man he took up an interest in linguistics . At first this interest drew him to the study of Biblical Hebrew , but he quickly went on to study the indigenous languages of Mesoamerica on his own . Professional scholars were impressed by his work and in 1930 he received a grant to study the Nahuatl language in Mexico ; on his return home he presented several influential papers on the language at linguistics conferences . This led him to begin studying linguistics with Edward Sapir at Yale University while still maintaining his day job at the Hartford Fire Insurance Company . During his time at Yale he worked on the description of the Hopi language , and the historical linguistics of the Uto @-@ Aztecan languages , publishing many influential papers in professional journals . He was chosen as the substitute for Sapir during his medical leave in 1938 . Whorf taught his seminar on " Problems of American Indian Linguistics " . In addition to his well known work on linguistic relativity , he wrote a grammar sketch of Hopi and studies of Nahuatl dialects , proposed a deciphering of Maya hieroglyphic writing , and published the first attempt towards a reconstruction of Uto @-@ Aztecan . 
 After his death from cancer in 1941 his manuscripts were curated by his linguist friends who also worked to spread the influence of Whorf 's ideas on the relation between language , culture and cognition . Many of his works were published posthumously in the first decades after his death . In the 1960s Whorf 's views fell out of favor and he became the subject of harsh criticisms by scholars who considered language structure to primarily reflect cognitive universals rather than cultural differences . Critics argued that Whorf 's ideas were untestable and poorly formulated and that they were based on badly analyzed or misunderstood data . In the late 20th century , interest in Whorf 's ideas experienced a resurgence , and a new generation of scholars began reading Whorf 's works , arguing that previous critiques had only engaged superficially with Whorf 's actual ideas , or had attributed to him ideas he had never expressed . The field of linguistic relativity studies remains an active focus of research in psycholinguistics and linguistic anthropology , and continues to generate debate and controversy between proponents of relativism and proponents of universalism . By comparison Whorf 's other work in linguistics , the development of such concepts as the allophone and the <unk> , and the formulation of " Whorf 's law " in Uto @-@ Aztecan historical linguistics , have met with broad acceptance . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 The son of Harry Church Whorf and Sarah Edna Lee Whorf , Benjamin Lee Whorf was born on April 24 , 1897 in Winthrop , Massachusetts . Harry Church Whorf was an artist , intellectual and designer – first working as a commercial artist and later as a dramatist . Benjamin had two younger brothers , John and Richard , who both went on to become notable artists . John became an internationally renowned painter and illustrator ; Richard was an actor in films such as Yankee Doodle Dandy and later an Emmy @-@ nominated television director of such shows as The Beverly Hillbillies . Benjamin was the intellectual of the three and at a young age he conducted chemical experiments with his father 's photographic equipment . He was also an avid reader , interested in botany , astrology , and Middle American prehistory . He read William H. Prescott 's Conquest of Mexico several times . At the age of 17 he began to keep a copious diary in which he recorded his thoughts and dreams . 
 = = = Career in fire prevention = = = 
 Whorf graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1918 with a degree in chemical engineering where his academic performance was of average quality . In 1920 he married Celia Inez Peckham , who became the mother of his three children , Raymond Ben , Robert Peckham and Celia Lee . Around the same time he began work as a fire prevention engineer ( an inspector ) for the Hartford Fire Insurance Company . He was particularly good at the job and was highly commended by his employers . His job required him to travel to production facilities throughout New England to be inspected . One anecdote describes him arriving at a chemical plant in which he was denied access by the director because he would not allow anyone to see the production procedure which was a trade secret . Having been told what the plant produced , Whorf wrote a chemical formula on a piece of paper , saying to the director : " I think this is what you 're doing " . The surprised director asked Whorf how he knew about the secret procedure , and he simply answered : " You couldn 't do it in any other way . " Whorf helped to attract new customers to the Fire Insurance Company ; they favored his thorough inspections and recommendations . Another famous anecdote from his job was used by Whorf to argue that language use affects habitual behavior . Whorf described a workplace in which full gasoline drums were stored in one room and empty ones in another ; he said that because of flammable vapor the " empty " drums were more dangerous than those that were full , although workers handled them less carefully to the point that they smoked in the room with " empty " drums , but not in the room with full ones . Whorf argued that by habitually speaking of the vapor @-@ filled drums as empty and by extension as inert , the workers were oblivious to the risk posed by smoking near the " empty drums " . 
 = = = Early interest in religion and language = = = 
 Whorf was a spiritual man throughout his lifetime although what religion he followed has been the subject of debate . As a young man he produced a manuscript titled " Why I have discarded evolution " , causing some scholars to describe him as a devout Methodist Episcopalian , who was impressed with fundamentalism , and perhaps supportive of creationism . However , throughout his life Whorf 's main religious interest was theosophy . Theosophy is a nonsectarian organization based on Buddhist and Hindu teachings , and it promotes the view of the world as an interconnected whole and the unity and brotherhood of humankind " without distinction of race , creed , sex , caste or color " . Some scholars have argued that the conflict between spiritual and scientific inclinations have been a driving force in Whorf 's intellectual development , particularly in the attraction by ideas of linguistic relativity . Some of Whorf 's unpublished manuscripts on spirituality also suggest that he was influenced by the ideas of Helena Blavatsky the founder of the Theosophical Society who wrote about cosmic evolution , a belief that regards reincarnation to be the source of evolution of human races towards continuously higher forms . Whorf said that " of all groups of people with whom I have come in contact , Theosophical people seem the most capable of becoming excited about ideas — new ideas . " 
 Around 1924 Whorf first became interested in linguistics . Originally he analyzed Biblical texts , seeking to uncover hidden layers of meaning . Inspired by the esoteric work La langue <unk> <unk> by Antoine Fabre d <unk> , he began a semantic and grammatical analysis of Biblical Hebrew . Whorf 's early manuscripts on Hebrew and Maya have been described as exhibiting a considerable degree of mysticism , as he sought to uncover esoteric meanings of glyphs and letters . 
 = = = Early studies in Mesoamerica linguistics = = = 
 Whorf studied Biblical linguistics mainly at the Watkinson Library ( now Hartford Public Library ) . This library had an extensive collection of materials about Native American linguistics and folklore , originally collected by James Hammond Trumbull . It was at the Watkinson library that Whorf became friends with the young boy , John B. Carroll , who later went on to study psychology under B. F. Skinner , and who in 1956 edited and published a selection of Whorf 's essays as Language , Thought and Reality Carroll ( <unk> ) . The collection rekindled Whorf 's interest in Mesoamerican antiquity . He began studying the Nahuatl language in 1925 , and later , beginning in 1928 , he studied the collections of Maya hieroglyphic texts . Quickly becoming conversant with the materials , he began a scholarly dialog with <unk> such as Alfred Tozzer , the Maya archaeologist at Harvard University , and Herbert J. Spinden of the Brooklyn Museum . 
 In 1928 he first presented a paper at the International Congress of <unk> in which he presented his translation of a Nahuatl document held at the Peabody Museum at Harvard . He also began to study the comparative linguistics of the Uto @-@ Aztecan language family , which Edward Sapir had recently demonstrated to be a linguistic family . In addition to Nahuatl , Whorf studied the <unk> and <unk> languages , while in close correspondence with linguist J. Alden Mason . 
 = = = Field studies in Mexico = = = 
 Because of the promise shown by his work on Uto @-@ Aztecan , Tozzer and Spinden advised Whorf to apply for a grant with the Social Science Research Council ( <unk> ) to support his research . Whorf considered using the money to travel to Mexico to procure Aztec manuscripts for the Watkinson library , but Tozzer suggested he spend the time in Mexico documenting modern Nahuatl dialects . In his application Whorf proposed to establish the <unk> nature of the Nahuatl language . Before leaving Whorf presented the paper " Stem series in Maya " at the Linguistic Society of America conference , in which he argued that in the Mayan languages syllables carry symbolic content . The <unk> awarded Whorf the grant and in 1930 he traveled to Mexico City where Professor Robert H Barlow put him in contact with several speakers of Nahuatl to serve as his informants , among whom were Mariano Rojas of Tepoztlán and Luz Jimenez of Milpa Alta . The outcome of the trip to Mexico was Whorf 's sketch of Milpa Alta Nahuatl , published only after his death , and an article on a series of Aztec pictograms found at the <unk> monument at Tepoztlán , Morelos in which he noted similarities in form and meaning between Aztec and Maya day signs . 
 = = = At Yale = = = 
 Until his return from Mexico in 1930 Whorf had been entirely an autodidact in linguistic theory and field methodology , yet he had already made a name for himself in Middle American linguistics . Whorf had met Sapir , the leading US linguist of the day , at professional conferences , and in 1931 Sapir came to Yale from the University of Chicago to take a position as Professor of Anthropology . Alfred Tozzer sent Sapir a copy of Whorf 's paper on " Nahuatl tones and saltillo " . Sapir replied stating that it " should by all means be published " ; however , it was not until 1993 that it was prepared for publication by Lyle Campbell and Frances Karttunen . 
 Whorf took Sapir 's first course at Yale on " American Indian Linguistics " . He enrolled in a program of graduate studies , nominally working towards a PhD in linguistics , but he never actually attempted to obtain a degree , satisfying himself with participating in the intellectual community around Sapir . At Yale , Whorf joined the circle of Sapir 's students that included such luminary linguists as Morris Swadesh , Mary Haas , Harry Hoijer , G. L. Trager and Charles F. Voegelin . Whorf took on a central role among Sapir 's students and was well respected . 
 Sapir had a profound influence on Whorf 's thinking . Sapir 's earliest writings had espoused views of the relation between thought and language stemming from the Humboldtian tradition he acquired through Franz Boas , which regarded language as the historical embodiment of <unk> , or ethnic world view . But Sapir had since become influenced by a current of logical positivism , such as that of Bertrand Russell and the early Ludwig Wittgenstein , particularly through Ogden and Richards ' The Meaning of Meaning , from which he adopted the view that natural language potentially obscures , rather than facilitates , the mind to perceive and describe the world as it really is . In this view , proper perception could only be accomplished through formal logics . During his stay at Yale , Whorf acquired this current of thought partly from Sapir and partly through his own readings of Russell and Ogden and Richards . As Whorf became more influenced by positivist science he also distanced himself from some approaches to language and meaning that he saw as lacking in rigor and insight . One of these was Polish philosopher Alfred <unk> 's General semantics , which was espoused in the US by Stuart Chase . Chase admired Whorf 's work and frequently sought out a reluctant Whorf , who considered Chase to be " utterly incompetent by training and background to handle such a subject . " Ironically , Chase would later write the foreword for Carroll 's collection of Whorf 's writings . 
 = = = = Work on Hopi and descriptive linguistics = = = = 
 Sapir also encouraged Whorf to continue his work on the historical and descriptive linguistics of Uto @-@ Aztecan . Whorf published several articles on that topic in this period , some of them with G. L. Trager , who had become his close friend . Whorf took a special interest in the Hopi language and started working with Ernest <unk> , a speaker of Hopi from <unk> village living in Manhattan , New York . Whorf credited <unk> as the source of most of his information on the Hopi language , although in 1938 he took a short field trip to the village of <unk> , on the Second Mesa of the Hopi Reservation in Arizona . 
 In 1936 , Whorf was appointed Honorary Research Fellow in Anthropology at Yale , and he was invited by Franz Boas to serve on the committee of the Society of American Linguistics ( later Linguistic Society of America ) . In 1937 , Yale awarded him the Sterling Fellowship . He was a Lecturer in Anthropology from 1937 through 1938 , replacing Sapir , who was gravely ill . Whorf gave graduate level lectures on " Problems of American Indian Linguistics " . In 1938 with Trager 's assistance he elaborated a report on the progress of linguistic research at the department of anthropology at Yale . The report includes some of Whorf 's influential contributions to linguistic theory , such as the concept of the allophone and of covert grammatical categories . Lee ( 1996 ) has argued , that in this report Whorf 's linguistic theories exist in a condensed form , and that it was mainly through this report that Whorf exerted influence on the discipline of descriptive linguistics . 
 = = = = Final years = = = = 
 In late 1938 , Whorf 's own health declined . After an operation for cancer he fell into an unproductive period . He was also deeply influenced by Sapir 's death in early 1939 . It was in the writings of his last two years that he laid out the research program of Linguistic relativity . His 1939 memorial article for Sapir , " The Relation of Habitual Thought And Behavior to Language " , in particular has been taken to be Whorf 's definitive statement of the issue , and is his most frequently quoted piece . 
 In his last year Whorf also published three articles in the MIT Technology Review titled " Science and Linguistics " , " Linguistics as an Exact Science " and " Language and Logic " . He was also invited to contribute an article to a theosophical journal , Theosophist , published in Madras , India , for which he wrote " Language , Mind and Reality " . In these final pieces he offered a critique of Western science in which he suggested that non @-@ European languages often referred to physical phenomena in ways that more directly reflected aspects of reality than many European languages , and that science ought to pay attention to the effects of linguistic categorization in its efforts to describe the physical world . He particularly criticized the Indo @-@ European languages for promoting a mistaken essentialist world view , which had been disproved by advances in the sciences , whereas he suggested that other languages dedicated more attention to processes and dynamics rather than stable essences . Whorf argued that paying attention to how other physical phenomena are described in the study of linguistics could make valuable contributions to science by pointing out the ways in which certain assumptions about reality are implicit in the structure of language itself , and how language guides the attention of speakers towards certain phenomena in the world which risk becoming overemphasized while leaving other phenomena at risk of being overlooked . 
 = = = Posthumous reception and legacy = = = 
 At Whorf 's death his friend G. L. Trager was appointed as curator of his unpublished manuscripts . Some of them were published in the years after his death by another of Whorf 's friends , Harry Hoijer . In the decade following , Trager and particularly Hoijer did much to popularize Whorf 's ideas about linguistic relativity , and it was Hoijer who coined the term " Sapir @-@ Whorf hypothesis " at a 1954 conference . Trager then published an article titled " The systematization of the Whorf hypothesis " , which contributed to the idea that Whorf had proposed a hypothesis that should be the basis for a program of empirical research . Hoijer also published studies of Indigenous languages and cultures of the American South West in which Whorf found correspondences between cultural patterns and linguistic ones . The term , even though technically a misnomer , went on to become the most widely known label for Whorf 's ideas . According to John A. Lucy " Whorf 's work in linguistics was and still is recognized as being of superb professional quality by linguists " . 
 = = = = Universalism and anti @-@ Whorfianism = = = = 
 Whorf 's work began to fall out of favor less than a decade after his death , and he was subjected to severe criticism from scholars of language , culture and psychology . In 1953 and 1954 psychologists Roger Brown and Eric Lenneberg criticized Whorf for his reliance on anecdotal evidence , formulating a hypothesis to scientifically test his ideas , which they limited to an examination of a causal relation between grammatical or lexical structure and cognition or perception . Whorf himself did not advocate a straight causality between language and thought ; instead he wrote that " Language and culture had grown up together " ; that both were mutually shaped by the other . Hence , Lucy ( <unk> ) has argued that because the aim of the formulation of the Sapir @-@ Whorf hypothesis was to test simple causation , from the outset it failed to test Whorf 's ideas . 
 Focusing on color terminology , with easily discernible differences between perception and vocabulary , Brown and Lenneberg published in 1954 a study of Zuni color terms that slightly support a weak effect of semantic categorization of color terms on color perception . In doing so they began a line of empirical studies that investigated the principle of linguistic relativity . 
 Empirical testing of the <unk> hypothesis declined in the 1960s to 1980s as Noam Chomsky began to redefine linguistics and much of psychology in formal universalist terms . Several studies from that period refuted Whorf 's hypothesis , demonstrating that linguistic diversity is a surface veneer that masks underlying universal cognitive principles . Many studies were highly critical and disparaging in their language , ridiculing Whorf 's analyses and examples or his lack of an academic degree . Throughout the 1980s most mentions of Whorf or of the Sapir @-@ Whorf hypotheses continued to be disparaging , and led to a widespread view that Whorf 's ideas had been proven wrong . Because Whorf was treated so severely in the scholarship during those decades , he has been described as " one of the prime whipping boys of introductory texts to linguistics " . In the late 1980s , with the advent of cognitive linguistics and psycholinguistics some linguists sought to rehabilitate Whorf 's reputation , as scholarship began to question whether earlier critiques of Whorf were justified . 
 By the 1960s analytical philosophers also became aware of the Sapir @-@ Whorf hypothesis , and philosophers such as Max Black and Donald Davidson published scathing critiques of Whorf 's strong relativist viewpoints . Black characterized Whorf 's ideas about metaphysics as demonstrating " amateurish crudity " . According to Black and Davidson , Whorf 's viewpoint and the concept of linguistic relativity meant that translation between languages with different conceptual schemes would be impossible . Recent assessments such as those by Leavitt and Lee , however , consider Black and Davidson 's interpretation to be based on an inaccurate characterization of Whorf 's viewpoint , and even rather absurd given the time he spent trying to translate between different conceptual schemes . In their view the critiques are based on a lack of familiarity with Whorf 's writings ; according to these recent Whorf scholars a more accurate description of his viewpoint is that he thought translation to be possible , but only through careful attention to the subtle differences between conceptual schemes . 
 Eric Lenneberg , Noam Chomsky , and Steven Pinker have also criticized Whorf for failing to be sufficiently clear in his formulation of how language influences thought , and for failing to provide real evidence to support his assumptions . Generally Whorf 's arguments took the form of examples that were anecdotal or speculative , and functioned as attempts to show how " exotic " grammatical traits were connected to what were considered equally exotic worlds of thought . Even Whorf 's defenders admitted that his writing style was often convoluted and couched in neologisms – attributed to his awareness of language use , and his reluctance to use terminology that might have pre @-@ existing connotations . McWhorter ( 2009 : 156 ) argues that Whorf was mesmerized by the foreignness of indigenous languages , and exaggerated and idealized them . According to Lakoff , Whorf 's tendency to <unk> data must be judged in the historical context : Whorf and the other <unk> wrote at a time in which racism and jingoism were predominant , and when it was unthinkable to many that " savages " had redeeming qualities , or that their languages were comparable in complexity to those of Europe . For this alone Lakoff argues , Whorf can be considered to be " Not just a pioneer in linguistics , but a pioneer as a human being " . 
 Today many followers of universalist schools of thought continue to oppose the idea of linguistic relativity , seeing it as unsound or even ridiculous . For example , Steven Pinker argues in his book The Language Instinct that thought exists prior to language and independently of it , a view also espoused by philosophers of language such as Jerry Fodor , John Locke and Plato . In this interpretation , language is inconsequential to human thought because humans do not think in " natural " language , i.e. any language used for communication . Rather , we think in a meta @-@ language that precedes natural language , which Pinker following Fodor calls " <unk> . " Pinker attacks what he calls " Whorf 's radical position " , declaring , " the more you examine Whorf 's arguments , the less sense they make . " Scholars of a more " relativist " bent such as John A. Lucy and Stephen C. Levinson have criticized Pinker for misrepresenting Whorf 's views and arguing against <unk> . 
 = = = = Resurgence of Whorfianism = = = = 
 Linguistic relativity studies have experienced a resurgence since the 1990s , and a series of favorable experimental results have brought Whorfianism back into favor , especially in cultural psychology and linguistic anthropology . The first study directing positive attention towards Whorf 's relativist position was George Lakoff 's " Women , Fire and Dangerous Things " , in which he argued that Whorf had been on the right track in his focus on differences in grammatical and lexical categories as a source of differences in conceptualization . In 1992 psychologist John A. Lucy published two books on the topic , one analyzing the intellectual genealogy of the hypothesis , arguing that previous studies had failed to appreciate the subtleties of Whorf 's thinking ; they had been unable to formulate a research agenda that would actually test Whorf 's claims . Lucy proposed a new research design so that the hypothesis of linguistic relativity could be tested empirically , and to avoid the pitfalls of earlier studies which Lucy claimed had tended to presuppose the universality of the categories they were studying . His second book was an empirical study of the relation between grammatical categories and cognition in the Yucatec Maya language of Mexico . 
 In 1996 Penny Lee 's reappraisal of Whorf 's writings was published , reinstating Whorf as a serious and capable thinker . Lee argued that previous explorations of the Sapir @-@ Whorf hypothesis had largely ignored Whorf 's actual writings , and consequently asked questions very unlike those Whorf had asked . Also in that year a volume , " Rethinking Linguistic Relativity " edited by John J. <unk> and Stephen C. Levinson gathered a range of researchers working in psycholinguistics , sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology to bring renewed attention to the issue of how Whorf 's theories could be updated , and a subsequent review of the new direction of the linguistic relativity paradigm cemented the development . Since then considerable empirical research into linguistic relativity has been carried out , especially at the Max Planck Institute for <unk> with scholarship motivating two edited volumes of linguistic relativity studies , and in American Institutions by scholars such as <unk> <unk> and <unk> Gentner . 
 In turn universalist scholars frequently dismiss as " dull " or " boring " , positive findings of influence of linguistic categories on thought or behavior , which are often subtle rather than spectacular , suggesting that Whorf 's excitement about linguistic relativity had promised more spectacular findings than it was able to provide . 
 Whorf 's views have been compared to those of philosophers such as Friedrich Nietzsche and the late Ludwig Wittgenstein , both of whom considered language to have important bearing on thought and reasoning . His hypotheses have also been compared to the views of psychologists such as Lev <unk> , whose social constructivism considers the cognitive development of children to be mediated by the social use of language . <unk> shared Whorf 's interest in gestalt psychology , and he also read Sapir 's works . Others have seen similarities between Whorf 's work and the ideas of literary theorist Mikhail <unk> , who read Whorf and whose approach to textual meaning was similarly holistic and relativistic . Whorf 's ideas have also been interpreted as a radical critique of positivist science . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Linguistic relativity = = = 
 Whorf is best known as the main proponent of what he called the principle of linguistic relativity , but which is often known as " the Sapir @-@ Whorf hypothesis " , named for him and Edward Sapir . Whorf never stated the principle in the form of a hypothesis , and the idea that linguistic categories influence perception and cognition was shared by many other scholars before him . But because Whorf , in his articles , gave specific examples of how he saw the grammatical categories of specific languages related to conceptual and behavioral patterns , he pointed towards an empirical research program that has been taken up by subsequent scholars , and which is often called " Sapir @-@ Whorf studies " . 
 = = = = Degree of influence of language on thought = = = = 
 If read superficially , some of Whorf 's statements lend themselves to the interpretation that he supported linguistic determinism . For example , in an often @-@ quoted passage Whorf writes : 
 We dissect nature along lines laid down by our native language . The categories and types that we isolate from the world of phenomena we do not find there because they stare every observer in the face ; on the contrary , the world is presented in a kaleidoscope flux of impressions which has to be organized by our minds — and this means largely by the linguistic systems of our minds . We cut nature up , organize it into concepts , and ascribe <unk> as we do , largely because we are parties to an agreement to organize it in this way — an agreement that holds throughout our speech community and is codified in the patterns of our language . The agreement is of course , an implicit and unstated one , but its terms are absolutely obligatory ; we cannot talk at all except by subscribing to the organization and classification of data that the agreement decrees . We are thus introduced to a new principle of relativity , which holds that all observers are not led by the same physical evidence to the same picture of the universe , unless their linguistic backgrounds are similar , or can in some way be calibrated . 
 The statements about the obligatory nature of the terms of language have been taken to suggest that Whorf meant that language completely determined the scope of possible conceptualizations . However neo @-@ <unk> argue that here Whorf is writing about the terms in which we speak of the world , not the terms in which we think of it . Whorf noted that to communicate thoughts and experiences with members of a speech community speakers must use the linguistic categories of their shared language , which requires moulding experiences into the shape of language to speak them — a process called " thinking for speaking " . This interpretation is supported by Whorf 's subsequent statement that " No individual is free to describe nature with absolute impartiality , but is constrained by certain modes of interpretation even when he thinks himself most free " . Similarly the statement that observers are led to different pictures of the universe has been understood as an argument that different conceptualizations are incommensurable making translation between different conceptual and linguistic systems impossible . Neo @-@ <unk> argue this to be is a misreading since throughout his work one of his main points was that such systems could be " calibrated " and thereby be made <unk> , but only when we become aware of the differences in conceptual schemes through linguistic analysis . 
 = = = = Hopi time = = = = 
 Whorf 's study of Hopi time has been the most widely discussed and criticized example of linguistic relativity . In his analysis he argues that there is a relation between how the Hopi people conceptualize time , how they speak of temporal relations , and the grammar of the Hopi language . Whorf 's most elaborate argument for the existence of linguistic relativity was based on what he saw as a fundamental difference in the understanding of time as a conceptual category among the Hopi . He argued that the Hopi language , in contrast to English and other SAE languages , does not treat the flow of time as a sequence of distinct countable instances , like " three days " or " five years " , but rather as a single process . Because of this difference , the language lacks nouns that refer to units of time . He proposed that the Hopi view of time was fundamental in all aspects of their culture and furthermore explained certain patterns of behavior . In his 1939 memorial essay to Sapir he wrote that “ ... the Hopi language is seen to contain no words , grammatical forms , construction or expressions that refer directly to what we call ' time ' , or to past , present , or future ... ” 
 Linguist <unk> Malotki challenged Whorf 's analyses of Hopi temporal expressions and concepts with numerous examples how the Hopi language refers to time . Malotki argues that in the Hopi language the system of tenses consists of future and non @-@ future and that the single difference between the three @-@ tense system of European languages and the Hopi system , is that the latter combines past and present to form a single category . 
 Malotki 's critique was widely cited as the final piece of evidence in refuting Whorf 's ideas and his concept of linguistic relativity while other scholars defended the analysis of Hopi , arguing that Whorf 's claim was not that Hopi lacked words or categories to describe temporality , but that the Hopi concept of time is altogether different from that of English speakers . Whorf described the Hopi categories of tense , noting that time is not divided into past , present and future , as is common in European languages , but rather a single tense refers to both present and past while another refers to events that have not yet happened and may or may not happen in the future . He also described a large array of stems that he called " tensors " which describes aspects of temporality , but without referring to countable units of time as in English and most European languages . 
 = = = Contributions to linguistic theory = = = 
 Whorf 's distinction between " overt " ( phenotypical ) and " covert " ( <unk> ) grammatical categories has become widely influential in linguistics and anthropology . British linguist Michael Halliday wrote about Whorf 's notion of the " <unk> " , and the conception of " how grammar models reality " , that it would " eventually turn out to be among the major contributions of twentieth century linguistics " . 
 Furthermore , Whorf introduced the concept of the allophone , a word that describes positional phonetic variants of a single <unk> phoneme ; in doing so he placed a cornerstone in consolidating early phoneme theory . The term was popularized by G. L. Trager and Bernard Bloch in a 1941 paper on English phonology and went on to become part of standard usage within the American structuralist tradition . Whorf considered allophones to be another example of linguistic relativity . The principle of allophony describes how acoustically different sounds can be treated as reflections of a single phoneme in a language . This sometimes makes the different sound appear similar to native speakers of the language , even to the point that they are unable to distinguish them auditorily without special training . Whorf wrote that : " [ allophones ] are also relativistic . Objectively , acoustically , and physiologically the allophones of [ a ] phoneme may be extremely unlike , hence the impossibility of determining what is what . You always have to keep the observer in the picture . What linguistic pattern makes like is like , and what it makes unlike is unlike " . ( Whorf , 1940 ) 
 Central to Whorf 's inquiries was the approach later described as <unk> by G. L. Trager , who in 1950 published four of Whorf 's essays as " Four articles on <unk> " . Whorf was crucially interested in the ways in which speakers come to be aware of the language that they use , and become able to describe and analyze language using language itself to do so . Whorf saw that the ability to arrive at progressively more accurate descriptions of the world hinged partly on the ability to construct a <unk> to describe how language affects experience , and thus to have the ability to calibrate different conceptual schemes . Whorf 's endeavors have since been taken up in the development of the study of <unk> and <unk> awareness , first by Michael Silverstein who published a radical and influential rereading of Whorf in 1979 and subsequently in the field of linguistic anthropology . 
 = = = Studies of Uto @-@ Aztecan languages = = = 
 Whorf conducted important work on the Uto @-@ Aztecan languages , which Sapir had conclusively demonstrated as a valid language family in 1915 . Working first on Nahuatl , <unk> , Tohono O 'odham he established familiarity with the language group before he met Sapir in 1928 . During Whorf 's time at Yale he published several articles on Uto @-@ Aztecan linguistics , such as " Notes on the <unk> language " . In 1935 he published " The Comparative Linguistics of Uto @-@ Aztecan " , and a review of Kroeber 's survey of Uto @-@ Aztecan linguistics . Whorf 's work served to further cement the foundations of the comparative Uto @-@ Aztecan studies . 
 The first Native American language Whorf studied was the Uto @-@ Aztecan language Nahuatl which he studied first from colonial grammars and documents , and later became the subject of his first field work experience in 1930 . Based on his studies of Classical Nahuatl Whorf argued that Nahuatl was an <unk> language , a typological category that he invented . In Mexico working with native speakers , he studied the dialects of Milpa Alta and Tepoztlán . His grammar sketch of the Milpa Alta dialect of Nahuatl was not published during his lifetime , but it was published posthumously by Harry Hoijer and became quite influential and used as the basic description of " Modern Nahuatl " by many scholars . The description of the dialect is quite condensed and in some places difficult to understand because of Whorf 's propensity of inventing his own unique terminology for grammatical concepts , but the work has generally been considered to be technically advanced . He also produced an analysis of the prosody of these dialects which he related to the history of the glottal stop and vowel length in Nahuan languages . This work was prepared for publication by Lyle Campbell and Frances Karttunen in 1993 , who also considered it a valuable description of the two endangered dialects , and the only one of its kind to include detailed phonetic analysis of supra @-@ segmental phenomena . 
 In Uto @-@ Aztecan linguistics one of Whorf 's achievements was to determine the reason the Nahuatl language has the phoneme / tɬ / , not found in the other languages of the family . The existence of / tɬ / in Nahuatl had puzzled previous linguists and caused Sapir to reconstruct a / tɬ / phoneme for proto @-@ Uto @-@ Aztecan based only on evidence from Aztecan . In a 1937 paper published in the journal American Anthropologist , Whorf argued that the phoneme resulted from some of the Nahuan or Aztecan languages having undergone a sound change from the original * / t / to [ tɬ ] in the position before * / a / . This sound law is known as " Whorf 's law " , considered valid although a more detailed understanding of the precise conditions under which it took place has since been developed . 
 Also in 1937 , Whorf and his friend G. L. Trager , published a paper in which they elaborated on the <unk> @-@ <unk> language family , proposed originally by Sapir as a family comprising the Uto @-@ Aztecan and the Kiowa @-@ <unk> languages — ( the <unk> and Kiowa languages ) . 
 = = = Maya epigraphy = = = 
 In a series of published and unpublished studies in the 1930s , Whorf argued that Mayan writing was to some extent phonetic . While his work on deciphering the Maya script gained some support from Alfred Tozzer at Harvard , the main authority on Ancient Maya culture , <unk> Thompson , strongly rejected Whorf 's ideas , saying that Mayan writing lacked a phonetic component and is therefore impossible to decipher based on a linguistic analysis . Whorf argued that it was exactly the reluctance to apply linguistic analysis of Maya languages that had held the decipherment back . Whorf sought for cues to phonetic values within the elements of the specific signs , and never realized that the system was logo @-@ syllabic . Although Whorf 's approach to understanding the Maya script is now known to have been misguided , his central claim that the script was phonetic and should be deciphered as such was vindicated by Yuri Knorozov 's syllabic decipherment of Mayan writing in the 1950s . 
 = The Day the World Gets ' Round = 
 " The Day the World Gets ' Round " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1973 album Living in the Material World . Harrison was inspired to write the song following the successful Concert for Bangladesh shows , which were held in New York on 1 August 1971 as a benefit for refugees from the country formerly known as East Pakistan . The lyrics reflect his disappointment that such a humanitarian aid project was necessary , given the abundance of resources available across the planet , and his belief that if all individuals were more spiritually aware , there would be no suffering in the world . Adding to Harrison 's frustration while writing the song , the aid project became embroiled in financial problems , as commercial concerns delayed the release of the Concert for Bangladesh album , and government tax departments failed to embrace the goodwill inherent in the venture . 
 Harrison recorded " The Day the World Gets ' Round " in England between October 1972 and March 1973 . The recording features an orchestral arrangement by John Barham and a similarly well @-@ regarded vocal performance from Harrison . The other contributing musicians were Nicky Hopkins , Klaus Voormann , Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner . Reviewers have described the composition variously as a protest song , a devotional prayer , and a counterpart to John Lennon 's peace anthem " Imagine " . 
 As with all the new songs released on Living in the Material World , Harrison donated his publishing royalties from the track to the Material World Charitable Foundation , an organisation he set up to avoid the tax problems that had befallen his Bangladesh relief effort . The song typifies Harrison 's ideal for a world unencumbered by national , religious or cultural delineation . In 2009 , Voormann and Yusuf Islam covered " The Day the World Gets ' Round " and released it as a single to benefit children in war @-@ torn Gaza . 
 = = Background = = 
 In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , George Harrison describes the period following the two Concert for Bangladesh shows as " very emotional " . The concerts took place at Madison Square Garden , New York , on 1 August 1971 , as the first part of his fundraising program for the 8 – 10 million refugees of the Bangladesh Liberation War . The generosity of all the participants , together with the response from the general public , encouraged Harrison to feel " very positive about certain things " . At the same time , the fact that it had fallen to musicians such as himself and concert instigator Ravi Shankar to address the issue left Harrison " slightly enraged " , given the wealth of resources available to governments around the globe . Author Gary Tillery writes that , through his humanitarian gesture , Harrison had " changed the perception " of rock musicians , " making it clear they could be good world citizens too " , while music critic Mikal Gilmore has noted of Harrison 's " cautious yet optimistic and tender " worldview : " [ it ] stood in stark contrast to the ugly dissolution of the Beatles and the defeated idealism that then characterised so much of rock & roll culture . " The day after the Madison Square Garden concerts , Harrison began writing the song " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , having stayed in New York to work with producer Phil Spector on the proposed live album of the event . 
 = = = The Concert for Bangladesh album release = = = 
 Harrison found frustration in this next phase of the Bangladesh project , as the various record companies associated with the concerts ' performers attempted to profit from the forthcoming release . Chief among these was the Beatles ' US distributor , Capitol Records , who delayed issuing the album in the hope of negotiating a royalty rate to cover what they perceived as high distribution costs for the boxed three @-@ record set . Harrison was resolute that Capitol should absorb the costs , just as the Beatles ' Apple record label had already paid for the album 's lavish packaging and full @-@ colour booklet . All those involved with the concerts and post @-@ production on the live album had given their services for free , in keeping with Harrison 's hope that , in Tillery 's words : " Every penny of income – from the gate receipts to the profits from an album and a film – would go toward alleviating the suffering . " 
 By early October 1971 , bootleg recordings of the concerts were available in New York , potentially denying funds to the refugees . On 23 November , Harrison 's exasperation with the situation saw him raging against Capitol president Bhaskar Menon during a late @-@ night television interview with Dick Cavett , and threatening to take the album to a rival label . Menon then backed down , ceding much of the distribution rights to Columbia / CBS , whose artist Bob Dylan had made a successful comeback at the Concert for Bangladesh . Further delaying the release until well into December , wholesalers objected to Apple 's financial terms , which ensured that wholesalers and retailers could make little profit on each copy shipped . Ignoring the spirit behind the release , author Peter Lavezzoli writes , some US retailers " engaged in shameless price gouging " . 
 = = = Legal and taxation issues = = = 
 Of greater detriment to the project in the long term , Harrison 's business manager , Allen Klein , had neglected to register the concerts as UNICEF fundraising benefits before they had taken place . As a result , the American and British tax departments were demanding a share of the proceeds from the live album and Saul Swimmer 's concert film , ignoring Harrison 's appeals that an exception be made in the case of this humanitarian disaster . Until India 's defeat of Pakistan on 16 December , America continued to supply arms and financial aid to the Pakistani army , led by General Yahya Khan , despite reports of genocide being committed against the Bangladeshis . In reply to a New Yorker 's offer to start a petition to make the US Treasury scrap its tax on the Concert for Bangladesh album , Harrison wrote : " Until the [ politicians ] become human , we must do our service to others without their help . " 
 Although Rolling Stone and other countercultural publications lauded the Bangladesh concerts as proof that " the Utopian spirit of the Sixties was still flickering " , in the words of author Nicholas Schaffner , Harrison addressed , in " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , the corporate greed and governmental apathy he had encountered . While staging the concerts Harrison had made a point of distancing himself from the politics behind the war in what was formerly known as East Pakistan , and he similarly advocated peace activist Swami <unk> 's proposal for Planet Earth passports – whereby " [ one truth ] underlies all nations , all cultures , all colours , all races , all religions " . Referring to the song and the moral responsibility of wealthy Western nations , he says in I , Me , Mine : " If everyone would wake @-@ up and do even a little , there could be no misery in the world . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Author Robert Rodriguez describes " The Day the World Gets ' Round " as both " an expression of gratitude to all the good hearts that had contributed to the success [ of the Bangladesh benefits ] " , and a " stinging indictment " of governments who had the power to help but instead " turned their backs when it suited their ends to do so " . Harrison musical biographer Simon Leng notes also Harrison 's dismay at how the 1960s countercultural revolution had failed to influence the motivations of the music business – to the extent that the altruism behind the Concert for Bangladesh " was almost torpedoed by boardroom balance sheets " . 
 A slow @-@ paced ballad , the song 's opening verse reflects Harrison 's optimism and idealism , on the one hand : 
 The day the world gets ' round 
 To understanding where it is 
 Using all it 's found 
 To help each other , hand in hand . 
 His frustration is evident from verse two , where , in what Leng terms a " knee @-@ jerk reaction " to the politics behind the Bangladesh crisis , Harrison sings of a world " Losing so much ground / Killing each other , hand in hand " . 
 In the song 's middle eight , Leng suggests , Harrison identifies the absence of humility as the root of humankind 's problems , and concludes : 
 I look for the pure of heart 
 And the ones who have made a start 
 But Lord , there are just a few 
 Who bow before you ... 
 These lines have led to conflicting interpretations among Harrison biographers regarding a supposedly superior attitude on the singer 's part . Ian Inglis writes of " an increasingly familiar elitism in his apparent perception of himself " , adding : " When [ Harrison ] sings of ' the pure of heart ' and tells the Lord that ' there are just a few who bow before you , ' the implied conclusion is that he counts himself among their number . " While acknowledging the ambiguity of this message , Leng writes : " This could be taken as Harrison 's statement of his own spiritual superiority , or it might be his metaphor for a rejection of conceit . If ego @-@ driven politicians and self @-@ serving military leaders were able to bow before anything , even a ' concept ' like God , the world would be a better place . ' The Day the World Gets ' Round ' laments human nature and calls for a little humility . " 
 Dale Allison , a Christian theologian , views these lyrics as a song @-@ wide message where Harrison " mourns how few are working for a better world and paying homage to God " . Allison refutes the idea of any elitism or superiority in Harrison 's compositions , suggesting : " George nowhere claims to have arrived [ at his spiritual goal ] ; he is rather always a pilgrim , always on the road . In the words of ' The Day the World Gets ' Round , ' he is one of those who has ' made a start , ' nothing more . " 
 The same three biographers comment on the comparisons between Harrison and Dylan that were encouraged by this and other Harrison songs from 1971 – 73 , during a period when , author Peter Doggett writes , the ex @-@ Beatle was " arguably music 's most influential figure " . Leng views Harrison 's call for humility in " The Day the World Gets ' Round " as " identical to the thrust " of Dylan 's " Masters of War " , a protest song written about the 1962 – 63 Cold War arms race . Inglis suggests that whereas Dylan adopts the more analytical approach of an observer in his politically themed songs , Harrison " appears as a campaigner who is there to convert " ; his words duly carry " a suggestion of self @-@ satisfaction " , Inglis opines , while also remarking on the " overall pessimism " of " The Day the World Gets ' Round " . Allison contrasts the song with " Slow Train Coming " , a lyrically uncompromising Dylan composition reflecting the American singer 's late @-@ 1970s conversion to born @-@ again Christianity , and cites " The Day the World Gets ' Round " as an example of how Harrison 's worldview instead " entails a happy ending " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Speaking in February 1977 , Harrison told BBC Radio 's Anne Nightingale that the Bangladesh relief project took " two years solid " of his life . Doggett describes 1972 as a year of " recuperation and retreat " for the ex @-@ Beatle , interspersed with meetings " to determine which department of which government was now stalling the funds so desperately needed in the newly independent nation " . Harrison received UNICEF 's " Child Is the Father of Man " award in New York on 5 June 1972 and then oversaw the delayed British release of the Concert for Bangladesh film on 27 July , after which he was able to dedicate himself to working on the long @-@ awaited follow @-@ up to his 1970 triple album , All Things Must Pass . 
 Sessions for Living in the Material World took place at Apple Studio in central London and at Harrison 's Friar Park studio , FPSHOT , beginning in October 1972 . Despite his original intention to co @-@ produce with Phil Spector as before , Harrison was sole producer throughout the sessions , with Phil McDonald again serving as recording engineer . While Harrison succeeded in paring down the album 's production after the Wall of Sound excesses of All Things Must Pass , commentators note that he incorporated aspects of Spector 's signature style on this and other songs on Material World , through the use of orchestral strings and brass , a choir and multiple drummers . 
 On the basic track for " The Day the World Gets ' Round " , Harrison used the same rhythm section that had supported him at the Concert for Bangladesh – bassist Klaus Voormann and drummers Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner – along with keyboard players Nicky Hopkins and Gary Wright . The latter 's contribution , on harmonium , is prominent on the take available unofficially on Living in the Alternate World , a bootleg compilation containing pre @-@ overdubbed versions of the officially released songs , but was subsequently superseded by John Barham 's orchestral arrangements . 
 As an example of a more subtle production aesthetic compared with Spector 's , Harrison " gave the tunes breathing space , allowing the instruments to sparkle " , Rodriguez writes . His chiming acoustic @-@ guitar harmonics sound out alone during the occasions when the words " The day the world gets ' round " are sung . Inglis describes Barham 's string arrangement on the recording as " almost identical " to that on John Lennon 's Beatles composition " Across the Universe " , and other reviewers have similarly likened " The Day the World Gets ' Round " to that song , and to the All Thing Must Pass tracks " Isn 't It a Pity " and " Beware of Darkness " . Along with Harrison 's vocal parts , the overdubs for Barham 's contributions took place in London during the first two months of 1973 . Mixing on the album was completed by the start of March , shortly before the Concert for Bangladesh won the Grammy Award for best album of 1972 . 
 = = Material World Charitable Foundation = = 
 On 26 April 1973 , Harrison set up the Material World Charitable Foundation , to which he donated the publishing royalties from " The Day the World Gets ' Round " and eight other songs on Living in the Material World . Part of the foundation 's mission was to " encourage the exploration of alternative life views and philosophies " and " [ support ] established charitable organizations with consideration to those with special needs " – so allowing Harrison to donate money without encountering the problems that had hampered the Bangladesh aid project . In his 2009 book You Never Give Me Your Money , Doggett writes that the foundation " continues to fund worthy causes to this day " . 
 The first event sponsored by the Material World Charitable Foundation was Ravi Shankar 's Music Festival from India , in September – October 1974 , following which Harrison and Shankar toured North America together . During their stopover in Washington , DC , Harrison used his audience with US president Gerald Ford to ask for presidential intercession into the ongoing IRS audit that was still holding the Bangladesh fund 's US proceeds in escrow . 
 = = Release = = 
 Apple Records released Living in the Material World in late May 1973 , with " The Day the World Gets ' Round " appearing as the penultimate track . Reflecting the album content , Tom Wilkes 's design for the LP 's face labels contrasted a devout spiritual existence with life in the material world , by featuring a painting of the Hindu god Krishna and his warrior prince Arjuna on side one , and a picture of a Mercedes stretch limousine on the reverse . The latter image was a detail taken from Ken Marcus 's inner gatefold photograph , which depicted Harrison and his fellow musicians at a Last Supper @-@ style banquet . The album was a commercial success , topping America 's Billboard 200 chart for five weeks , thus ensuring the Material World Charitable Foundation a considerable injection of funds . 
 The release reflected Harrison 's continued belief in the power of music to instigate change in the world , an ideal that distinguished Material World as the last of " rock 's grand statements " , Leng suggests , and " the final fading of the 1960s dream into middle @-@ age contentment and fiscal luxury " . Author and former Mojo editor Mat Snow writes of the timing of the album 's US release : " he caught a public mood that craved an echo of 1960s idealism as America was gripped by the cynicism revealed in the Watergate hearings . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a highly favourable review in Rolling Stone magazine , Stephen Holden described Living in the Material World as " <unk> , opulently , romantic " and referred to " The Day the World Gets ' Round " as a " devotional prayer " that , combined with the album @-@ closing " That Is All " , left the listener " suspended in ethereality " . Decades later , Bruce Eder of AllMusic was likewise impressed , writing that Harrison 's singing " soars magnificently in his heartfelt performance " . 
 While Holden admired Harrison 's lyrics for imparting " an extraordinary sincerity that transcends questions of craftsmanship " , other reviewers bristled at the apparent preachiness in songs such as " The Day the World Gets ' Round " . Peter Doggett has commented on the impression left among music critics : " the prevailing tone of the record was moral disapproval , never an attractive quality in a popular singer . " 
 In his 1996 biography on the ex @-@ Beatle , Alan Clayson praised Harrison 's vocal performance on a song that , although " naive " , " smouldered from the angered question of why a mere pop star rather than a governing body was obliged to pinpoint iniquities " , Clayson adding that " never had his pipes been so adept " as on Material World . To Greg Kot , writing in Rolling Stone 's posthumous tribute to Harrison , " The Day the World Gets ' Round " and the ballad " Who Can See It " " aspire to a <unk> calm but never rise to the transcendent heights of [ All Things Must Pass ] " . Writing for Blogcritics , Seattle @-@ based music critic Chaz Lipp views the production on Material World as " meticulous " and superior to its predecessor , such that " [ t ] he delicate melodies of songs like ' The Day the World Gets ' Round ' and ' Be Hear Now ' are never lost in bombast . " In his review of the 2006 @-@ remastered album , for Mojo magazine , Mat Snow wrote of " this long overdue reissue " being " worth it alone for four wonderful songs " , one of which was " The Day the World Gets ' Round " . More recently , Snow has praised the song for its " deep and delicious emotion " and comments that through the idealism Harrison expressed on Living in the Material World , he was " without qualification , perhaps more loved and respected as a human being " . 
 In Simon Leng 's opinion , the track is " a classic 1960s protest song " – Harrison 's reaction to the failure of that decade 's social revolution to create any meaningful change . While comparing the song to Dylan 's " epoch @-@ making ' Masters of War ' " , Leng notes that the " political essence " of " The Day the World Gets ' Round " is often overlooked due to the lyrics ' " framework of spiritual redemption " . Dale Allison similarly labels it " a passionate protest song of deep disillusionment " , reflecting " the broken utopian dreams of the 1960s " . Allison groups " The Day the World Gets ' Round " with " Bangla Desh " and " Far East Man " as obvious examples of Harrison 's " humanitarian impulse , his concern for the world and its people " . 
 Elliot Huntley views the song as a " strong candidate " for the album 's best track , thanks to its " stunning structure and melody twists " . Barham 's orchestration complements the message " perfectly " , according to Huntley , who praises also the middle eight , where Harrison " lets rip with his vocals " . Less impressed with the composition , Ian Inglis acknowledges the importance of Barham 's contribution – the ascending string arrangement being " the most startling facet " of the song musically . Robert Rodriguez describes the track as an " earnest counterpart " to Lennon 's song " Imagine " . 
 = = Yusuf & Klaus 's version = = 
 An avowed fan of the Material World album , and a vocal supporter of Harrison 's humanitarian legacy , Klaus Voormann had established himself as an in @-@ demand session musician during the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s before recording his first solo album in 2008 . Titled A Sideman 's Journey , it included cover versions of Harrison 's " The Day the World Gets ' Round " and " All Things Must Pass " , both recorded in London with singer Yusuf Islam and credited to Yusuf & Klaus . Islam said that he came across the song while looking through albums by Harrison , whom he described as being " more responsible than any other artist for initiating Pop music 's movement to aid people and countries stricken by wars and calamities " . Besides Voormann and Islam , the musicians on the recording include Luke Potashnick and Cassiano De Sa ( guitars ) , Nikolaj Torp ( keyboards ) and Kristoffer <unk> ( drums ) . 
 In January 2009 , Voormann issued " The Day the World Gets ' Round " as an advance single from the album . Proceeds from the single were donated to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency ( UNRWA ) and Save the Children , to alleviate the suffering in war @-@ torn Gaza . To serve as artwork for the release , Voormann incorporated part of his Grammy Award @-@ winning design for the Beatles ' Revolver album ( 1966 ) , combining the image of Harrison from that album cover with a similar @-@ styled drawing of Islam and a 1966 @-@ era photo of himself . 
 In a press release to announce the single , Yusuf Islam wrote of " The Day the World Gets ' Round " : " This song represents for me the great spirit of George Harrison . I hope this song will help remind people of the immense legacy of love , peace and happiness we can share when we get round to looking at mankind 's futile wars and prejudices , and start to change our foolish ways . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals , 12 @-@ string acoustic guitars , backing vocals 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Ringo Starr – drums 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 John Barham – string and brass arrangements , choral arrangement 
 = World of Stone = 
 " World of Stone " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released in 1975 on Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) , his final album for Apple Records . It was also the B @-@ side of the album 's lead single , " You " . Harrison wrote the song in 1973 but recorded it two years later , following the negative reception afforded his 1974 North American tour and the Dark Horse album . Due to its context on release , commentators view " World of Stone " as a plea from Harrison for tolerance from his critics . According to some of his biographers , the lyrics reflect Harrison 's doubts regarding his devotion to a spiritual path – an apparent crisis of faith that followed his often @-@ unwelcome spiritual pronouncements during the tour , and which permeated his work throughout 1975 . 
 Harrison recorded " World of Stone " in Los Angeles with backing from musicians including David Foster , Gary Wright and Klaus Voormann . The downbeat mood of the recording is typical of the Extra Texture album while also demonstrating the influence of soul music on Harrison 's career during this period . Music critics have tended to view the track in an unfavourable light ; author Dale Allison describes the song as an " expression of alienation from the world " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although George Harrison 's 1974 album Dark Horse attracted highly favourable reviews from publications such as Melody Maker and Billboard , much of the critical reaction to the album was scathing and focused on his near @-@ completed North American tour with co @-@ headliner Ravi Shankar , which took place in November and December that year . Harrison had planned these concerts during a pilgrimage to India in February 1974 , midway through a period that was otherwise blighted by rock @-@ star excess and the failure of his marriage to Pattie Boyd . Author Gary Tillery suggests that Harrison envisaged the tour as a development of his acclaimed 1971 Concert for Bangladesh shows , where Shankar 's Indian music set and Harrison 's spiritually themed rock songs had been warmly received . " Why not carry the idea further and proselytize ? " Tillery writes of Harrison 's motivation . " One tour might open tens of thousands of minds to the wisdom found in Eastern mysticism . " 
 Harrison 's workload throughout 1974 , particularly his dedication to setting up Dark Horse Records , as a boutique label to replace the Beatles ' fast disintegrating Apple Records , left him rushing to prepare for the tour by October while also completing Dark Horse . Another issue that compromised Harrison 's enthusiasm for the venture was the attention afforded it as the first US tour by a former Beatle , resulting in a clash between the artist 's self @-@ image and the expectations of many critics and concertgoers . Among the criticism levelled at him during the tour , Harrison 's declarations of his Hindu @-@ aligned religious beliefs came across as harangues rather than uplifting messages to his fans , and were symbolic of what NME critic Bob Woffinden later described as a " didactic , sermonising mood " on the singer 's part . For the shows ' encore , Harrison turned his biggest solo hit , " My Sweet Lord " , into an " exhortation to chant God 's name " , author Alan Clayson writes , be it Krishna , Buddha , Christ or Allah ; at times during Shankar 's set , he chastised the audience for their lack of respect for Indian music and a God @-@ conscious path . In a rare interview early in the tour , Harrison also used religiosity to defend his decision to feature few Beatles @-@ era songs in the setlist , telling Ben Fong @-@ Torres of Rolling Stone magazine : " Gandhi says create and preserve the image of your choice . The image of my choice is not Beatle George ... My life belongs to the Lord Krishna ... I 'm the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of Krishna . " 
 Simon Leng , Harrison 's musical biographer , describes the period immediately following the tour as " open season on Harrison " . Whereas Rolling Stone had declared in 1973 that Harrison had " inherited the most precious Beatle legacy – the spiritual aura that the group accumulated " , now the magazine 's album reviewer attacked him for his " insufferable " spiritual preoccupations . Writing in the NME , Woffinden similarly dismissed Dark Horse as " the product of a complete egotist ... someone whose universe is confined to himself . And his guru . " Privately , Harrison descended into a " spiritual funk " , Tillery writes ; another biographer , Joshua Greene , concludes of Harrison 's post @-@ tour mindset : " He grappled with the depressing realization that most people simply didn 't care to hear about Krishna or maya or getting liberated from birth and death ... A man whose natural instinct was to share his life @-@ transforming discoveries with others had been rejected ... " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Author Robert Rodriguez suggests that one of the reasons for Harrison 's follow @-@ up album , Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) , being rushed into production in April 1975 was to " redeem the artist from negative fallout " created by Dark Horse over the winter of 1974 – 75 . Having come up with little new material in the previous six months , Harrison revisited songs he had written or begun writing in 1973 , one of which was titled " World of Stone " . In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison explains the message of the song as being " Don 't follow me " , as outlined in its opening verse : 
 Wise men you won 't be 
 To follow the like of me 
 In this world made of stone 
 Such a long way to go . 
 Because of its context when he recorded the song , Harrison 's biographers view these lyrics as an abdication by Harrison of his previous role as an avatar for Eastern mysticism . Leng notes the precedent set in the late 1960s , when the Beatles were " recast " as " the bearers of fundamental spiritual truths " , yet here Harrison was observing that " rock stars have no cure for the world 's spiritual malaise " . Ian Inglis interprets this verse as either a " rebuke " to listeners looking to the Beatles for philosophical answers , or a " frank confession " from Harrison that " his own quasi @-@ religious search for enlightenment has brought him little contentment " . 
 The song 's second verse serves as Harrison 's plea for tolerance from his critics , Leng writes , as on other Extra Texture songs such as " The Answer 's at the End " : 
 You may disagree 
 We all have the right to be 
 In this world made of stone ... 
 The eponymous " world of stone " is " the material world under another guise " , Leng observes . 
 Before the first of the song 's two instrumental breaks , Harrison states that this world is " Such a long way from home " – home being " spiritual understanding " , according to Inglis . This repeated line is viewed as significant by Tillery and by Christian theologian Dale Allison , on the basis of whether Harrison intended the final word to be " home " or the sacred Sanskrit term " Om " . Tillery writes : " Where does he find himself ? ' Such a long way from home , ' he says , but in his autobiography , he renders it , ' Such a long way from OM ' – confessing his inner turmoil at having strayed from his faith . " Allison identifies Extra Texture as being unique among Harrison 's post @-@ Beatles solo albums due to its complete avoidance of " positive theological statements " , mirroring the " emptiness " of Harrison 's apparently faithless existence in 1975 , and he interprets this particular lyric as the singer " expressing his remoteness from both God and his ideals " . While noting that the ancient Hindu text Bhagavad Gita " identifies the sound ' OM ' with Brahman and promises that chanting it with attention on one 's deathbed will lead one to ' the highest goal ' " , Allison writes of its possible inclusion in the context of " World of Stone " : " All pontifical pronouncements have ceased . George has come to doubt what matters to him most . " 
 Allison opines that in the lyrics to " World of Stone " , Harrison " abandons his earlier religious content for ambiguity " , a quality that Leng identifies especially in two lines in the song 's final verse : " The wiser you may be / The harder it can be to see " . Leng presents three possible interpretations for this couplet : " another play on the blind seer idea " ; Harrison 's rejection of the concept espoused in his 1968 Beatles composition " The Inner Light " , " that knowledge is the key to enlightenment " ; or , like his 1975 rebuttal to detractors such as Rolling Stone , " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " , a " dig at smartass rock journalists " . 
 In September 1975 , during his track @-@ by @-@ track discussion of Extra Texture with BBC Radio 1 's Paul Gambaccini , Harrison commented on " World of Stone " : " There 's not much of a story to it ... it 's really just down to saying that everybody has their own opinion and right to be ... It 's a nice melody . " Author Peter <unk> writes that , after Dark Horse and the ill @-@ fated 1974 tour , Harrison " continued to infuse his work with an implicit spirituality that rarely manifested on the surface " . Harrison 's 1976 album Thirty Three & 1 / 3 , his first on Dark Horse Records , contains the spiritually themed " Learning How to Love You " and " Dear One " , the last of which , Allison writes , " reflects a religious renewal following the melancholy of Extra Texture " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The sessions for Extra Texture took place at A & M Studios in Hollywood , starting in the third week of April 1975 . Harrison taped the basic track for " World of Stone " on 2 May , with backing musicians David Foster ( piano ) , Gary Wright ( organ ) , Jesse Ed Davis ( electric guitar ) , Klaus Voormann ( bass ) and Jim Keltner ( drums ) . A friend of Harrison 's since the Beatles ' years in Hamburg , Voormann was dismayed at the prevalence of drugs at the sessions ; recognising that Harrison was " bottoming out from events of the past couple of years " , according to Rodriguez , Voormann 's participation on " World of Stone " marked a relatively rare appearance by the German bass player at the Extra Texture sessions . With regard to this song and the similarly downbeat " Grey Cloudy Lies " , Harrison 's girlfriend at the time ( and later , his wife ) , Olivia Arias , recalls that Harrison " was being very hard on himself " during this period . 
 " World of Stone " is typical of its parent album 's keyboard @-@ based sound , which " tended toward moody , piano @-@ driven soul @-@ jazz " , in Leng 's estimation . The recording opens with Foster 's piano , which also provides the main instrumentation over the first two verses , before what author Elliot Huntley describes as the song 's " sped up second section " , featuring the full band . Leng suggests that this structure partly mirrors that of Harrison 's 1971 charity single " Bangla Desh " : " a slow explanatory introduction followed by a stomping rocker – except that ' World of Stone ' is more <unk> shuffle than stomp " . Unlike " Bangla Desh " , the song returns briefly to this sparse , piano @-@ led setting , over which Harrison sings falsetto , similar to the two " smoochy codas " in " The Answer 's at the End " . Gary Wright 's gospel @-@ inflected Hammond organ becomes prominent during the two more @-@ uptempo , instrumental sections , which feature extended guitar soloing from Harrison and a shouted , crowd @-@ like backing chorus . Authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter write that overdubbing on the basic track took place on 2 June and that the song was " revisited " on 27 June ; although the album 's musicians credits provide no personnel for the chorus singing , Madinger and Easter list Harrison , Davis , Foster and Attitudes singer Paul Stallworth as participating in the 2 June session . 
 = = Release = = 
 With the 1971 @-@ recorded " Motown pastiche " " You " the most obvious choice for an A @-@ side , " World of Stone " was selected for the reverse side of the album 's lead single , released on 12 September 1975 in Britain and three days later in the United States . Author Bruce Spizer describes the pairing as an " up @-@ beat love song " backed by a " philosophical ballad " . Rodriguez notes the " joyous " quality of the single 's A @-@ side compared with the " slower or darker groove " of songs such as " World of Stone " , the latter being " every bit as downbeat as the [ title ] suggested " . For the first time as a solo artist , Harrison undertook promotion for the album ; while limiting any discussion of spiritual issues , he conceding to feeling like a " heathen " and stated that he was in " a real down place " when writing many of the songs . 
 Apple issued Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) later in September 1975 , with " World of Stone " closing side one of the original LP format . Despite the lack of religiosity in the album 's lyrical content , the Roy Kohara @-@ designed artwork ( based on sketches provided by Harrison ) included a blue Om symbol displayed prominently on the vivid orange cover , as did the face labels for both the single and the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Leng describes the critical reception for Extra Texture as " only slightly less vituperative than the one Dark Horse had received " . Dave Marsh of Rolling Stone dismissed most of the album 's first side as " padded subterfuges " and concluded of the collection as a whole : " Finally , we are faced with the fact that Harrison 's records are nothing so much as boring . They drone , and while chants and mantras may be paths to glory in other realms , in pop music they are only routes to tedium . " Writing in 1981 , Bob Woffinden commented in response to " World of Stone " and other songs that " again plead plaintively with critics not to judge too severely " : " In this different context [ a year on from Dark Horse ] , such pleas are more sympathetic . Very well , then , we will not . " In a 2001 review , Record Collector editor Peter Doggett was similarly more impressed , writing that " In retrospect , side one of the album was most commendable , from the upbeat ' You ' … to the portentous ' World Of Stone ' . " 
 The track is held in low esteem by Harrison 's biographers . Dale Allison describes it as an " expression of alienation from the world " and notes : " The disparity between this confused melancholy and the confident religious advocacy on All Things Must Pass and Living in the Material World is remarkable . " Gary Tillery includes the song along with Extra Texture tracks " Grey Cloudy Lies " and " Tired of Midnight Blue " as examples of Harrison having reached " rock bottom " in 1975 . Elliot Huntley views " World of Stone " as overlong , the uptempo sections ' backing vocals " annoying " , with Harrison 's guitar sound " a bit thin and weedy " , and bemoans that " the melody doesn 't really deviate from its beginnings " . Like Leng , Ian Inglis gives over much of his discussion of the song to possible interpretations of its lyrics , but he otherwise writes : " Harrison returns to his view of the world as a place of obstacles and trials in which there is little hope ... The variations in his vocal range fail to add variety or interest to what is , by now , a predictable and cheerless message , set to a leaden and monotonous score . " 
 Reviewing the 2014 reissue of Harrison 's Apple catalogue , Paul Trynka of Classic Rock considers that Extra Texture 's " confessional songs " such as " World of Stone " have " worn well " . Trynka writes that the track exemplifies its composer 's " knack for taking a sweet melody in an unpredictable direction " , and concludes : " Today , when pop stars swig Cristal and flash their <unk> on Instagram , we can appreciate the irony of Harrison being attacked for preaching enlightenment . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric guitar , backing vocals 
 David Foster – piano , ARP synthesizer 
 Gary Wright – organ 
 Jesse Ed Davis – electric guitar 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 uncredited – backing vocals 
 = Mieczysław Jagielski = 
 Mieczysław Jagielski ( 12 January 1924 – 27 February 1997 ) was a Polish politician and economist . During the times of the People 's Republic of Poland he was the last leading politician from the former eastern regions of pre @-@ Second World War Poland . 
 Jagielski became a communist deputy to the legislative body of Poland , the Sejm , in 1957 , and he would continue to serve in that capacity for seven consecutive terms until 1985 . In 1959 , he was posted to be a member of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers ' Party and appointed to be the Minister of Agriculture . After he left his position as Minister of Agriculture in 1970 , Jagielski became a Deputy Prime Minister , and the next year , a member of the Politburo of the Polish United Workers ' Party . In August 1980 , Jagielski represented the government during talks with strikers in the city of Gdańsk . He negotiated the agreement which recognized Solidarity , a Polish trade union , as the first officially recognized independent trade union within the Eastern Bloc . Between August 1980 and August 1981 , Jagielski continued to interact with representatives of Polish workers , though his health was declining during this period . In late July 1981 , Jagielski was fired from the Deputy Premiership , reportedly because he failed to produce a recovery program for the economic crisis Poland was experiencing at that time . The same year , he left his membership of the Political Bureau of the Polish United Workers Party and the Central Committee . He died in Warsaw , Poland from a heart attack at the age of 73 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Jagielski was born to a peasant family on 12 January 1924 , in <unk> , Poland ( Second Polish Republic ) ( now <unk> , Ukraine ) . He spent the Second World War as an agricultural laborer on the farm of his parents . After the war he finished studies at the Main School of Planning and Statistics as well as in the <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Institute of Preparing Science Cadres ) , the latter being a graduate school preparing people for prominent positions in the Polish communist party structures . 
 Jagielski signed up to the Polish Workers ' Party ( PPR ) in 1944 , or in 1946 ( sources vary ) . When the Polish Worker 's Party transformed into the Polish United Workers Party ( PZPR ) in 1948 , he became a member of the new party . From 1946 to 1949 , Jagielski served on the Central Board of the Związek <unk> <unk> ( Association of Peasant Self @-@ Help ) , a communist organization designed to take control of the countryside . From 1950 to 1952 he was on the Central Board of the State Agricultural Farms and from December 1952 to December 1953 he was a deputy director of that institution . In December 1953 , he became the Director of the Agricultural Department of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party , a position he would hold until December 1956 . 
 In March 1954 , he became a deputy to a member of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party and would retain this position until March 1959 . As a result of the January 1957 Polish legislative elections , Jagielski was appointed as a deputy to the Sejm , the Polish legislative body . In January of that year , he also became the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and was appointed as the Minister of Agriculture in October 1959 , a position he would hold until June 1970 . In March 1959 , he was appointed a full member of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party ( he was previously a deputy to a full member ) . In June 1964 , he became a deputy to a member of the Politburo of the Polish United Workers ' Party and would hold that position until December 1971 . 
 Jagielski was also an economist , specializing in issues of agricultural economics . Beginning in 1975 , he held a professorship in the Main School of Planning and Statistics in Warsaw . 
 = = Deputy Prime Minister = = 
 In June 1970 , Jagielski was appointed as a Deputy Prime Minister ( thus ending his tenure as the Minister of Agriculture and becoming the Deputy of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Poland ) , and in December 1971 he became a full member of the Politburo of the Polish United Workers ' Party ( he was previously a deputy to an existing member ) . On 26 October 1971 , he became the Chairman of the Planning Committee of the Council of Ministers . On 23 October 1975 , he was relieved of his post as Chairman of the Planning Committee after he suffered a severe heart attack . From 1971 to 1981 he was the Polish representative in the Comecon . In February 1981 he became the president of the Economy Committee at the Council of Ministers . 
 He is described as having a " profound influence " on Poland 's economic policies between 1971 and 1975 , when he lost his position as Chairman of the Planning Committee . On 1 July 1980 , the Polish government announced price increases , which led to many workers striking in several Polish cities , including Lublin . As a result of the strike in Lublin , the city was " virtually shut down " , and Jagielski led a delegation to the city which was able to ease tension there . 
 = = = Gdańsk negotiations = = = 
 Gdańsk became the focal point of the strike movement . On 21 August 1980 , Mieczysław Jagielski replaced Tadeusz <unk> to lead a Polish government commission which was negotiating with strikers there . The strikers were represented by the Inter @-@ Enterprise Strike Committee , which was demanding that the workers it represented be given better rights , including better rights to strike . On 26 August meeting with representatives of the strikers at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdańsk , Jagielski promised that the right to strike would be added to a new law on the official trade unions of Poland . After 5 more days of difficult negotiations , a settlement was reached between the strikers and the government , known as the Gdańsk agreement . Norman Davies contends that Jagielski " in the end realised that only two alternatives remained [ to a general government victory in the negotiations ] <unk> agreement on the strikers ' terms or an immediate resort to force for which the government was not prepared . " The agreement , as well as giving the workers of the Lenin Shipyard the right to strike , also allowed them to form their own independent trade union . Jagielski said of the negotiations that led to the agreement , " We have spoken as Poles to Poles ... There are no winners and losers . The important thing here is that we have understood each other and the best guarantee for what we have done is hard work . " He was reported to have spoken eloquently . 
 = = = After the Gdańsk negotiations = = = 
 In October 1980 , he interacted with a delegation of Solidarity members that included Lech Wałęsa , future President of the Third Republic of Poland . When Wałęsa complained that the Polish government was not keeping to its promise of allowing the independent labour movement enough of an opportunity to publicize itself , Jagielski indicated that he would try to give the movement better access to the Polish press , and to the Polish radio network . Jagielski led a delegation that went to a meeting in Moscow of Comecon , the Eastern Bloc economic community , during January 1981 . That month , the government declared that the poor economy was forcing it to cut back on its promise of ensuring that Polish workers did not have to work on Saturdays , and that it would offer a number of Saturdays as work @-@ free instead . 
 Unrest grew among Polish workers over the government 's decision , and Jagielski negotiated with Wałęsa for six hours in the building of the Council of Ministers regarding the Saturday issue . Other talking points included Solidarity 's exemptions from standard state censorship . The negotiations did not end the unrest , and Jagielski offered a compromise in an appearance on the Polish national television network , stating that the government would grant workers every other Saturday off , or give them all Saturdays free but add half an hour to each working day . He warned that Poland 's economic troubles would increase should all Polish workers gain all Saturdays off from work , and he appealed to " the patriotism of the people " . Many Polish workers , though , stayed off work the following Saturday . In April Jagielski , described as a " veteran negotiator " , met with France 's President Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , and he was able to gain a pledge of $ 800 million in aid from France . That month , he was received by the United States 's Secretary of State Alexander Haig and Vice President George H.W. Bush , and they promised Jagielski that the US would sell Poland 50 @,@ 000 tons of surplus butter and dried milk and would consider cooperating on rescheduling Poland 's $ 3 billion debt to the US . 
 On 10 June as a member of the Politburo of the Polish United Workers ' Party , Jagielski offered to other members of that group to terminate his position within the Politburo , and his position as Deputy Prime Minister , stating " I submit my resignation as a member of the PB ( Politburo ) , especially since I had a certain incident in my life . I also submit my resignation as vice premier ( Deputy Prime Minister ) . " It seems his offer was rebuffed , and the incident in his life that he spoke of may have been a heart attack he had recently suffered . On 31 July 1981 , Jagielski was fired from his position as Deputy Prime Minister , reportedly because he failed to produce a recovery program for the economic crisis Poland was experiencing at the time . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In July 1981 , Jagielski lost his memberships in the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party , the Politburo of the Polish United Workers and the Economic Committee . He remained a deputy to the Sejm until 1985 . He died on the night of 27 February 1997 , from a heart attack in his home , in Warsaw , Poland , at the age of 73 . After Jagielski 's death , Lech Wałęsa described him as a " sensitive man who always listened to arguments " , and said that Jagielski differed in that respect from other Polish politicians in 1980 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 He received the Order of the Builders of People 's Poland ( Order <unk> Polski <unk> ) , the highest civil decoration of the People 's Republic of Poland . 
 = A Free Ride = 
 A Free Ride , also known as A Grass Sandwich , is a stag film of the silent era that is considered to be the earliest extant American hardcore pornographic movie . It depicts a motorist who picks up two women from the roadside and later engages in several sex acts with them . Although most scholars consider A Free Ride a 1915 film , some sources claim that it was produced later . The film 's director used a pseudonym and the cast remained anonymous . The filming location is not known , although it may have been produced in New Jersey . Two contradictory theories have emerged regarding the identities of the cast : some sources suggest they were people with low social status , but others assert the opposite . The Kinsey Institute has a print of the film in its collection . A Free Ride was screened at the inauguration of the Museum of Sex . In 2004 , Lisa Oppenheim , a New York @-@ based artist , remade the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A Free Ride 's opening intertitle denotes the film 's setting as " in the wide open spaces , where men are men and girls will be girls , the hills are full of romance and adventure " . The film shows two women walking together alongside a road near their home . A wealthy male motorist in a right @-@ hand @-@ drive 1912 Haynes 50 @-@ 60 Model Y Touring Car arrives and offers them a lift . After some hesitation , the women accept his offer and sit beside him in the front seat . The man then kisses and fondles them . Later , as he urinates behind a tree , the women <unk> watch him . When he is about to finish , the women quickly return to the car . After his return , the women urinate behind the tree while the man secretly watches them and becomes sexually aroused . The women return to the car and the man offers them a drink . 
 Afterwards , the man and one woman walk into the woods together and masturbate each other while standing . The other woman , left at the car , becomes curious and follows them into the woods . Upon seeing them , she becomes sexually aroused and stimulates herself . Meanwhile , the man and the previous woman have sex in the missionary position . Soon after , the other woman joins them and the man has sex with her doggy style . Later , they have a threesome , and one of the women subsequently gives the man fellatio . After finishing the sexual acts , they return to the car . 
 = = Production = = 
 British author Dave Thompson , in his book Black and White and Blue : Erotic Cinema from the Victorian Age to the VCR , notes that D. W. Griffith is credited by one source as director on A Free Ride . But this claim is rejected by film historian Kevin Brownlow and author Thompson himself . The identities of the cast are not disclosed in the credits ( the title card says " starring the Jazz Girls " ) . Thompson asserts that the cast do not resemble identifiable contemporary silent film stars . He claims the crew strove to make the cast unidentifiable , noting that the actor wears a large fake mustache and a hat . When the actor 's mustache became detached before the end of the film , he hid his face until the mustache was reattached . Thompson notes that some historical accounts , which he describes as " casual histories " , have suggested that the cast of early pornographic films were drawn from among people with low social status such as the homeless , drug addicts , the mentally ill , prostitutes , and petty criminals . Thompson argues that there is almost no documentary evidence for this claim , and suggests that the actors likely had higher social status . 
 A Free Ride was shot outdoors . According to cultural historian Joseph W. Slade , there is a legend that it was shot in New Jersey . Most scholars , including Al Di Lauro , Gerald Rabkin and Jonathon Ross , believe that the film was produced in 1915 and is the earliest surviving American hardcore pornographic film . Los Angeles Times columnist Jay Jones notes A Free Ride is believed to be the first pornographic film made for commercial purposes . The 1915 production date is disputed by some sources . According to the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex , Gender , and Reproduction , the film was made between 1917 and 1919 . Film scholar Linda Williams also writes that the assertion that A Free Ride is the earliest surviving American stag film is " doubtful " . Kevin Brownlow writes in his book Behind the Mask of Innocence that , " judging by the fashions , the film was actually made around 1923 " . Thompson says that the evidence presented to support the later production date is shoddy , but notes that some other experts agree with Brownlow 's assertion . Evidence cited in support of a 1923 production date includes the similarity of one of the women 's hairstyle to that of Mary Pickford , an actress who dominated American film industry during the 1920s . Proponents of the later date claim that the woman wore a Pickford @-@ style wig . However , Thompson indicates that the curly Pickford @-@ style hair became popular in the 1910s , citing a 1914 interview in Photoplay magazine in which Pickford said that she felt exhausted by incoming letters that inquired about her hair . Thompson further disputes the claim that the woman in the film was actually wearing a wig . 
 = = Release = = 
 A Free Ride was first shown to its target audience in 1915 . At that time , it was not possible to screen stag films in public theaters due to the Victorian moral views of contemporary society . Like other pornographic films of that era , A Free Ride was released and circulated underground to avoid censorship . It was likely shown in brothels , gentlemen 's clubs , illegal gatherings of men in public places , stag parties , and other all @-@ male venues : the film was kept hidden from society at large and the government . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 According to Williams , A Free Ride is a typological representative of a genre of early pornographic movies that included voyeurism . The film also shows sexual intercourse , fellatio , <unk> , and urolagnia . Like the Argentinian film El <unk> ( c . 1907 – 15 ) and the German film Am Abend ( c . 1910 ) , A Free Ride begins with simple narrative frames , then shows signs of more conventional cinema for a short period , and finally shows hardcore scenes in a fragmented manner . Author Laurence O 'Toole has described early stag films such as A Free Ride as " a muddle of jerky camerawork and slipshod editing " . However , like other stag films from the 1910s , this film is of superior quality to the non @-@ commercial pornography which preceded it . 
 Journalist Luke Ford writes that sex is given emphasis over story in A Free Ride . The film uses humor in its opening credits through false cast and crew names , such as A. Wise Guy as director , Will B. Hard as photographer , and Will She as the title writer . Williams describes this as " crude humor " and asserts it was common in American stag films produced from this time . Professor Frank A. Hoffman of University at Buffalo writes that the film 's production standard indicates that there had been previous experimentation with stag films . O 'Toole writes that despite the elementary nature of movies like A Free Ride , stag films became " <unk> into a restricted visual experience " in a short period of time . 
 Hoffman notes that A Free Ride contains many fundamental constituents which are the characteristics of an archetypal pornographic film . He identifies these basic constituents as a carefully planned but not complicated state of affairs to provide introductory motivation , visual stimuli to sexually excite the women , a theme that is generally rare in reality , a straightforward and very quick seduction , and the sex acts as the film 's central theme . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 A Free Ride was a well @-@ known stag film of the 1910s and , according to Williams , is regarded as a classic pornographic film . It is one of the three earliest pornographic films , along with El <unk> and Am Abend , in the collection of the Kinsey Institute . The 1970 documentary film A History of the Blue Movie includes scenes from this film . The Museum of Sex in New York City showed A Free Ride at its 2002 inaugural exhibition . Lisa Oppenheim , a New York @-@ based film director , remade the film in 2004 using no actors ; instead the events of the film were represented by " the landscape and trees " . 
 = Battle of Cer = 
 The Battle of Cer was fought between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia in August 1914 during the early stages of the Serbian Campaign of the First World War . It took place around Cer Mountain and several surrounding villages , as well as the town of Šabac . 
 The battle , part of the first Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion of Serbia , began on the night of 15 August when elements of the Serbian 1st Combined Division encountered Austro @-@ Hungarian outposts that had been established on the slopes of Cer Mountain earlier in the invasion . The clashes that followed escalated into a battle for control over several towns and villages near the mountain , especially Šabac . On 19 August , the morale of the Austro @-@ Hungarians collapsed and thousands of soldiers retreated back into Austria @-@ Hungary , many of them drowning in the Drina River as they fled in panic . On 24 August the Serbs re @-@ entered Šabac , marking the end of the battle . Serbian casualties after nearly ten days of fighting were 3 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 killed and 15 @,@ 000 wounded . Those of the Austro @-@ Hungarians were significantly higher , with 6 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 soldiers killed , 30 @,@ 000 wounded and 4 @,@ 500 taken as prisoners of war . The Serb victory over the Austro @-@ Hungarians marked the first Allied victory over the Central Powers in the First World War , and the first aerial dogfight of the war took place during the battle . 
 = = Background = = 
 Relations between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia deteriorated in the aftermath of the May Overthrow in 1903 . Almost immediately , the new Karađorđević government aligned itself with the Russian Empire and oriented its foreign policy away from its long time patron , the Habsburgs , and Austria @-@ Hungary . In 1906 , Austria @-@ Hungary closed its border to Serbian agricultural exports in an episode known as the Pig War . In 1908 , Austria @-@ Hungary formally annexed Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina — a territory with a large Serb population that it had been granted by the Congress of Berlin in 1878 . The annexation prompted the Serbian public to call for war with Austria @-@ Hungary . With no promise of Russian support in the event of war , the Serbian government decided against pursuing the matter militarily . Count Franz Conrad von <unk> boasted that it would take Austro @-@ Hungary only three months to defeat Serbia should war erupt between the two nations . 
 With Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina firmly in Austro @-@ Hungarian hands , Serbia and several other Balkan states turned to forcing the Ottoman Empire from southeastern Europe . The ensuing Balkan Wars , which lasted from 1912 until 1913 , saw Serbia take possession of Kosovo and Macedonia . On 28 June 1914 , Bosnian Serb student Gavrilo Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in Sarajevo . The assassination precipitated the July Crisis , which led Austria @-@ Hungary to issue an ultimatum to Serbia on 23 July on suspicion that the assassination had been planned in Belgrade . The Austro @-@ Hungarian government made the ultimatum intentionally unacceptable to Serbia , and it was indeed rejected . The Austro @-@ Hungarians declared war on Serbia on 28 July and that same day the Serbs destroyed all bridges on the Sava and Danube rivers in order to prevent the Austro @-@ Hungarians from using them during any future invasion . Belgrade was shelled the following day , marking the beginning of the First World War . 
 Fighting in Eastern Europe began with the first Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion of Serbia in early August 1914 . The number of Austro @-@ Hungarian troops assigned to such an invasion was far smaller than the 308 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force intended when war was declared . This was because a large portion of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 2nd Army had moved to the Russian Front , reducing the number of troops involved in the initial stages of the invasion to approximately 200 @,@ 000 . Forty percent of this force was composed of South Slavs living within Austro @-@ Hungarian borders . On the other hand , the Serbs could muster some 450 @,@ 000 men to oppose the Austro @-@ Hungarians upon full mobilization . The main elements to face the Austro @-@ Hungarians were the 1st , 2nd , 3rd and Užice Armies , with a combined strength of approximately 180 @,@ 000 men . The Balkan Wars had only just concluded and Serbia was still recovering . Over 36 @,@ 000 Serbian soldiers had been killed and 55 @,@ 000 seriously wounded . Few recruits had been gained from the newly acquired territories , and the Serbian army had been stretched by the need to garrison them against Albanian insurgents and the threat of Bulgarian attack . To compound matters , the Serbian army was dangerously short of artillery , and had only just begun to replenish its ammunition stocks . Its supply problems also extended to more basic items . Many Serbian recruits reported for duty barefoot , and many units lacked any uniform other than a standard issue greatcoat and a traditional Serbian cap known as a šajkača . Rifles were also in critically short supply . It was estimated that full mobilization would see some 50 @,@ 000 Serbian soldiers with no equipment at all . The Austro @-@ Hungarians , on the other hand , possessed an abundance of modern rifles and had twice as many machine guns and field guns as the Serbs . They also had better stocks of munitions , as well as much better transport and industrial infrastructure behind them . The Serbs had a slight advantage over the Austro @-@ Hungarians : many of their soldiers were experienced veterans of the Balkan Wars and better trained than their Austro @-@ Hungarian counterparts . Serb soldiers were also highly motivated , which compensated in part for their lack of weaponry . 
 Austro @-@ Hungarian forces assigned to the invasion were placed under the command of General Oskar Potiorek , who had been responsible for the security detail of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo . Prior to the battle , Potiorek had predicted an easy victory over the Serbians , calling them " pig farmers . " The Serbian army was commanded by Crown Prince Alexander , with the Chief of the General Staff , Field Marshal Radomir Putnik , who had commanded Serb forces in the Balkan Wars , as his deputy and de facto military leader . Generals Petar Bojović , Stepa Stepanović and Pavle Jurišić Šturm commanded the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Serbian Armies , respectively . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 From 29 July to 11 August , the Austro @-@ Hungarian army launched a series of artillery attacks in northern and northwestern Serbia and subsequently managed to exploit the bombardments by constructing a system of pontoon bridges across the Sava and Drina rivers . The Serbians knew that it was impossible for their forces to line the entirety of the Austro – Serbian border , which extended 340 miles ( 550 km ) . Putnik therefore ordered the Serbian army to fall back on a traditional line of defence as he grouped the bulk of his forces in Šumadija , from where they could rapidly move either north or west . Strong detachments were posted in the towns of Valjevo and Užice , and outposts were stationed at every important point on the frontier . At this stage , all the Serbian General Staff could do was wait until the Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion plan materialized . 
 Belgrade , Smederevo and Veliko <unk> continued to be subjected to more vigorous artillery bombardments , and a number of failed attempts to cross the Danube resulted in heavy Austro @-@ Hungarian losses . The bulk of the Austro @-@ Hungarian forces were stationed in Bosnia , and the Serbian General Staff were not misled by these feints on the Danube . Subsequently , the Austro @-@ Hungarians attempted to cross the Drina at Ljubovija and the Sava at Šabac , and these attacks were seen as more significant . On 12 August , Austro @-@ Hungarian troops entered Serbia through the town of Loznica , crossing the Drina . There , and in the village of <unk> , the Austro @-@ Hungarian 13th Army Corps made a crossing , while on the same day the Austro @-@ Hungarian 4th Army Corps crossed the Sava to the north of Šabac , while other Austro @-@ Hungarian troops crossed the Drina . The town of Šabac was quickly taken . By 14 August , over a front of about 100 miles ( 160 km ) , the Austro @-@ Hungarians had crossed the rivers and converged on Valjevo . The Austro @-@ Hungarian 2nd and 5th Armies moved towards Belgrade , where they encountered the Serbian 1st , 2nd and 3rd Armies . On 15 August , Putnik ordered his forces into counterattack . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Around 23 : 00 on 15 August , elements of the Serbian 1st Combined Division encountered outposts set up by the invading Austro @-@ Hungarian army on the slopes of Cer Mountain and fighting erupted . The Austro @-@ Hungarian positions were lightly held , and their defenders were driven back away from the mountain . By midnight , fierce clashes between the Austro @-@ Hungarians and the Serbs were underway and chaos ensued in the darkness . By the morning of 16 August , the Serbians had seized the <unk> Range and dislodged the Austro @-@ Hungarians from their positions in the village of <unk> Selo . The Austro @-@ Hungarians , who had suffered heavy casualties during the fighting , retreated in some disorder . As the day progressed , the Serbs drove the 21st Infantry Division off the slopes of Cer to prevent it from linking with the 2nd Army in Šabac . 
 On 17 August , the Serbs attempted to retake Šabac , but their efforts failed . The 1st Combined Division attacked the villages of Trojan and <unk> before moving on towards the small town of <unk> Grad . Elsewhere , the Austro @-@ Hungarians succeeded in repulsing the Serbian 3rd Army , forcing it to manoeuvre one of its divisions to protect the approach to the town of Valjevo , which was threatened by the 42nd Mountain Division . 
 In the early morning of 18 August , the Austro @-@ Hungarians launched another attack , with the intention of pushing the 1st Šumadija Division off the Šabac bridgehead to allow the 5th Army to advance . However , the attack failed as the Serbs defeated the Austro @-@ Hungarians at the Dobrava River , forcing their surviving soldiers to withdraw . Elsewhere , the Serbian 2nd Army 's counter @-@ offensive continued along the Cer and <unk> , with the 1st Combined Division attacking the village of <unk> and coming under severe pressure at <unk> Grad . The first Serbian assault was fought off , but a wave of further attacks followed throughout the night . In the early morning of 19 August , the Serbs finally defeated the Austro @-@ Hungarians and seized the small town . The 1st Morava Division drove the 9th Infantry Division from its position and fought off the division 's subsequent counterattack , inflicting heavy losses . The 4th Corps renewed its attack against the Šumadija Division , forcing the Serbs to withdraw having only sustained light casualties . Because the 4th Corps did not break the Serbs , the Austro @-@ Hungarian division was unable to alter the direction of its advance towards Cer Mountain , since doing so would have put the Šumadija Division in a position to attack the 4th Corps from the rear . As a result , the 4th Corps was unable to join other Austro @-@ Hungarian forces fighting at Cer . 
 The Serbs retook <unk> at noon , and the 1st Combined Division exploited this to advance towards <unk> . Meanwhile , the 1st Morava Division attacked <unk> and managed to drive the Austro @-@ Hungarians back . The village of Velika Glava fell to the Serbs before mid @-@ day , and by the late afternoon the <unk> Grob ridge had been retaken . At around this time , the Austro @-@ Hungarians began retreating with increasing rapidity , their will and cohesion apparently shattered . The 3rd Army had similar success , routing the 36th Infantry Division and forcing it to retreat in considerable disorder . The Serbs then moved to pursue the fleeing Austro @-@ Hungarians all along the front . By 20 August , Austro @-@ Hungarian forces were fleeing across the Drina River , still being pursued by the Serbs back into Bosnia , with the entire 5th Army being forced across the Austro @-@ Hungarian side of the river . Many Austro @-@ Hungarian soldiers drowned in the water as they fled in panic . Serbian military reports announced that " the enemy is withdrawing in the greatest disorder . " Putnik then notified King Peter in a telegram , saying " the main enemy has been defeated in Jadar and on Mount Cer , and our troops are in hot pursuit . " Upon their triumph at Cer Mountain , the Serbs sought to recapture the heavily fortified town of Šabac . Violent clashes occurred on 21 and 22 August , during which Serb forces fought their way to the western approaches of the town . By 23 August , the Serbs had encircled the town and that evening they brought up their siege artillery . On 24 August , Serbian forces entered Šabac and discovered that the Austro @-@ Hungarians had decamped the previous night . By 16 : 00 , the Serbs reached the banks of the Sava River , bringing the first Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion of Serbia to an end . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 Both sides suffered heavy casualties in the battles . Estimates of the number of Austro @-@ Hungarian casualties vary . Jordan states that the Austro @-@ Hungarians suffered a total of 37 @,@ 000 casualties in the battle , of whom 7 @,@ 000 were fatalities . Misha Glenny states that almost 30 @,@ 000 Austro @-@ Hungarian soldiers were wounded and 6 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 were killed . Horne writes that the Austro @-@ Hungarians had 8 @,@ 000 soldiers killed and 30 @,@ 000 wounded in the battle , compounded by the loss of 46 cannons , 30 machine guns and 140 ammunition wagons . Historian David Stevenson states that 4 @,@ 500 Austro @-@ Hungarian soldiers were taken prisoner . 
 Estimates of the number of Serbian casualties also vary . Horne and Jordan both agree that approximately 3 @,@ 000 Serbian soldiers were killed and 15 @,@ 000 were wounded in the battle . Glenny counters that 3 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 Serb soldiers were killed in the battle . Nevertheless , the number of fatalities suffered by both sides heralded the massive cost in human lives of the First World War . French journalist Henry <unk> reported : 
 The area between Cer and the river Jadar where this tremendous battle took place was nothing but mass graves and putrefying flesh ... From the shadow of the woods emerged a stench so foul that it rendered the approach to the summit of Cer impossible . The number of corpses there was so enormous that the Second Army was constrained to abandon their burial due to a lack of time . 
 Atrocities were committed by both the Austro @-@ Hungarians and Serbs , although , according to author Lawrence Sondhaus , the majority were committed by the Austro @-@ Hungarians . The Austro @-@ Hungarians charged Serb civilians with mutilating Austro @-@ Hungarians soldiers , while undisciplined Austro @-@ Hungarian troops summarily executed hundreds of Serb men and raped and murdered numerous women and children during the battle , which <unk> ascribes to their hatred towards Serbs for starting the war . Many of those murdered by the Austro @-@ Hungarians were the victims of fellow South Slavs ( Serbs , Croats and Bosnian Muslims ) serving in the Austro @-@ Hungarian army . Serbian commanders noted that the Austro @-@ Hungarians had committed numerous reprisal killings over the course of the battle . General Pavle Jurišić Šturm recounted : 
 The Austrian army has committed frightful atrocities in our territories . A group of nineteen ( men , women and children ) has been found by the <unk> tavern . They had been roped together and then horribly massacred . Such a group of fifteen people was found in <unk> . Small groups of slaughtered and disfigured people , mostly women and children , are to be found throughout the villages . One woman had belts of skin cut off and another had had her breasts cut off ... Another group of twelve women and children has been found who had been tied together and massacred . Peasants say such sights are to be seen everywhere . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although they succeeded in repelling the Austro @-@ Hungarian attack , the Serbs used up much of their ammunition during the battle , needing 6 @.@ 5 million cartridges and 35 @,@ 000 shells to prevail . The commander of the Serbian 2nd Army , General Stepa Stepanović , was promoted to the rank of field marshal ( Serbian : vojvoda , вoјвода ) for his successful command . In contrast , Austro @-@ Hungarian commander Oskar Potiorek was humiliated in defeat and determined to launch a second invasion of Serbia . In September , he was given permission to launch such an invasion provided that he " not risk anything that might lead to a further fiasco . " Defeat at Cer Mountain also affected the morale of the Austro @-@ Hungarian troops . The first aerial dogfight of the war occurred during the battle , when Serbian aviator Miodrag Tomić encountered an Austro @-@ Hungarian plane while performing a reconnaissance mission over enemy positions . The Austro @-@ Hungarian pilot fired at Tomić with his revolver . Tomić managed to escape , and , within several weeks , all Serbian and Austro @-@ Hungarian planes were fitted with machine @-@ guns . 
 The battle was the first Allied victory over the Central Powers in the First World War . Serbia 's triumph on the battlefield drew worldwide attention to the country and won the Serbs sympathy from both neutral and Allied countries . A number of foreigners flocked to Serbia in late 1914 , offering financial , political , humanitarian and military aid . Articles in defence of Serbia became more frequent in the British press . Certain cultural circles in Italy advocated entering the war on the Allied side , citing Serbian and Montenegrin battlefield successes . 
 The Serbian patriotic song March on the Drina was written by Serbian composer Stanislav <unk> shortly after the battle to commemorate the victory . <unk> dedicated the march to his favourite commander in the army , Colonel Stojanović , who was killed during the fighting . A Yugoslav war film also titled March on the Drina was released in 1964 and is loosely based on the battle . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = 1992 Nicaragua earthquake = 
 The 1992 Nicaragua earthquake occurred off the coast of Nicaragua at 6 : 16 p.m. on September 2 . Some damage was also reported in Costa Rica . At least 116 people were killed and several more were injured . The quake was located in an active zone of stress and deformation . It created tsunamis disproportionately large for its surface wave magnitude . 
 = = Tectonics = = 
 The 1992 Nicaragua earthquake was the first tsunami earthquake to be captured on modern broadband seismic networks . The initial surface wave magnitude was estimated at 7 @.@ 2 . The shock occurred on the subduction interface between the Cocos and Caribbean Plates , an active zone of stress and deformation , and due to the absence of sediment on the ocean floor off Nicaragua , the slip propagated up @-@ dip all the way to the trench bottom , a creator of large tsunamis . This occurrence of slip of a plate interface filled with soft subducted sediments caused the rupturing process to be slower than the average subduction zone thrust earthquakes while the focus of the earthquake was much shallower than the typical subduction zone earthquake . 
 = = Damage and casualties = = 
 The first shock of the earthquake occurred at 0 : 16 GMT and was followed by several strong aftershocks . The quake was most widely felt in the Chinandega and León departments of Nicaragua , though it was also felt elsewhere in Nicaragua at Crucero , Managua and San Marcos and at San José in Costa Rica . It was the strongest seismic event to hit Nicaragua since the earthquake of 1972 . 
 At least 116 people were killed , most being children sleeping in their beds , with more than 68 missing and over 13 @,@ 500 left homeless in Nicaragua . At least 1 @,@ 300 houses and 185 fishing boats were destroyed along the west coast of Nicaragua . Total damage in Nicaragua was estimated at between 20 and 30 million U.S. dollars . 
 According to the Augusto César Sandino Foundation , the most affected were " inhabitants of small poor communities who live from diverse subsistence activities . Their houses , located beside the sea , were almost entirely destroyed . These people have lost their livelihoods , poor peasants who grow basic grains for their own consumption in marginal areas , and <unk> who have lost their fishing equipment , boats , storage sheds and warehouses . Their already extreme poverty has been exacerbated . " 
 = = Tsunami = = 
 Most of the casualties and damage were caused by a tsunami affecting the west coasts of Nicaragua and Costa Rica , and it was one of three tsunamis to occur within a span of six months . Runup heights were measured shortly after the earthquake and reached heights of up to 9 @.@ 9 meters , though the average height was 3 to 8 meters . The tsunami was disproportionately large for its surface wave magnitude , or Ms , and the duration of the rupture process was 100 s , unusually long for its size . The moment magnitude was 7 @.@ 6 , larger than the 20 @-@ s Ms of 7 ; this Ms – Mw difference is a characteristic of tsunami earthquakes . Tide <unk> were set up at Corinto and Puerto Sandino , which showed an impulsive tsunami originating 61 minutes after the earthquake . It ran inland 1 @,@ 000 meters to <unk> , the hardest hit major town of all , with 9 fatalities . 
 = = Relief efforts = = 
 From the onset of the disaster authorities provided initial assistance . President Violeta Chamorro stated in her speech to her nation on September 2 , 1992 that no international assistance was needed . However , the Red Cross did assist in some operations while the National Civil Defence carried out much of the relief operations , with wounded people being transported to the Hospital Leon and Lenin @-@ Fonseca Hospital . 
 = Izzat Darwaza = 
 Muhammad ' Izzat Darwaza ( or <unk> ) ( Arabic : محمد <unk> <unk> ; 1888 – 1984 ) was a Palestinian politician , historian , and educator from Nablus . Early in his career , he worked as an Ottoman bureaucrat in Palestine and Lebanon . Darwaza had long been a sympathizer of Arab nationalism and became an activist of that cause following the Arab Revolt against the Ottoman Empire in 1916 , joining the nationalist al @-@ Fatat society . As such , he campaigned for the union of Greater Syria ( modern @-@ day Levant ) and vehemently opposed Zionism and foreign mandates in Arab lands . From 1922 to 1927 , he served as an educator and as the principal at the an @-@ Najah National School where he implemented a pro @-@ Arab nationalist educational system , promoting the ideas of Arab independence and unity . Darwaza 's particular brand of Arab nationalism was influenced by Islam and his beliefs in Arab unity and the oneness of Arabic culture . 
 Later , Darwaza co @-@ founded the nationalist Istiqlal party in Palestine and was a principal organizer of anti @-@ British demonstrations . In 1937 , he was exiled to Damascus as a result of his activities and from there he helped support the Arab revolt in the Mandatory Palestine . He was incarcerated in Damascus by French authorities for his involvement in the revolt , and while in prison he began to study the Qur 'an and its interpretations . In 1945 , after he was released , Darwaza eventually compiled his own interpretation entitled al @-@ Tafsir al @-@ Hadith . 
 In 1946 , he joined the Arab Higher Committee led by Haj Amin al @-@ Husseini , but resigned the next year after being disenfranchised by al @-@ Husayni 's methods . He left for Syria afterward and briefly aided in the unity talks between Syria and Egypt in the mid @-@ 1950s . By the time of his death in 1984 , Darwaza had written over thirty books and published numerous articles on the Palestinian question , Arab history , and Islam . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and background = = = 
 Darwaza was born to a middle @-@ class Sunni Muslim mercantile family in Nablus . The Darwaza family had long been involved in textiles and had extensive trade relationships with merchants in Beirut and Damascus . In his memoirs , Izzat writes " The import of [ textile ] goods from the outside was , for the most part , through Beirut and Damascus . " Izzat 's father , ' Abd al @-@ Hadi Darwaza and his paternal grandfather Darwish Darwaza , owned a store in the Khan al @-@ Tujjar of Nablus . Izzat recalled , " From what I remember from my father and through my grandfather , the title merchant or merchants in Nablus mostly referred to owners of commercial textile and cloth shops . In Nablus , these shops were confined , or mostly confined , to a caravansary called Khan al @-@ Tujjar , in the middle of Nablus . " 
 Izzat received elementary and preparatory education in Ottoman government @-@ run schools in the city . In addition to Arabic , he learned Turkish and English , as well as a basic knowledge of French which he strengthened in by the end of his formal education . Darwaza left school without going to Istanbul or Beirut to finish his education as was the custom of his generation . Instead , he educated himself , and according to Rashid Khalidi , became " a self @-@ taught intellectual . " 
 = = = Loyalty to dissidence toward the Ottoman Empire = = = 
 Originally , Darwaza supported the Ottoman Empire based on his feelings of identification with Islam and of belonging to the larger Ottoman Muslim <unk> ( " nation " ) . In 1906 , he served in the local Ottoman administration as a clerk in the Department of Telegraphic and Postal Services ( DTPS ) in Nablus . His first assignment in that department was for the District of Beisan and northern Palestine ( the Galilee and northern Samaria ) . He was also an Arabist and was enthusiastic about the Young Turk Revolution in 1908 , expecting that the new Ottoman government would institute reforms and grant the Arabs autonomy within the framework of the empire . 
 His loyalty to the Ottomans eroded , however , due to the impact of the new governments 's Turkification policies which he viewed as repressive against his ideals . Because of his dissatisfaction with the Young Turks , Darwaza was driven to support Arab independence from the empire . In 1908 , he joined the Committee of Union and Progress ( CUP ) , but withdrew soon after because of its Turkish nationalist political agenda . He played an active role in establishing a branch for the Party of Harmony and Freedom in Nablus in 1911 . The party was originally founded in Istanbul and joined by Arab members to counter the policies of the CUP . In 1913 , he joined a anti @-@ Zionist group based in Nablus that sought to prevent the sale of Arab @-@ owned land to Jews by submitting petitions to the Ottoman sultan , or by buying land for sale to preempt its purchase by Jews . In June 1913 , he helped to prepare and became secretary of the First Palestinian Congress ( also known as the Arab Congress of 1913 ) in Paris . In congress , he was also the delegate for the Jamma 'in subdistrict of the District of Nablus . Meanwhile , Darwaza was still working in the DTPS . 
 In 1914 , he established the Arab Scientific Society whose purpose was to spread Arabic culture in the region through the establishment of Arabic schools . The society did not succeed , however , due to the outbreak of World War I. Within the DTPS , Darwaza was appointed commissioner and deputy for the Nablus Post Office . He was promoted again — this time as director of postal stamp sales in Beirut . 
 = = = Promoting unity with Syria = = = 
 During World War I , Darwaza served as Postal Directorate @-@ General of Beirut and retained this post until 1918 . In 1916 , while serving with the Ottoman army in the Sinai Peninsula , he joined the underground al @-@ Fatat organization through Ahmad Qadri , a high @-@ ranking member from Damascus . The aim of al @-@ Fatat was to liberate and unite the Arab lands under Ottoman rule . In the wake of the Arab Revolt of 1916 , Darwaza left the Ottoman civil service to serve in King Faisal 's provisional government in Damascus . Ideologically , Darwaza became an Arab nationalist endorsing the concept of a Greater Syrian Arab state . 
 Following the World War I Armistice , Darwaza held several political posts including Secretary @-@ General of al @-@ Fatat from May 1919 to March 1920 , Secretary of the Muslim @-@ Christian Association 's Nablus branch , and Secretary of the First Palestine Arab Congress in Jerusalem in 1919 . During the spring and summer of 1919 , a vigorous political campaign was waged by the Arab politicians in Palestine who were divided into " Younger Politicians " and " Older Politicians " . The campaign was centered on the political future of Palestine , and Darwaza , a Younger Politician , played a central role . The Younger Politicians consisted of Arab nationalists who sought to unite Palestine with King Faisal 's Syria while the Older Politicians consisted of Palestinian nationalists who preferred that Palestine be an independent entity . 
 Darwaza and Hafiz Kanaan — another leading al @-@ Fatat member from Nablus — lobbied Arab groups in Jerusalem to advocate Syro @-@ Palestinian unity before the arrival of the King @-@ Crane Commission on 10 June 1919 . They first met with Haj Amin al @-@ Husseini and Kamil al @-@ Husayni of al @-@ Nadi al @-@ Arabi party and they immediately expressed their support . They also suggested that Darwaza meet Raghib al @-@ Nashashibi , <unk> ad @-@ Din <unk> , and Aref al @-@ Dajani , supporters of independence . Darwaza convinced Nashashibi to gather some of the Older Politicians of Jerusalem to a meeting at his house . When it was made clear that Musa al @-@ Husayni , a leader of the Older Politicians , was now in favor of unity , all of the other Older Politicians followed suit . When the commission arrived in Jaffa , it concluded on 27 June that it was in favor of Syro @-@ Palestinian unity under a British Mandate . 
 In the first week of July 1919 , the General Syrian Congress ( GSC ) held its first meeting in Damascus and Darwaza was its secretary . The GSC called for the immediate independence of Syria as a sovereign state under a constitutional monarchy and underlined its opposition to the establishment of Zionism in southern Syria ( Palestine ) . Along with Haj Amin al @-@ Husseini and Aref al @-@ Aref , Darwaza founded and became an officer of the Palestinian Society in Damascus . The organization urged all societies and clubs in Palestine to cooperate and condemn the San Remo Conference 's decision to grant Great Britain a mandate over Palestine and Transjordan . 
 The hope of Darwaza and the Younger Politicians for unity with Syria were curtailed when it became known that King Faisal was aligning himself with the leaders of the Zionist movement because " they [ the Zionists ] were helping us [ the Arabs ] in the [ Paris Peace ] conference . " Afterward , Darwaza believed King Faisal did not devote to the Palestine issue its deserved attention . Faisal was deposed by the French in July 1920 . An event that further deteriorated Darwaza 's ambitions of Arab unity was the confirmation of the British Mandate over Palestine at the San Remo Conference on 24 April 1920 . His experience in Damascus revealed to him that the universalism of Arab nationalism was not as concrete as its advocates had thought , and the military might of the colonial powers — France and Great Britain — were an overwhelming force to contend with . 
 = = = Educator in Nablus = = = 
 Darwaza continued his political activity , representing Nablus in the Fourth Palestinian Congress in May 1921 and the Seventh Palestinian Congress in June 1928 . From 1922 to 1927 , he served as the principal of the an @-@ Najah National School ( later to become an @-@ Najah National University ) where he initiated and nurtured an Arab nationalist political educational process . Darwaza wrote textbooks and was an educator himself . One of his students who later became a nationalist politician , Akram Zu <unk> , wrote that Darwaza " used to give us a weekly lesson on the principles of Nationalism and [ modern ] society , in a way which sharpened our thought and broadened our horizons . " <unk> also recalls that Darwaza wrote up nationalist and historical plays that his students would perform in . 
 In 1927 , Rashid al @-@ Haj Ibrahim , the leader of the Young Men 's Muslim Association of Haifa , a prominent merchant , and future associate of Darwaza , invited him to his home to speak to a large group of students and notables about nationalist ( <unk> ) and patriotic ( <unk> ) education . This was recognition that Darwaza 's contribution to the spread of Arab nationalist sentiments gained influence not only in an @-@ Najah School , but throughout Palestine . 
 = = = Fight against the British Mandate = = = 
 Darwaza became a member of the Arab Executive Committee and in 1930 was appointed by rival nationalist Haj Amin al @-@ Husseini ( now the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem ) as the General Administrator of the Waqf ( Islamic religious trust ) under the Supreme Muslim Council . In 1931 , he convinced his city 's MCA to change its name to the Patriotic Arab Association . Unlike other Arab politicians at the time , Darwaza supported a combination of pan @-@ Arabism , Islamism , and dedication to the Palestinian nationalist ideal . 
 He began to edit in the al @-@ Ja <unk> al @-@ <unk> newspaper in the early 1930s and in December 1931 @-@ January 1932 , he wrote articles encouraging Arabs to fight British policies in the Middle East , to unite in the face of growing dangers , and to renew their drive towards freedom and independence . In August 1932 , he along with Awni Abd al @-@ Hadi and others founded the Istiqlal ( Independence ) party in Palestine , an offshoot of al @-@ Fatat . Originally , the Istiqlal operated in Syria , then Transjordan , but reassembled in Palestine after facing disappointing circumstances in both those territories . The party coaxed Palestinians towards defying British rule by staging demonstrations and political and social boycotts . Darwaza refused to allow the Istiqlal to participate in meetings between local Palestinian political parties and the British high @-@ commissioner . Darwaza wrote an article on 21 June 1933 , vehemently attacking Palestinian " vested interests " . He argued that the wealthy Arab notables of Palestine were subservient to the British and the Zionists and would willingly leave Palestine for other countries , while the poor and middle @-@ class Arabs had to remain to fight and die in their battle against British oppression . Darwaza helped instigate and organize the 1933 demonstrations in Jaffa which protested British policy in Palestine and continued Jewish immigration . 
 Darwaza was one of the principal organizers of the 1936 – 39 Arab revolt in Palestine which first erupted in his hometown of Nablus with the launch of the Palestinian general strike . Along with Abd al @-@ Hadi , Darwaza was arrested by the British authorities in June and imprisoned in the military camp at <unk> al @-@ Amar . The Mufti sent a delegation consisting of Darwaza , Mu 'in al @-@ Madi , and Abd al @-@ Hadi to Baghdad , then to Riyadh to discuss the situation and upon their return on 6 January 1937 , they revealed that the advice given to them was to cease hostilities . During the revolt , in 1937 , Darwaza was exiled from Palestine by British authorities to Damascus . Later in that year , Darwaza held several meetings with Nuri al @-@ Sa 'id of Iraq to explore various solutions to help the Arabs avoid appearing intransigent . 
 Despite attempts to calm the situation , in Damascus , Darwaza established and headed the Central Committee for National Jihad in Palestine which echoed Izz al @-@ Din al @-@ Qassam 's call for a holy war against the British and Zionism . Darwaza had many encounters with al @-@ Qassam , describing him as " a man lacking in arrogance or self @-@ love . He was open and available to all of the people and the people loved him . And he lived the life of a mujahid . " Darwaza worked closely with the Mufti , who was now under house arrest in Beirut , to garner support and supplies for the revolt and supervise the Arab rebels in Palestine . 
 In late 1939 , he was accused by French military authorities of helping Palestinian rebels in the revolt , tried by a military court , and sentenced to five years imprisonment in the Citadel of Damascus . While his exile by the British abruptly curtailed his political life , his imprisonment marked the beginning of a new life wherein the Quran becomes a major concern for the next several years . He was released in November 1944 . After his release , Darwaza was unable to return to Nablus because British authorities had issued an order preventing him from entering Palestine . As a result , he left for Turkey , mostly staying in Bursa until the end of 1945 . 
 The Mufti re @-@ established the Arab Higher Committee ( AHC ) in late 1946 and Darwaza joined the ten @-@ member council upon a request from the Mufti . Darwaza , along with Emil Ghuri and Mu 'in al @-@ Madi , served as the AHC 's delegates to the September 1947 convention of the Arab League 's Political Committee in Lebanon . With support from the Transjordanian representative , Salih Jaber , the Prime Minister of Iraq , openly criticized the delegates and questioned the AHC 's right to even send delegates to the convention . Later that year , Darwaza resigned from the AHC due to the Mufti 's unbending attitude towards wider representation . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 After resigning from the AHC , Darwaza spent the rest of his life in the modern state of Syria where he left politics to concentrate on literature . Although he did much of his writing in the 1930s and 1940s , he did not have any of his works published until the 1960s . As a pan @-@ Arab intellectual , Darwaza aided in establishing the union between Syria and Egypt forming the short @-@ lived United Arab Republic . After Egypt adopted its 1956 constitution declaring that it was an Arab country and its people a part of the Arab nation , Darwaza concluded that Egypt and Syria were in a position to unite . When unity negotiations underwent , he suggested several forms of federation , such as the American , Soviet , and Indian models , but did not recommend any specific model for an Arab state . Darwaza did , however , suggest that the institution of a federation between Egypt and Syria would be the first step towards the realization of a comprehensive union . 
 In 1983 Darwaza granted Palestinian historian Muhammad Y. Muslih an eight @-@ day interview and allowed him to photo @-@ copy his memoirs in entirety . Muslih noted that Darwaza was failing in health at the time . He died in Damascus in 1984 at the age of 96 . Darwaza had three daughters , Najah , Salma , and <unk> and a son , <unk> . 
 = = Literary works = = 
 One of the first modern histories of the Arab nation in contrast to a history of an individual Arab country was composed by Darwaza in the late 1920s under the title Lessons of Arab History : From Antiquity to Present Times . In the book , Darwaza begins by describing the origins of the Semitic peoples , the rise of Islam , the end of Arab rule in the Middle East by Turkic groups , and the foreign rule over the Arabs by Western powers . The book was intended to be used as a textbook in primary and secondary schools throughout the British Mandates of Palestine and later Iraq , hence its simplified and direct language . Nonetheless , it played a pioneering role in the development of pan @-@ Arabism . 
 In 1934 , Darwaza published a widely read story , The Angel and the Land Broker , reflecting popular Arab sentiments against the growing " Zionist threat " and attacking brokers who tempted Palestinian land owners to sell their land to Jews . The story describes methods used by Zionists to entice Arab landowners to sell their land and the main characters in the story are an illiterate farmer and a Jewish girl from Tel Aviv who encourages the former to spend himself deep into debt , forcing him to sell his land at a price far below its value . 
 Later in his lifetime after leaving politics , Darwaza published memoirs that discussed in detail the city of Nablus in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . According to Youssef <unk> , " he gives a graphic and almost exhaustive description of his hometown ... its mosques , residential quarters , orchards , industries , and inhabitants . Moreover , he dwells at length of the social composition of the town endeavoring to reveal the open conflict between ' feudal families ' and the new generation of middle traders , functionaries , civil servants , and teachers . " 
 = = = Quranic studies and interpretations = = = 
 While he was imprisoned in Damascus , Darwaza was provided with an opportunity to read and reflect upon the Quran . He states " I considered [ this opportunity ] an act of divine [ favor ] and started reading whatever books of exegesis and qur 'anic studies were accessible to me . " During his incarceration , he compiled three books dealing with the Quran and conceived the idea of writing a modern tafsir ( " interpretation " ) . 
 His time in Turkey exposed him to the libraries of Bursa and it was there where he wrote the rough draft of his tafsir entitled al @-@ Tafsir al @-@ Hadith . Darwaza states in this exegesis he would " uncover the wisdom of revelation , the fundamental concepts of the Qur 'an and the whole range of its subject matter and present it in a new style and new sequential order . " Al @-@ Tafsir al @-@ Hadith was generally aimed at the Muslim youth who had been alienated by the traditional interpretations of the Quran . Darwaza placed much emphasis on the close relationship between the text of the Quran and the environment in which it was revealed . He rejected the hadith which states the Qur 'an was originally preserved on a tablet in the seventh heaven , sent down to lowest heaven and from there gradually to Muhammad . 
 After the completion of the rough draft , he wrote a volume of four chapters , Qur 'an al @-@ Majid , which served as an introduction for the tafsir . Darwaza stresses a close connection between the Quran and the biography of the Muhammad ( sira ) and states that the Quran fully reflects various stages between the Quran and the career of Muhammad . He also emphasizes that both the angels and the jinn are spoken in the Quran not for their own sake , but to reinforce Muhammad 's missions and goals . 
 He contends that the presentation of the Quran and its <unk> was dictated by Muhammad and that the task of Abu Bakr was to collect the Quran between its two covers and transcribe it into one copy , while Uthman 's task was to fix the transcription and unify it to prevent variant readings . He also expresses doubts that Ali , as it is alleged , had made a chronologically arranged collection . Darwaza was very critical of other modern interpreters who used certain verses of the Quran to deduce and support scientific theories . He argues that those people have done harm to Islam by trivializing the sacred character of the Quran . 
 Darwaza was convinced that interpretations of the Quran were the only possible basis for any renewal and development of Islamic religious , political and social thought , and that the Quran was the only resource for Muslim reinterpretation of traditional norms in Islam and Islamic thinking . Since it was quite uncommon to follow a chronological order for a whole tafsir — which Darwaza did — he had to justify his position by seeking a fatwa from the <unk> of Aleppo and Damascus . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Throughout his life , Darwaza was an Arab nationalist and supported the unity of Syria and Palestine . His particular brand of Arab nationalism was influenced by Islam , his belief in Arab unity , and the oneness of Arabic culture . According to his perspective , the ideology 's main points were the Arabic language , the Arab homeland , a shared Arab history and common Arab interests . Although Darwaza believed that Arab nationalism pre @-@ dated Islam , he also maintained that Islam expanded Arab territory and " stamped them with the eternal mark of Arab nationalism . " According to Muhammad Y. Muslih , this meant that Islam had provided Arabs with " spiritual , cultural , and legal unity and within the framework of that unity the Arab individual formed his moral and social beliefs , irrespective of where he lived and through it the Arabs were able to preserve national identity and maintain their culture in the face of foreign invaders , including the Ottomans " . Darwaza contends that Arab nationalism is not a new concept borrowed from the West and asserts the constituents of Arab nationalism are stronger than those which make up the modern forms of nationalism in the world . 
 His ideas helped the spread the word of secular pan @-@ Arabism against religious nationalists and those who believed in separate Syrian , Lebanese , and Palestinian destinies . In the mid @-@ 1950s , Darwaza asserted that the first stage of Arab union should be based on a merger between Egypt and Syria . In his opinion , a union between the northern Arabs ( Syria ) and the southern Arabs ( Egypt ) would facilitate the adherence of other Arab states . He believed that Egypt 's capabilities and human resources compelled it to fill the role of an Arab " Prussia " . Darwaza remarked on Gamal Abdel Nasser , Egyptian president and founder of the short @-@ lived union , saying " Since the Arab revolt against the Turks , no Arab leader has been up to the level of events except for Jamal ' Abd al @-@ Nasir . He emerged and vanished like a shooting star . " 
 Rashid Khalidi states about Darwaza , " Moved as he was by the civilization of Arabs , he evoked a distant Arab past . For obvious reasons Islam was central to that past . But in the case of Darwaza , Islam was important not as the binding substance of the nation , but as a culture and civilization . In other words , culture , language , and history not religious solidarity were posited as the glue that was to hold the Arab nation together . " According to Khalidi , Darwaza contributed to Arab nationalism in the practical and intellectual domains greatly . 
 = = List of works = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1946 ) . 
 Ta <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> min <unk> . ( 1958 ) . 
 Al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> . ( 1959 ) . 
 Al- ' Arab <unk> ' <unk> min al @-@ qarn at @-@ <unk> <unk> l @-@ qarn ar @-@ <unk> ' ' <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1959 ) . 
 <unk> Misr fi l @-@ <unk> wal @-@ <unk> au <unk> al @-@ <unk> wa @-@ ba <unk> . ( 1963 ) . 
 <unk> an @-@ <unk> ' <unk> as @-@ <unk> wa @-@ bai <unk> <unk> al @-@ ba <unk> . ( 1964 ) . 
 <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1971 ) . 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> wal @-@ <unk> al- ' <unk> wa @-@ min <unk> an @-@ <unk> wa li @-@ <unk> mu <unk> @-@ <unk> . ( 1972 ) . 
 al @-@ <unk> fī <unk> Allāh fi l @-@ Qur 'an ̄ wal @-@ <unk> . ( 1975 ) . 
 Az @-@ <unk> wa- ' l @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> 'if . ( 1978 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fī <unk> . ( 1978 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fi <unk> al @-@ <unk> wa @-@ <unk> <unk> . ( 1978 ) . 
 al- <unk> fi ' l @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> : <unk> wa @-@ ah ̲ <unk> wa @-@ <unk> <unk> ' l @-@ <unk> ̲ a . Wa @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> fi ' l @-@ <unk> fī zaman an @-@ <unk> . Wa @-@ <unk> wa @-@ ah ̲ <unk> wa @-@ <unk> min ad @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> wa @-@ ma . ( 1980 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fī <unk> al @-@ Urdunn wa @-@ <unk> . ( 1981 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fī <unk> ' n @-@ <unk> . ( 1981 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fi ' l @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> wa- ' l @-@ <unk> 'ir wa @-@ <unk> wa @-@ <unk> . ( 1981 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fī <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1981 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fi ' l @-@ <unk> . ( 1981 ) . 
 Al @-@ imārāt al @-@ ʻarabīya as @-@ šāmila fi <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1983 ) . 
 <unk> : <unk> <unk> bi @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ ʻarabīya wa- ' l @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> <unk> qarn min az @-@ zaman : 1305 @-@ 1404 hijra , 1887 @-@ 1984 . ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = Islamic = = = 
 Ad @-@ <unk> al @-@ qur ' <unk> fī <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1956 ) . 
 At @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ̲ as @-@ <unk> . ( 1962 ) . 
 Sīrat ar @-@ <unk> . ( 1965 ) . 
 Ad @-@ <unk> al @-@ qur <unk> was @-@ sunna an @-@ <unk> fī <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> . ( 1966 ) . 
 Al @-@ Mar 'a fi l @-@ Qur 'an was @-@ sunna . ( 1967 ) . 
 = X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter = 
 X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter ( Japanese : <unk> VS . ストリートファイター , Hepburn : Ekkusu Men bāsasu Sutorīto Faitā ) is a crossover fighting video game developed and published by Capcom . It is Capcom 's third fighting game to feature Marvel Comics characters , following X @-@ Men : Children of the Atom and Marvel Super Heroes , and the first installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series . As the title suggests , the game includes characters from Marvel 's X @-@ Men franchise and the cast from Capcom 's Street Fighter series . Originally released as a coin @-@ operated arcade game in 1996 , it was eventually ported to the Sega Saturn in 1997 and the PlayStation in 1998 . 
 X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter features gameplay similar to Street Fighter , but incorporates dual @-@ character selection and tag team @-@ based combat . Each player selects two characters to compete in a one @-@ on @-@ one battle , attempting to defeat the opposing team . The players are given the ability to switch between their characters at any point during the match . The game also incorporates numerous elements from X @-@ Men : Children of the Atom and Marvel Super Heroes . 
 The game was released to generally positive reviews , with critics praising its gameplay and sprite animation quality . While the Sega Saturn port received praise for maintaining the experience of the original arcade version , the PlayStation port was met with mixed to negative critical reception for removing several features , such as tag team battles . The changes were done in response to the technical limitations of the PlayStation . A sequel to the game , Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , was released in 1997 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Similar to Capcom 's various Street Fighter titles , X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter is a 2D fighting game in which players control various characters to engage in one @-@ on @-@ one combat , attempting to knock out the opponent by depleting their health . It is the first formal installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series and features dual @-@ character selection and tag team battles . Instead of the typical best @-@ of @-@ three round format , matches consist of a single round . Players select two characters at the beginning of a match , each sporting their own life gauge . Players control one character at a time , while the other awaits off @-@ screen . The starting character can tag in the off @-@ screen character at any time during the fight . The dormant character will also slowly recover a portion of their vitality while the current character is fighting . If one character loses all of their vitality , then the tag partner will automatically come into play . The match continues until both characters on either team are defeated . If the timer runs out before either team is knocked out , then the player with the most remaining health is declared the winner . 
 The game borrows numerous gameplay conventions from Capcom 's previous Marvel @-@ licensed ventures , X @-@ Men : Children of the Atom and Marvel Super Heroes , such as the " Super Jump " , the ability to jump higher than normal , and " Aerial Rave " , the ability to perform combos on the opponent while in the air . X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter also includes a meter system similar to the two aforementioned games called the " Hyper Combo Gauge " . As characters perform moves and receive damage , the players ' Hyper Combo <unk> will gradually fill . Players can expend their meter to perform various special techniques , such as the " Hyper Combo " , which unleashes high amounts of damage ; " Variable Combination " , where both characters use their Hyper Combos simultaneously ; and " Variable Counter " , which transforms a defensive block into an offensive counterattack by tagging in the off @-@ screen character . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 The arcade , Sega Saturn , and PlayStation versions of X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter all include Arcade Mode and Versus Mode . In Arcade Mode , the player fights several artificial intelligence @-@ controlled teams before competing in a final battle against the boss character , Apocalypse , an antagonist from the X @-@ Men series . In Versus Mode , two players can fight against each other locally . The PlayStation port also features Training Mode , where players can practice moves and combos against non @-@ aggressive computer opponents , and Survival Mode , where players fight against endless waves of teams . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter features a roster of 17 playable characters . The character sprites for the X @-@ Men characters were drawn from X @-@ Men : Children of the Atom , with the exception of Rogue , Gambit , and Sabretooth , who had not appeared in a previous Capcom fighting game . The sprite designs themselves are based on the characters ' appearances from the 1990s animated X @-@ Men television series , complete with the original voice actors . The Street Fighter character sprites are reused from Street Fighter Alpha 2 . Similar to his secret guest appearance in Children of the Atom , Akuma appears as a hidden character in X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . In order to create a level playing field between the cast of Street Fighter and the X @-@ Men series ' superheroes and supervillains , the Street Fighter characters were re @-@ imagined with highly exaggerated versions of their special moves . For example , Ryu comes equipped with a " super Hadouken " that fills the entire screen . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter debuted in Japan in September 1996 for the CP System II arcade board . The game received a port to the Sega Saturn in Japan on November 21 , 1997 . The port utilized the Saturn 's 4MB RAM cartridge peripheral , which was packaged alongside the game , to deliver an arcade @-@ perfect conversion . It was not officially released in North America due to the Saturn 's low sales numbers in the North American market . An imported version was sold at certain Electronics Boutique locations . Sega had initially intended to release the game in Europe bundled with the expansion cartridge ; however , these plans were eventually shelved . The game was then ported to the PlayStation on February 26 , 1998 in Japan , where it was renamed X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter : EX Edition . The PlayStation port was also released in North America on June 11 , 1998 , and Europe on June 22 , 1998 . 
 Due to the memory limitations of the PlayStation , both the graphics and gameplay of the port were altered . Several frames of character sprite animations were removed to reduce the amount of RAM usage . Most notably , the tag team combat was omitted . Instead of being able to switch between characters at will , the second character only comes into play during certain attacks , such as Variable Combinations and Variable Counters . In addition , the one @-@ round battles used in the arcade and Sega Saturn versions were extended to a two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ three round setup . The PlayStation version includes a code that allows players to compete in " pseudo @-@ tag team matches " , provided that each player uses their opponent 's starting character as their partner . For example , if Player 1 is controlling Ryu and Player 2 is controlling Wolverine , then Player 1 's partner will be Wolverine and Player 2 's partner will be Ryu . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Sega Saturn edition of X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter received generally positive critical reception , with reviewers praising its fast @-@ paced gameplay , animation and sound quality , and technical performance in comparison to the original arcade version . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot commended the character sprite animations and background details , claiming that " there is no better looking 2D fighter on any console system " . While Gerstmann also praised the port for its fast loading times and lack of slowdown , he criticized the game for its defense @-@ oriented gameplay and unoriginal soundtrack . Game Informer lauded the port for running and looking identical to its arcade counterpart , declaring it " one of the best arcade conversions ever seen to date " . 
 The PlayStation version , on the other hand , received mixed to negative reviews ; many reviewers ' critiques were centered on the port 's various changes as a result of the PlayStation 's technical restraints . Both GameSpot and Game Revolution lambasted the game for its removal of tag team battles and several instances of slowdown . The two sites also criticized the port 's low frame rate and noticeable decline in animation quality . While Game Informer and IGN shared many of the same criticisms , they viewed the game from a more positive perspective . Both maintained that , while the PlayStation port paled in comparison to the Sega Saturn version , it was still a solid fighting game . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel to X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter was released by Capcom in 1997 . Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , while similar in terms of gameplay and art style , replaces a majority of the X @-@ Men cast with characters from other Marvel Comics properties , such as Captain America and Spider @-@ Man . The game is notable for introducing " assists " into the Marvel vs. Capcom series , which allow players to summon their off @-@ screen character to perform an attack during battle . Like X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter , the game was ported to the Sega Saturn and PlayStation , which were released in 1998 and 1999 , respectively . 
 = Dinosaur ( Kesha song ) = 
 " Dinosaur " ( stylized as <unk> $ <unk> ) is a song by American recording artist and songwriter Kesha , taken from her debut studio album Animal ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Kesha in collaboration with Max Martin and Shellback ; the latter two also produced the song , while all three are responsible for the instrumentation . The song 's conception stems from an encounter Kesha had with an older man that had been hitting on her , which she compared to a prehistoric dinosaur . " Dinosaur " is a dance @-@ pop song that lyrically discusses an older man that is attempting to hit on a younger female , which is ultimately rejected . The song received generally negative reviews from music critics . Upon the release of Animal , " Dinosaur " charted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , peaking 107 respectively . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Dinosaur " is a song written by Kesha Sebert , in collaboration with Max Martin , Shellback ; the latter two are responsible for the song 's production . The song 's lyrics and conception use a metaphor , comparing an older man to a prehistoric , carnivorous dinosaur . All three composers were responsible for providing the song 's instruments . The song 's recording was commenced at Maratone Studios , in Stockholm , Sweden , by Martin and Shellback . While being interviewed by Rolling Stone , Kesha was asked about her writing technique and how her songs come to fruition , which she explained using " Dinosaur " as an example . The singer explained that the song 's conception was auto @-@ biographical and that it stemmed from a previous experience she had when an older man had been hitting on her , which she elaborated on : " I just write about what I live — literally , my entire record is totally autobiographical , because I think there 's a great pop song in anything and everything , any situation . There 's a song called ' Dinosaur ' about this old guy who was hitting on me , and his toupee was kind of falling off , and I was like , ' Oh my God , you 're so old , you 're prehistoric , you 're like a dinosaur . D @-@ I @-@ N @-@ O @-@ S @-@ A @-@ you are a dinosaur . ' " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Dinosaur " is a song composed in the dance @-@ pop genre . According to digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony @-@ ATV Music Publishing , the song is written in the key of E major and the tempo moves at 128 beats per minute at a jungle beat . Kesha 's vocal range in the song spans from the lower note of E3 to the higher note of E5 . The song encompasses keyboards , a cowbell , and a whistle in its production , the latter of which has been described as a " whistle @-@ synth . " The song 's lyrics revolve around an older man who is attempting to persuade a younger girl to leave the club with him , to which the protagonist responds with " a scattergun spray of insults . " 
 Rebecca Blissett of The Georgia Straight described the song as a " percussion @-@ bombed snot @-@ rapper " . According to Andrew Burgess of musicOMH , " Dinosaur " features a " Mark Mothersbaugh @-@ like whistle @-@ synth " and focuses on " the grossness of older men hitting on younger girls " . Burgess cites the line " hey carnivore , you want my meat , I know it " as evidence for this . The UrbanWire 's Cheryl Chia noted that the song is reminiscent of " Girlfriend " by Avril Lavigne , as well as Gwen Stefani 's " Hollaback Girl " . According to Althea Legaspi of The Chicago Tribune , " Dinosaur " contains " lyrical merit in that most women have experienced unwanted advances from a creepy way @-@ too @-@ old man " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Dinosaur " received generally negative reviews from most music critics . Ian Gittins of The Guardian called it a " bitchy put @-@ down of ageing suitors " . Doug Rule of Metro Weekly criticized the song 's chorus , which according to him is " spelt out like a " modern @-@ day Toni Basil " , saying : " Are we supposed to think that 's cute , even clever ? It 's neither . " The UrbanWire 's Cheryl Chia was critical of the song , saying that it " has the potential to be very annoying after a few rounds . " Billboard 's Monica Herrera also gave a negative review . She used the song as an example of one of the album 's " missteps " , stating that it could " only appeal to the most heartless of teens " . Ailbhe Malone of NME stated that " Dinosaur " contains the pay @-@ off " Honey , your toupee is falling to the left side / Get up and go bro / Oh wait , you ’ re fossilized " . 
 Fraser McAlpine of the BBC was positive in his review of the song . McAlpine felt that " Dinosaur " was the album 's best track , and went on to note that its conception was enough to " drive rock @-@ bores into a state of <unk> fury . " McAlpine 's consensus on the song was that " it is made of nothing but sugar and sass and additives , a song from a young girl to an older man who is attempting to pick her up in a club . All she has to offer him is a scattergun spray of insults , and cutie @-@ pie whistling . It ’ s childish and Parental Advisory Required at the same time , and is going to infuriate any adult within hearing range . " 
 = = Live performances and cover = = 
 The song was first performed live for MTV Push , a program broadcast by MTV Networks worldwide . The song was later performed as part of her world tour , the Get Sleazy Tour , as it was part of the concert 's set @-@ list . During the performance , Kesha was backed with dancers and band members that were dressed in an array of dinosaur costumes . Actress Heather Morris covered the song in the television series Glee in the episode titled " Prom @-@ asaurus " . It was aired on May 8 , 2012 , and is the 19th episode of that season . The episode 's plot revolves around prom with its theme involving dinosaurs . Morris ' character , Brittany S. Pierce , covered the song in the episode , performing a choreographed dance routine to it . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone wrote that the episode 's performance was " a small victory " , and concluded that it was the best performance of that episode . Erin Strecker of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the song was " auto @-@ tuned within an inch of its life " , but praised Pierce 's performance , writing " but Brittany can totally move . " Glee 's cover was released for digital download through the iTunes Store on May 8 , 2012 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Dinosaur " – 2 : 55 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded by Max Martin and Shellback at Maratone Studios , Stockholm , Sweden . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Kesha Sebert , Max Martin , Shellback 
 Production – Max Martin , Shellback for Maratone Productions 
 Keyboards – Max Martin 
 Cowbell – Kesha 
 Whistle – Kesha , Shellback 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Animal , Kemosabe Recordings , via RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Animal , " Dinosaur " debuted and peaked at 107 on the issue date of January 3 , 2010 , on the South Korea Gaon International Songs Chart . 
 = Castlevania : Dawn of Sorrow = 
 Castlevania : Dawn of Sorrow , known in Japan as Akumajō Dracula : <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , literally Devil 's Castle Dracula : Cross of the Blue Moon ) , is an action @-@ adventure game developed and published by Konami . It is part of Konami 's Castlevania video game series and the first Castlevania game to be released on the Nintendo DS . The game is the sequel to Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow and incorporates many elements from its predecessor . Dawn of Sorrow was commercially successful , selling more than 15 @,@ 000 units in its first week in Japan and 164 @,@ 000 units in the United States three months after its initial release . 
 Dawn of Sorrow continues the story of Aria of Sorrow , in which Dracula has been completely defeated , and his powers assumed by his reincarnation , Soma Cruz . With the help of his allies , Soma avoids becoming the new dark lord . A cult forms to bring forth a new dark lord by killing Soma . Soma and his allies move to ensure that a new dark lord is not created . 
 Dawn of Sorrow incorporates many features from previous Castlevania games : the combination of elements from platform games and role @-@ playing video games , the " Tactical Soul " system featured in Aria of Sorrow , and a dark , gothic atmosphere . Dawn of Sorrow also introduces new gameplay elements , such as the " Magic Seal " system , which requires the use of the DS stylus to draw a pattern in order to defeat powerful enemies , a distinctive anime character design , and a multiplayer mode , where two players compete for fastest times on a prerendered level . The game received high scores from many video game publications , and was considered one of the best games on the Nintendo DS for 2005 . The game was re @-@ released in Japan on June 29 , 2006 and later in North America during 2007 as part of the " Konami the Best " line . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 During the game , the player controls the onscreen character from a third @-@ person perspective to interact with people , objects , and enemies . Like previous games in the series and most role @-@ playing games , characters level up each time they earn a set number of experience points from defeating enemies ; each level gained increases the character 's statistics , thus improving their performance in battle . <unk> examples include hit points , the amount of damage a character can receive ; magic points , which determine the number of times a character can use magical attacks ; strength , the power of a character 's physical attacks ; and intelligence , the power of a character 's magical spells . Upon encountering an enemy , the player can use a variety of weapons to attack and defeat the enemy . Despite the game being set in 2036 , the weapon choices are largely medieval , including swords , axes , and spears , although handguns and a rocket @-@ propelled grenade are available . These weapons differ in their damage output , the range of the weapon , and the speed of the attack . 
 Dawn of Sorrow , similar to most games in the Castlevania series , is set in a castle , which is further subdivided into various areas . Areas of the castle differ in their composition , including monsters and terrain features . In addition , each area has its own unique piece of theme music that plays while the player remains in that area . The character moves around the environment based on the player 's choices ; however , the areas the character can move into are restricted based upon the items the player has , similar to most platform games . Progression , however , is not linear , as players are free to explore the parts of the castle they have access to , and can backtrack or move forward as they see fit . 
 = = = Tactical Soul = = = 
 The primary method for the player to gain additional abilities in the game is the absorption of souls via the Tactical Soul system , which was originally featured in Aria of Sorrow . Except for human enemies and the game 's final opponent , all enemies ' souls can be absorbed by the player . The chances for absorbing a soul varies on the enemy , as certain enemies will release souls more regularly than others . The player can absorb multiple copies of the same soul ; many of these souls will increase in effectiveness depending on the number of the same soul a player possesses . Souls provide a variety of effects , and are separated into four categories : Bullet , Guardian , Enchant , and Ability souls . The player can only have one type of Bullet , Guardian , and Enchant soul equipped at any given time . However , when the player acquires the " <unk> " soul , the player can have two different weapon and soul setups , and switch between them at will . Players can trade souls wirelessly using two Dawn of Sorrow game cards . 
 Bullet souls are often projectiles , and consume a set amount of magic points upon use . Guardian souls provide continuous effects , including transforming into mythical creatures , defensive abilities , and the summoning of familiars . The movement and attacking of familiars can be directly controlled with the stylus . Guardian souls continually drain magic points so long as they are activated . Several Guardian souls can be used in conjunction with Bullet souls to execute special attacks called Tactical Soul combos . Enchant souls offer statistical bonuses and resistance against several forms of attack . They are passive , and require no magic points to remain active . Ability souls give the player new abilities and are required to move into certain areas of the castle . They are always active , and therefore not equipped , nor do they consume magic points . Some examples include the ability to break ice blocks with the stylus , and the ability to double @-@ jump . 
 Souls can alternatively be spent to permanently transform a character 's weapon . At Yoko Belnades ' shop , the player can remove certain souls from their inventory in order to change their weapon into a stronger form . Certain weapons can only be acquired through using souls to strengthen a lesser form of the weapon . Souls are also used in the " Enemy Set " mode , where a player builds a custom scenario . The player can place monsters inside rooms if the player has acquired the monster 's soul in the main game , but boss enemies cannot be added to any scenario , even if the player has the boss ' soul . Two players , using two Nintendo DS consoles , can compete in these scenarios , with the winner being the one with the fastest time in completing the course . 
 = = = Magic Seal = = = 
 The Magic Seal system is a new feature introduced in Dawn of Sorrow , and makes use of the DS touchscreen . Once the player reduces the hit points of a " boss " enemy to zero , a circle will appear , and the game will automatically draw a pattern connecting any number of smaller circles on the circumference of the larger circle . After this , the player is prompted to draw the same pattern on the touchscreen in a set amount of time . If the player fails to draw the pattern accurately within the time limit , the boss will regain health and the battle will resume . If successful , the boss will be defeated . More powerful boss enemies require higher level Magic Seals , which have more intricate and complex patterns as the level increases and are found over the course of the game . 
 = = = Julius Mode = = = 
 After the player completes the game with either the bad ending or the best ending , Julius Mode is unlocked , similar to the Julius Mode in Aria of Sorrow . Julius Mode , in storyline terms , follows the assumption that Soma succumbed to his dark power , and became the new dark lord . A new game can then be started from the main menu in Julius Mode . In Julius Mode , the playable characters include Julius Belmont , Yoko Belnades , and Alucard . Each character has a weapon and an assortment of abilities unique to them , and although these abilities remain static throughout the entire game , the characters ' statistics can improve by acquiring enough experience points to level up . The castle layout and enemies are the same , with the exception of the final battle , which is against Soma . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Dawn of Sorrow is set in the fictional universe of the Castlevania series . The primary premise of the series is the struggle of the vampire hunters of the Belmont clan against the vampire Dracula and his legacy . Before the events of Castlevania : Aria of Sorrow , Dracula was permanently defeated and his castle sealed within a solar eclipse . With Dracula dead , a prophecy relating to who would inherit his powers drove the events of Aria of Sorrow , with the protagonist , Soma Cruz , realizing that he was Dracula 's reincarnation . Soma manages to escape his fate of becoming the new dark lord with the help of his allies . Dawn of Sorrow takes place one year after the events of Aria of Sorrow , where Soma believes that his inherited powers have been lost . The majority of the game is played inside a copy of Dracula 's castle , which is further subdivided into several areas that the player must venture through over the course of the game . The future setting of both Aria of Sorrow and Dawn of Sorrow , as well as starting a storyline after Dracula 's defeat , was a result of Koji Igarashi wanting to take a " different route " with Aria of Sorrow . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The primary playable character in Dawn of Sorrow is Soma Cruz , the reincarnation of Dracula , the longtime antagonist of the Castlevania series . He is supported in his quest by Mina Hakuba , the daughter of the priest of the Hakuba shrine ; Genya Arikado , a mysterious government agent dealing primarily with the supernatural ; Julius Belmont , the latest member of the Belmont clan of vampire hunters featured in the series ; Yoko Belnades , a witch in the service of the Roman Catholic Church ; and Hammer , a vendor of military material who retains a large information network . 
 A cult , dedicated to the resurrection of the dark lord , serves as the game 's antagonists . Celia Fortner is a shadow priestess at the head of the cult , and seeks to revive the dark lord in order to prevent the loss of her magical powers . Dmitrii Blinov and Dario Bossi are Celia 's primary lieutenants , the former a ruthless manipulator and the latter a vicious firebrand . They are the " dark lord 's candidates , " born on the day Dracula was slain , and thus can assume the mantle of dark lord by destroying Dracula 's soul , which is present in Soma Cruz . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 One year after the events in Aria of Sorrow , Soma is living peacefully , and believes that his powers have been lost . A woman who identifies herself as Celia Fortner , appears and summons several monsters . Arikado arrives to help Soma defeat the monsters , after which Soma absorbs their souls . Celia retreats , proclaiming that she will destroy Soma . Soma expresses disbelief at the return of his powers , but Arikado reveals that his powers were never lost , only dormant . He informs Soma that Celia is the head of a cult that seeks the resurrection of the dark lord . He leaves , instructing Soma not to pursue Celia . 
 Soma , however , uses information acquired from Hammer to locate the cult 's base , a facsimile of Dracula 's castle . Hammer arrives , and as he has left the military , agrees to help Soma by opening up a shop in the castle . After entering the castle , Soma encounters Yoko and Julius Belmont . As Julius leaves , Soma escorts Yoko to a safe location . During this time , she instructs him in the use of a Magic Seal , which is necessary to defeat certain monsters in the castle . As Soma travels farther into the castle , he meets Celia , who is flanked by two men , Dmitrii Blinov and Dario Bossi . Celia explains their nature as the " dark lord 's candidates , " who can become the dark lord by destroying Soma . He later encounters Dmitrii and is able to defeat him . Soma gains dominance over his soul , although he acquires no abilities . As Soma travels further , he comes upon Dario . Soma bests him , and Celia teleports Dario away from harm . 
 Soma meets Arikado , who is initially angered by Soma 's presence , but accepts the situation . He gives Soma a letter and a talisman from Mina . Soma briefs Arikado on the current situation , and Arikado leaves to locate Dario . Soma comes upon Dario and Julius , with the latter defeated due to his inability to use the Magic Seals . Dario retreats , instructing Soma to fight him in the castle 's throne room . Soma does so , lambasting Dario for only desiring power , and promising to defeat him . Before the battle begins , Soma uses one of his souls to transport himself into the mirror in the room , revealing <unk> , the flame demon sealed within Dario 's soul . Soma defeats <unk> , leaving Dario powerless . As Dario flees , Celia arrives , and instructs Soma to come to the castle 's center . 
 Upon arriving , Soma is forced to watch Celia kill Mina . Furious , he begins to succumb to his dark power . The talisman that Mina gave Soma is able to slow the transformation , enabling Arikado to arrive in time to inform Soma that the " Mina " that Celia killed was a doppelgänger . This aborts the transformation , but a soul exits Soma and enters the doppelgänger , which takes on the appearance of Dmitrii . Dmitrii states that when Soma defeated him he allowed himself to be absorbed , wishing to use his powers to copy Soma 's ability of dominance over the souls of Dracula 's minions . He then leaves with Celia to absorb the souls of many powerful demons and monsters in an attempt to increase his power . Soma and Arikado chase after the two , and find them in the castle 's basement . Dmitrii , using Celia as a sacrifice , seals Arikado 's powers , and engages Soma . However , his soul is unable to bear the strain of controlling the demons he has absorbed , and they erupt out of him , combining into one gargantuan creature called Menace . Soma manages to defeat it , but the souls that composed the demon begin to fall under Soma 's dominance . He becomes overwhelmed and rejects them , fleeing from the castle with Arikado . Soma is conflicted over the present situation , as he believes that it was his responsibility to become the dark lord and that the events of the game were a result of him not accepting this responsibility , but Arikado convinces him that his fate is not fixed . Soma then shares a tender moment with Mina , much to the amusement of his onlooking friends . 
 = = Development = = 
 The production of Dawn of Sorrow was announced on January 6 , 2005 as the first Castlevania game to be released on the Nintendo DS . Longtime Castlevania producer Koji Igarashi was in charge of the production . The choice to use the Nintendo DS in favor of the Sony PlayStation Portable was due to Aria of Sorrow 's success on Nintendo 's Game Boy Advance , and Igarashi 's observations during the 2005 E3 Media and Business Summit of both consoles . Igarashi felt that the storyline with Soma Cruz and the Tactical Soul system were a waste to only use in one game , contributing to his desire to make a sequel . The original design team from Aria of Sorrow , as well as numerous new additions from Konami Tokyo , was involved in the production of Dawn of Sorrow . Igarashi intended to include a white collar Japanese worker in the game . This worker would be a manager in a Japanese firm and have a family as well . However , the development team 's opposition to this idea forced him to drop this prospect . 
 The use of the technical features of the Nintendo DS was one of the production team 's principal concerns during development . The DS touch screen was a primary point of interest , and several functions , such as picking up items on the screen and moving them , were originally intended to be incorporated . However , scheduling problems forced the development team to abandon many of these ideas . Igarashi 's primary concern with using the touch screen was that it would detract from " the Castlevania pure action gameplay , " in which the player would have to slow down play in order to use the stylus . The DS microphone was looked at during development , but Igarashi noted that although he found humorous uses for it , it was never seriously considered for inclusion into the game . 
 For the graphical representations of the numerous enemies in the game , Igarashi had sprites from previous Castlevania games such as Castlevania : Symphony of the Night reused , and the development team redesigned them for use on the Nintendo DS . Unlike most recent Castlevania games , Ayami Kojima did not participate in the character designs for Dawn of Sorrow . Instead , the characters were drawn in a distinctive anime style . This was done due to influence from producer Koji Igarashi , who wanted to market the game to a younger audience . Aria of Sorrow 's sales figures did not meet expectations , and as a result , Igarashi consulted Konami 's sales department . The staff concluded that the demographics of the Game Boy Advance did not line up with the series ' target age group . Igarashi believed that the Nintendo DS inherently attracted a younger audience , and he was working to court them with the anime style . Furthermore , Igarashi considered the anime style a litmus test for whether future Castlevania games would incorporate it . Kojima 's hiatus was also to allow her to concentrate upon her character designs for Castlevania : Curse of Darkness . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The game 's music was composed by Michiru Yamane and Masahiko Kimura . Yamane , a longtime composer of music for the Castlevania series , had previously worked on the music of Castlevania games such as Symphony of the Night and Aria of Sorrow , while Kimura had developed the music for Castlevania on the Nintendo 64 . In an interview , Yamane noted that she made the music " simple " and " easy to recognize , " similar to her work on previous Castlevania games , and she specifically drew a parallel between her work on Castlevania games for the Game Boy Advance and her music in Dawn of Sorrow . Igarashi , present in the interview , asserted that making music for handheld game consoles , regardless of the type , is largely the same , although he accepted that the DS 's sound capabilities were much better than those of the Game Boy Advance 's . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dawn of Sorrow has received critical acclaim from many video game publications , with several hailing it as the best Nintendo DS game of 2005 . In Japan , the game sold over 15 @,@ 000 units in its first week , acquiring the number ten slot in software sales . The game sold over 164 @,@ 000 copies three months after its release in the United States . The game was later re @-@ released in both Japan and North America as part of Konami 's " Konami the Best " line . 
 Many reviewers noted that despite being highly similar to Aria of Sorrow , it managed to define itself as a standalone title . GameSpot commented that Dawn of Sorrow succeeded in continuing 2D games as a definite genre , and that it " keeps that flame burning as bright as ever " . In addition , GameSpot considered it for the accolade of best Nintendo DS game of 2005 , with the prize ultimately going to Mario Kart DS . Editors at IGN awarded Dawn of Sorrow the prize of best adventure game on the DS for 2005 . 
 The gameplay , the Tactical Soul system in particular , received praise from reviewers . The sheer depth of abilities from the numerous souls found in the game was lauded , and IGN believed that the ability to have two customizable " profiles " of different abilities was " an extremely handy idea " . The relative difficulty of the game and its length was also brought into question , with GameSpot noting that the game could be finished in five hours and " is fairly easy as far as Castlevania games go " . 
 GameSpot extolled the game 's animation and graphics , describing the backgrounds as " intricate and gorgeous " and the individual animation , especially of enemies , as one of the game 's " highlights " . IGN echoed this assessment , calling the animation " stunning and fluid , " and noted the differences in graphics between Aria of Sorrow and Dawn of Sorrow , stating that the latter was on a " broader and more impressive scale " . The utilization of an anime style of drawing the characters , as versus the traditional gothic presentation of illustrator Ayami Kojima in previous Castlevania games , was lambasted by reviewers . GameSpy deplored the " shallow , lifeless anime images " used for the characters and Kojima 's absence from the production . IGN believed the new images were " down to the level of ' generic Saturday morning Anime ' quality " . The audio by Michiru Yamane and Masahiko Kimura was highly regarded , with GameSpot stating that it was " heads and shoulders above [ Aria of Sorrow ] " . IGN noted that the DS dual speaker system presented the audio " extraordinarily well " . In the review from 1UP.com , the game 's score was compared to the soundtrack of Symphony of the Night , and the sound quality and compositions considered " excellent " and " exceptional " respectively . 
 The functionality associated with the Nintendo DS , namely the use of the touch screen and the Magic Seal system , was subject to criticism from reviewers . GameSpot noted that it was difficult to use the stylus immediately after the game prompted the player to draw the Magic Seal , thus forcing the player to use their fingernail on the touch screen . Other functions using the touch screen , including clearing ice blocks , were viewed as trivial , with GameSpy labeling it as a " gimmick " . However , IGN dismissed the lack of DS functionality as a major issue , claiming that it " doesn 't hurt the product in the slightest " . 
 In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . 
 = Little Thetford = 
 Little Thetford / <unk> / is a small village and civil parish 3 miles ( 5 km ) south of Ely in Cambridgeshire , England , about 76 miles ( 122 km ) by road from London . The village is built on a boulder clay island surrounded by flat fenland countryside , typical of settlements in this part of the East of England . During the Mesolithic era , the fenland basin was mostly dry and forested , although subject to salt and fresh water incursions . The marshes and meres of this fenland may therefore have been difficult to occupy , other than seasonally , but there is evidence of human settlement on the island since the late Neolithic Age ; a Bronze Age causeway linked the village with the nearby Barway , to the south @-@ east . An investigation , prior to a 1995 development in the village , discovered a farm and large tile @-@ kiln of Romano @-@ British origin ; further investigations uncovered an earlier settlement of the Pre @-@ Roman Iron Age . The Roman road Akeman Street passed through the north @-@ west corner of the parish , and the lost 7th century Anglo @-@ Saxon village of Cratendune may be nearby . 
 The 10th @-@ century Old English name , <unk> <unk> , suggests a ford across the nearby River Great Ouse , which today forms most of the village 's eastern boundary . In 1007 , an Anglo @-@ Saxon noblewoman named <unk> granted her lands in Cambridgeshire and Norfolk , including the " land at Thetford and the fisheries around those marshes " , to the abbots of Ely Abbey ; the village was still listed as a fishery in the Domesday Book , 79 years later . Pasture farming , and harvesting of reeds , peat , and rushes were the other dominant activities of the time . The draining of the land , which began in the 17th century , enabled arable farming activity that continues to this day . During the late 19th century , coprolite , a phosphate @-@ rich fossil used as a fertiliser , was mined in shallow pits around the village . 
 Little Thetford resisted the Parliamentary Inclosure Acts of William IV for seven years , which may have led to the strong Baptist following amongst the poor of the village . About half of Little Thetford was eventually enclosed under the Parliamentary Inclosure Thetford Act of Victoria . 
 The river flooding , which affected 30 counties in England during March 1947 , caused the Great Ouse to break its banks at Little Thetford . Heavy rain following a very severe winter overwhelmed multiple rivers throughout England and eastern Wales . It was the worst flooding in over two hundred years . The dismantled Ely and St Ives Railway crossed the A10 road at Thetford corner . The Cambridge station to Ely station section of the Fen Line passes through the east of the village . Occupying an area of 2 square miles ( 5 km2 ) , and with a population of 792 , Little Thetford is the smallest civil parish in the ward of Stretham ; notable buildings in the village date from the 14th century . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 There is evidence of human settlement at Little Thetford since the Neolithic Age . A 1996 search along the Anglian Water pipeline at Little Thetford — <unk> Fen uncovered an important and unusually dense concentration of late Neolithic ( 3000 – 2201 BC ) remains . This is unusual because , although the fenland basin was dry and forested during the Mesolithic era , the area was sometimes subject to marine incursions , and at other times , fresh @-@ water flooding . This led to marshes and open water areas which may have been difficult to settle on — except perhaps for seasonal activity . A Neolithic polished flint axe ( 4000 – 2201 BC ) was found in the village in 1984 at Bedwell Hey Farm . Fourteen pre @-@ Roman flints of various finishes were also discovered in 1998 at the same site . 
 A more substantial Bronze Age settlement is known to have existed ; the remains of what may have been a causeway were discovered in 1934 , in the form of wooden piles unearthed by a farmer between Little Thetford and nearby Barway . A Bronze Age ring and a late Bronze Age sherd were excavated nearby . There have been a number of Bronze Age finds in the area , including a pre – 701 BC palstave at nearby <unk> farm , Barway , and at Little Thetford , a middle Bronze Age ( 1600 – 1001 BC ) rapier in 1953 , and a late Bronze Age flesh @-@ hook in 1929 . 
 A Romano @-@ British farm around 200 AD , largely built upon a previous Iron Age settlement dating from 200 – 100 BC , was discovered during the Watson 's Lane development in 1994 . Pre @-@ Roman Iron Age and Romano @-@ British pottery was found on the site , as well as human skeletal remains . A single @-@ flue @-@ chamber tile kiln was also uncovered . Roofing tile fragments were found near the kiln , including tegulae , imbrices , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The Roman road Akeman Street is three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) due west of the village . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 A middle Saxon pendant dating from 601 – 700 AD was discovered in a field in Little Thetford in 1952 . This 3 @-@ centimetre ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) diameter by 1 @-@ centimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) thick pendant , made from rock @-@ crystal , gold , garnet , and amethyst coloured @-@ glass , has been worked in a lathe . The workmanship is not of a high standard . Æthelberht of Kent was said to have built a church at Cratendune around 600 AD , about a mile from what is now Ely Cathedral . In 673 AD , Æthelthryth considered restoring this church , thought to have been destroyed by Penda of Mercia , but instead made what is now Ely Cathedral the site of her monastery . An early Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery , used at some point between 410 – 1065 AD , was uncovered around 1945 near Little Thetford ( <unk> , <unk> ) , and was thought to be this lost village of Cratendune . A deserted Saxon settlement , 410 – 1065 AD , examined in 1999 in Ely , may also be a candidate for this lost site of worship . 
 Little Thetford means little public or people 's ford — Old English <unk> <unk> ( c . 972 ) and <unk> [ sic ] ( 1086 ) — compare with Thetford , Norfolk — Old English <unk> ( late 9th century ) and <unk> ( 1086 ) . The online Domesday Book records the settlement under the name <unk> [ sic ] . The first written evidence that Ely Abbey had inherited the Little Thetford lands was in the 12th @-@ century chronicle , Liber Eliensis . The will of <unk> ( d . 1007 ) , an Anglo @-@ Saxon noblewoman , granted estates in Cambridgeshire and Norfolk to the Abbey , which included " ... that land at Thetford and fisheries around those marshes " . In 1110 , Hervey le Breton , Bishop of Ely , granted the manor to William Brito , his Archdeacon and also his nephew . Chapel Hill in the village , near the river , commemorates the site of <unk> Chapel , used since 1381 . Some of the stone from this chapel , dismantled in 1571 , was used in the building of St George 's Church . By 1539 , the Little Thetford manor and its estates contained arable land , pasture , gardens , and orchards . In the mid @-@ 16th century , the antiquary William Bowyer owned the farm . 
 There was once a medieval windmill in Thetford Field , west of the main built up area of the village . This may have been the site of the look @-@ out tower that village legend says had been used during the Norman Conquest by Hereward the Wake 's defence of the Isle of Ely ; a deserted settlement at this location may once have been the centre of the village . The stump of a late medieval ( roughly 1540 – 1900 AD ) windmill in the present centre of the village was converted into a house . The site of this mill is where the Roundhouse still stands . The <unk> windmill was on the east bank of the River Great Ouse at Barway . The chain ferry linked Barway with Little Thetford . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 The apothecary and botanist , William Sole ( June 1741 February 1802 ) , was born in Little Thetford and educated at King 's School , Ely . Sole was apprenticed to Robert Cory of Cambridge for five years ; he followed this by setting up a solo apothecary practice in Bath and later a practice in partnership with Thomas West . Sole published <unk> Britannicae ; he was one of the first elected associates of the Linnean Society of London and Sprengel named a plant species Solea ( now Viola ) after him . 
 An Enclosure Act is a parliamentary authority to fence @-@ off common land , thus making that land private property , while awarding commoners land in compensation . Inclosure is the name given to the parliamentary statute thus created . The enclosure process began in the 13th century and was supported by Acts of Parliament from 1640 . In November 1833 , the Isle of Ely intended to apply for Acts of Parliament to enclose the lands of Little Thetford . Officials arrived in the village armed with nothing more than a notice to be pinned on the Church of England 's St. George 's church door , but were prevented from doing so by a dozen villagers . They returned later with ten constables , authorised by Ely magistrates , and were confronted this time by 150 stick @-@ wielding protesters , who continued to prevent due process . When the clergyman , Henry Hervey Baber , arrived the following afternoon , he was prevented from carrying out his normal Sunday service . Villagers may have rebelled against the church at this time , perhaps believing it was acting on behalf of the establishment in the enclosure acts . This event may have been the trigger that , five years later , encouraged a strong Baptist following amongst the poorer villagers . About half the total area of Little Thetford was eventually enclosed in 1844 , seven years after that of Stretham . 
 The village sent 61 men to fight in the First World War , which represents over 30 percent of the village population of 1911 . Two villagers won Distinguished Conduct Medals . Thirteen villagers — over six percent of the village — died at battles including La Cateau , Second Battle of Ypres , Gallipoli Campaign , Battle of the Somme , and the Battle of Arras . 
 One of the thatched houses in Little Thetford was destroyed by fire . Reported in the Cambridge Chronicle 6 November 1930 , the cause of the fire at the c . 13th @-@ century six @-@ room building was not known . Fireworks were being discharged at the other end of the village . All that remained were burnt beams and smouldering walls , which were apparently made of old fen @-@ mud . The villagers saved the nearby Three Horseshoes public house , by forming a bucket chain , and pouring water on its thatched roof . 
 Two residents of the village were killed in action during the Second World War . One villager , serving with the 5th Battalion of the Suffolk Regiment , was captured during the Battle of Singapore , and died in captivity in Thailand . Another villager , serving on board HMS Warspite , was fatally wounded at Salerno during his ship 's support of the Allied invasion of Italy . 
 The river floods that began in mid @-@ March 1947 affected over 1 @,@ 000 square miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km2 ) of England . Some parts of thirty out of the forty English counties were underwater for nearly two weeks , during the worst flooding for over 200 years . Before the flooding , snow had been falling continuously since 23 January , with drifts up to 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) deep in places . The winter of 1946 – 1947 had been very severe , with mean average temperatures 4 ° C ( 7 ° F ) below normal , for that time of year . As the thaw began in mid @-@ March , the warmer weather brought heavy rains . The rain running off the frozen ground , combined with the thaw , overwhelmed multiple rivers in England and eastern Wales , which flooded . The River Great Ouse collapsed at Little Thetford on 17th March , flooding over 3 square miles ( 7 @.@ 8 km2 ) of nearby land . The army was drafted in to help repair the river banks , assisted by villagers , including women , and German prisoners . 
 Built in 1958 , the village hall houses the village social club , which started in a small extension to the hall in 1973 . The club was extended in 1981 , as the membership had grown to over 400 . Ely Member of Parliament , Mr. Clement Freud , opened the new room , built mainly by members themselves , on 7 May 1981 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 In 1929 , Stretham and Little Thetford were together one of the twelve parishes of the South <unk> Hundred , with a total area of 58 square miles ( 150 km2 ) . The village of Little Thetford is coterminous with the civil parish of Thetford . The civil parish today is in the ward of Stretham , which comprises three civil parishes , Stretham , Thetford , and <unk> , each of which has an elected council . Thetford seems to be the preferred administrative name used for the village , however it is easily confused with Thetford in Norfolk . Parish council services include bus shelters , cemeteries , shared equity housing , local planning consultation , play areas , village halls , and war memorials . Parish council meetings are held in the village hall situated in each civil parish . Little Thetford is also an ecclesiastical parish , although the church no longer has the same administrative responsibilities as it had until the early 19th century . A civil parish need not cover the same area as an ecclesiastical parish , but in the case of Little Thetford , they do . 
 The civil parish councils were governed by Ely Rural District council from 1894 until 1974 . East Cambridgeshire District Council ( ECDC ) was formed in 1974 with administration buildings in Ely . The district council collects council tax , provides services such as building regulations and local planning , leisure and tourism , handles issues strategic to the district , and many other services . ECDC is in turn governed by Cambridgeshire County Council which has administration buildings in Cambridge . The county council provides county @-@ wide services such as major road infrastructure , fire and rescue , libraries and heritage , and strategic planning . A mobile library visits the village every fortnight . 
 The parish is represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom as part of South East Cambridgeshire . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . It is also part of the East of England constituency of the European Parliament which elects seven MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Geology and topography = = = 
 The village , which is at about 16 feet ( 5 m ) above sea @-@ level , sits largely on the Kimmeridge Clay , a Jurassic shallow @-@ water shelf @-@ sea deposit , with an overall south @-@ south @-@ east to south @-@ east dip . Underlying the Kimmeridge Clay , are similarly dipping older Jurassic clays , which also contain thin beds of limestone and sandstone . Overlying the Kimmeridge Clay and lying some distance to the east of the village are similarly dipping , younger Cretaceous rocks , comprising the Greensand and Chalk . At the west of the village , an outlier of Greensand forms the foundation of a hill rising to some 30 feet ( 9 m ) above sea @-@ level . This hill is capped by much younger ( Pleistocene ) boulder clay , the result of large ice sheets having moved over the wider general area . 
 The Greensand also crops out to the south of the village . There it forms the eastern end of a similar outlier , on top of which is sited the village of Stretham . To the north @-@ west of Little Thetford , a further outlier of Greensand , capped by boulder clay , occurs in the vicinity of Bedwell Hey Farm . Northwards , an even larger outlier of Greensand , partly capped by glacial deposits , forms a hill rising to 85 feet ( 26 m ) above sea @-@ level . This , the highest point locally , has allowed the development of the regionally important Saxon settlement of Ely , Cambridgeshire . 
 Even more geologically recent gravel , alluvium and fen deposits are found in the valley of the River Great Ouse at the eastern end of the village ; they merge into the extensive flat tracts of The Fens which stretch north @-@ north @-@ west towards The Wash . Holme at nine feet ( 2 @.@ 75 m ) below sea @-@ level is East Cambridgeshire 's ( and the United Kingdom 's ) lowest point , and is 22 miles ( 35 km ) north @-@ west . 
 = = = Boundaries = = = 
 The A10 road forms most of the western boundary . The fourth longest river in the United Kingdom , the River Great Ouse , forms most of the eastern boundary . The northern boundary of the village extends from the north of Bedwell Hey Farm then eastwards across the A10 road to the River Great Ouse . Braham Farm falls just outside the village boundary to the north . The southern boundary encloses the Stretham coprolite pits , between Hundred Acre and Holt Fen , thus putting the pits firmly within the Little Thetford boundary . The size of the parish has changed . It was two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ square miles ( 1 @,@ 630 acres ; 6 @.@ 6 km2 ) in 1861 ; one @-@ point @-@ seven @-@ square miles ( 1 @,@ 078 acres ; 4 @.@ 36 km2 ) between 1891 and 1931 ; then changed to the present value of two square miles ( 1 @,@ 311 acres ; 5 @.@ 31 km2 ) from 1951 onwards . 
 = = = Drainage and the Fens = = = 
 There are many man @-@ made waterways , or Lodes nearby , including Wicken Lode and Soham Lode . Researchers suggest the Fenland Lodes are Roman in origin — almost certainly Soham Lode . Other researchers disagree , presenting a case for such lodes being Anglo @-@ Saxon or later . The Thetford catchwater ( drain ) , constructed in 1838 , runs south @-@ west to north @-@ east around the eastern edge of the built @-@ up part of the village . It drains by gravity , into the River Great Ouse north @-@ east of the village , at the Braham Dock drain . 
 The Earl of Bedford carried out extensive venture @-@ capital led Fen draining schemes during the 17th century . The Fens continue to be drained to this day . Wicken Fen , one of Britain 's oldest nature reserves , is two miles ( 3 km ) south @-@ east of the village . Little Thetford is in the Littleport and Downham Internal Drainage board , which itself is part of the Ely Group of Internal Drainage Boards . Stretham and Prickwillow local museums preserve examples of steam @-@ driven and diesel @-@ driven pumping stations , respectively . The Little Thetford pumping station is just inside the eastern boundary of the village . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 With an average annual rainfall of 24 inches ( 600 mm ) , Cambridgeshire is one of the driest counties in the British Isles . Protected from the cool onshore coastal breezes east of the region , Cambridgeshire is warm in summer and cold and frosty in winter . Regional weather forecasting and historical summaries are available from the UK Met Office . The nearest Met Office weather station is Cambridge <unk> . Additional local weather stations report periodic figures to the internet such as Weather Underground , Inc . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Between 1881 and 1961 , the village population density remained static at around 0 @.@ 15 / acre ( 37 / km2 ; 96 / sq mi ) . In contrast , the England and Wales figures for the same period almost doubled , rising from around 0 @.@ 75 / acre ( 190 / km2 ; 480 / sq mi ) to around 1 @.@ 2 / acre ( 300 / km2 ; 770 / sq mi ) . Little Thetford is in output area classification zones ( CGM ) six and seven . The area is classified as type three @-@ C , accessible countryside . In this classification , most residents work from home employed in agriculture or fishing . The areas in this classification are less densely populated than other areas of the country . The usually detached households generally have two or more cars . Varied ethnic backgrounds are less likely in such areas . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The marshes and meres surrounding the village supported fishing since Saxon times , at least until significant draining during the 17th century . Eels were plentiful in the waters in and around the Isle of Ely ( Eel – ey ) . In 1086 , Little Thetford was worth 3 @,@ 250 eels to the nearby abbots . In one year , 1087 , it was written that 52 @,@ 000 eels were caught in and around the city . The islands in this landscape supported pastures ; whilst reeds , peat , and rushes were harvested from the wetlands . As the land was drained , arable farming became the dominant activity , as it is today . 
 Little Thetford played a part in the coprolite mining rush of c . 1858 – 1900 . Coprolites are phosphate @-@ rich fossils found 2 and 10 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 and 3 @.@ 05 m ) below the surface in 33 feet ( 10 m ) deep by rarely more than 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) wide Gault clay beds . When mixed with sulphuric acid , the coprolite forms a fertiliser . One author attributes the Stretham coprolite pit , in Little Thetford , as being owned by John Bailey Denton , 1814 – 1893 , the surveyor and civil engineer . The site was worked from 1866 . Mainly local labour was used in shovelling the coprolite from the pit , for washing and sorting . In 1871 , six percent of the population of Little Thetford worked at the pit . The coprolite was transported to the James Fison ( now Fisons Ltd ) factory in Thetford , Norfolk , by river and then onwards by railway . 
 The Three Horseshoes , now a residential property , was one of seven public houses known to be within the village boundaries since the mid @-@ 19th century . The British Beer and Pub Association estimated in 2001 that " six rural pubs close each week " . There was a public house at Little Thetford , the Fish and Duck , situated along the river nearer Stretham ; it closed sometime during 2006 , and the owning company dissolved on 11 May 2010 . There is a combined newsagent , post office , and grocery store in Stretham , 2 miles ( 3 km ) south of the village . The one remaining local store is the recumbent bicycle shop , <unk> , on the main street . 
 The average distance the village population travels to work , by any means , is 13 @.@ 6 miles ( 21 @.@ 9 km ) . Most residents commute to Cambridge , although some villagers use the 75 @-@ minute Fen Line commuter service to London from Ely railway station , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away . There is a train every 30 minutes during peak time . 
 = = Community facilities = = 
 Sports and social activities including regular quiz @-@ nights , netball , and cricket , are held in and around the village hall . The hall is a brick building erected in 1958 . The larger of the two village greens is used as a play area . A picnic bench shaded by large trees is available for passing walkers . The green has a full @-@ sized basketball hoop at one end . Dog control orders are in force . In the <unk> to Ely section of Judith Bambers Rough Guide to walks in London and the south @-@ east , a 7 @-@ mile ( 11 km ) walk is described which passes Little Thetford on the east bank of the River Great Ouse . 
 Saffron Walden Angling Club , formed in 1960 , has a number of venues , including Little Thetford on the River Great Ouse . Fish species caught , along the weed and reed @-@ lined river at Little Thetford , include roach , bream , rudd , perch and bleak . In addition , some tench to 6 pounds ( 3 kg ) and rarely carp have been landed . A family run all @-@ year @-@ round grass camp site is in the village , offering 36 pitches for caravans or tents , with toilet facilities , showers , a laundry room , a vegetable preparation area , and washing @-@ up facilities . 
 = = Notable buildings = = 
 St George 's Church is a 14th @-@ century stone building with slate roof . The roof was thatched until 1863 , when the church was heavily restored . In 1886 , it was struck by lightning and required extensive rebuilding . Today , the church consists of a chancel , nave , north porch , and south vestry . The octagonal bowl font still has an original lead lining . St. George 's Church , a Grade II * listed building , is part of the Ely Team Ministry . The Baptist chapel was erected in 1867 on the site of its 1839 predecessor . 
 The history of <unk> House in Main Street is disputed . It has been claimed that it is a late 15th @-@ century dovecote . A Sun <unk> insurance policy still exists , number <unk> , dated July 1793 , the earliest known written record of the house . Other sources suggest the Round House is an 18th @-@ century thatched cottage , similar to the South African <unk> . A further source claims the building is a post @-@ medieval , AD 1540 – 1900 , tower mill . A family of 13 children lived in the building during the 19th century . The now private dwelling was re @-@ thatched in 2009 . 
 The Horseshoes is a Grade II listed residential thatched cottage , which was originally the Three Horseshoes public house , a 17th @-@ century pink @-@ painted cottage built to follow the curve of the road . April Thatch is a former public house , now a Grade II listed residential property . This white @-@ painted early 18th @-@ century cottage used to be the Rose & Crown . 
 = = Transport = = 
 A half @-@ mile ( 1 km ) section of the Roman road Akeman Street is shown on the 1903 Ordnance Survey map , three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) due west of the village . This straight north @-@ north @-@ east section originates in Stretham and heads towards Ely . John Cary , the 18th @-@ century cartographer , documents a coach route from London to King 's Lynn passing by the village in his Cary 's New Itinerary Road vehicle access to the village is now from the A10 road at Thetford Corner . Stagecoach operate the X9 bus service , Cambridge to March via Ely . This service stops near The <unk> , Thetford Corner . The village is a cul @-@ de @-@ sac to road vehicles , with no possible passage except in and out . It is a five @-@ minute walk to the River Great Ouse from the eastern end of Holt Fen . 
 The former Ely and St Ives Railway , known locally as the Grunty Fen express , crossed the A10 road at Thetford Corner . Passenger service ceased in February 1931 ; the line was never popular because of the high cost of travel . In 1866 , a year after the Ely – Sutton section opened , for example , the 7 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) return journey from Ely to Sutton cost 2s 0d . That equates to a cost of almost £ 8 at present worth , as of 2016 . The line completely closed in 1964 . The nearest station was Stretham railway station , situated on nearby Grunty Fen . The Fen Line , Cambridge to Ely railway is close to the River Great Ouse as they both pass the village . Little Thetford " presents a picturesque appearance from the railway . The main line running close to its eastern end " . The nearest station is at Ely , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north @-@ east of the village , about one hour 15 minutes away from London by rail . 
 The village can also be accessed by boat . The River Great Ouse passes to the east , forming much of the village 's eastern boundary , and there are mooring bollards inside the village boundary . A privately owned 1945 de Havilland Dragon Rapide , based at the Shuttleworth Trust 's Old Warden airfield , passes over the village during sightseeing tours to Ely . A privately maintained light aircraft airfield is located at Bedwell Hey Farm in the village . 
 = = Education = = 
 Little Thetford School is a Church of England primary school . In 1870 , there was a school in the village using run @-@ down premises lent by Townsend 's <unk> , now the John Townsend charity . Following local subscriptions and charitable donations , a 75 @-@ place school , designed by J. P. St. Aubyn , was erected in 1872 . This late Victorian building now provides education to around 100 pupils . The school was ranked joint @-@ top in all of Cambridgeshire by aggregate @-@ scores in all three key @-@ stage 2 test subjects in 2009 . The secondary education school , City of Ely Community College , is 5 miles ( 8 km ) from the village . The independent King 's school , established c . 970 , is also in Ely . King 's provides education to pupils of nursery age through to international study . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Anglian Water supplies the village water and sewage services from their Ely Public Water Supply zone <unk> . The water quality was reported as excellent in 2009 . In the same report , the hardness was reported as 304 mg / l . This is in the hard range of the scale which is more than moderately hard and less than very hard . The nearest reservoir , <unk> Water , is 24 miles ( 39 km ) due west of the village . 
 The Distribution Network Operator for electricity is EDF Energy . The largest straw @-@ burning power station in the world is at nearby Sutton . This renewable energy resource power station rated at 36 @.@ 85 MW from burning biomass , nearly 25 percent of the total renewable energy reported for Cambridgeshire in 2009 . The world 's largest poultry litter power plant , 38 @.@ 5 MW , at Thetford , refers to the other Thetford in Norfolk . 
 East Cambridgeshire District Council is part of the Recycling in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough ( <unk> ) Partnership , which was granted Beacon status for waste and recycling in 2006 – 2007 . 
 National health services ( NHS ) for the village are administered by NHS East of England . Acute cases are handled by four hospitals , including Addenbrooke 's Hospital , 16 miles ( 26 km ) south and Papworth Hospital 24 miles ( 39 km ) south @-@ west of the village . The nearest doctor 's surgery is Haddenham Surgery , Stretham , 2 miles ( 3 km ) south of the village . This is a satellite surgery for the main surgery in Haddenham , Cambridgeshire , 5 miles ( 8 km ) west of the village . 
 = Gillian Welch = 
 Gillian Howard Welch ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born October 2 , 1967 ) is an American singer @-@ songwriter . She performs with her musical partner , guitarist David Rawlings . Their sparse and dark musical style , which combines elements of Appalachian music , bluegrass , and Americana , is described by The New Yorker as " at once innovative and obliquely reminiscent of past rural forms " . 
 Welch and Rawlings have released five critically acclaimed albums under the name Gillian Welch and two under the name Dave Rawlings Machine . Their 1996 debut , Revival , and the 2001 release Time ( The Revelator ) , received nominations for the Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album . Their 2003 album , Soul Journey , introduced electric guitar , drums and a more upbeat sound to their body of work . After a gap of eight years , they released their fifth studio album , The Harrow & The Harvest , in 2011 , which was also nominated for a Grammy for Best Contemporary Folk Album . 
 Welch was associate producer and performed on two songs of the O Brother , Where Art Thou ? soundtrack , a platinum album that won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 2002 . Welch has collaborated and recorded with distinguished musicians such as Alison Krauss , Ryan Adams , Jay Farrar , Emmylou Harris , the Decemberists , and Ani DiFranco . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gillian Howard Welch was born on October 2 , 1967 in New York City , and was adopted by Ken and <unk> Welch , comedy and music entertainers . Her biological mother was a freshman in college , and her father was a musician visiting New York City . Welch has speculated that her biological father could have been one of her favorite musicians , and she later discovered from her adoptive parents that he was a drummer . Alec Wilkinson of The New Yorker stated that " from an address they had been given , it appeared that her mother ... may have grown up in the mountains of North Carolina " . When Welch was three , her adoptive parents moved to Los Angeles to write music for The Carol Burnett Show . They also appeared on The Tonight Show . 
 As a youngster , Welch was introduced to the music of American folk singers Bob Dylan , Woody Guthrie , and the Carter Family . She performed folk songs with her peers at the Westland Elementary School in Los Angeles . Welch later attended Crossroads School , a high school in Santa Monica , California . While in high school , a local television program featured her as a student who " excelled at everything she did " . 
 When a student at the University of California , Santa Cruz , Welch played bass in a goth band , and drums in a psychedelic surf band . In college , a roommate played an album by the bluegrass band The Stanley Brothers , and she had an epiphany : 
 The first song came on and I just stood up and I kind of walked into the other room as if I was in a tractor beam and stood there in front of the stereo . It was just as powerful as the electric stuff , and it was songs I 'd grown up singing . All of a sudden I 'd found my music . 
 After graduating from UC Santa Cruz with a degree in photography , Welch attended the Berklee College of Music in Boston , where she majored in songwriting . During her two years studying at Berklee , Welch gained confidence as a performer . Welch met her music partner David Rawlings at a successful audition for Berklee 's only country band . 
 = = Career = = 
 Upon finishing college in 1992 , Welch and Rawlings moved to Nashville , Tennessee . She recalled , " I looked at my record collection and saw that all the music I loved had been made in Nashville — Bill Monroe , Dylan , the Stanley Brothers , Neil Young — so I moved there . Not ever thinking I was thirty years too late . " Rawlings soon followed . In Nashville , after singing " Long Black Veil " , the two first realized that their voices harmonized well and they started to perform as a duo . They never considered using a working name , so the duo were simply billed as " Gillian Welch " . A year after moving to Nashville , Welch found a manager , Denise Stiff , who already managed Alison Krauss . Both Welch and Stiff ignored frequent advice that Welch should stop playing with Rawlings and join a band . They eventually signed a recording contract with Almo Sounds . Following a performance opening for Peter Rowan at the Station Inn , producer T @-@ Bone Burnett expressed interest in recording an album . Burnett did not plan to disturb Welch 's and Rawlings ' preference for minimal instrumentation , and Welch agreed to take him on as a producer . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 For the recording sessions of Welch 's debut , Revival , Burnett wanted to recapture the bare sound of Welch 's live performance . Welch recalled , " That first week was really intense . It was just T @-@ Bone , the engineer , and Dave and myself . We got so inside our little world . There was very little distance between our singing and playing . The sound was very immediate . It was so light and small . " Later , they recorded several more songs and played with an expanded group of musicians ; guitarist and Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee James Burton , bassist Roy Huskey , Jr . , and veteran session drummers Jim Keltner , and Buddy Harman . 
 The album was released in April 1996 to positive reviews . Mark Deming of Allmusic called it a " superb debut " and wrote , " Welch 's debts to artists of the past are obvious and clearly acknowledged , but there 's a maturity , intelligence , and keen eye for detail in her songs you wouldn 't expect from someone simply trying to ape the Carter Family . " Bill Friskics @-@ Warren of No Depression praised the album as " breathtakingly austere evocations of rural culture " . The Arlington Heights , Illinois Daily Herald 's Mark Guarino observed that Revival was " cheered and scrutinized as a staunch revivalist of Depression @-@ era music only because her originals sounded so much like that era . " He attributed this to the biblical imagery of the lyrics , Burnett 's threadbare production , and the plainly @-@ sung bleakness in Welch 's vocals . Ann Powers of Rolling Stone gave Revival a lukewarm review and criticized Welch for not singing of her own experiences , and " manufacturing emotion . " Robert Christgau echoed Powers : Welch " just doesn 't have the voice , eye , or way with words to bring her simulation off . " Revival was nominated for the 1997 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album , but lost to Bruce Springsteen 's The Ghost of Tom Joad . 
 = = = Hell Among The Yearlings = = = 
 The duo 's 1998 Hell Among the Yearlings continued the rustic and dark themes ; the songs ' subject matter varies from a female character killing a rapist , a mining accident , a murder ballad , and an ode to morphine before death . Like Revival , Hell Among The Yearlings featured a sparse style that focused on Rawlings and Welch 's voices and guitars . 
 The album also received favorable reviews . Robert Wilonsky of the Dallas Observer observed that Welch " inhabits a role so completely , the fiction separating character and audience disappears " . Thom Owens ( Allmusic ) stated that the album " lacks some of the focus " of Revival , but is " a thoroughly satisfying second album " and proof that her debut was not a fluke . No Depression 's Farnum Brown commended the live and " immediate feel " of the album , Welch 's <unk> banjo , and Rawlings ' harmonies . Similar to Revival , Welch was praised for reflecting influences such as the Stanley Brothers , but still managing to create an original sound , while Chris Herrington from Minneapolis 's City Pages criticized the songs ' lack of authenticity . He wrote " Welch doesn 't write folk songs ; she writes folk songs about writing folk songs . " 
 = = = O Brother , Where Art Thou ? = = = 
 Welch sang two songs and served as the associate producer for the Burnett @-@ produced soundtrack to the 2000 film of the same name . She shared vocals with Alison Krauss on a rendition of the gospel song " I 'll Fly Away . " Dave McKenna of The Washington Post praised their version : the singers " soar together . " Burnett and Welch wrote additional lyrics for the song " Didn 't Leave Nobody but the Baby , " sung by Welch , Emmylou Harris , and Krauss . The song is an elaboration of an old Mississippi tune discovered by Alan Lomax , and was nominated for the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals . The platinum album won the 2002 Grammy Award for Album of the Year . The surprise success of the soundtrack gave Welch a career boost . Welch also made a cameo appearance in the film . 
 = = = Time ( The Revelator ) = = = 
 When Universal Music Group purchased Almo Sounds , Welch began her own independent label , Acony Records ( named for the Appalachian wildflower , Acony Bell , subject of the song of that name on Revival ) . Rawlings produced the first release on Welch 's new label , the 2001 album Time ( The Revelator ) . All but one song on the album was recorded in the historic RCA Studio B in Nashville . " I Want To Sing That Rock and Roll " was recorded live at the Ryman Auditorium in the recording sessions for the concert film Down from the Mountain . 
 Welch has said the album is about American history , rock ' n ' roll , and country music . There are songs about the assassination of Abraham Lincoln , the Titanic Disaster , John Henry , and Elvis Presley . Time continues Welch and Rawlings ' style of mellow and sparse arrangements . Welch explained , " As opposed to being little tiny folk songs or traditional songs , they 're really tiny rock songs . They 're just performed in this acoustic setting . In our heads we went electric without changing instruments . " 
 Time ( The Revelator ) received extensive critical praise , most of which focused on the evolution of lyrics from mountain ballads . For Michael Shannon Friedman of The Charleston Gazette , " Welch 's soul @-@ piercing , backwoods quaver has always been a treasure , but on this record her songwriting is absolutely stunning . " Critics compare the last track , the 15 @-@ minute " I Dream a Highway " , to classics by Bob Dylan and Neil Young . Zac Johnson of Allmusic described I Dream ... as akin to " sweetly dozing in the [ river ] current like Huck and Jim 's Mississippi River afternoons " . No Depression 's Grant Alden wrote , " Welch and Rawlings have gathered ... fragments from across the rich history of American music and reset them as small , subtle jewels adorning their own keenly observed , carefully constructed language . " Time finished thirteenth in the 2001 Village Voice Pazz & Jop music critic poll . Time ( The Revelator ) appeared in best of decade lists of Rolling Stone , Paste , Uncut , The Irish Times , and the Ottawa Citizen . The album was nominated for the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album , but lost to Bob Dylan 's Love and Theft . Time peaked at No. 7 on the Billboard Independent Album chart . 
 The Revelator Collection DVD was released in 2002 . It featured live performances and music videos of songs from Time , and some covers . The concert footage was filmed in 2001 , and the music videos included Welch and Rawlings performing three songs at RCA Studio B. No Depression 's Barry <unk> praised the DVD as an accompaniment for Time , calling it " one last exclamation point on that memorable and important project " . 
 = = = Soul Journey = = = 
 For the 2003 release , Soul Journey , Welch and Rawlings explored new territory . Welch said : " I wanted to make it a happier record . Out of our four records , I thought this might be the one where you 're driving down the road listening to it on a sunny summer day . " Rawlings again produced the record . The album also reflected a change in the typically sparse instrumentation : Welch and Rawlings introduced a dobro , violin , electric bass and drums , and Welch later said , " Everything 's not supposed to sound the same , you want it to reflect change and growth . " 
 In three songs of Soul Journey , for the first time Welch and Rawlings recorded their own versions of traditional folk songs . On the original compositions , Welch 's lyrics are more autobiographical than previous albums . 
 The album received mixed reviews . Allmusic 's Zac Johnson wrote that it was " too casual and off @-@ the @-@ cuff " , but called it a " wonderful , dusty summertime front @-@ porch album , full of whiskey <unk> and sly smiles , floorboard stomps and screen @-@ door creaks " . Jon Caramanica of Rolling Stone criticized the slower songs as stagnant , but complimented the upbeat songs . Soul Journey also garnered significant acclaim . John Harris of Mojo magazine described the album as " pretty much perfect " , and Uncut 's Barney Hoskyns favorably compared it to Bob Dylan and The Band 's The Basement Tapes . Will Hermes of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Welch has " never sounded deeper , <unk> , or sexier . " Soul Journey peaked at No. 107 on the Billboard charts , and reached No. 3 for Independent Albums . 
 = = = Dave Rawlings Machine = = = 
 Welch and Rawlings continued their partnership in the band Dave Rawlings Machine . Welch co @-@ wrote five of the songs with Rawlings , and provided guitar and harmony vocals . Andy Gill of The Independent described the 2009 debut album A Friend of a Friend as " akin to one of Welch 's albums , but with the balance of their harmonies swapped to favour Rawlings ' voice " . Although ostensibly Rawlings ' first solo album , Alex Ramon of PopMatters noted the similarities to Welch albums . Paste Magazine 's Stephen Deusner praised A Friend of a Friend for incorporating " a wide swath of traditional American music , " comments echoed by Rolling Stone 's Will Hermes and in the PopMatters piece . 
 On September 18 , 2015 , the duo released their second album under the band title Dave Rawlings Machine , Nashville Obsolete . The band includes Willie Watson , Paul <unk> , Brittany Haas , and occasionally includes Jordan Tice . 
 = = = The Harrow & The Harvest = = = 
 In a 2007 feature in The Guardian , critic John Harris expressed frustration that there had not been a Gillian Welch release in four years . Creation Records founder Alan McGee showed optimism about Welch and Rawlings testing out some new songs while opening some concerts for Rilo Kiley , and wrote in a 2009 blog entry " the long gestation period signals nothing less than a perfect album " . In 2009 , Rawlings said that recording for the next Gillian Welch album has started , but did not give a release date . 
 The Harrow & The Harvest was released on June 28 , 2011 . Welch attributed the long time period between releases to dissatisfaction with the songs they were writing . She explained : " Our songcraft slipped and I really don 't know why . It 's not uncommon . It 's something that happens to writers . It 's the deepest frustration we have come through , hence the album title . " The writing process involved " this endless back and forth between the two of us , " Welch said , stating that " It ’ s our most intertwined , co @-@ authored , jointly @-@ composed album . " 
 The album received praise from publications such as The Los Angeles Times , Uncut , and Rolling Stone . Thom Jurek of Allmusic wrote that the album " is stunning for its intimacy , its lack of studio artifice , its warmth and its timeless , if hard won , songcraft " . 
 The album peaked at No. 20 on the US Billboard 200 and No. 25 on the UK Albums Chart . It was nominated for a Grammy for Best Contemporary Folk Album , as well as Best Engineered Album . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Welch and Rawlings incorporate elements of early twentieth century music such as old time , classic country , gospel and traditional bluegrass with modern elements of rhythm and blues , rock ' n ' roll , jazz , and punk rock . The New Yorker 's Alec Wilkinson maintained their musical style is " not easily classified — it is at once innovative and obliquely reminiscent of past rural forms " . 
 The instrumentation on their songs is usually a simple arrangement , with Welch and Rawlings accompanying their own vocals with acoustic guitars , banjos , or a mandolin . Welch plays rhythm guitar with a 1956 Gibson J @-@ 50 ( or banjo ) , while Rawlings plays lead on a 1935 Epiphone Olympic Guitar . The New Yorker 's Wilkinson described Rawlings as a " strikingly inventive guitarist " who plays solos that are " daring melodic leaps " . A review in No Depression by Andy Moore observed that Rawlings " squeezes , strokes , chokes and does just about everything but blow into " his guitar . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Many songs performed by Welch and Rawlings contain dark themes about social outcasts struggling against such elements as poverty , drug addiction , death , a disconnection from their family , and an unresponsive God . Despite Welch being the lead singer , several of these characters are male . Welch has commented , " To be commercial , everybody wants happy love songs . People would flat @-@ out ask me , ' Don 't you have any happy love songs ? ' Well , as a matter of fact , I don 't . I 've got songs about orphans and morphine addicts . " To reflect these themes , Welch and Rawlings often employ a slow pace to their songs . Their tempo is compared to a " slow heartbeat " , and <unk> of Rolling Stone observed that their songs " can lull you into near @-@ hypnosis and then make your jaw drop with one final revelation " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Welch has received broad critical praise . Geoffrey Himes of The Washington Post described Welch as " one of the most interesting singer @-@ songwriters of her generation " . In 2003 , Tom <unk> of The Boston Globe observed that she was " quietly establishing one of the most impressive catalogs in contemporary roots music " , and a 2007 piece in The Guardian by John Harris called Welch " one of the decade 's greatest talents " . Critic Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " At every turn , she demonstrates a spark and commitment that should endear her to anyone from country and folk to pop and rock fans who appreciate imagination and heart . " 
 When Welch 's first two albums came out , critics questioned the authenticity of her music , as she was raised in Southern California , but performed Appalachian themed songs . For Revival , Welch was criticized for " manufacturing emotion " , and a review of Hell Among the Yearlings by Chris Herrington of City Pages stated , " Welch is someone who discovered old @-@ time music in college and decided that her own sheltered life could never be worth writing about " , and that she is " completely devoid of individuality " . Other critics rejected the notion that her background affects the authenticity of her music . Music critic Mark Kemp defended Welch in a The New York Times piece : 
 The first @-@ person protagonist of Ms. Welch ’ s song ( " Caleb Meyer " ) may be a young girl from a time and place that Ms. Welch will never fully understand , but the feelings the singer expresses about rape , and the respect she displays for her chosen musical genre , are nothing if not poignantly authentic . Likewise , it matters not whether Ms. Welch has ever walked the streets of " the black dust towns of East Tennessee " about which she sings in " Miner 's Refrain " because the sense of foreboding that she expresses for the men who once labored in coal mines with futile hopes of a better life comes through loud and clear . 
 The Wall Street Journal 's Taylor Holliday echoed this : " <unk> critics give Ms. Welch a hard time because she 's a California city girl , not an Appalachian coal miner 's daughter . But as Lucinda or Emmylou might attest , love of the music is not a birthright , but an earned right . Listen to Ms. Welch yodel , in a tune about that no @-@ good " gal " Morphine , and you know she 's as mountain as they come . " 
 On September 16 , 2015 the duo was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award for Songwriting by the Americana Music Association . 
 = = = Influences and collaborations = = = 
 Welch emphasizes music from a previous era as her major influence . She said that " by and large I listen to people who are dead . I 'm really of the tried @-@ and @-@ true school . I let 50 years go by and see what 's really relevant . " Welch has acknowledged inspiration from several traditional country artists , including the Stanley Brothers , the Carter Family , the Louvin Brothers , and the Blue Sky Boys . She explained her relationship with traditional music by saying , " I 've never tried to be traditional . It 's been a springboard for me and I love it and revere it and would not be doing what I do without the music of the Monroe Brothers , the Stanley Brothers and the Carter Family . However , it was clear I was never going to be able to do exactly that ; I 'm a songwriter . " 
 In addition to the strong country influence , Welch also draws on a repertoire of such rock ' n ' roll artists as Bob Dylan , Chuck Berry , Neil Young , the Grateful Dead and the Velvet Underground . She has noted alternative rock bands Throwing Muses , Pixies and Camper Van Beethoven " don 't directly inform my music , but they 're in there . " 
 Welch has recorded songs with a variety of notable artists , including Ryan Adams , Ani DiFranco , Emmylou Harris , Jay Farrar , Alison Krauss , Old Crow Medicine Show , Bright Eyes , Robyn Hitchcock , Steve Earle , Ralph Stanley , The Decemberists , Solomon Burke and Mark Knopfler . Welch and Rawlings ' contributions on Hitchcock 's album Spooked was described by Christopher Bahn of The A.V. Club as " subtle but vital " . She later created the cover art for Hitchcock 's 2014 album The Man Upstairs . Mark Deming of Allmusic wrote that their work on Ryan Adams ' album Heartbreaker " brought out the best in Adams " . 
 Artists who have recorded songs written by Welch include Jimmy Buffett , Alison Krauss and Union Station , Trisha Yearwood , Joan Baez , Allison Moorer , Emmylou Harris , Miranda Lambert , Kathy <unk> and ZZ Top . 
 = = = Performances = = = 
 Welch and Rawlings have played many music festivals , including The Newport Folk Festival , Coachella Festival , The Telluride Bluegrass Festival , The Cambridge Folk Festival , MerleFest , The Austin City Limits Festival , and Farm Aid . They have toured North America extensively , and have played in Europe , Australia , and New Zealand . Concert reviews have praised the chemistry between Welch and Rawlings on stage . <unk> Asher of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer wrote " there was a startling unspoken intimacy between them . They anticipated each other 's movements and shifted when necessary to fit each other . " 
 The Dave Rawlings Machine have toured North America , with the band originally composed of Rawlings , Welch and three members of Old Crow Medicine Show . The band is currently composed of Rawlings , Welch , <unk> Watson , Paul <unk> , and Brittany Haas . Welch and Rawlings also participate in group tours with notable musicians . In 2004 , they were part of the Sweet Harmony Traveling Revue , a three @-@ week US tour with Patty Griffin , Buddy Miller and Emmylou Harris . In 2009 , The Dave Rawlings Machine joined Old Crow Medicine Show , the Felice Brothers and Justin Townes Earle for the Big Surprise Tour , a US tour described as a " roots @-@ music extravaganza " . In 2011 , Welch was a support act for the recently reformed Buffalo Springfield . 
 = = Discography = = 
 1996 – Revival Almo Sounds 
 1998 – Hell Among the Yearlings Acony Records 
 2001 – Time ( The Revelator ) Acony Records 
 2003 – Soul Journey Acony Records 
 2009 – A Friend of a Friend ( as Dave Rawlings Machine ) Acony Records 
 2011 – The Harrow & The Harvest Acony Records 
 2015 – Nashville Obsolete ( as Dave Rawlings Machine ) Acony Records 
 = Cow tipping = 
 Cow tipping is the purported activity of sneaking up on any unsuspecting or sleeping upright cow and pushing it over for entertainment . The practice of cow tipping is generally considered an urban legend , and stories of such feats viewed as tall tales . The implication that rural citizens seek such entertainment due to lack of other alternatives is viewed as a stereotype . The concept of cow @-@ tipping apparently developed in the 1970s , though tales of animals that cannot rise if they fall has historical antecedents dating to the Roman Empire . 
 Cows routinely lie down and can easily regain their footing unless sick or injured . Scientific studies have been conducted to determine if cow @-@ tipping is theoretically possible , with varying conclusions . All agree that cows are large animals that are difficult to surprise and will generally resist attempts to be tipped . Estimates suggest a force of between 3 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 newtons ( 670 and 900 lbf ) is needed , and that at least four and possibly as many as fourteen people would be required . In real @-@ life situations where cattle have to be laid on the ground , or " cast " , such as for branding , hoof care or veterinary treatment , either rope restraints are required or specialized mechanical equipment is used that confines the cow and then tips it over . On rare occasions , cattle can lie down or fall down in proximity to a ditch or hill that restricts their normal ability to rise without help . Cow @-@ tipping has many references in popular culture and is also used as a figure of speech . 
 = = Scientific study = = 
 The urban legend of cow tipping relies upon the presumption that cattle are slow @-@ moving , dim @-@ witted , and weak @-@ legged , thus easily pushed over without much force . Some versions suggest that because cows sleep standing up , it is possible to approach them and push them over without the animals reacting . However , cows only sleep lightly while standing up , and they are easily awakened . They lie down to sleep deeply . Furthermore , numerous sources have questioned the practice 's feasibility , since most cows weigh over half a ton and easily resist any lesser force . 
 A 2005 study led by Margo Lillie , a zoologist at the University of British Columbia , and her student Tracy Boechler , concluded that tipping a cow would require a force of nearly 3 @,@ 000 newtons ( 670 lbf ) and is therefore impossible to accomplish by a single person . Her calculations found that it would require more than four people to apply enough force to push over a cow , based on an estimate that a single person could exert 660 newtons ( 150 lbf ) of force . However , since a cow can brace itself , Lillie and Boechler suggested that five or six people would , most likely , be needed . Further , cattle are well aware of their surroundings and are very difficult to surprise , due to excellent senses of both smell and hearing . Lillie and Boechler 's analysis found that if a cow did not move , the principles of static physics suggest that two people might be able to tip a cow if its centre of mass were pushed over its hooves before the cow could react . However , cows are not rigid or unresponsive , and the faster humans have to move , the less force they can exert . Thus Lillie and Boechler concluded that it is unlikely that cows can actually be tipped over in this way . Lillie stated , " It just makes the physics of it all , in my opinion , impossible . " 
 Although he agrees that it would take a force of about 3 @,@ 000 newtons to push over a standing cow , biologist Steven Vogel thinks that the study by Lillie and Boechler overestimates the pushing ability of an individual human . Using data from Cotterell and <unk> , who estimated that humans exert a pushing force of 280 newtons , Vogel suggests that someone applying force at the requisite height to topple a cow might generate a maximum push of no more than 300 newtons . By this calculation , at least 10 people would be needed to tip over a non @-@ reacting cow . However , this combined force requirement , he says , might not be the greatest impediment to such a prank . Standing cows are not asleep and like other animals have ever @-@ vigilant reflexes . " If the cow does no more than modestly widen its stance without an overall shift of its center of gravity " , he says , " about 4 @,@ 000 newtons or 14 pushers would be needed — quite a challenge to deploy without angering the cow . " 
 = = Historical origins = = 
 The belief that certain animals cannot rise if pushed over has historical antecedents , though cattle have never been so classified . Julius Caesar recorded a belief that a European elk ( moose ) had no knee joints and could not get up if it fell . Pliny said the same about the hind legs of an animal he called the <unk> , which Pliny 's 19th @-@ century translators Bostock and Riley said was merely another name for the elk . They also noted that Pliny 's belief about the <unk> back legs of the <unk> ( elk ) was false . 
 In 1255 , Louis IX of France gave an elephant to Henry III of England for his menagerie in the Tower of London . A drawing by the historian Matthew Paris for his Chronica Majora can be seen in his bestiary at Parker Library of Corpus Christi College , Cambridge . An accompanying text cites elephant lore suggesting that elephants did not have knees and were unable to get up if they fell . 
 Journalist Jake <unk> believes the American urban myth of cow tipping originated in the 1970s . It " stampeded into the ' 80s " , he says , " when movies like Tommy Boy and Heathers featured cow tipping expeditions . " Stories about cow tipping tend to be second @-@ hand , he says , told by someone who does not claim to have tipped a cow but who knows someone else who says he or she did . 
 = = Veterinary and husbandry practices = = 
 Cattle may need to be deliberately thrown or tipped over for certain types of husbandry practices and medical treatment . When done for medical purposes , this is often called " casting " , and when performed without mechanical assistance requires the attachment of 30 to 40 feet ( 9 to 12 m ) of rope around the body and legs of the animal . After the rope is secured by non @-@ slip <unk> knots , it is pulled to the rear until the animal is off @-@ balance . Once the cow is forced to lie down in sternal <unk> ( on its chest ) , it can be rolled onto its side and its legs tied to prevent kicking . 
 A calf table or calf cradle , also called a " tipping table " or a " throw down " , is a relatively modern invention designed to be used on calves that are being branded . A calf is run into a chute , confined , and then tipped by the equipment onto its side for easier branding and castration . 
 Hydraulic tilt tables for adult cattle have existed since the 1970s and are designed to lift and tip cattle onto their sides to enable veterinary care , particularly of the animals ' genitalia , and for hoof maintenance . ( Unlike horses , cows generally do not cooperate with a farrier when standing . ) A Canadian veterinarian explained , " Using the table is much safer and easier than trying to get underneath to examine the animal " , and noted that cows tipped over on a padded table usually stop struggling and become calm fairly quickly . One design , developed at the Western College of Veterinary Medicine in Saskatoon , Saskatchewan , included " cow comfort " as a unique aspect of care using this type of apparatus . 
 = = = Involuntary <unk> = = = 
 Cows may tip themselves inadvertently . Due to their bulk and relatively short legs , cattle cannot roll over . Those that lie down and roll to their sides with their feet pointing uphill may become stuck and unable to rise without assistance , with potentially fatal results . In such cases , two humans can roll or flip a cow onto its other side , so that its feet are aimed downhill , thus allowing it to rise on its own . In one documented case of " real @-@ life cow tipping " , a pregnant cow rolled into a gully in New Hampshire and became trapped in an inverted state until rescued by volunteer fire fighters . The owner of the cow commented that he had seen this happen " once or twice " before . 
 Trauma or illness may also result in a cow unable to rise to its feet . Such animals are sometimes called " downers . " Sometimes this occurs as a result of muscle and nerve damage from calving or a disease such as mastitis . Leg injuries , muscle tears , or a massive infection of some sort may also be causes . Downer cows are encouraged to get to their feet and have a much greater chance of recovery if they do . If unable to rise , some have survived — with medical care — as long as 14 days and were ultimately able to get back on their feet . Appropriate medical treatment for a downer cow to prevent further injury includes rolling from one side to the other every three hours , careful and frequent feeding of small amounts of fodder , and access to clean water . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Dead animals may appear to have been tipped over . But this is actually the process of rigor mortis , which stiffens the muscles of the carcass , beginning six to eight hours after death and lasting for one to two days . It is particularly noticeable in the limbs , which stick out straight . Post @-@ mortem bloat also occurs because of gas formation inside the body . The process may result in cattle carcasses that wind up on their back with all four feet in the air . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Assorted individuals have claimed to have performed cow @-@ tipping , often while under the influence of alcohol . These claims to date , cannot be reliably verified . 
 Pranksters have sometimes pushed over artificial cows . Along Chicago 's Michigan Avenue in 1999 , two " apparently drunk " men felled six fiberglass cows that were part of a Cows on Parade public art exhibit . Four other vandals removed a " Wow cow " sculpture from its lifeguard chair at Oak Street Beach and abandoned it in a pedestrian underpass . A year later , New York City anchored its <unk> art cows , including " A <unk> Named Desire " , to concrete bases " to prevent the udder disrespect of cow @-@ <unk> and thieves . " 
