 After the hurricane 's passage , officials deployed the Florida National Guard to affected areas in order to maintain order and quell looting . Across Florida , a total of 3 @,@ 897 people filed damage claims after receiving damage from the hurricane , 80 % of them in the Miami area . Insurance companies paid about $ 1 million to compensate for the storm damage . Due to the loss in citrus crop , prices briefly increased , although they returned to normal levels by late October . 
 The name King was not used again after the season , although it was on the naming list for 1951 and 1952 due to being part of the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . The Phonetic Alphabet was decommissioned in 1953 in favor of using female names . Based on population growth in south Florida , it is estimated that a storm identical to Hurricane King would cause $ 2 @.@ 8 billion in insured damage if it struck in 2001 , with the total roughly split between Broward and Miami @-@ Dade counties . 
 = Joan Ganz Cooney = 
 Joan Ganz Cooney ( born Joan Ganz ; November 30 , 1929 ) is an American television producer . She is one of the founders of the Sesame Workshop ( originally Children 's Television Workshop or CTW ) , the organization famous for the creation of the children 's television show Sesame Street , which was also co @-@ created by her . Cooney grew up in Phoenix , Arizona and earned a B.A. degree in education from the University of Arizona in 1951 . After working for the State Department in Washington , D.C. and as a journalist in Phoenix , she worked as a publicist for television and production companies in New York City . In 1961 , she became interested in working for educational television , and became a documentary producer for New York 's first educational TV station WNET ( Channel 13 ) . Many of the programs she produced won local Emmys . 
 In 1966 , Cooney hosted what she called " a little dinner party " at her apartment near Gramercy Park . In attendance was her husband Tim Cooney , her boss Lewis Freedman , and Lloyd Morrisett , an executive at the Carnegie Corporation , in which the potential of television to teach young children was discussed . Cooney was chosen to oversee and direct the creation of what eventually became the children 's television program Sesame Street , which premiered in 1969 , and the CTW , the organization that oversaw its production . Cooney was named CTW 's first executive director . As one of the first female executives in American television , her appointment was called " one of the most important television developments of the decade " . 
 Cooney remained executive director of the CTW until 1990 , when she became the chair of CTW 's executive board . She served on several boards , was the trustees of many organizations , and received many awards and honorary degrees . In 2007 , the Sesame Workshop founded The Joan Ganz Cooney Center , named in her honor . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Joan Ganz was born on November 30 , 1929 in Phoenix , Arizona , to Sylvan Ganz , a banker , and Pauline ( née <unk> ) , a homemaker . Her father was a native Phoenician who was born in the U.S. so that his mother could receive medical care after his birth . Her grandfather Emil Ganz was a tailor from Walldorf , Thuringia in Germany , who immigrated to the U.S. in 1858 and was president of the First National Bank of Arizona and mayor of Phoenix for three terms . Joan Ganz was the youngest of three siblings . She described her childhood as " upper middle class , country club atmosphere " and stated , " I was raised in the most conventional way , raised to be a housewife and a mother , to work an interesting job when I got out of college , and to marry at the appropriate age , which would have been twenty @-@ five " . Her father was Jewish and her mother was Catholic . 
 She attended North High School in Phoenix , where she was active in school plays . She stated that her biggest influence as a teenager was her teacher Bud Brown , whose lectures about the Civil Rights movement , poverty , the free press , and anti @-@ semitism in Europe " absolutely inflamed " her and changed her life . Brown was later investigated as a Communist . She went to Dominican College , an all @-@ girls Catholic institution in San Rafael , California for a year before transferring to the University of Arizona in 1948 . She stopped acting in college because her father refused to support her in that career . She chose Education , even though she was not interested in becoming a teacher , on the recommendation of her mother and because as she later stated , " It was something that girls of my generation did because teaching was acceptable " . 
 = = Early career = = 
 After graduating in 1951 , Joan Ganz moved to Washington , D.C. , where she worked as a clerk and typist at the State Department . She was exposed to Father James Keller 's Christopher Movement , which inspired her to become involved with television and the media . Ganz later said , " Father Keller said that if idealists didn 't go into the media , <unk> would " . She returned to Phoenix and despite no experience in journalism , took a job as a reporter at the Arizona Republic . Eighteen months later , in 1953 and at the age of 23 , she moved to New York City and was a publicist for the next ten years , initially for David Sarnoff at RCA , then at NBC writing press releases and soap opera synopses , and then for the United States Steel Hour at CBS . During this time , she became involved with liberal Democratic politics and " fell in with a literary set of young writers and editors who gathered at the West Side apartment of Partisan Review editor William Phillips " . Some of this " notable group " included Jason Epstein and Norman Mailer . In 1956 , after many years of depression , Joan Ganz 's father committed suicide at his home in Phoenix . 
 While working for the U.S. Steel Hour , a colleague left to work for the educational television station WGBH @-@ TV in Boston ; her reaction was life @-@ changing : " What ? ! There is educational television ? ! " She later stated , " I knew that I was born to be in educational television ; it was St. Paul on the highway " . In 1961 , she began to track the progress of a court case in which public television station WNDT in New Jersey was attempting to acquire New York independent station Channel 13 , which later became the precursor of PBS station WNET , the first public broadcasting station in New York . When Channel 13 became public two years later , Joan Ganz applied for a position as the station 's publicist , but the general manager told her they needed producers . " I can produce " , she told him , even though she had no experience in producing television shows . She later stated , " I 've never been qualified for any job I 've been hired for " . According to television historian Cary O 'Dell , Channel 13 hired her because of the ties she had made through her political activities and associations with Partisan Review . Joan Ganz later said during an interview with the Archive of American Television that the transition to becoming a documentary producer was not difficult for her because she was well @-@ read and aware of the issues of the day , adding , " I felt like I 'd died and gone to heaven , dealing with foreign policy and domestic policy and civil rights , which became the great passion in those years for me " . 
 Taking a pay cut , she and her boss Lewis Freedman produced what author Michael Davis called " a series of teach @-@ ins on major issues " . One of her first programs was called Court of Reason , a weekly live debate show ; notable guests included Malcolm X and Calvin Butts . She produced a debate show on America 's policy about Cuba that aired the week before the Cuban Missile Crisis . She also produced another debate show called Poverty , Anti @-@ Poverty , and the World , in which poor people were brought into the studio to confront the government officials responsible for developing anti @-@ poverty programs . Although the ratings were low , Joan Ganz and Freedman won Emmys for its production , and as Davis stated , " the viewers who did tune in were serious @-@ minded adults who cared about matters of race , injustice , and the imbalance of opportunity in New York and beyond " . She also produced inexpensively @-@ made documentaries that she later called " Little Grandma Moses documentaries " for Channel 13 that were well received by their viewers , including A Chance at the Beginning , which featured the precursor of Head Start that won her a local Emmy and was later used to train Head Start teachers . She later reported that Channel 13 had won eight out of 13 New York Emmys in one year . 
 In February 1964 , at age 34 , she married Timothy Cooney , a staff member of New York mayor Robert Wagner , Jr .. They met while she was working on A Chance at the Beginning . He was also director of public relations for the New York City Department of Labor and director of New York 's Office of Civil Defense . Timothy Cooney would eventually become " an unpaid advocate for the urban poor " . Joan Cooney credited him , whom Davis called " a radical feminist " , for making her into a feminist , and later said that he was very supportive and encouraging . Davis called the Cooneys " a delightfully unmatched set , a Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn two @-@ some who married despite differences in upbringing , station , and sobriety " . 
 = = Sesame Street and the Children 's Television Workshop = = 
 In the winter of 1966 , Cooney hosted what she called " a little dinner party " at her apartment near Gramercy Park . In attendance was her husband Tim Cooney , her boss Lewis Freedman , and Lloyd and Mary Morrisett , whom the Cooneys knew socially . Lloyd Morrisett was an executive at Carnegie Corporation , and was responsible for funding educational research . The conversation turned to the possibilities of using television to educate young children ; Morrisett raised the question , " Do you think television could be used to teach young children ? " Cooney replied , " I don 't know , but I 'd like to talk about it . " According to Davis , the party was the start of a five @-@ decade long professional relationship between Cooney and Morrisett . A week later , Cooney and Freedman met with Morrisett at the offices of Carnegie Corporation to discuss doing a feasibility study on creating an educational television program for preschoolers . Freedman was opposed to Cooney 's involvement because he did not think she would be interested in a project that focused on children and because he did not want to lose her at Channel 13 , but she was chosen to do the study . 
 In the summer of 1967 , Cooney took a leave of absence from Channel 13 , and funded by Carnegie Corporation , traveled the U.S. and Canada interviewing experts in child development , education , and television . She reported her findings in a fifty @-@ five @-@ page document entitled " The Potential Uses of Television in Preschool Education " . The report , which Gikow called " a schematic for the show Sesame Street would become " , described what the new show would look like and proposed the creation of a company that oversaw its production , which eventually became known as the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) . Cooney later stated that her undergraduate training in Education helped her research and write the study , and that it , along with her Emmy , provided her with credibility in the eyes of both the experts she interviewed and the new show 's funding sources . Davis credited Cooney 's motivation to be involved with the project with her journalism skills , learned early in her career , and her idealism , which drove her to want to , as she put it , " make a difference " . She later told an interviewer , " I could do a thousand documentaries on poverty and poor people that would be watched by a handful of the convinced , but I was never really going to have an influence on my times " . She later told Davis , " <unk> were not necessarily my thing . It was using television in a constructive way that turned me on " . 
 At first , Cooney assumed that the project would be produced by Channel 13 , but when the station 's owner rejected the proposal and questioned Cooney 's credentials , she left the station and went to the Carnegie Corporation as a full @-@ time consultant in May 1967 . For the next two years , Cooney and Morrisett worked on researching and developing the new show , raising $ 8 million for Sesame Street , and establishing the CTW . According to Davis , despite her leadership in the project 's initial research and development , Cooney 's installment as CTW 's executive director was put in doubt due to her lack of high @-@ level managerial experience and leadership , untested financial management skills , and lack of experience in children 's television and education . Davis also speculated that sexism was involved , stating , " Doubters also questioned whether a woman could gain the full confidence of a quorum of men from the federal government and two elite philanthropies , institutions whose wealth exceeded the gross national product of entire countries " . At first , Cooney did not fight for the position , but with the support of her husband and Morrisett , and after the investors of the project realized that they could not move forward without her , Cooney pursued it and was named executive director of CTW in February 1968 . As one of the first female executives in American television , her appointment was called " one of the most important television developments of the decade " . 
 Sesame Street premiered on PBS on November 10 , 1969 . In its first season , the show won three Emmys , a Peabody , and was featured on the cover of Time Magazine . According to Newsday , " Scores of glowing newspaper and magazine stories fluttered down on Mrs. Cooney and her workshop like confetti onto the heads of conquering heroes " . Les Brown of Variety Magazine called Cooney " St. Joan " . Cooney later reported , " The reception was so incredible . The press adored us ; the parents adored us . " The first year Sesame Street was on the air , Cooney was , as Davis put it , " inundated with attention " . Cooney reported that the requests for interviews from the press " were endless " , and attributed it to the emergence of the women 's movement in the early 1970s . Cooney also testified before Congressional hearings on children and television , starting before the show 's premiere . 
 In 1969 , Tim and Joan Cooney , who were childless , became " de facto foster parents to an inner @-@ city black child " whom Tim Cooney met while working in Harlem for a civil rights organization . Eventually , the child returned to live with his mother and was killed in New York City before he turned 30 . The Cooneys ' marriage , which Davis called " turbulent " , ended in 1975 . Due to Tim Cooney 's long history of alcoholism , he was unable to support himself , so Joan Cooney paid him alimony until his death in 1999 . In August 1975 , nine months after separating from her husband , Cooney was diagnosed with breast cancer and underwent a radical mastectomy . In 1980 , Cooney married businessman Peter G. Peterson , former U.S. Secretary of Commerce under President Richard Nixon . They met when Peterson was on the board of National Educational Television , during her presentation of Sesame Street to them . From her marriage to Peterson , she has five stepchildren . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Cooney remained the chairman and chief executive officer of the CTW until 1990 , when she stepped down and was replaced by David Britt , who Cooney called her " right @-@ hand for many years " . Britt had worked for her at the CTW since 1975 and its president and chief operating officer since 1988 . At that time , she became chairman of the CTW 's executive board , which oversaw its businesses and licensing , and became more involved in the organization 's creative side . Cooney served on several committees and corporate boards , including the Mayo Foundation , Chase Manhattan Bank , Johnson & Johnson , and Metropolitan Life Insurance . Cooney recognized that she was invited to serve on these boards because she was a woman , and because companies were trying to be more inclusive . She also did some public speaking on the behalf of the CTW and returning to her roots , worked on documentaries . She credited her involvement with the boards with teaching her how to run an organization and about the business world . In 1990 , she was the first female <unk> to be inducted into the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences Hall of Fame , and was given the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Bill Clinton in 1995 . 
 In 2007 , Sesame Workshop founded The Joan Ganz Cooney Center , an independent , non- profit organization which studies how to improve children 's literacy by using and developing digital technologies " grounded in detailed educational curriculum " , just as was done during the development of Sesame Street . In 2014 , Public Prep launched a full day pre @-@ kindergarten program for low @-@ income 4 year olds living in South Bronx NYC Housing Authority projects , called the Joan Ganz Cooney Early Learning Program . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Unless otherwise stated , the items in this list are from The Museum of Broadcast Communications . 
 National Institute for Social Sciences Gold Medal , 1971 
 Frederick Douglass Award , New York Urban League , 1972 
 Silver Satellite Award , American Women in Radio and TV , 1979 
 Woman of the Decade Award , 1979 
 National Endowment for the Arts , Friends of Education Award , 1981 
 Kiwanis Decency Award , 1981 
 National Association of Educational Broadcasters Distinguished Service Award , 1981 
 Stephen S. Wise Award , 1981 
 Harris Foundation Award , 1982 
 Emmy Award , for Lifetime Achievement , 1989 
 Academy of Television Arts and Sciences Hall of Fame , 1989 
 University of Arizona Centennial Medallion Award , 1989 
 Presidential Medal of Freedom , 1995 
 10th Anniversary Award , National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations , 1996 
 Annenberg Public Policy Center , Distinguished Contribution to Children and Television , 1998 
 National Women 's Hall of Fame , 1998 
 Association of Educational Publishers Hall of Fame , 2004 
 National Endowment for the Humanities Award , 2006 
 <unk> Award of the National Book Award , 2010 
 Honoree , Annual Sesame Workshop Benefit Gala , 2014 
 Board of directors 
 Director , Johnson & Johnson 
 Director , Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 
 President 's Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse , 1971 – 73 
 National News Council , 1973 – 81 
 Council Foreign Relations , 1974 – present 
 Advance Committee for Trade Negotiations , 1978 – 80 
 Governor 's Commission on International Year of the Child , 1979 
 President 's Commission for Agenda for the 1980s , 1980 – 81 
 Carnegie Foundation National Panel on High Schools , 1980 – 82 
 National Organization for Women ( NOW ) 
 National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences 
 National Institute Social Sciences 
 International Radio and TV Society 
 American Women in Radio and TV 
 Trustee 
 WNET ( Channel 13 ) 
 Museum of Television & Radio 
 Columbia Presbyterian Hospital 
 National Child Labor Committee 
 Honorary degrees 
 Boston College , 1970 
 Hofstra University , 1970 
 Oberlin College , 1972 
 Ohio Wesleyan University , 1971 
 Princeton University , 1973 
 Russell Sage College , 1974 
 University of Arizona , 1975 
 Harvard University , 1975 
 Allegheny College , 1976 
 Georgetown University , 1978 
 University of Notre Dame , 1982 
 Smith College , 1986 
 Brown University , 1987 
 University of Arizona , 1989 
 Columbia University , 1991 
 New York University , 1991 
 University of Pennsylvania , 2002 
 Dartmouth College ( Doctor of Arts ) , 2006 
 Northwestern University ( Doctor of Humane Letters ) , 2012 
 = My Belarusy = 
 " We Belarusy " ( Belarusian : <unk> , <unk> ( My , <unk> ) ; " We Belarusians " ) is the unofficial title of the national anthem of Belarus and the first line of its lyrics . Officially , " My Belarusy " is titled " the State Anthem of the Republic of Belarus " ( Belarusian : Дзяржаўны <unk> Рэспублікі Беларусь , Russian : <unk> гимн Республики Беларусь ) . The anthem was originally written and adopted in 1955 for use in the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic . The music of the Byelorussian SSR anthem was composed by <unk> Sakałoŭski and the lyrics were written by <unk> Klimkovich . After the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the music composed by Sakałoŭski was kept and the lyrics were discarded . New lyrics , which were written by Klimkovich and Uladzimir <unk> , were adopted by a presidential decree issued on July 2 , 2002 . The lyrics of the anthem now sing of a friendly Belarus , honoring past military battles and looking forward to the future . The music was kept due to the historical connections it has to Belarus . 
 = = Anthem of the Byelorussian SSR = = 
 " My Belarusy " was originally used as the anthem of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic ( Belarusian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Рэспублікі , Russian : гимн <unk> <unk> <unk> Республики ) starting from February 24 , 1955 . The original anthem was composed by Sakałoŭski and the lyrics were written by Maxim Klimkovich . It was presented in front of a jury in 1944 , but it took 11 years of modifications before it was officially adopted . Soon after Belarus became an independent country , the national anthem was modified to drop the Communist @-@ era lyrics . An attempt was made in 1995 to adopt <unk> <unk> 's poem " O God Almighty " as the national anthem , but the suggestion was not acted on even though it was supported by a parliamentary committee . 
 = = Anthem of the Republic of Belarus = = 
 The only legal mention of the national anthem before 2002 is in the Constitution of the Republic of Belarus . Section One , Article 19 of the constitution states that " The symbols of the Republic of Belarus as a sovereign state shall be its national flag , national emblem and national anthem . " While the constitution only mentioned the use of the flag , anthem and arms as national symbols , each symbol had to be defined by law . A law introducing an anthem was not enacted until Presidential Decree 350 took effect , on July 18 , 2002 , the day before Belarus 's independence day . The decree 's main objective was to establish lyrics for the anthem and introduce musical notation along with the new lyrics . Moreover , the decree designated when , where , and how the anthem was to be performed . 
 According to the newspaper Soviet Byelorussia , President Lukashenko decided on the anthem on June 12 , 2002 and chose to have its first performance on July 3 , Belarusian independence day , the anniversary of the date in 1944 when the Wehrmacht was driven away from Minsk by the Red Army . However , the first performance actually took place on July 2 at a concert organized by the government as part of the Belarusian independence festivities . 
 Belarus did not have an anthem before one was adopted in the Soviet @-@ era . When Lukashenko issued his decree selecting a new national anthem , only slight changes were made to the Soviet @-@ era hymn . While the references to Russia , the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Vladimir Lenin were replaced ; the overall theme of " friendship of peoples " and the original music composed by Sakałoŭski were preserved . The government decided to keep Sakałoŭski 's music in order to maintain historical continuity , and also on account of its popularity and musical quality After the national anthem was adopted , the process of adopting national symbols was completed . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 The organization Freedom House commented on the adoption of the anthem in a report about the country , published in 2003 . On page 125 of the " Country Report of Belarus " , Freedom House says that President Lukashenko has " reintroduced the state symbols used by the old Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic . In 2002 , the president approved a streamlined version of the Soviet @-@ era anthem " My Belarusy " ( " We Belarusians " ) , as the country 's new national anthem . " The report also mentioned President Lukashenko 's ban of the symbols that were used since Belarus 's independence in 1991 , such as the Pahonia arms and the white , red , white flag , which Lukashenko claims are associated with fascism ( because the pro @-@ Nazi Belarusian Central Rada in World War II used these symbols ) . In 2003 , Dr. Taras Kuzio wrote in Radio Free Europe that President Lukashenko " is the quintessential Soviet Belarusian patriot who presides over a regime steeped in Soviet nostalgia . " Kuzio said that the motives of Russia and Belarus in re @-@ adopting Soviet @-@ era symbols are part of restoring that nostalgia . 
 = = = Regulations = = = 
 The anthem must be performed in accordance with the lyrics and sheet music established by law . Every day , state @-@ owned Belarusian television and radio stations are required to play the national anthem upon signing on at 6 a.m. and again upon signing off ( usually around midnight ) . The anthem can also be performed on certain occasions , such as at government meetings , before sporting events and presidential inaugurations . While the anthem is being performed , citizens are required to stand at attention and those in military or police uniform must salute . 
 = = Other songs = = 
 A favorite in the anthem competition was the poem called " Young Belarus " ( <unk> Беларусь ) by <unk> <unk> . However , the poem was never set to a musical composition so Young Belarus could not be selected as the anthem . 
 Belarus and Russia have been working towards a closer relationship with each other , resulting in the proposed Union of Russia and Belarus . While Belarus and Russia will be able to keep their own symbols , a song called " Sovereign Union of Nations " ( Belarusian : Дзяржаўны <unk> <unk> , Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) has been proposed as the Union 's unofficial anthem . The song , which was modified from the National Anthem of the Soviet Union , refers to a wider union of the two nations . 
 Some Belarusian emigrants use " <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> Boža " as their anthem . " <unk> <unk> " was the official anthem of the Belarusian National Republic , a state that was created in 1918 but lasted only 10 months , during the German occupation of Belarus in World War I. " <unk> Boža " is a religious hymn , but is now used as a song by those who oppose the Lukashenko Government . 
 = = Official lyrics = = 
 = = Anthem of the Byelorussian SSR = = 
 For comparison , below is a part of the anthem of the Byelorussian SSR . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = Sheet music = = 
 = Fred Dibnah = 
 Frederick " Fred " Dibnah MBE ( 28 April 1938 – 6 November 2004 ) , born in Bolton , was an English steeplejack and television personality , with a keen interest in mechanical engineering . 
 Dibnah was born in a country which then relied heavily upon coal to fuel its industry . As a child he was fascinated by the steam engines which powered the many textile mills in Bolton , but he paid particular attention to chimneys and the men who worked on them . He began his working life as a joiner , before becoming a steeplejack . From age 22 , he served for two years in the armed forces , as part of his national service . Once demobilised , he returned to steeplejacking but met with limited success until he was asked to repair Bolton 's parish church . The resulting publicity provided a welcome boost to his business , ensuring he was almost never out of work . 
 In 1978 , while making repairs to Bolton Town Hall , Dibnah was filmed by a regional BBC news crew . The BBC then commissioned an award @-@ winning documentary , which followed the rough @-@ hewn steeplejack as he worked on chimneys , interacted with his family and talked about his favourite hobby — steam . His Lancastrian manner and gentle , self @-@ taught philosophical outlook , proved popular with viewers and he featured in a number of television programmes . Toward the end of his life , the decline of Britain 's industry was mirrored by a decline in his steeplejacking business and Dibnah increasingly came to rely on after @-@ dinner speaking for his income . In 1998 , he presented a programme on Britain 's industrial history and went on to present a number of series , largely concerned with the Industrial Revolution and its mechanical and architectural legacy . 
 He died from cancer in November 2004 , aged 66 . He is survived by his five children from three marriages . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Fred Dibnah was the son of Frank and Betsy Dibnah ( née Travis ) , who were initially both employed at a bleach works . His mother later worked as a charwoman at a gas works . Named after his uncle Frederick , he was born on 28 April 1938 and brought up in the historic Lancashire town of Bolton , then a predominantly industrial town with a history in the spinning and weaving of cotton . As a child , Dibnah was fascinated by the sights and sounds of industry and the dozens of chimney stacks visible around Burnden Park , and paid particular attention to the steeplejacks he saw on his way to school . A popular pastime for local children was playing around the many mill lodges ( industrial ponds ) which once littered the area . An inventive child , Dibnah and some friends designed a makeshift diving suit from a crisp tin , a car inner tube and some piping . After being told to remove it from the local swimming baths , they tested it in one of the lodges , but were unsuccessful . 
 The Bolton arm of the Manchester , Bolton and Bury Canal was one of Dibnah 's regular haunts . The canal was by then largely disused ( the Bolton arm had been mostly closed in 1924 ) and Dibnah sometimes dredged it with an iron hook on a rope , for what he called ' plunder ' . Much of this was stored in the back yard of his mother 's house . Dibnah and his friend Alan Heap built a canoe from old bicycle wheels ( cut in half to make the ribs ) , slate laths and a canvas sheet from the back of a lorry . Much to the consternation of his mother , Dibnah sailed the boat along the nearby River Croal . He once astonished his teachers when , following the theft of the school keys , he cut new keys for each classroom door . 
 = = = As a young man = = = 
 At school Dibnah was placed in an art class ( his reading and writing skills were judged to be poor ) , following which he spent three years at art college , where his work was based mainly on industrial themes such as machinery , pithead gear and spinning mills . On leaving college at 16 he was offered a job at a funeral parlour , but left quickly to begin work at a local joinery . 
 Dibnah had watched the activities of steeplejacks throughout his childhood , and witnessed his first chimney felling from his father 's allotment near Bolton 's greyhound track at Raikes Park . The steeplejacks first removed the top of the chimney and then created a hole in its base , propped with blocks of wood . They then lit a fire , destroying the supports and causing the chimney to collapse . Unfortunately , on this occasion the chimney fell in the wrong direction , onto the greyhound track 's dog kennels , a local cafe and a series of power cables . 
 His first job that involved ladders was given to him while he still worked as a joiner . He was asked to point a garden wall and then the gable end of the customer 's house . He used several short ladders , lashed together with rope and hardboard . This gave Dibnah valuable experience and his employer expanded the business to include property repairs . Aged about 17 – 18 he climbed the 262 @-@ foot ( 80 m ) chimney at Barrow Bridge , for a 10 shilling bet . During the night he took two Union flags to the top and secured each to the lightning conductors there . The Bolton Evening News reported the incident , with a photograph of Dibnah 's feat , but attributed it to the activities of students from Manchester University . At about the same time , Dibnah decided to replace the chimney stack at his mother 's house on Alfred Street with one of his own design , as his mother used only one fireplace — leaving four of the five chimney pots redundant . As the single opening at the top of the new stack was only about 4 inches ( 10 cm ) wide , the flue needed regular maintenance . On one occasion , he was cleaning the flue using a sack of bricks tied to a rope when the sack ripped open , breaking several lead pipes and flooding his mother 's kitchen . After the death of his mother , the house was sold and the council placed a preservation order on the chimney , which remains to this day . 
 = = = National service = = = 
 Aged 22 Dibnah was conscripted into the army to complete his National Service and was given a position in the cook house . He spent six weeks training at Aldershot , before being sent to Catterick to learn the basics of army catering . He was then posted with the 14th / 20th King 's Hussars and sent to West Germany . There he persuaded his commanding officer to let him repair the regiment 's farmhouse ( used for stabling horses and hounds ) and he was soon given a more permanent position as a builder and handyman . He dug a 35 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) deep shaft into which the horse manure and dog faeces would be emptied and he also fed the animals . He impressed his commanding officers by making a weathercock from army kitchen trays , but was also chastised when he was found with a 1914 Luger <unk> pistol he had bought from a fellow soldier . He often received parcels of alcohol and tobacco from his mother , which allowed him to maintain the habits he had formed when he began his working life . Although Dibnah initially resented being called into service , he would later be more positive about the experience : 
 It wasn 't a bad thing , if National Service had been kept going it might have kept all the vandals and hooligans we have now in line . 
 = = Steeplejack = = 
 On his return from National Service in 1962 Dibnah retrieved his tools from storage , bought a 1927 350 cc AJS motorcycle for 21 guineas and looked for more work . Bolton , however , was in the midst of post @-@ industrial decline ; between 1957 and 1965 about 70 mills were closed in the town , leaving only 37 mills operational and about 50 disused . Initially he was unable to find much work and existed on smaller , domestic jobs , until he earned enough to buy his own set of ladders and secured his first commission while working at a local mill . He was paid £ 140 to point a mill tower , which he did at weekends . He struggled , however , to get any more meaningful work , until he met Lonsdale Bonner , one of his teachers from art college . The two agreed a deal whereby Bonner would be paid a commission for each job he got for Dibnah . His first job was dismantling a chimney alongside the Manchester and Bolton Railway , a difficult proposition , as a mistake could force the temporary closure of the railway . The two managed to gain commissions for several jobs , but their relationship was terminated when Dibnah was called upon to undertake another six months of National Service . 
 He was then commissioned to repair a chimney at a local brewery . While working on this , he met a local welder who also knew the vicar of Bolton ( Richard Greville <unk> ) , who wanted some repairs made to Bolton parish church 's <unk> . The vicar drove a 1929 Humber limousine and was impressed by Dibnah 's AJS motorcycle ; the two quickly became friends . The church was the tallest building in Bolton and once Dibnah had repaired the weathervane the vicar asked him to gild it . Dibnah appeared in the local newspaper and the publicity and his friendship with the vicar enabled him to gain more work from the local clergy . 
 His next major job was for local firm Hick Hargreaves , the proceeds of which enabled him to expand his collection of ladders to 30 . He was commissioned to remove the top half of a 270 @-@ foot ( 82 m ) chimney and employed an assistant , Percy Porter . The top of the chimney contained a length of railway line , which had been used for lifting materials during construction . Dibnah <unk> the line into pieces , letting each piece fall to the ground , while his assistant below kept the area clear . He then spent the next six months removing each brick by hand while the chimney was still in use , as the factory could not afford to halt production . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 In 1967 , following disagreements over who should be invited to their wedding , Dibnah and 19 @-@ year @-@ old hairdresser Alison Mary Foster eloped to Gretna Green , to get married . Dibnah had first spotted Alison from the top of a chimney and , when one day she walked into the pub where he was drinking , he asked her out ; six weeks later , the two became engaged . They left notes for their parents , caught a train to Carlisle and from thereon a series of buses to Dumfries . They had initially planned to stay at the house of a friend but as he had returned to Bolton for his holidays , they stayed instead at a local farmhouse . The two had to be resident for at least 21 days to be married and so Dibnah agreed to point the gable ends of a local hotel in exchange for bed and board . On 19 May , the two married at the church at Gretna Green and returned to live at Dibnah 's mother 's house . They later moved into a Victorian gatehouse on the Earl of Bradford 's estate , just outside Bolton . Dibnah spent years restoring the property , including building an extension . The house was a listed building and so he had to source appropriately aged bricks for the extension . A vicar offered him some of the old gravestones from the church graveyard , which Dibnah then used to create the stone lintels and mullions , though he later expressed his fear that his property would now be haunted . The couple later purchased the house for £ 5 @,@ 000 , although it required major repairs to stabilize the rear wall . 
 The couple had their first child , a girl named Jayne , in June 1968 . Alison was initially worried about her husband 's occupation but learned to deal with the risk and to trust Fred . She organised his accounts and even collected debts . She also helped him demolish some of the chimneys that he worked on , by lighting the fire to burn away the temporary supports he had put in place . 
 = = = Chimney felling = = = 
 Having mastered his trade repairing chimneys , Dibnah became aware of the demand for a cost @-@ effective method of demolishing them . He offered to remove them without using explosives , by cutting an ingress at the base of the chimney — supporting the brickwork with wooden props — and then burning away the props so that the chimney fell , hopefully in the intended direction . Although this was a tried and tested method , it was not without its opponents . On one occasion he was contracted by the local council to fell two chimneys . The contract obliged him to dismantle each by hand , but he decided to fell them by cutting away the base . The first chimney collapsed as planned , but the council terminated his contract and refused to pay . Dibnah contacted the borough engineer and offered to fell the second chimney for no charge , to prove the effectiveness of his technique . He even offered to let the engineer light the fire , but the wind blew so hard that the chimney did not draw the flames and once the props had been burnt through , it remained standing . Dibnah resorted to using a hydraulic jack to apply extra pressure to the intact side of the base and the chimney eventually fell . He later told the engineer that " it was all about fine balancing and counteracting high wind forces . " He almost lost his life in 1997 , when a concrete chimney he had been asked to fell on Canvey Island began to collapse before the felling team had finished preparing the base . As the team ran from the chimney , Dibnah tripped and fell and was greeted by the sight of 2 @,@ 500 tonnes of concrete leaning toward him , but fortunately the chimney righted itself and then fell in the opposite direction . He felled his last chimney in Royton , in May 2004 . 
 = = = Steam = = = 
 Dibnah 's interest in steam power stemmed from his childhood observations of the steam locomotives on the nearby railway line , and his visits to his father 's workplace — a bleach works in Bolton — where he was fascinated by the steam engines used to drive the line shafting . A small mill near his childhood home was sometimes mothballed and Dibnah once broke in : 
 I remember getting into the mill and lifting up a dust sheet to have a look at the engine they 'd got under it . I found there was this beautiful British racing green steam engine under there with all the brasses left on . The boilers were still there and there was plenty of grease on everything , all ready and waiting for the next job . It was a bit sad really to see it standing there idle like that . 
 He later became a steam enthusiast , befriending many of the engine drivers and firemen who worked on the nearby railway . As a teenager he met a driver who invited him onto the footplate of his locomotive and who asked him to keep the boiler supplied with fuel . Dibnah became so enamoured with steam engines that he eventually looked for one he could buy . He learnt of a steamroller kept in a barn near Warrington and which the owners had bought from Flintshire County Council . He had the boiler pressure @-@ tested and , despite its being in poor condition , bought it for £ 175 . He towed it to a friend 's house , spent a fortnight making various repairs , and drove it to his mother 's house in Bolton . After he married and bought his own property on Radcliffe New Road , he cut an access road to the garden of his new house and moved the steamroller there . Restoring the engine took many years , as Dibnah had to create his own replacement parts , using Victorian engineering techniques and equipment he built in his garden . The boiler was in poor condition and needed serious work , but Dibnah fell back on local knowledge and was eventually able to build a new boiler . Once it was restored , he used the 1910 Aveling & Porter steamroller together with a living van he bought and restored , to take his family around the local steam fairs . While driving the vehicle was relatively safe , Dibnah had experienced several mishaps , including one instance when he lost control while descending a steep hill and was forced to drive the engine into a concrete barrier to bring it to a halt , smashing the front fork in the process . 
 Restoring the steamroller placed a heavy burden upon his marriage and Alison would often complain that her husband spent more time in the shed , repairing the engine , than he did in the house . He responded by naming the vehicle Alison , telling his wife " It 's not every woman that has a steam engine named after her . " Alison eventually developed an affection for the antique vehicle saying " We 've done without for so many years to get it built up . I couldn 't bear to part with it . There 's too much of us in it . " 
 His next purchase , made in the autumn of 1980 , was a 1912 Aveling & Porter traction engine . Dibnah paid a friend £ 2 @,@ 300 for the vehicle and moved it to the garden behind his home . He built a steam @-@ driven workshop in his garden , salvaging parts from various mills , including line shaft gear and a stationary engine from a mill in Oldham . He gave a conservative estimate of four years to complete the work , but the restoration eventually took 27 years . The engine was sold at auction in July 2010 for £ 240 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1988 he was asked by Caernarfon Council to make repairs to a chimney at Parc <unk> . Beneath the chimney , an engine room contained an 1854 single @-@ cylinder steam engine in poor condition . Dibnah repaired the chimney and several weeks later was asked to repair the engine , which he dismantled during the winter of 1988 / 89 and took back to Bolton . With his assistant Neil Carney , he spent six months repairing the engine . The two sourced a replacement boiler from a local pork pie factory and re @-@ installed the engine in Wales . Dibnah later won a prize for the quality of the restoration work . He also spent about seven months restoring the boiler , engine and <unk> at <unk> County Pottery near Penrith . 
 = = Fame = = 
 = = = Fred Dibnah , Steeplejack = = = 
 In 1978 Dibnah was commissioned to make repairs to Bolton Town Hall . Decades of exposure to soot and rain had caused serious damage to the clock tower and Dibnah alerted the Clerk of Works to the condition of the 16 stone pillars at the top of the tower . He bought new stone , built a lathe in his workshop and created the replacement pillars . He was given the job of repairing the clock tower and he also gilded the golden sphere at the top of the building . While Fred was working from his bosun 's chair , a public relations officer at the Town Hall informed Dibnah that BBC Look North West wanted to interview him . The following week , the film crew arrived and Alistair MacDonald conducted the interview from the top of the building , with Dibnah perched outside on his scaffold . His warm and friendly manner combined with his enthusiasm and broad Lancashire accent proved popular and he was later contacted by producer Don Haworth , with a view to making a documentary . After several meetings over the course of a few weeks , filming began early one morning just as Dibnah had climbed to the top of a 245 @-@ foot ( 75 m ) chimney at Shaw and Crompton , a mill town near Oldham . Sporadic filming took place over an 18 @-@ month period and captured Dibnah ( with assistant Donald <unk> ) working on a range of buildings , spending time with his family and enjoying his hobbies . Giulio <unk> 's Carnival Of Venice ( performed by James Galway ) was the music chosen to accompany Dibnah 's work on Bolton Town Hall . One of the more notable aspects was Dibnah 's 1979 demolition of a chimney in Rochdale . Standing only yards away from the base of the chimney as it began to collapse , his retreat to safety and subsequent boyish outburst of " Did you like that ? " endeared him to viewers . 
 Fred Dibnah , Steeplejack won the 1979 BAFTA award for best documentary , and over the years Haworth returned to film more documentaries . With his newly found fame , however , came distractions from his work . Visitors would arrive at his house , to see his garden . He began to receive fan mail ; one individual wrote to offer Dibnah a steam @-@ powered machine he no longer wanted . One company , who were apparently disturbed to see Dibnah 's matches being extinguished by the wind while at the top of a chimney , sent him a sample of their <unk> matches . Filming would also interfere with his work . Cameraman Martin Lightening would climb with Fred to the top of a chimney — with a 16mm film camera — and film him at work , often hundreds of feet above the ground . 
 Several years later , Dibnah and his family went on holiday , to Blackpool . The trip was filmed for television and showed Dibnah 's preference for working rather than holidaying . He did however manage to undertake the removal of a small chimney stack from a business in the town , under a distinctly grey sky and aided by his wife , Alison . His payment for the job was a new front plate for the boiler of his traction engine . Dibnah , however , refused to take any more holidays and , after 18 years of marriage , Alison booked and paid for a holiday to Greece , taking their three children ( Jayne , Lorna and Caroline ) with her . Dibnah remained at home and was surprised when , upon her return , she asked for a divorce . One day in October 1985 , Dibnah attended a solid fuel exhibition in nearby Bury . Upon his return he discovered that Alison had left the house , taking with her their three children , the dog and some items of furniture . Short of money , he was forced to sell his antique AJS motorcycle . He found life without his family difficult but defended his wife : " There is no doubt whatsoever , she were a good help to me and I 'm going to miss her . It was just that all the pressure got too much for her . " 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 Dibnah met his second wife Susan Lorenz — a 28 @-@ year @-@ old administrator — at a steam rally in Cheshire . In The Fred Dibnah Story ( 1996 ) she recalled their first meeting : " He looked sad and miserable , quite a pathetic sort of figure really , none of the bounce that people knew him for . " He later invited her to a chimney felling in Oldham and then a talk he had been invited to give to a group of fans in Halifax , known as The Fred Dibnah Appreciation Society . Sue moved into Dibnah 's home in Bolton and the two married on 27 February 1987 . She encouraged him to grow a moustache and also to give up smoking . 
 Many of the chimneys around Bolton had now been either repaired , or demolished and so Dibnah was forced to travel further afield for work . He travelled to the Yorkshire Dales to install a lightning conductor on the parish church in Kirkby <unk> . While digging the hole for the conductor , they uncovered human bones , for which a reinterment ceremony was held . Their first son , Jack ( named after his father 's trade ) , was born in 1987 . Dibnah offered to make a weathercock , provided that his son was christened in the same church . His second son , Roger , was born in 1991 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1996 Dibnah repaired the 262 @-@ foot ( 80 m ) chimney at Barrow Bridge — the same chimney he had scaled for a bet , in his youth . He was also asked to install a peregrine falcon nest at the top . He was later influential in ensuring the chimney was made a listed building . As a notable raconteur he also became an after @-@ dinner speaker and would wear his trademark flat cap with his dinner jacket . He made an appearance in a 1996 television advertisement for <unk> , but the strain of living with a man so dedicated to his hobbies began to take its toll on his wife : " Sometimes he 'll have busted his thumb because he 's hit it with a hammer ; you couldn 't really expect him then to come in and start doing things in the house . I just don 't think it 's fair though , I think you 've got to strike a balance and I think ours is about 90 / 10 . Me for 90 per cent of the housework and Fred for 10 . " Susan met another man and moved out , taking Roger with her and leaving Jack with Fred . 
 She went away from here saying , " I don 't want your antiques , I don 't want your house , I don 't want any money , " [ ... ] But what she did do was take my lads away from me and I can 't forgive her for that . " 
 = = = Third marriage and television presenting = = = 
 By 1997 Dibnah was living alone , with little work or money . Competition from Manchester had reduced his income from steeplejacking and filming for the BBC had dried up completely . He had , however , met Sheila Grundy , a former magician 's assistant . She had arrived one day with her parents and young son to see Dibnah 's back yard , and signed the visitor 's book . The two remained in contact and became friends ; they shared an interest in steam and Grundy was fascinated by Dibnah 's tales of steeplejacking . She and her son moved in with Dibnah in 1998 and the couple married on 26 September that year . At their wedding reception in Bolton , Dibnah was surprised and moved to tears when his youngest daughter , Caroline , came to see him . Dibnah had had little contact with his daughters in the years since his divorce from Alison . 
 In 1997 he met author David Hall . Hall had been raised in the Bradford district of Manchester and the two swapped tales of growing up in the latter half of the 20th century . Hall suggested that Dibnah would be unlikely to have any further television work commissioned on his life and that he should consider becoming a television presenter . The two worked on new ideas for a programme that would show Dibnah touring the country , visiting important historical locations and speaking to the men involved in the maintenance and restoration of industrial machinery and architecture . The programme would also exploit Dibnah 's working @-@ class attitude and show him operating some of the machinery he visited . Filming of Fred Dibnah 's Industrial Age began in July 1998 . The first location was near Bolton , at the Wet Earth Colliery and the crew then moved on to various locations around the country , continuing to film through the summer and autumn of 1998 . 
 The series achieved high viewing figures , with positive reviews , and the associated website became the second most @-@ visited BBC website at the time . A complementary book was also published and was one of the top five best @-@ selling history books of the year . Dibnah admitted he found speaking to a camera more nerve @-@ racking than climbing a chimney , but the success of Fred Dibnah 's Industrial Age was a portent ; he later presented several other television series . Before filming began for Fred Dibnah 's Magnificent Monuments , he had installed his red ladders on the steeple at St. <unk> 's in Preston , ready for an inspection . With filming for television now taking up much of his time , however , he was unable to complete the job . He left the ladders at the church for several years and donated them to the tradesman who eventually took the job . 
 = = Last years = = 
 = = = Illness = = = 
 In 2001 , to mark the centenary of the death of Queen Victoria , the BBC transmitted a season of programmes based on a Victorian theme and Dibnah presented Fred Dibnah 's Victorian Heroes . He had long been fascinated by the Victorians , especially Isambard Kingdom Brunel , whom he regarded as his hero . During filming he visited a number of locations including the 245 @-@ foot ( 75 m ) high Clifton Suspension Bridge and the slipway for the SS Great Eastern . 
 In early 2001 Dibnah was due to begin filming Fred Dibnah 's Building of Britain , but suffered severe abdominal pains and was admitted to hospital for tests . He was discharged and began filming at locations around the country , including the Globe Theatre , Ely Cathedral and Glamis Castle . Dibnah was the chairman of the Manchester Bolton & Bury Canal Society and an episode on the construction of Britain 's canal network was therefore of particular interest to him . Toward the end of filming , Dibnah went to Bolton Royal Hospital for a check @-@ up , where a tumour was found on his right kidney . The kidney was removed and the tumour was found to be malignant . He went to Christie Hospital in Manchester , where further growths were discovered around his bladder . On the same day , Sheila 's father fell from the roof of his house and died . Dibnah underwent chemotherapy and once his treatment was finished tests showed that he was free of cancer . 
 Filming for Fred Dibnah 's Age of Steam began early in 2003 , at the Trencherfield Mill , near Wigan Pier . The film crew visited a number of locations , including a steam rally in Cornwall and the Bluebell Railway in Sussex . Dibnah was travelling around the country working on a subject that fascinated him , visiting old friends and making money from his hobby . The restoration of his traction engine was almost complete ; later that year , however , Dibnah had another checkup at Christie Hospital and was told that a large tumour had been found on his bladder . 
 = = = Dig with Dibnah = = = 
 Dibnah had another course of chemotherapy , but this time the treatment was unsuccessful . Undeterred , he began to dig a replica coal mine in the back garden of his home . Although the sight of pithead gear may have been considered by his neighbours to be unusual , as a child raised in Bolton he had been surrounded by pits such as Ladyshore Colliery and had long harboured an interest in mining . He had already assembled the wooden pithead gear and was planning to sink a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) brick @-@ lined shaft below this into the hillside . At the bottom of the shaft , a horizontal tunnel would have led out to the steep side of the valley above which his garden sits . The intention was to have a narrow gauge railway running along the tunnel , back up the hillside on a rope @-@ hauled inclined plane , returning to the pithead . The ultimate aim was to be able to demonstrate the basic working of an early colliery . Seven years before his diagnosis , therefore , Dibnah had sourced drawings of suitable pithead gear and built a frame from timber and iron bolts . He had applied for and was given planning permission to erect the structure , but made no mention of his wish to dig a shaft underneath it . The BBC decided to make a documentary on Dibnah 's proposed mine , which would entail his once again travelling around the country , visiting working collieries and heritage mines . Filming started late in 2003 , by which time Dibnah and his friend Alf Molyneux had already made a start on the shaft . 
 Using traditional shaft @-@ sinking techniques and the labour of mining friends Alf Molyneux and Jimmy Crooks , the shaft was sunk to a depth of 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) and lined with brick . The work had been undertaken without planning permission and , when the council eventually found out what was happening , they insisted he apply for planning permission . 
 = = = Fred Dibnah 's Made in Britain = = = 
 Despite Dibnah 's best efforts , planning permission was refused . Although he appealed against the decision , a new series diverted his attention . At the end of 2003 production began for Fred Dibnah 's Made in Britain . With his friend , Alf Molyneux , Dibnah would tour the country on his completed traction engine , visiting the workshops that still could produce the parts needed for his antique vehicle . His engine , however , was not yet complete and Dibnah 's medical diagnosis was not good : he knew he had only a short time to live . His traction engine developed a serious fault , but with the help of friends it was quickly repaired and its restoration completed . 
 In December 2003 , his traction engine was now in working order and planning for the new series commenced . Dibnah 's illness necessitated that he sleep in hotels , rather than the living van the engine would tow during the trip . For the long distances between locations , the engine would be transported on the back of a low loader . Dibnah 's engine suffered early mechanical problems ; it could barely tow the fully loaded living van uphill , as the cylinder had been placed very slightly closer to the footplate than it should have been . As a result of this , every time the piston was fully forward it covered the steam inlet port . The engine was repaired , and with some minor engineering work to one of the pistons was brought up to full power . The team was joined by Dibnah 's sons , Jack and Roger . 
 The production crew made every effort to reduce Dibnah 's workload . Changes were made to the filming schedule , to allow Dibnah more time to rest at home between filming days . The crew visited the Forth Road Bridge and Dibnah became the first man to drive a traction engine under its own steam across the bridge . Such pleasures provided a welcome distraction for Dibnah , who was by then ill and in pain . By the end of June he was so ill he could not continue filming . He was sent home to rest and given medication to alleviate his condition , so that he could collect his MBE . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2000 , Dibnah was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Technology for his achievement in engineering by Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen , and on 19 July 2004 he was made an honorary Doctor of the University by the University of Birmingham . 
 Dibnah was awarded an MBE for services to heritage and broadcasting . He said " I 'm looking forward to meeting the Queen but I shall probably have to get a new cap . And I 'd like to meet Prince Charles because we share the same views about modern architecture . " 
 On 7 July 2004 , Dibnah went to Buckingham Palace to receive his award from the Queen . He initially planned to drive his traction engine into the palace grounds , but was refused as the Royal Parks Agency feared that its weight would damage the surface of The Mall . Eventually he was allowed to drive the engine to an army barracks a short distance from the palace . He collected his medal wearing morning dress and a top hat . 
 Filming continued at various locations around the country , with sons Jack and Roger , who had become essential members of the tour , providing much @-@ needed support for their father . By the end of July , the crew had filmed only 34 days with Dibnah , out of a planned 60 . It was becoming more difficult by the day for Dibnah to fulfil his filming duties and the crew decided to cut short the schedule . Once home , Dibnah decided to creosote the pithead gear in his garden but fell and injured his back . He was adamant that he would continue filming , however , and made the trip to North Wales to complete filming . He later made a partial recovery and completed his last day 's filming at an Ironworks in Atherton . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Dibnah died at Bolton Hospice , surrounded by his family , on 6 November 2004 , after suffering from cancer for three years . He was 66 years old . At the time of his death , his estate was estimated as being worth about £ 1 million . 
 Eleven days later , thousands of mourners watched as Dibnah 's coffin ( on top of which his trade mark flat cap was placed ) was towed through the centre of Bolton by his restored traction engine , driven by his son . A cortège of steam @-@ powered vehicles followed , as the procession made its way to Bolton Parish Church . During the hour @-@ long service , David Hall told the congregation " He wasn 't a posh TV presenter . He was recognised as a working man who had learned through experience . " Following the service , led by the Vicar of Bolton — Canon Michael Williams ( a friend of Dibnah ) — he was buried at Tonge Cemetery , behind his home . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Through his television work Dibnah became famous for felling chimneys ( by the time of his death he had felled ninety ) , although it was one of his least favourite jobs . As he made more films with Don Haworth , his outspoken views on changing society , work ethics and delinquency , made him the embodiment of the views of many of his fans and epitomised the view of a northern working man . 
 Dibnah was praised by many notable British people . After reporting on his death , television presenter Peter Sissons remarked : " They don 't make them like that any more " . Comedian Peter Kay said : " It 's very sad news . He was one of a kind and now he has gone I think there will be no one else like him . He was enthusiastic about a way of life that has virtually disappeared now . " Brian Tetlow , chairman of the Bolton and District Civic Trust , said : " He 's unique , not just to Bolton but to Britain and the world . Our thoughts are with his wife and children . " 
 An 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) bronze statue of Dibnah was unveiled by the Mayor of Bolton , in Bolton town centre , on 29 April 2008 . The sculpture was created by Jane Robbins . His home has since been converted into a heritage centre . A play titled The Demolition Man , based on his final years , was staged in 2011 at Bolton 's Octagon Theatre . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 See Fred Dibnah at the Internet Movie Database 
 Fred Dibnah : Steeplejack ( 1979 ) 
 Fred ( 1983 ) 
 Fred – A Disappearing World ( 1983 ) 
 A Year with Fred ( 1987 ) 
 A Year with Fred – New Horizons ( 1991 ) 
 Life With Fred ( 1994 ) 
 The Ups and Downs of Chimneys ( 1994 ) 
 The Fred Dibnah Story ( 1996 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Industrial Age ( 1999 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Magnificent Monuments ( 2000 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Victorian Heroes ( 2001 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Getting Steamed Up ( 2001 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Building of Britain ( 2002 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Age of Steam ( 2003 ) 
 Dig with Dibnah ( 2004 ) 
 A Tribute to Fred Dibnah ( 2004 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's Made in Britain ( 2005 ) 
 Fred Dibnah 's World of Steam , Steel and Stone ( 2006 ) 
 = Hugh Daily = 
 Hugh Ignatius Daily , born Harry Criss ( 17 July 1847 – after 1923 ) , nicknamed " One Arm " Daily , was an Irish American professional right @-@ handed pitcher who played six seasons , for seven different teams ; the Buffalo Bisons , the Cleveland Blues , and the St. Louis Maroons of the National League , Chicago Browns and Washington Nationals of the Union Association , and the Cleveland Blues of the American Association . He was known for having a surly disposition and was not well liked by baseball executives , which occasioned his frequent change of teams . However , he was a favourite of fans wherever he played . 
 Daily was successful as a starting pitcher early in his major league career . In 1883 and 1884 , he won 20 or more games each season , while finishing in the top ten among league leaders in major pitching categories such as earned run average ( as calculated retroactively , since <unk> was not an official statistic at the time ) , innings pitched , complete games , and strikeouts . Daily established the pitching record for strikeouts in a season ( later surpassed ) , tied a record by tossing two consecutive one @-@ hitters , broke the record for one @-@ hitters in a season , and threw a no @-@ hitter . After his initial three years of success , the final three years of his career were marked by quick decline in his seasonal numbers , and he was gone from organised baseball shortly thereafter . Today he remains a mysterious figure , as there is little record of his activities after his career . It is unclear where he lived and where he died . 
 = = Nickname and disposition = = 
 His nickname , " One Arm " Daily , is a reference to his left arm ; he had lost his left hand to a gun accident earlier in his life . To compensate for this injury , he fixed a special pad over the affected area and caught the baseball by trapping it between the pad and his right hand . Sometimes , after long games of having to catch baseballs this way , his stump would become sensitive – so sensitive in fact , that he once punched his catcher for not heeding his warning to throw the balls back to him softer . 
 Daily was well known for having a bad disposition , he has been described as surly , and having a volatile temper . Other sources add to that : mean , contemptuous , and uncommunicative . While this behaviour was not well liked by the baseball establishment , he was popular with the home crowds because of his verbal tirades against umpires and opposing players alike . 
 Some theories attempt to explain Daily 's tempestuous behaviour , one of which was put forth by Frank Vaccaro in his 1999 edition of The National Pastime . His theory explains that , in Daily 's day , except in cases of injury , for a pitcher to be relieved from his position , another player already in the game would have to relieve him , and the pitcher would have to take a position in the field . His physical condition did not allow him many opportunities to play any other positions , so this compelled his managers to leave him in the game longer , even when his performance was declining . He was allowed to play in the field on several occasions , when the situation warranted it , as he is credited as playing three games in the outfield , two at second base , and one at shortstop . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Ireland , Daily first began playing baseball professionally around the Baltimore area , often receiving more lucrative offers to play in more prominent leagues , all of which he declined , preferring to stay in the local area . His reputation , along with actions such as verbally assaulting umpires and fans , forced him to move on to other teams , which landed him in New York City playing for the Metropolitans , which was an all @-@ professional club but had yet to join a major league ; they later joined the National League in 1883 . He became the team 's ace pitcher , winning 38 games , including notable victories against Cap Anson 's Chicago White Stockings , and most of the other top professional teams in the country at the time . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 Daily 's performance that season caught the eye of Major League teams , and he signed with the Buffalo Bisons for the 1882 season . Although he shared starts with future Hall of Famer Pud Galvin , he was able to pitch in 29 games , winning 15 of them . He was playing for the Cleveland Blues of the National League when he pitched a no @-@ hitter on 13 September 1883 against the Philadelphia Quakers , a 1 – 0 victory . He finished the season with a 23 – 19 win – loss record , and finished in the top ten in several pitching categories . He finished second in the league with two shutouts , fifth place with a 2 @.@ 42 earned run average , seventh in strikeouts with 171 , and ninth in the league in wins , games pitched , and games started . However , he did lead the league with 99 walks – a remarkable total , given that in 1882 and 1883 walks were issued after seven balls rather than four . 
 For the 1884 season , he feasted on the upstart Union Association 's lack of talent , pitching for the Chicago Browns ( which became the Pittsburgh Stogies ) , and for the Washington Nationals later in the season . He finished with a 28 – 28 win – loss record , but did have a low 2 @.@ 43 ERA , and set a few records in that lone season for the Association . Daily struck out a total of 483 batters that season , a record that was surpassed only in 1886 by both Matt Kilroy ( 513 ) , and Toad Ramsey ( 499 ) . Among the season totals , he struck out 19 batters in a game , on 7 July , tying Charlie Sweeney . Unofficially , his reported 19 strikeout game was upgraded to 20 when it was discovered that one batter had struck out but reached first base when the pitch got away from the catcher . This meant that Daily did not just tie the record , but broke it instead ( Roger Clemens then unofficially tied the mark in 1986 ) . Daily added one more record that season ; he set the record for most one @-@ hitters in one season , with four , two of them back to back , which was also itself a record at the time . The record was later matched by Grover Cleveland Alexander in 1915 . 
 When the Union Association dissolved , Daily had to pay a $ 500 fine to regain his major league eligibility for the 1885 season , as did all the players who jumped to this new league and were subsequently blacklisted . He joined the St. Louis Maroons of the National League , where he only pitched in 11 games , and had a record of 3 wins and 8 losses . The rest of his career included short stints with the 1886 Washington Nationals , and the 1887 Cleveland Blues of the American Association . He played his final major league game on 21 August 1887 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Very few facts are known about his personal life or where and when he died . In 1910 United States Census , he was living in Baltimore with two sisters , working as a clerk for a custom house . According to the 1920 United States Census , he was living with his sister , and was a clerk for a hotel . His last known location was 1923 in Baltimore , living on Washington . 
 = Blast furnace = 
 A blast furnace is a type of metallurgical furnace used for smelting to produce industrial metals , generally iron , but also others such as lead or copper . 
 In a blast furnace , fuel , ores , and flux ( limestone ) are continuously supplied through the top of the furnace , while a hot blast of air ( sometimes with oxygen enrichment ) is blown into the lower section of the furnace through a series of pipes called tuyeres , so that the chemical reactions take place throughout the furnace as the material moves downward . The end products are usually molten metal and slag phases tapped from the bottom , and flue gases exiting from the top of the furnace . The downward flow of the ore and flux in contact with an <unk> of hot , carbon monoxide @-@ rich combustion gases is a countercurrent exchange process . 
 In contrast , air furnaces ( such as reverberatory furnaces ) are naturally aspirated , usually by the convection of hot gases in a chimney flue . According to this broad definition , bloomeries for iron , blowing houses for tin , and smelt mills for lead would be classified as blast furnaces . However , the term has usually been limited to those used for smelting iron ore to produce pig iron , an intermediate material used in the production of commercial iron and steel , and the shaft furnaces used in combination with sinter plants in base metals smelting . 
 = = History = = 
 Blast furnaces existed in China from about 1st century AD and in the West from the High Middle Ages . They spread from the region around Namur in Wallonia ( Belgium ) in the late 15th century , being introduced to England in 1491 . The fuel used in these was invariably charcoal . The successful substitution of coke for charcoal is widely attributed to Abraham Darby in 1709 . The efficiency of the process was further enhanced by the practice of preheating the combustion air ( hot blast ) , patented by James Beaumont Neilson in 1828 . 
 = = = China = = = 
 The oldest extant blast furnaces were built during the Han Dynasty of China in the 1st century AD . However , cast iron farm tools and weapons were widespread in China by the 5th century BC , while 3rd century BC iron smelters employed an average workforce of over two hundred men . These early furnaces had clay walls and used phosphorus @-@ containing minerals as a flux . The effectiveness of the Chinese blast furnace was enhanced during this period by the engineer Du Shi ( c . 31 AD ) , who applied the power of waterwheels to piston @-@ bellows in forging cast iron . 
 While it was long thought that the Chinese had developed the blast furnace and cast iron as their first method of iron production , Donald Wagner ( the author of the above referenced study ) has published a more recent paper that supersedes some of the statements in the earlier work ; the newer paper still places the date of the first cast @-@ iron artifacts at the 5th and 4th centuries BC , but also provides evidence of earlier bloomery furnace use , which migrated from China to Western parts and Central Asia during the beginning of the Chinese Bronze Age of the late Longshan culture ( 2000 BC ) . He suggests that early blast furnace and cast iron production evolved from furnaces used to melt bronze . Certainly , though , iron was essential to military success by the time the State of Qin had unified China ( 221 BC ) . Usage of the blast and cupola furnace remained widespread during the Song and Tang Dynasties . By the 11th century AD , the Song Dynasty Chinese iron industry made a remarkable switch of resources from charcoal to bituminous coal in casting iron and steel , sparing thousands of acres of woodland from felling . This may have happened as early as the 4th century AD . 
 The Chinese blast furnace remained in use well until the 20th century . The backyard furnaces favoured by Mao Zedong during the Great Leap Forward were of this type . In the regions with strong traditions of metallurgy , the steel production actually increased during this period . In the regions where there was no tradition of steelmaking or where the ironmasters knowing the traditional skills or the scientific principles of the blast furnace process had been killed , the results were less than satisfactory . 
 = = = Elsewhere in the ancient world = = = 
 In most places in the world other than in China , there is no evidence of the use of the blast furnace ( proper ) . Instead , iron was made by direct reduction in bloomeries . The bloomery process was invented probably in modern @-@ day Xinjiang or other parts of Western China by Hans or Mongols around 800 BC . Iron finds in China proper are few before bloomeries were supplanted by the blast furnace in the 5th century BC which seems to have developed independently in the southern Chinese cultural sphere . An exception would be the Haya people of northwestern Tanzania , who are renowned for creating steel using a blast furnace process and refining process very similar to open hearth process for possibly as long as 2000 years . 
 In Europe , the Greeks , Celts , Romans , and Carthaginians all used this process . Several examples have been found in France , and materials found in Tunisia suggest they were used there as well as in Antioch ( south @-@ central Turkey , between Syria and the Mediterranean Sea ) during the Hellenistic Period . Though little is known of it during the Dark Ages , the process probably continued in use . Similarly , smelting in bloomery @-@ type furnaces in West Africa and forging for tools appear in the Nok culture in Africa by 500 BC . The earliest records of bloomery @-@ type furnaces in East Africa are discoveries of smelted iron and carbon in Nubia and Axum that date back between 1 @,@ 000 – 500 BCE . Particularly in Meroë , there are known to have been ancient bloomeries that produced metal tools for the Nubians and Kushites and produced surplus for their economy . 
 <unk> have also been discovered and recorded to have been created in medieval West Africa with some of the metalworking Bantu civilizations such as the <unk> Empire and the <unk> people . 
 = = = Medieval Europe = = = 
 = = = = Catalan forges = = = = 
 The simplest forge , known as the Corsican , was used prior to the advent of Christianity . Examples of improved bloomeries are the <unk> ( sometimes called wolf @-@ furnace ) or the Catalan forge , which remained until the beginning of the 19th century . The Catalan forge was invented in Catalonia , Spain , during the 8th century . Instead of using natural draught , air was pumped in by a trompe , resulting in better quality iron and an increased capacity . This pumping of airstream in with bellows is known as cold blast , and it increases the fuel efficiency of the bloomery and improves yield . The Catalan forges can also be built bigger than natural draught bloomeries . 
 Modern experimental archaeology and history re @-@ enactment have shown there is only a very short step from the Catalan forge to the true blast furnace , where the iron is gained as pig iron in liquid phase . Usually , obtaining the iron in liquid phase is actually undesired , and the temperature is intentionally kept below the melting point of iron , since while removing the solid bloom mechanically is tedious and means batch process instead of continuous process , it is almost pure iron and can be worked immediately . On the other hand , pig iron is the eutectic mixture of carbon and iron and needs to be <unk> to produce steel or wrought iron , which was extremely tedious in the Middle Ages . 
 = = = = Oldest European blast furnaces = = = = 
 The oldest known blast furnaces in the West were built in <unk> in Switzerland , the <unk> <unk> in Germany , and at <unk> in Sweden , where the complex was active between 1205 and 1300 . At <unk> in the Swedish parish of <unk> , there have also been found traces of blast furnaces dated even earlier , possibly to around 1100 . These early blast furnaces , like the Chinese examples , were very inefficient compared to those used today . The iron from the <unk> complex was used to produce balls of wrought iron known as <unk> , and these were traded internationally – a possible reference occurs in a treaty with Novgorod from 1203 and several certain references in accounts of English customs from the 1250s and 1320s . Other furnaces of the 13th to 15th centuries have been identified in Westphalia . 
 The technology of blast furnace may have either been transferred from China , or may have been an indigenous innovation . Al @-@ <unk> in the 13th century and other travellers subsequently noted an iron industry in the <unk> Mountains to the south of the Caspian Sea . This is close to the silk route , so that the use of technology derived from China is conceivable . Much later descriptions record blast furnaces about three metres high . As the Varangian Rus ' people from Scandinavia traded with the Caspian ( using their Volga trade route , it is possible that the technology reached Sweden by this means . High quality ores , water power for bellows for blast and wood for charcoal are readily obtainable in Sweden . However , since blast furnace has also been invented independently in Africa by the Haya people , it is more likely the process has been invented in Scandinavia independently . The step from bloomery to true blast furnace is not big . Simply just building a bigger furnace and using bigger bellows to increase the volume of the blast and hence the amount of oxygen leads inevitably into higher temperatures , bloom melting into liquid iron and , cast iron flowing from the smelters . Already the Vikings are known to have used double bellows , which greatly increases the volumetric flow of the blast . 
 This Caspian region may also separately be the technological source for at furnace at <unk> , described by <unk> . Water @-@ powered bellows at <unk> in northern Italy in 1226 in a two @-@ stage process . In this , the molten iron was tapped twice a day into water thereby <unk> it . 
 = = = = Cistercian contributions = = = = 
 One means by which certain technological advances were transmitted within Europe was a result of the General Chapter of the Cistercian monks . This may have included the blast furnace , as the Cistercians are known to have been skilled metallurgists . According to Jean Gimpel , their high level of industrial technology facilitated the diffusion of new techniques : " Every monastery had a model factory , often as large as the church and only several feet away , and waterpower drove the machinery of the various industries located on its floor . " Iron ore deposits were often donated to the monks along with forges to extract the iron , and within time surpluses were being offered for sale . The Cistercians became the leading iron producers in Champagne , France , from the mid @-@ 13th century to the 17th century , also using the phosphate @-@ rich slag from their furnaces as an agricultural fertilizer . 
 Archaeologists are still discovering the extent of Cistercian technology . At <unk> , an outstation of Rievaulx Abbey and the only medieval blast furnace so far identified in Britain , the slag produced was low in iron content . Slag from other furnaces of the time contained a substantial concentration of iron , whereas <unk> is believed to have produced cast iron quite efficiently . Its date is not yet clear , but it probably did not survive until Henry VIII 's Dissolution of the Monasteries in the late 1530s , as an agreement ( immediately after that ) concerning the " <unk> " with the Earl of Rutland in 1541 refers to blooms . Nevertheless , the means by which the blast furnace spread in medieval Europe has not finally been determined . 
 = = Origin and spread of early modern blast furnaces = = 
 The direct ancestor of these used in France and England was in the Namur region in what is now Wallonia ( Belgium ) . From there , they spread first to the Pays de Bray on the eastern boundary of Normandy and from there to the Weald of Sussex , where the first furnace ( called <unk> ) in <unk> was built in about 1491 , followed by one at Newbridge in Ashdown Forest in 1496 . They remained few in number until about 1530 but many were built in the following decades in the Weald , where the iron industry perhaps reached its peak about 1590 . Most of the pig iron from these furnaces was taken to finery forges for the production of bar iron . 
 The first British furnaces outside the Weald appeared during the 1550s , and many were built in the remainder of that century and the following ones . The output of the industry probably peaked about 1620 , and was followed by a slow decline until the early 18th century . This was apparently because it was more economic to import iron from Sweden and elsewhere than to make it in some more remote British locations . Charcoal that was economically available to the industry was probably being consumed as fast as the wood to make it grew . The <unk> blast furnace built in Cumbria in 1711 has been described as the first efficient example . 
 The first blast furnace in Russia opened in 1637 near Tula and was called the <unk> Works . The blast furnace spread from here to the central Russia and then finally to the Urals . 
 = = = Coke blast furnaces = = = 
 In 1709 , at Coalbrookdale in Shropshire , England , Abraham Darby began to fuel a blast furnace with coke instead of charcoal . Coke 's initial advantage was its lower cost , mainly because making coke required much less labor than cutting trees and making charcoal , but using coke also overcame localized shortages of wood , especially in Britain and on the Continent . Metallurgical grade coke will bear heavier weight than charcoal , allowing larger furnaces . A disadvantage is that coke contains more impurities than charcoal , with sulfur being especially detrimental to the iron 's quality . 
 Coke iron was initially only used for foundry work , making pots and other cast iron goods . Foundry work was a minor branch of the industry , but Darby 's son built a new furnace at nearby <unk> , and began to supply the owners of finery forges with coke pig iron for the production of bar iron . Coke pig iron was by this time cheaper to produce than charcoal pig iron . The use of a coal @-@ derived fuel in the iron industry was a key factor in the British Industrial Revolution . Darby 's original blast furnace has been archaeologically excavated and can be seen in situ at Coalbrookdale , part of the Ironbridge Gorge Museums . Cast iron from the furnace was used to make girders for the world 's first iron bridge in 1779 . The Iron Bridge crosses the River Severn at Coalbrookdale and remains in use for pedestrians . 
 = = = Hot blast = = = 
 Hot Blast was the single most important advance in fuel efficiency of the blast furnace and was one of the most important technologies developed during the Industrial Revolution . Hot blast was patented by James Beaumont Neilson at <unk> Ironworks in Scotland in 1828 . Within a few years of the introduction , hot blast was developed to the point where fuel consumption was cut by one @-@ third using coke or two @-@ thirds using coal , while furnace capacity was also significantly increased . Within a few decades , the practice was to have a " stove " as large as the furnace next to it into which the waste gas ( containing CO ) from the furnace was directed and burnt . The resultant heat was used to preheat the air blown into the furnace . 
 Hot blast enabled the use of raw anthracite coal , which was difficult to light , to the blast furnace . Anthracite was first tried successfully by George Crane at <unk> ironworks in south Wales in 1837 . It was taken up in America by the Lehigh Crane Iron Company at <unk> , Pennsylvania , in 1839 . 
 = = = Modern furnaces = = = 
 = = = = Iron blast furnaces = = = = 
 The blast furnace remains an important part of modern iron production . Modern furnaces are highly efficient , including Cowper stoves to pre @-@ heat the blast air and employ recovery systems to extract the heat from the hot gases exiting the furnace . Competition in industry drives higher production rates . The largest blast furnaces have a volume around 5 @,@ 580 m3 ( 197 @,@ 000 cu ft ) and can produce around 80 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 79 @,@ 000 long tons ; 88 @,@ 000 short tons ) of iron per week . 
 This is a great increase from the typical 18th @-@ century furnaces , which averaged about 360 tonnes ( 350 long tons ; 400 short tons ) per year . Variations of the blast furnace , such as the Swedish electric blast furnace , have been developed in countries which have no native coal resources . 
 = = = = Lead blast furnaces = = = = 
 Blast furnaces are currently rarely used in copper smelting , but modern lead smelting blast furnaces are much shorter than iron blast furnaces and are rectangular in shape . The overall shaft height is around 5 to 6 m . Modern lead blast furnaces are constructed using water @-@ cooled steel or copper jackets for the walls , and have no refractory linings in the side walls . The base of the furnace is a hearth of refractory material ( bricks or castable refractory ) . Lead blast furnaces are often open @-@ topped rather than having the charging bell used in iron blast furnaces . 
 The blast furnace used at the <unk> Port Pirie lead smelter differs from most other lead blast furnaces in that it has a double row of tuyeres rather than the single row normally used . The lower shaft of the furnace has a chair shape with the lower part of the shaft being narrower than the upper . The lower row of tuyeres being located in the narrow part of the shaft . This allows the upper part of the shaft to be wider than the standard . 
 = = = = Zinc blast furnaces ( Imperial Smelting <unk> ) = = = = 
 The blast furnaces used in the Imperial Smelting Process ( " ISP " ) were developed from the standard lead blast furnace , but are fully sealed . This is because the zinc produced by these furnaces is recovered as metal from the vapor phase , and the presence of oxygen in the off @-@ gas would result in the formation of zinc oxide . 
 Blast furnaces used in the ISP have a more intense operation than standard lead blast furnaces , with higher air blast rates per m2 of hearth area and a higher coke consumption . 
 Zinc production with the ISP is more expensive than with electrolytic zinc plants , so several smelters operating this technology have closed in recent years . However , ISP furnaces have the advantage of being able to treat zinc concentrates containing higher levels of lead than can electrolytic zinc plants . 
 = = Modern process = = 
 Modern furnaces are equipped with an array of supporting facilities to increase efficiency , such as ore storage yards where barges are unloaded . The raw materials are transferred to the <unk> complex by ore bridges , or rail hoppers and ore transfer cars . Rail @-@ mounted scale cars or computer controlled weight hoppers weigh out the various raw materials to yield the desired hot metal and slag chemistry . The raw materials are brought to the top of the blast furnace via a skip car powered by winches or conveyor belts . 
 There are different ways in which the raw materials are charged into the blast furnace . Some blast furnaces use a " double bell " system where two " bells " are used to control the entry of raw material into the blast furnace . The purpose of the two bells is to minimize the loss of hot gases in the blast furnace . First , the raw materials are emptied into the upper or small bell which then opens to empty the charge into the large bell . The small bell then closes , to seal the blast furnace , while the large bell rotates to provide specific distribution of materials before dispensing the charge into the blast furnace . A more recent design is to use a " bell @-@ less " system . These systems use multiple hoppers to contain each raw material , which is then discharged into the blast furnace through valves . These valves are more accurate at controlling how much of each constituent is added , as compared to the skip or conveyor system , thereby increasing the efficiency of the furnace . Some of these bell @-@ less systems also implement a discharge chute in the throat of the furnace ( as with the Paul <unk> top ) in order to precisely control where the charge is placed . 
 The iron making blast furnace itself is built in the form of a tall structure , lined with refractory brick , and profiled to allow for expansion of the charged materials as they heat during their descent , and subsequent reduction in size as melting starts to occur . Coke , limestone flux , and iron ore ( iron oxide ) are charged into the top of the furnace in a precise filling order which helps control gas flow and the chemical reactions inside the furnace . Four " uptakes " allow the hot , dirty gas high in carbon monoxide content to exit the furnace throat , while " bleeder valves " protect the top of the furnace from sudden gas pressure surges . The coarse particles in the exhaust gas settle in the " dust catcher " and are dumped into a railroad car or truck for disposal , while the gas itself flows through a venturi scrubber and / or electrostatic precipitators and a gas cooler to reduce the temperature of the cleaned gas . 
 The " <unk> " at the bottom half of the furnace contains the bustle pipe , water cooled copper tuyeres and the equipment for casting the liquid iron and slag . Once a " <unk> " is drilled through the refractory clay plug , liquid iron and slag flow down a trough through a " skimmer " opening , separating the iron and slag . Modern , larger blast furnaces may have as many as four <unk> and two <unk> . Once the pig iron and slag has been tapped , the <unk> is again plugged with refractory clay . 
 The tuyeres are used to implement a hot blast , which is used to increase the efficiency of the blast furnace . The hot blast is directed into the furnace through water @-@ cooled copper nozzles called tuyeres near the base . The hot blast temperature can be from 900 ° C to 1300 ° C ( 1600 ° F to 2300 ° F ) depending on the stove design and condition . The temperatures they deal with may be 2000 ° C to 2300 ° C ( 3600 ° F to 4200 ° F ) . Oil , tar , natural gas , powdered coal and oxygen can also be injected into the furnace at tuyere level to combine with the coke to release additional energy and increase the percentage of reducing gases present which is necessary to increase productivity . 
 = = Process engineering and chemistry = = 
 Blast furnaces operate on the principle of chemical reduction whereby carbon monoxide , having a stronger affinity for the oxygen in iron ore than iron does , reduces the iron to its elemental form . Blast furnaces differ from bloomeries and reverberatory furnaces in that in a blast furnace , flue gas is in direct contact with the ore and iron , allowing carbon monoxide to diffuse into the ore and reduce the iron oxide to elemental iron mixed with carbon . The blast furnaces operates as a countercurrent exchange process whereas a bloomery does not . Another difference is that bloomeries operate as a batch process while blast furnaces operate continuously for long periods because they are difficult to start up and shut down . ( See : Continuous production ) Also , the carbon in pig iron lowers the melting point below that of steel or pure iron ; in contrast , iron does not melt in a bloomery . 
 Carbon monoxide also reduces silica which has to be removed from the pig iron . The silica is reacted with calcium oxide ( burned limestone ) and forms a slag which floats to the surface of the molten pig iron . The direct contact of flue gas with the iron causes contamination with sulfur if it is present in the fuel . Historically , to prevent contamination from sulfur , the best quality iron was produced with charcoal . 
 The downward moving column of ore , flux , coke or charcoal and reaction products must be porous enough for the flue gas to pass through . This requires the coke or charcoal to be in large enough particles to be permeable , meaning there cannot be an excess of fine particles . Therefore , the coke must be strong enough so it will not be crushed by the weight of the material above it . Besides physical strength of the coke , it must also be low in sulfur , phosphorus , and ash . This necessitates the use of metallurgical coal , which is a premium grade due to its relative scarcity . 
 The main chemical reaction producing the molten iron is : 
 Fe2O3 + <unk> → 2Fe + <unk> 
 This reaction might be divided into multiple steps , with the first being that preheated blast air blown into the furnace reacts with the carbon in the form of coke to produce carbon monoxide and heat : 
 2 C ( s ) + O2 ( g ) → 2 CO ( g ) 
 The hot carbon monoxide is the reducing agent for the iron ore and reacts with the iron oxide to produce molten iron and carbon dioxide . Depending on the temperature in the different parts of the furnace ( warmest at the bottom ) the iron is reduced in several steps . At the top , where the temperature usually is in the range between 200 ° C and 700 ° C , the iron oxide is partially reduced to iron ( II , III ) oxide , Fe3O4 . 
 3 Fe2O3 ( s ) + CO ( g ) → 2 Fe3O4 ( s ) + CO2 ( g ) 
 At temperatures around 850 ° C , further down in the furnace , the iron ( II , III ) is reduced further to iron ( II ) oxide : 
 Fe3O4 ( s ) + CO ( g ) → 3 FeO ( s ) + CO2 ( g ) 
 Hot carbon dioxide , unreacted carbon monoxide , and nitrogen from the air pass up through the furnace as fresh feed material travels down into the reaction zone . As the material travels downward , the counter @-@ current gases both preheat the feed charge and decompose the limestone to calcium oxide and carbon dioxide : 
 CaCO3 ( s ) → CaO ( s ) + CO2 ( g ) 
 The calcium oxide formed by decomposition reacts with various acidic impurities in the iron ( notably silica ) , to form a <unk> slag which is essentially calcium silicate , <unk> : 
 SiO2 + CaO → <unk> 
 As the iron ( II ) oxide moves down to the area with higher temperatures , ranging up to 1200 ° C degrees , it is reduced further to iron metal : 
 FeO ( s ) + CO ( g ) → Fe ( s ) + CO2 ( g ) 
 The carbon dioxide formed in this process is re @-@ reduced to carbon monoxide by the coke : 
 C ( s ) + CO2 ( g ) → 2 CO ( g ) 
 The temperature @-@ dependent equilibrium controlling the gas atmosphere in the furnace is called the <unk> reaction : 
 2CO ⇌ CO2 + C 
 The " pig iron " produced by the blast furnace has a relatively high carbon content of around 4 – 5 % , making it very brittle , and of limited immediate commercial use . Some pig iron is used to make cast iron . The majority of pig iron produced by blast furnaces undergoes further processing to reduce the carbon content and produce various grades of steel used for construction materials , automobiles , ships and machinery . 
 Although the efficiency of blast furnaces is constantly evolving , the chemical process inside the blast furnace remains the same . According to the American Iron and Steel Institute : " Blast furnaces will survive into the next millennium because the larger , efficient furnaces can produce hot metal at costs competitive with other iron making technologies . " One of the biggest drawbacks of the blast furnaces is the inevitable carbon dioxide production as iron is reduced from iron oxides by carbon and there is no economical substitute – steelmaking is one of the unavoidable industrial contributors of the CO2 emissions in the world ( see greenhouse gases ) . 
 The challenge set by the greenhouse gas emissions of the blast furnace is being addressed in an ongoing European Program called <unk> ( Ultra Low CO2 Steelmaking ) . Several new process routes have been proposed and investigated in depth to cut specific emissions ( CO2 per ton of steel ) by at least 50 % . Some rely on the capture and further storage ( CCS ) of CO2 , while others choose <unk> iron and steel production , by turning to hydrogen , electricity and biomass . In the nearer term , a technology that incorporates CCS into the blast furnace process itself and is called the Top @-@ Gas Recycling Blast Furnace is under development , with a scale @-@ up to a commercial size blast furnace under way . The technology should be fully demonstrated by the end of the 2010s , in line with the timeline set , for example , by the EU to cut emissions significantly . Broad deployment could take place from 2020 on . 
 = = Manufacture of stone wool = = 
 Stone wool or rock wool is a spun mineral fibre used as an insulation product and in <unk> . It is manufactured in a blast furnace fed with diabase rock which contains very low levels of metal oxides . The resultant slag is drawn off and spun to form the rock wool product . Very small amounts of metals are also produced which are an unwanted by @-@ product and run to waste . 
 = = Decommissioned blast furnaces as museum sites = = 
 For a long time , it was normal procedure for a decommissioned blast furnace to be demolished and either be replaced with a newer , improved one , or to have the entire site demolished to make room for follow @-@ up use of the area . In recent decades , several countries have realized the value of blast furnaces as a part of their industrial history . Rather than being demolished , abandoned steel mills were turned into museums or integrated into multi @-@ purpose parks . The largest number of preserved historic blast furnaces exists in Germany ; other such sites exist in Spain , France , the Czech Republic , Japan , Luxembourg , Poland , Romania , Mexico , Russia and the United States . 
 = Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters = 
 The Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States was built as the headquarters for the former chemical manufacturing company Rohm and Haas . Completed in 1964 , the building was the first private investment for the urban renewal of the Independence Mall area . Only two blocks from Independence Hall the building , designed by Pietro Belluschi and George M. Ewing Co . , was lauded for its respect to the nearby park and historical buildings . Philadelphia 's city planners praised the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters as a standard for all redevelopment buildings . 
 The nine @-@ story building 's most notable feature is its translucent , corrugated sunscreens . Supported by aluminum lattices throughout the building 's facade , the sunscreens are made of Rohm and Haas 's principal product , Plexiglas . In 2007 the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters was listed on the National Register of Historic Places and today is considered one of the best examples of the International style . 
 = = History = = 
 The Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters was conceived as part of the city of Philadelphia 's plan to improve and revive the area around Independence Hall . Along with the creation of a park north of Independence Hall , the area saw the construction of new and modern buildings including a federal courthouse , a new Philadelphia Mint and the Rohm and Haas Building . For the revival of the Independence Mall area , city planner Edmund Bacon approached Otto Haas to move Rohm and Haas , a Philadelphia @-@ based chemical manufacturing company , to Independence Mall . According to legend , Haas reportedly said , " This city may or may not survive . But if companies like Rohm and Haas desert it , then surely the city will not survive ! " Federal funds for private investors investing in urban renewal land was also a significant factor in Rohm and Haas 's decision to stay in Philadelphia . 
 In 1959 Rohm and Haas , the first private investor to build on the Independence Mall , first commissioned Philadelphia @-@ based George M. Ewing Co. to design their new headquarters . Ewing 's design was met with a poor response from the City Art Commission , and Rohm and Haas decided on using a leading architect and approached Pietro Belluschi . At the time the dean of architecture and planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Belluschi worked with George M. Ewing Co. to redesign Ewing 's original plan . The new design was completed in a few months and was approved by Rohm and Haas , the City Planning Commission , the Redevelopment Authority , and the City Art Commission . Construction began in 1963 and was completed in 1964 , costing close to US $ 10 million . Rohm and Haas moved from their old Washington Square headquarters into the new building in 1965 . 
 By the 2000s , the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters needed upgrades to its building systems and facilities . The company spent two years deciding whether to renovate its current building or to move to cheaper , more modern space in Center City . In 2006 Rohm and Haas decided to stay in the current building and spend up to US $ 25 million on renovations . The building 's architecture and layout were the main reason for the company to stay . The building allows single departments to stay together on the same floor , while in a Center City skyscraper departments would likely have to be spread out over several floors . 
 RMJM Hillier was hired to handle the building 's renovations . The original plan was well received but exceeded the renovation 's budget . To help pay for the renovations , RMJM Hillier tried to get the building declared a National Historic Landmark , which would allow the company to get tax credits . Usually buildings less than fifty years old are not considered , but the building 's significance in Modern architecture kept the state of Pennsylvania and the National Park Service interested . While not designated a National Historic Landmark , the building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on February 9 , 2007 . 
 To help get the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters listed as a landmark , RMJM Hillier and Rohm and Haas focused renovations on opening up floor space and modernizing systems . A part of the original plan that altered the building 's facade was abandoned , but the facade received a thorough cleaning . Inside , most of the enclosed office space was removed and replaced with open workstations . The new layout was also designed to let more light into the interior of the building . The work spaces also received new furniture , which replaced some that dated back to the 1960s . The dining area was moved from the basement to street level in a space that was previously occupied by a bank , but had lain vacant for several years . Security , telecommunications , and central plant systems were also upgraded and modernized . The interior renovations finished around May 2008 , with improvements to the surrounding plaza completed several months later . 
 = = Building = = 
 Starting from George M. Ewing 's original design of an office tower , Pietro Belluschi and George M. Ewing Co. turned the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters into a 300 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 28 @,@ 000 m2 ) , nine @-@ story low horizontal block . At the corner of 6th Street and Market Street , two blocks away from Independence Hall , the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters front facade runs parallel along 6th Street looking towards the Independence Mall . The reinforced concrete framed building sits on flaring concrete columns and is set back from the street by a raised plaza . The landscaped plaza cuts through the middle of the ground level of the building , opening up to a larger plaza with a fountain and small pool . The plaza behind the building allows public access to an alley that leads to Seventh Street . 
 To help keep the building cool , Belluschi added bronze @-@ colored translucent corrugated panel sunscreens to the facade . Supported by a bronze anodized aluminum lattice , the sunscreens are made of Rohm and Haas 's principal product , Plexiglas . The use of sunscreens and dark colors gave the facade a textured pattern and overall effect of avoiding making the building appear oversized . Besides the sunscreens , Plexiglas was used in the board room , in a few of the artistic commissions and light fixtures by designer György <unk> . 
 The building was very well received by Philadelphia 's city planners , who felt it set a standard for redevelopment buildings . The building was designed to contrast , but not overwhelm the nearby 18th @-@ century Georgian architecture . The Washington Post architecture critic Wolf Von Eckardt praised the building for its sensitivity to the nearby historic buildings , and how it related to the texture and small size of Independence Hall and at the same time the large open space of Independence Mall . The Corporate Headquarters has also been praised for its logical configuration , the building being described as " a very well done rational office building . " Today the Rohm and Haas Corporate Headquarters is considered one of the best examples of the International style . 
 = Tropical cyclone forecast model = 
 A tropical cyclone forecast model is a computer program that uses meteorological data to forecast aspects of the future state of tropical cyclones . There are three types of models : statistical , dynamical , or combined statistical @-@ dynamic . Dynamical models utilize powerful supercomputers with sophisticated mathematical modeling software and meteorological data to calculate future weather conditions . Statistical models forecast the evolution of a tropical cyclone in a simpler manner , by extrapolating from historical datasets , and thus can be run quickly on platforms such as personal computers . Statistical @-@ dynamical models use aspects of both types of forecasting . Four primary types of forecasts exist for tropical cyclones : track , intensity , storm surge , and rainfall . Dynamical models were not developed until the 1970s and the 1980s , with earlier efforts focused on the storm surge problem . 
 Track models did not show forecast skill when compared to statistical models until the 1980s . Statistical @-@ dynamical models were used from the 1970s into the 1990s . Early models use data from previous model runs while late models produce output after the official hurricane forecast has been sent . The use of consensus , ensemble , and superensemble forecasts lowers errors more than any individual forecast model . Both consensus and superensemble forecasts can use the guidance of global and regional models runs to improve the performance more than any of their respective components . Techniques used at the Joint Typhoon Warning Center indicate that superensemble forecasts are a very powerful tool for track forecasting . 
 = = Statistical guidance = = 
 The first statistical guidance used by the National Hurricane Center was the Hurricane Analog Technique ( <unk> ) , which was available in 1969 . It used the newly developed North Atlantic tropical cyclone database to find storms with similar tracks . It then shifted their tracks through the storm 's current path , and used location , direction and speed of motion , and the date to find suitable analogs . The method did well with storms south of the 25th parallel which had not yet turned northward , but poorly with systems near or after recurvature . Since 1972 , the Climatology and Persistence ( CLIPER ) statistical model has been used to help generate tropical cyclone track forecasts . In the era of skillful dynamical forecasts , CLIPER is now being used as the baseline to show model and forecaster skill . The Statistical Hurricane Intensity Forecast ( <unk> ) has been used since 1979 for tropical cyclone intensity forecasting . It uses climatology and persistence to predict future intensity , including the current Julian day , current cyclone intensity , the cyclone 's intensity 12 hours ago , the storm 's initial latitude and longitude , as well as its zonal ( east @-@ west ) and meridional ( north @-@ south ) components of motion . 
 A series of statistical @-@ dynamical models , which used regression equations based upon CLIPER output and the latest output from primitive equation models run at the National Meteorological Center , then National Centers for Environmental Prediction , were developed between the 1970s and 1990s and were named <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Within the field of tropical cyclone track forecasting , despite the ever @-@ improving dynamical model guidance which occurred with increased computational power , it was not until the decade of the 1980s when numerical weather prediction showed skill , and until the 1990s when it consistently outperformed statistical or simple dynamical models . In 1994 , a version of <unk> was created for the northwest Pacific ocean for typhoon forecasting , known as the Statistical Typhoon Intensity Forecast ( <unk> ) , which used the 1971 @-@ 1990 data for that region to develop intensity forecasts out to 72 hours into the future . 
 In regards to intensity forecasting , the Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme ( SHIPS ) utilizes relationships between environmental conditions from the Global Forecast System ( GFS ) such as vertical wind shear and sea surface temperatures , climatology , and persistence ( storm behavior ) via multiple regression techniques to come up with an intensity forecast for systems in the northern Atlantic and northeastern Pacific oceans . A similar model was developed for the northwest Pacific ocean and Southern Hemisphere known as the Statistical Intensity Prediction System ( <unk> ) , which accounts for land interactions through the input environmental conditions from the Navy Operational Global Prediction System ( NOGAPS ) model . The version of SHIPS with an inland decay component is known as Decay SHIPS ( <unk> ) . The Logistic Growth Equation Model ( <unk> ) uses the same input as SHIPS but within a simplified dynamical prediction system . Within tropical cyclone rainfall forecasting , the Rainfall Climatology and Persistence ( r @-@ CLIPER ) model was developed using microwave rainfall data from polar orbiting satellites over the ocean and first @-@ order rainfall measurements from the land , to come up with a realistic rainfall distribution for tropical cyclones based on the National Hurricane Center 's track forecast . It has been operational since 2004 . A statistical @-@ parametric wind radii model has been developed for use at the National Hurricane Center and Joint Typhoon Warning Center which uses climatology and persistence to predict wind structure out to five days into the future . 
 = = Dynamical guidance = = 
 During 1972 , the first model to forecast storm surge along the continental shelf of the United States was developed , known as the Special Program to List the Amplitude of Surges from Hurricanes ( SPLASH ) . In 1978 , the first hurricane @-@ tracking model based on atmospheric dynamics – the movable fine @-@ mesh ( MFM ) model – began operating . The Quasi @-@ Lagrangian Limited Area ( <unk> ) model is a multi @-@ level primitive equation model using a Cartesian grid and the Global Forecasting System ( GFS ) for boundary conditions . In the early 1980s , the assimilation of satellite @-@ derived winds from water vapor , infrared , and visible satellite imagery was found to improve tropical cyclones track forecasting . The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GFDL ) hurricane model was used for research purposes between 1973 and the mid @-@ 1980s . Once it was determined that it could show skill in hurricane prediction , a multi @-@ year transition transformed the research model into an operational model which could be used by the National Weather Service for both track and intensity forecasting in 1995 . By 1985 , the Sea Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes ( SLOSH ) Model had been developed for use in areas of the Gulf of Mexico and near the United States ' East coast , which was more robust than the SPLASH model . 
 The Beta <unk> Model ( BAM ) has been used operationally since 1987 using steering winds averaged through the 850 hPa to 200 hPa layer and the Beta effect which causes a storm to drift northwest due to differences in the coriolis effect across the tropical cyclone . The larger the cyclone , the larger the impact of the beta effect is likely to be . Starting in 1990 , three versions of the BAM were run operationally : the BAM shallow ( <unk> ) average winds in an 850 hPa to 700 hPa layer , the BAM Medium ( <unk> ) which uses average winds in an 850 hPa to 400 hPa layer , and the BAM Deep ( <unk> ) which is the same as the pre @-@ 1990 BAM . For a weak hurricane without well @-@ developed central thunderstorm activity , <unk> works well , because weak storms tend to be steered by low @-@ level winds . As the storm grows stronger and associated thunderstorm activity near its center gets deeper , <unk> and <unk> become more accurate , as these types of storms are steered more by the winds in the upper @-@ level . If the forecast from the three versions is similar , then the forecaster can conclude that there is minimal uncertainty , but if the versions vary by a great deal , then the forecaster has less confidence in the track predicted due to the greater uncertainty . Large differences between model predictions can also indicate wind shear in the atmosphere , which could affect the intensity forecast as well . 
 Tested in 1989 and 1990 , The Vic <unk> Barotropic ( <unk> ) model used a cubic @-@ B spline representation of variables for the objective analysis of observations and solutions to the shallow @-@ water prediction equations on nested domains , with the boundary conditions defined as the global forecast model . It was implemented operationally as the Limited Area Sine Transform Barotropic ( <unk> ) model in 1992 , using the GFS for boundary conditions . By 1990 , Australia had developed its own storm surge model which was able to be run in a few minutes on a personal computer . The Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) developed its own Typhoon Model ( <unk> ) in 1994 , and in 1998 , the agency began using its own dynamic storm surge model . 
 The Hurricane Weather Research and Forecasting ( HWRF ) model is a specialized version of the Weather Research and Forecasting ( WRF ) model and is used to forecast the track and intensity of tropical cyclones . The model was developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) , the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory , the University of Rhode Island , and Florida State University . It became operational in 2007 . Despite improvements in track forecasting , predictions of the intensity of a tropical cyclone based on numerical weather prediction continue to be a challenge , since <unk> methods continue to show higher skill over dynamical guidance . Other than the specialized guidance , global guidance such as the GFS , Unified Model ( UKMET ) , NOGAPS , Japanese Global Spectral Model ( GSM ) , European Centre for Medium @-@ Range Weather Forecasts model , France 's Action de Recherche Petite Echelle Grande Echelle ( <unk> ) and Aire Limit ´ ee Adaptation <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) models , India 's National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting ( <unk> ) model , Korea 's Global Data Assimilation and Prediction System ( <unk> ) and Regional Data Assimilation and Prediction System ( <unk> ) models , Hong Kong / China 's Operational Regional Spectral Model ( <unk> ) model , and Canadian Global Environmental Multiscale Model ( GEM ) model are used for track and intensity purposes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some models do not produce output quickly enough to be used for the forecast cycle immediately after the model starts running ( including HWRF , GFDL , and <unk> ) . Most of the above track models ( except CLIPER ) require data from global weather models , such as the GFS , which produce output about four hours after the synoptic times of 0000 , 0600 , 1200 , and 1800 Universal Coordinated Time ( UTC ) . For half of their forecasts , the NHC issues forecasts only three hours after that time , so some " early " models — <unk> , BAM , and <unk> — are run using a 12 @-@ hour @-@ old forecast for the current time . " Late " models , such as the GFS and GFDL , finish after the advisory has already been issued . These models are interpolated to the current storm position for use in the following forecast cycle — for example , <unk> , the interpolated version of the GFDL model . 
 = = Consensus methods = = 
 Using a consensus of forecast models reduces forecast error . <unk> , the GUNA model is a consensus of the interpolated versions of the GFDL , UKMET with quality control applied to the cyclone tracker , United States Navy NOGAPS , and GFS models . The version of the GUNA corrected for model biases is known as the <unk> . The TCON consensus is the GUNA consensus plus the Hurricane WRF model . The version of the TCON corrected for model biases is known as the <unk> . A lagged average of the last two runs of the members within the TCON plus the ECMWF model is known as the <unk> consensus . The version of the <unk> corrected for model biases is the <unk> consensus . 
 In early 2013 , The <unk> replaced the NOGAPS as the Navy 's primary operational global forecast model . For the 2013 season , and until model verification can occur , it is not being utilized in the development of any consensus forecasts . 
 For intensity , a combination of the <unk> , interpolated GFDL , interpolated HWRF , and <unk> models is known as the ICON consensus . The lagged average of the last two runs of models within the ICON consensus is called the <unk> consensus . Across the northwest Pacific and Southern Hemisphere , a ten @-@ member <unk> consensus is formed from the output of the NOGAPS , GFS , the Japanese GSM , the Coupled Ocean / Atmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System ( <unk> ) , the UKMET , the Japanese <unk> , the GFDL with NOGAPS boundary conditions , the Air Force Weather Agency ( AFWA ) Model , the Australian Tropical Cyclone Local Area Prediction System , and the Weber Barotropic Model . 
 = = Ensemble methods = = 
 No model is ever perfectly accurate because it is impossible to learn exactly everything about the atmosphere in a timely enough manner , and atmospheric measurements that are taken are not completely accurate . The use of the ensemble method of forecasting , whether it be a multi @-@ model ensemble , or numerous ensemble members based on the global model , helps define the uncertainty and further limit errors . 
 The JMA has produced an 11 @-@ member ensemble forecast system for typhoons known as the Typhoon Ensemble Prediction System ( <unk> ) since February 2008 , which is run out to 132 hours into the future . It uses a lower resolution version ( with larger grid spacing ) of its GSM , with ten perturbed members and one non @-@ perturbed member . The system reduces errors by an average of 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) five days into the future when compared to its higher resolution GSM . 
 The Florida State Super Ensemble ( <unk> ) is produced from a suite of models which then uses statistical regression equations developed over a training phase to reduce their biases , which produces forecasts better than the member models or their mean solution . It uses 11 global models , including five developed at Florida State University , the Unified Model , the GFS , the NOGAPS , the United States Navy NOGAPS , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre ( <unk> ) model , and Canadian Recherche en <unk> <unk> ( RPN ) model . It shows significant skill in track , intensity , and rainfall predictions of tropical cyclones . 
 The Systematic Approach Forecast Aid ( SAFA ) was developed by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center to create a selective consensus forecast which removed more erroneous forecasts at a 72 ‑ hour time frame from consideration using the United States Navy NOGAPS model , the GFDL , the Japan Meteorological Agency 's global and typhoon models , as well as the UKMET . All the models improved during SAFA 's five @-@ year history and removing erroneous forecasts proved difficult to do in operations . 
 = = Sunspot theory = = 
 A 2010 report correlates low sunspot activity with high hurricane activity . Analyzing historical data , there was a 25 % chance of at least one hurricane striking the continental United States during a peak sunspot year ; a 64 % chance during a low sunspot year . In June 2010 , the hurricanes predictors in the US were not using this information . 
 = = Hurricane forecast model accuracy = = 
 The accuracy of hurricane forecast models can vary significantly from storm to storm . For some storms , the factors affecting the hurricane track are relatively straightforward , and the models are not only accurate but they produce similar forecasts , while for other storms , the factors affecting the hurricane track and more complex , and different models produce very different forecasts . 
 = Opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway = 
 The opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway ( L & M ) took place on 15 September 1830 . Work on the L & M had begun in the 1820s , to connect the major industrial city of Manchester with the nearest deep water port at the Port of Liverpool , 35 miles ( 56 km ) away . Although horse @-@ drawn railways already existed elsewhere , and a few industrial sites already used primitive steam locomotives for bulk haulage , the L & M was the first locomotive @-@ hauled railway to connect two major cities , and the first to provide a scheduled passenger service . The opening day was a major public event . Arthur Wellesley , Duke of Wellington , the Prime Minister , rode on one of the eight inaugural trains , as did many other dignitaries and notable figures of the day . Huge crowds lined the track at Liverpool to watch the trains depart for Manchester . 
 The trains left Liverpool on time and without any technical problems . The Duke of Wellington 's special train ran on one track , and the other seven trains ran on an adjacent and parallel track , sometimes ahead and sometimes behind the Duke 's train . Around 13 miles ( 21 km ) out of Liverpool the first of many problems occurred , when one of the trains derailed and the following train collided with it . With no reported injuries or damage , the derailed locomotive was lifted back onto the track and the journey continued . At Parkside railway station , near the midpoint of the line , the locomotives made a scheduled stop to take on water . Although the railway staff advised passengers to remain on the trains while this took place , around 50 of the dignitaries on board alighted when the Duke of Wellington 's special train stopped . One of those who got off was William Huskisson , former cabinet minister and Member of Parliament for Liverpool . Huskisson had been a highly influential figure in the creation of the British Empire and an architect of the doctrine of free trade , but had fallen out with Wellington in 1828 over the issue of parliamentary reform and had resigned from the cabinet . Hoping to be reconciled with Wellington , he approached the Duke 's railway carriage and shook his hand . Distracted by the Duke , he did not notice an approaching locomotive on the adjacent track , Rocket . On realising it was approaching he panicked and tried to clamber into the Duke 's carriage , but the door of the carriage swung open leaving him hanging directly in the path of the oncoming Rocket . He fell onto the tracks in front of the train , suffering serious leg injuries and dying later that night . 
 The Duke of Wellington felt that the remainder of the day 's events should be cancelled following the accident at Parkside , and proposed to return to Liverpool . However , a large crowd had gathered in Manchester to see the trains arrive , and was beginning to become unruly . Wellington was persuaded to continue to Manchester . By the time the trains reached the outskirts of Manchester the crowd had become hostile and was spilling onto the tracks . With local authorities unable to clear the tracks , the trains were obliged to drive at low speed into the crowd , using their own momentum to push people out of the way . Eventually they arrived at Liverpool Road railway station in Manchester to be met by a hostile crowd , who waved banners and flags against the Duke and pelted him with vegetables . Wellington refused to get off the train , and ordered that the trains return to Liverpool . Mechanical failures and an inability to turn the locomotives meant that most of the trains were unable to leave Manchester . While the Duke of Wellington 's train left successfully , only three of the remaining seven locomotives were usable . These three locomotives slowly hauled a single long train of 24 carriages back to Liverpool , eventually arriving 61 ⁄ 2 hours late after having been pelted with objects thrown from bridges by the drunken crowds lining the track . 
 The death and funeral of William Huskisson caused the opening of the railway to be widely reported , and people around the world became aware that cheap and rapid long @-@ distance transport was now possible for the first time . The L & M became extremely successful , and within a month of its opening plans were put forward to connect Liverpool and Manchester with the other major cities of England . Within ten years , 1 @,@ 775 miles ( 2 @,@ 857 km ) of railways were built in Britain , and within 20 years of the L & M 's opening over 6 @,@ 200 miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km ) were in place . The L & M remains in operation , and its opening is now considered the start of the age of mechanised transport ; in the words of industrialist and former British Rail chairman Peter Parker , " the world is a branch line of the pioneering Liverpool – Manchester run " . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Liverpool and Manchester Railway = = = 
 The Liverpool and Manchester Railway ( L & M ) was founded on 24 May 1823 by Liverpool merchants Joseph Sandars and Henry Booth , with the aim of linking the textile mills of Manchester to the nearest deep water port at the Port of Liverpool . At the time , the only means of bulk transport between the two towns other than animal @-@ drawn carts was water transport on the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , the Bridgewater Canal and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal , all of which were slow and expensive to use ; transporting raw cotton the 35 miles ( 56 km ) from Liverpool to Manchester was as expensive as the initial cost of shipping it from America to Liverpool . Although horse and human powered railways had existed for centuries , and steam power was beginning to be used in some experimental industrial railways , the L & M was to be the first steam powered railway to provide an inter @-@ city passenger service , and the most expensive engineering project yet undertaken in Britain . ( Because much of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway ran over land owned by investors in the company , and because many of the early locomotives were owned by the engineering firms which built them rather than by the L & M , it is impossible to give a precise figure for the L & M 's construction costs . The direct construction cost of the line up to its opening was around £ 820 @,@ 000 , and the two years of lobbying necessary to get the railway authorised is estimated to have cost £ 70 @,@ 000 . In comparison , the Bridgewater Canal , which had the same purpose as the L & M in connecting Manchester to the Port of Liverpool , had cost an estimated £ 220 @,@ 000 to build in the late 18th century . The average labourer 's wage in the area at this time was around £ 20 per year . ) 
 The Marquess of Stafford , owner of the Bridgewater Canal , was a friend of Liverpool 's Member of Parliament William Huskisson , with whom he had worked at the British Embassy in Paris . Although the Marquess had initially feared the potential impact of railways on the income from his canal and had been strongly opposed to the railway , Huskisson persuaded him to allow the railway to use his lands and to invest in the scheme . 
 In 1826 George Stephenson was appointed to design and build the 35 @-@ mile ( 56 km ) route . Stephenson built the line using four equally spaced rails ; he envisaged that this would allow the line to operate as a double tracked railway line under normal circumstances , but that in the event of a locomotive needing to haul a particularly wide load or of one of the outside rails breaking , a locomotive could run along the central pair of rails . He also felt that , by having the rails this close together , it would reduce the amount of land required for the already extremely expensive L & M scheme . 
 = = = William Huskisson = = = 
 William Huskisson was born at <unk> Court , Malvern , Worcestershire , on 11 March 1770 . In 1783 , Huskisson went to Paris to live with his great @-@ uncle Dr. Richard Gem , witnessing the early years of the French Revolution , and was present at the Storming of the Bastille . Learning economics from the Marquis de Condorcet , he became an assistant to Earl Gower , who would later become the Marquess of Stafford . In 1792 Britain severed diplomatic relations with the French revolutionary government and Huskisson returned to London . 
 On Huskisson 's return to London Henry Dundas , the Home Secretary , appointed him to oversee the execution of the Aliens Act , which dealt with refugees arriving in Britain from areas affected by the French Revolution . He performed this task well , and in 1795 he was appointed Under @-@ Secretary of State for War at the age of 24 . In 1796 he was elected Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Morpeth . In 1799 he married Eliza Emily Milbanke ( known as Emily ) , daughter of Admiral Mark Milbanke , and shortly afterwards moved to Eartham House near Chichester . He resigned from public office in 1801 following the fall of William Pitt the Younger 's government . In 1804 he was re @-@ elected to Parliament for Liskeard , and appointed to the post of Secretary to the Treasury by the returning Pitt . In 1809 Huskisson resigned from the government along with George Canning following Canning 's duel with fellow cabinet minister Lord Castlereagh . In 1814 he re @-@ entered public life as First Commissioner of Woods and Forests ; although this was a relatively minor post , he was very influential in the development of detailed legislation and policy , particularly regarding the controversial relaxation of the Corn Laws . 
 In 1823 Huskisson was appointed to the Cabinet as President of the Board of Trade and Treasurer of the Navy . In the same year he succeeded George Canning in the important constituency of Liverpool . He oversaw a number of reforms aimed at developing industry and free trade , including reform of the Navigation Acts and reduction of taxes on manufacturing and on the import of foreign goods . He drove through the restructuring of Britain 's network of overseas outposts and colonies into the network of economically and politically interdependent states which became the British Empire , aiming for a gradual abolition of slavery and accelerating British colonisation . 
 In April 1827 Huskisson 's mentor George Canning became Prime Minister , but died less than four months later and was succeeded by Viscount Goderich . Goderich appointed Huskisson Secretary of State for War and the Colonies . Goderich resigned in January 1828 and was replaced as Prime Minister by Arthur Wellesley , Duke of Wellington . Huskisson , along with many other protégés of Canning , resigned later that year over the issue of the lack of parliamentary representation for Manchester . Huskisson remained in Parliament as MP for Liverpool , and devoted himself to working on behalf of the growing industrial towns of north west England ; the Manchester Guardian described him as " perhaps the most useful practical statesman of the present day " . Although still weak from a previous serious illness , he felt it was his duty as Liverpool 's MP to attend the opening of the railway . 
 = = = Rainhill Trials and preparation for opening = = = 
 In late 1829 , with construction of the railway almost complete , the Rainhill Trials were held on a short level stretch of the completed line near Rainhill , to test how the track withstood locomotives running over it and to determine which type of locomotive would be used , with a £ 500 prize at stake . The Trials were widely publicised , and 10 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 people attended the first day on 6 October 1829 . Of the five entrants Rocket , built by George Stephenson and his son Robert , was the only entrant to complete the trial without suffering a serious failure , and was duly selected as the design to be used . ( Although often described as a race , and shown as such in illustrations , the Rainhill Trials were a series of independent trials . Each engine ran on a different day . ) At around the time of the Rainhill Trials the tunnel to the forthcoming Liverpool terminus — the first tunnel ever dug under a major built @-@ up area — was completed . To win over sceptical locals it was whitewashed , fitted with lighting and a band , and the public charged a shilling apiece to walk through it . 
 By early 1830 the line was almost complete , and locomotives began trial runs over the route . On 14 June 1830 a test run from Liverpool to Salford drew two passenger carriages and seven fully loaded coal wagons for 29 miles ( 47 km ) in 2 hours 25 minutes without incident . Booth convened a meeting of the directors that evening , who decided that the railway would be ready to open in late summer . After consulting with the office of the Duke of Wellington over when he would be available to attend an inauguration ceremony , and learning that he was due in the area on 13 September to attend a dinner in Manchester , it was agreed that the railway would formally open on Wednesday 15 September 1830 . 
 Actress , author and anti @-@ slavery campaigner Fanny Kemble , who accompanied George Stephenson on a test of the L & M prior to its opening , described the tests in a letter written in early 1830 : 
 We were introduced to the little engine which was to drag us along the rails . She ( for they make these curious little fire horses all mares ) consisted of a boiler , a stove , a platform , a bench , and behind the bench a barrel containing enough water to prevent her being thirsty for fifteen miles , the whole machine not bigger than a common fire engine . She goes upon two wheels , which are her feet , and are moved by bright steel legs called pistons ; these are propelled by steam , and in proportion as more steam is applied to the upper extremities ( the hip @-@ joints , I suppose ) of these pistons , the faster they move the wheels ; and when it is desirable to diminish the speed , the steam , which unless suffered to escape would burst the boiler , evaporates through a safety valve into the air . The reins , bit , and bridle of this wonderful beast , is a small steel handle , which applies or withdraws the steam from its legs or pistons , so that a child might manage it . The coals , which are its oats , were under the bench , and there was a small glass tube affixed to the boiler , with water in it , which indicates by its fullness or emptiness when the creature wants water , which is immediately conveyed to it from its reservoirs ... 
 This snorting little animal , which I felt rather inclined to pat , was then harnessed to our carriage , and Mr. Stephenson having taken me on the bench of the engine with him , we started at about ten miles an hour ... [ George Stephenson 's ] way of explaining himself is peculiar , but very striking , and I understood , without difficulty , all that he said to me ... The engine having received its supply of water , the carriage was placed behind it , for it cannot turn , and was set off at its utmost speed , thirty @-@ five miles an hour , swifter than a bird flies ( for they tried the experiment with a snipe ) . You cannot conceive what that sensation of cutting the air was ; the motion is as smooth as possible , too . I could either have read or written ; and as it was , I stood up , and with my bonnet off ' drank the air before me . ' The wind , which was strong , or perhaps the force of our own thrusting against it , absolutely weighed my eyelids down . When I closed my eyes this sensation of flying was quite delightful , and strange beyond description ; yet strange as it was , I had a perfect sense of security , and not the slightest fear ... 
 Now for a word or two about the master of all these marvels , with whom I am most horribly in love . He is a man from fifty to fifty @-@ five years of age ; his face is fine , though careworn , and bears an expression of deep thoughtfulness ; his mode of explaining his ideas is peculiar and very original , striking , and forcible ; and although his accents indicates strongly his north country birth , his language has not the slightest touch of vulgarity or coarseness . He has certainly turned my head . Four years have sufficed to bring this great undertaking to an end . The railroad will be opened upon the fifteenth of next month . The Duke of Wellington is coming down to be present on the occasion , and , I suppose , what with the thousands of spectators and the novelty of the spectacle , there will never have been a scene of more striking interest . 
 = = Opening day = = 
 The directors of the L & M set out to do all they could to make the opening day a success . It was decided that for the opening , the dignitaries and guests would assemble in Liverpool , and eight of the L & M 's locomotives would haul them in special trains to Liverpool Road railway station , the railway 's Manchester terminus . A number of covered railway carriages " resembling the most luxurious of road coaches " , with cushioned seating and cloth linings and each capable of carrying between 12 and 24 passengers , were provided for the more important persons among those attending . More basic open carriages , described by an observer as " plain homely unadorned butter @-@ and @-@ egg sort of market carts " , each carried 60 passengers . <unk> James Edmondson was commissioned to design a special carriage for the Duke of Wellington and his companions , described by Egerton Smith as : 
 The floor – 32 feet long by 8 feet wide , supported by eight wheels , partly concealed by a basement , ornamented with bold gold mouldings and laurel wreaths on a ground of crimson cloth . A lofty canopy of crimson cloth , 24 feet in length , rested upon eight carved and gilt pillars , the cornice enriched with gold ornaments and pendant tassels , the cloth fluted to two centres , surmounted with two ducal coronets . An ornamental gilt balustrade extended round each end of the carriage , and united with one of the pillars which supported the roof . Handsome scrolls filled up the next compartments , on each side of the doorway , which was in the centre . 
 This special train was divided into four carriages . Behind the locomotive was a wagon carrying a band , and behind it were three passenger carriages , with the Duke 's special carriage in the centre . It was drawn by Northumbrian , Stephenson 's most advanced locomotive at the time with a 14 horsepower ( 10 kW ) engine . The Duke 's train was to run on the southern of the L & M 's two tracks , and the other seven trains would run on the northern track , to ensure the Duke would not be delayed should any of the other trains encounter problems . 
 The gathering of the dignitaries at the station and the departure of the trains was a major event . Every hotel room and lodging @-@ house in Liverpool was full the night before . From 9 @.@ 00 am onwards the area around the station was filled with people , and crowds thronged the trackside at Liverpool to watch the trains depart . One group of men had each paid two shillings for access to the best vantage point , the top of the air shaft of the tunnel leading to Crown Street railway station ; they were hoisted up by rope and board shortly after dawn to watch proceedings . 
 Shortly before 10 @.@ 00 am as the Duke of Wellington arrived , a band played See , the Conquering Hero Comes in his honour , beginning a tradition of the song being played at almost every British railway station opening from then on . The Duke 's party entered their carriage ; a gun was then fired to mark the opening of the railway . The Duke 's carriages had their brakes released and were allowed to roll down the incline under the force of gravity to be coupled to the waiting Northumbrian . 
 Soldiers cleared the tracks of onlookers , and the procession of trains left Crown Street station in Liverpool at 11 @.@ 00 am , William and Emily Huskisson travelled in the Ducal train , in the passenger carriage immediately in front of the Duke 's carriage . Northumbrian slowed periodically to allow the seven trains on the northern track to parade past it , but generally ran ahead of the other trains . 
 = = = Phoenix collision = = = 
 Near Parr , about 13 miles ( 21 km ) out of Liverpool , the world 's first passenger train @-@ on @-@ train collision took place , as described by " A <unk> " in Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine , who was travelling in the lead train on the northern track , hauled by Phoenix : 
 One of our engine wheels , how I know not , contrived to bolt from the course — in plain words , it escaped from the rail , and ploughed along upon the clay , with no other inconvenience than an increase of friction , which damped our speed , and with the additional application of the break , soon brought us to an anchor . The engine , however , behind us , not being aware of our mishap , came pelting on at a smart pace , without receiving its signal for checking motion in time . Accordingly , those on the look @-@ out hastily called on their fellow @-@ passengers to be on their guard , and prepare for a jolt , which took place with a crash upon our rear , sufficiently loud and forcible to give an idea of what would happen , if by any strange chance it had charged us with the unrestrained impetuosity of its powers . 
 With no reported injuries from this incident , the wheels of the derailed Phoenix were remounted on the rails and the journey continued . After crossing the Sankey Viaduct , the trains passed Warrington Junction , where George Stephenson 's Warrington and Newton Railway was under construction in the expectation of eventual extension southwards to link the L & M to Birmingham and London . After passing Warrington Junction , the parade of trains passed through the historic market town of Newton @-@ le @-@ Willows , roughly at the midpoint of the line . Fifty @-@ five minutes after leaving Liverpool the procession was scheduled to stop for the locomotives to take on water at Parkside railway station , half a mile east of Newton @-@ le @-@ Willows and 17 miles ( 27 km ) from Liverpool . 
 = = Parkside = = 
 Although in an isolated rural area , Parkside station had been designed as a junction station and water stop for proposed connections with the Wigan Branch Railway and the Bolton and Leigh Railway , and had multiple lines of rails in place . A leaflet given to those travelling on the trains advised that while : 
 the apparatus at which the water is supplied is worth looking at ... we recommend the inspection to take place from the carriages . There are here five lines of rails , and the excitation arising from the approach of a carriage will generally so confuse a person not accustomed to walk on the railroad , as to make it almost impossible for him to discern which line it is coming on . 
 The Duke 's train had run more slowly through populated areas owing to the cheering crowds , and by the time it reached Parkside the first two trains on the northern track , Phoenix and North Star , had already passed through Parkside and had pulled up ahead of the station waiting for the Duke 's train to depart . By now , the passengers in the Duke 's train had been travelling for almost an hour , and the water stop at Parkside was the only scheduled stop on the journey . Although it was beginning to drizzle , and despite a request from the railway engineers for passengers to remain on the trains , at 11 @.@ 55 am around 50 men disembarked from the Duke 's train to stretch their legs . The group consisted of many of the most influential figures of the day , including the Marquess of Stafford , Charles Arbuthnot , Prince Esterházy , the Earl of Wilton , L & M founder Joseph Sandars and William Huskisson . As the rain had formed deep puddles on either side of the railway embankment , most of the party remained on or near the railway tracks . 
 The group stood around the rail lines and discussed the events of the day and the potential of rail travel . According to Sandars , Huskisson congratulated him on the achievement of his vision , and said to Sandars that he " must be one of the happiest men in the world " . William Holmes , the Chief Whip , then called Huskisson to one side . He suggested that , with the Duke of Wellington in a particularly good mood owing to the cheering crowds which had lined the route , it might be a good time for Huskisson and the Duke to meet and try to arrange a reconciliation . 
 The Duke of Wellington was becoming unpopular as Prime Minister , particularly in the industrial north west of England , for continually blocking proposed reforms . Huskisson saw himself as well placed to unite the two wings of the Tory party should the Duke retire , or to lead the reforming faction of the party into a split from the Tories and a progressive alliance with the Whigs . He also saw himself as a natural ally for the Duke , despite their political differences , as a Tory popular in Liverpool and Manchester , both of which were traditionally hostile to the party . Newspapers were already beginning to report rumours that Huskisson and his supporters were to be invited back into the government . 
 Huskisson saw the Duke of Wellington sitting in the front corner of his special carriage . Huskisson walked along the tracks to the carriage , extended a hand , and the Duke reached out of the carriage and shook it . 
 = = = Rocket collision = = = 
 As Huskisson and the Duke of Wellington exchanged greetings , some of the crowd saw Rocket , hauling the third of the seven trains on the northern track , approaching in the distance . They shouted " An engine is approaching , take care gentlemen " to those people — including Huskisson — standing on the tracks . 
 The men gathered on the track moved out of the way of the approaching Rocket , either by climbing onto the embankment or getting back into their carriages . Unlike the other carriages , Edmondson had not equipped the Duke 's carriage with fixed steps . Instead , a movable set of steps was at the back of the carriage , to be moved into position to allow travellers to board and alight at whichever part of the carriage was most convenient . With Rocket approaching , there was not time to fetch the movable steps . With Rocket 80 feet ( 24 m ) away , only Holmes , Huskisson and Esterházy remained on the tracks . Edward Littleton MP , a passenger in the Duke 's carriage , reached out to Esterházy and hauled him into the carriage to safety . 
 Joseph Locke , driving Rocket , now saw that there were people on the line ahead . Rocket was an engineering prototype , and had not been equipped with brakes . Locke threw the engine into reverse gear , a process which took ten seconds to engage . As Rocket continued to approach , Huskisson and Holmes panicked . Holmes clung to the side of the Duke 's carriage , while Huskisson made two efforts to run across the track to safety , each time returning to the side of the carriage . 
 The space between the rails was 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) , and the carriages overhung the outside rails by 2 feet ( 610 mm ) . Pressed against the side of the carriage , the remaining gap was just enough for Huskisson and Holmes to escape without injury , but Huskisson misjudged the distance . According to Edward Littleton , the Duke of Wellington said to Huskisson " We seem to be going on — you had better step in ! " . Huskisson tried to clamber into the carriage , but those inside failed to reach him to pull him in . Holmes , still pressed against the carriage , shouted " For God 's sake , Mr Huskisson , be firm " , but Huskisson grabbed the door of the carriage . With Holmes still pressed against the side of the carriage , the door , with Huskisson hanging on to it , swung out directly into the path of Rocket . Rocket collided with the door and Huskisson fell onto the track in front of the locomotive . 
 In the words of Harriet Arbuthnot , who was in the Duke 's carriage , ' [ Huskisson ] was caught by it , thrown down & the engine passed over his leg & thigh , crushing it in a most frightful way . It is impossible to give an idea of the scene that followed , of the horror of everyone present or of the piercing shrieks of his unfortunate wife , who was in the car . He said scarcely more than , " It 's all over with me . Bring me my wife and let me die . " ' 
 = = = Initial reaction = = = 
 Joseph Parkes , Lord Wilton and William Rathbone were the first to reach Huskisson . They found that a wheel had passed over his right calf and thigh , leaving his knee itself untouched . A flap of skin on his upper leg had been cut back , exposing the muscles , and the exposed arteries had not been severed but were flattened , pulsing with Huskisson 's heartbeat . The damaged leg shook uncontrollably . Observers noted that Huskisson did not appear to be in pain , and instead lay watching the leg shake . Huskisson shouted " This is the death of me " . Parkes attempted to reassure him , but Huskisson replied " Yes , I am dying , call Mrs Huskisson " . A man threw his coat over William Huskisson 's leg to spare Emily Huskisson from seeing the extent of his injuries , and she was helped from the carriage in which she had been sitting . In hysterics , she attempted to throw herself onto Huskisson , but was restrained by fellow passengers as Lord Wilton applied a makeshift tourniquet he had made using handkerchiefs and an elderly passenger 's walking stick . Other passengers ripped the door of a nearby railway storeroom from its hinges , to serve as a makeshift stretcher . Huskisson was lifted onto the door , shaking his head and saying " Where is Mrs Huskisson ? I have met my death , God forgive me . " ( Garfield , writing in 2002 , gives his words as " This is my death , God forgive me " . ) 
 Men ran along the track in both directions to tell the other trains not to proceed . In the initial panic , the first thought of many of those present was that the Prime Minister had been assassinated . 
 On looking out , I observed the Duke 's train drawn up parallel to another train , with a considerable number of persons on foot assembled in the intervening space ; and , at the same time , I perceived an appearance of hustling , and stooping , and crowding together for which I could not well account . In another moment , a gentleman rushed forth , and came running up the line towards us ; as he neared , I saw evidently that he was much agitated , and pale , and breathless — in short , that something dreadful had happened was obvious . At length he stopped , and fifty voices exclaimed , " Has any thing happened ? What is the matter ? " In a state of distracted nervousness , and in broken unconnected words , he at last broke silence — " Oh God ! he is dead ! He is killed ! he is killed ! " — " Who , and when , and how ? " burst from every mouth ; the first passing thought on my own , and probably every other mind , being , that some desperate and successful attempt had been made on the Duke 's life . The truth , however , soon spread like wildfire to the right and left , acting , as it fell upon every car , like a spell . Smiles and cheerful countenances were changed for one general gloom . Amongst those who were near the fatal spot , the first feeling was one of thankfulness , that their own immediate relative was not the victim ; the next , and most permanent , was sympathy with the unhappy lady who saw her husband stretched , lacerated and bleeding , on the ground . A further sympathy was , I am sure , as generally and as sincerely felt — a sympathy with those gentlemen , who , as directors , had for so long devoted themselves to the accommodation of the public , and looked forward to this day as a gratifying and auspicious termination of their labours ; conscious , too , as they were , that had their printed directions , issued with the tickets , been adhered to , no such accident could by any possibility have occurred . 
 Henry Herbert Southey , physician to the recently deceased George IV , had travelled in the Duke 's train , as had Dr Hunter , professor of anatomy at the University of Edinburgh . The two of them rushed to Huskisson 's side , joined shortly afterwards by Joseph Brandreth , a Liverpool surgeon who had been travelling behind Phoenix . The doctors suggested returning Huskisson to Liverpool for treatment , but George Stephenson insisted that it would be better to take him on to Manchester . 
 Huskisson was loaded onto the flat @-@ bottomed wagon of the Duke 's train which had carried the band . The remaining three carriages of the Duke 's train were detached and the band 's carriage , hauled by Northumbrian , set off for Manchester with Stephenson driving . Lord Wilton held Huskisson 's hands and arms steady , while Lord Colville supported his head on his knees and tried to cushion him from the vibration of the train . With the train almost unladen and Stephenson running the engine flat @-@ out , the train reached the speed of almost 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) , briefly giving those on board the world speed record . The crowds lining the route , unaware of what had happened , cheered and waved as Northumbrian rushed past . 
 Believing Huskisson to be near death , Brandreth suggested that the party stop at the first house they came to . After some discussion the doctors decided to stop at the vicarage of the Rev. Thomas Blackburne , vicar of Eccles , four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) short of Manchester . When told of the decision , Huskisson concurred , saying " Pray do so , I am sure my friend Blackburne will be kind to me " , unaware that Blackburne had been invited to the inauguration of the railway and was now waiting with the rest of the passengers at Parkside . 
 = = Eccles = = 
 By the time the train reached Eccles , the day 's drizzle had been replaced by a storm . The doctors carried Huskisson , still on his door , off the train into a torrent of hail and thunder and walked the few hundred yards to the vicarage , frequently losing their footing as they climbed the deep cutting . Meanwhile , Stephenson and Wilton restarted the train and went on to Manchester to fetch medical assistance . 
 The party arrived at the vicarage to be greeted by Mrs Blackburne . ( Mrs Blackburne had originally intended to travel on the inaugural journey with her husband , but the previous day had felt a <unk> that something was wrong at home and her presence was required , and had returned alone by boat . She had then heard a rumour that a mob from Oldham were planning to storm the track at Eccles to attack the Duke of Wellington , and decided to remain in the vicarage . ) Huskisson was moved to the sofa , and given laudanum and brandy . At about 2 @.@ 00 pm Hunter and Brandreth cut Huskisson 's clothing away from his damaged leg to give it a proper examination . Unfamiliar with industrial injuries , they were baffled by the nature of the damage to Huskisson 's leg , but concluded that despite the apparent severity of his injuries the wounds were treatable . 
 The leg presented a frightful appearance , but in the wound nothing that would prevent the operation or any reason to doubt its success if he had , had constitutional strength to support the additional shock . It is a perfect mystery how the wound was produced , judging from the representations of those who witnessed the accident , and in those statements there is very little differences . The leg half way between the knee and ankle was almost entirely severed , except a small portion on the outside , but the boot was scarcely marked at all . Half @-@ way but rather higher up between the knee and body , the whole flesh was torn off above the bones broken , but the artery which lies over and above it was not injured ; which accounts for the small quantities of blood lost . The flesh on the outward and lower side was not injured much . It was scarcely possible to understand how this could take place if the wheel had gone over him , or how only one wheel , and that the first of the engines , could have done so , without the whole train following , or why it did not , from the enormous weight , entirely sever it . 
 The doctors decided that Huskisson was likely to survive but his injured leg was likely to need amputation . With no medicines or surgical tools , they waited for the arrival of the surgical equipment and medical specialists Stephenson had gone to summon from Manchester . 
 A coach from Manchester eventually arrived bearing four surgeons , led by William Robert Whatton . By this time Huskisson was suffering severe spasms , and those present were having to hold his arms and legs down to stop him falling off the sofa . Whatton assessed that Huskisson was suffering from severe haemorrhaging from the initial wound and subsequent blood loss , and that amputation was necessary to prevent a fatal loss of blood . However , in Huskisson 's agitated condition Whatton felt that traumatic surgery would likely prove fatal . Whatton and his colleagues applied warm water to Huskisson 's chest , feet and hands , and gave him warm cordials and further laudanum in an effort to calm him enough to withstand the shock of surgery . At around 3 @.@ 00 pm the party heard the sound of cannon fire from the west . Told that the cannons were probably being fired to mark the arrival of the Prime Minister in Manchester , Huskisson said " I hope to God the Duke may get safe through the day " . At around 4 @.@ 00 pm Huskisson had regained enough strength to dictate to William Wainewright , his secretary , a brief amendment to his will ensuring that Emily Huskisson would inherit all his property , and shakily signed it . He then requested the sacrament , which was performed by the Rev Blackburne , and read the Lord 's Prayer with Wilton . When Huskisson came to the line " and forgive us our trespasses , as we forgive them that trespass against us " , he said " That I do most heartily ; and I declare to God that I have not the slightest feeling of ill @-@ will towards any human being . " 
 = = Continuation to Manchester = = 
 Meanwhile , back at Parkside the other seven trains had come to a halt following the accident . The electrical telegraph had not yet been invented and no signalling system was in place advanced enough to communicate with Northumbrian , with Liverpool and Manchester , or with the party who had accompanied Huskisson to Eccles . The remaining passengers and railway staff congregated near the accident site to discuss how best to proceed . The L & M staff argued that since the railway was not at fault for the accident they should be allowed to continue to Manchester to prove the viability of the design . They also made the point that a large crowd would by now have gathered in Manchester , waiting to see the arrival of the trains and to get a glimpse of the Duke of Wellington . Joseph Sandars also suggested that , did the group not continue , the Manchester crowd would hear rumours of the accident and believe it to be more serious than it was . The Prime Minister and Sir Robert Peel , the Home Secretary , felt that it would be disrespectful to Huskisson to continue , and advocated that the group return to Liverpool to await news of Huskisson 's condition . 
 At about the time Whatton 's party of surgeons arrived at Eccles , riders on horseback arrived at Parkside from Manchester and Salford . They reported that the crowd in Manchester was becoming restless , and that the authorities feared a riot if the Duke did not arrive . The Duke 's party returned to Edmondson 's elaborate ducal carriage , still on the southern track . Northumbrian had gone ahead with Huskisson and the other seven locomotives were all on the northern track , and there was no way to move what remained of the Duke 's train onto the northern track or transfer a locomotive to the southern . A long chain was tied between Phoenix on the northern track , and the three remaining carriages of the Duke 's train on the southern track . At 1 @.@ 30 pm Phoenix and its train were then attached to North Star and its train and the two locomotives set out at low speed towards Manchester , passing Eccles and heading into the deserted marshland of Chat Moss . 
 During the long interval spent in a state of uncertainty , individual feelings were vented in a variety of ways . Some were in tears , some retired from the crowd and paced hastily up and down the road , some seated themselves by the side in silence . Some stood absorbed , while others discussed the accident in little knots and parties — some were <unk> , while others were looking on speechless and motionless . The final decision being in favour of advancing , seats were resumed , and we moved on ; but the buoyant exhilaration of the morning was past , and the whole now wore the sombre aspect of a funeral procession . The military band was left to return as it could ; I saw them , crest @-@ fallen , picking their way homeward through the mud and mire ; our trumpeters , who had hitherto rather overpowered us with their efforts , were ordered to keep silence , and no responsive greetings met the shouts of spectators , as yet in ignorance of the sad event . The weather , too , began to assume a cheerless aspect , and the lively face of a well @-@ cultivated country was soon exchanged for the dreary wilds of <unk> , that Paradise of Will o ' the Wisps , snipes , and blue devils ... A heavy shower , with distant thunder , tended little to raise our spirits in crossing this <unk> wilderness of nearly six miles in extent , continuing with more or less intermission till the end of our journey . 
 = = = Arrival in Manchester = = = 
 As Wellington 's makeshift train slowly headed towards Manchester , it was accompanied along the route by cheering crowds , still unaware of the accident . As they passed the milepost marking 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Liverpool , in the middle of Chat Moss , they met Stephenson and Northumbrian on the southern track , returning from Manchester . Stephenson told the party of Huskisson 's condition when he last saw him before leaving Eccles for Manchester ( erroneously claiming that amputation had already been attempted successfully ) , and boasted of having set a new speed record . The three remaining carriages of Wellington 's original train , still on the southern track , were detached from the train and attached to Northumbrian , which set off at full speed for Manchester . As the train approached Manchester the trackside bystanders became increasingly hostile , booing , hissing and waving banners against Wellington . Hostile crowds spilled onto the track , forcing the trains to slow to a crawl . Eventually the crowds on the track became so dense they were unable to disperse as the trains approached , and the trains were obliged " to play the part of the juggernaut car " , pushing people out of their path with their own momentum . 
 The Duke of Wellington arrived at Liverpool Road , the L & M 's Manchester terminus , a little before 3 @.@ 00 pm . As the messengers sent to Parkside had warned , the crowd had become hostile ; one observer described them as " A slovenly , ragged set , with hair <unk> and beards unshaven , with waistcoats open , exhibiting unwashed skin , dirty linen , and bare necks . " While some present cheered , others — especially weavers — hissed the Duke and pelted his carriage with vegetables . Two tricolore flags were hoisted , and banners reading " No Corn Laws " and " Vote by Ballot " were waved . The passengers on the trains disembarked and headed to a buffet of cold meats in the L & M 's warehouse . On disembarking from the train the Rev Thomas Blackburne learned for the first time that Huskisson was in his vicarage , and rushed home to Eccles by horse . Fearing the hostile crowd , Wellington refused to leave his carriage , sent for food to be brought in to him , and ordered that the locomotives be readied for return to Liverpool as soon as possible . At 4 @.@ 37 pm the trains began to pull out of Manchester to head back to Liverpool . 
 = = = Return to Liverpool = = = 
 The hasty departure from Manchester degenerated into chaos . Mechanical failures and a lack of space to turn the locomotives meant that the seven trains on the northern track were unable to get out of the station . Only three carriages — the Duke 's among them — managed to leave successfully . At around 6 @.@ 30 pm the Duke arrived in Roby , and went to spend the night at the Marquess of Salisbury 's house at Childwall Hall . Meanwhile , the remaining 24 passenger carriages were eventually lashed together with rope and fastened to the three locomotives which remained usable , which hauled this single long train , carrying around 600 passengers , out of Manchester at a speed of around 5 mph ( 8 km / h ) , further slowed by crowds of people standing on the tracks and by grit and mud settling on the rails . 
 The eight trains had been scheduled to arrive back in Liverpool at 4 @.@ 00 pm . By 7 @.@ 00 pm , the passenger train was not yet even halfway back to Liverpool . As darkness fell it began to rain , and the drivers , fearing for the safety of the trains in the dark and wet , slowed the train further . As it had not been intended that the inaugural journey take place in the darkness the trains were not fitted with lighting or engine lamps ; the driver of Comet , leading the train , held a burning tarry rope to light the way ahead . Although some of the crowds lining the route were now dispersing , many others had remained to see the trains return . These crowds had been drinking all day ; as the train passed under bridges the train , with its open carriages , was pelted with objects thrown down from the bridges , and on one occasion Comet struck a wheelbarrow , apparently deliberately placed across the rails . Passing Eccles , the train stopped briefly for enquiries to be made about Huskisson ; those enquiring were told that he was looking frail , and a successful operation was unlikely in his current condition . 
 Shortly after passing the accident site at Parkside , the train passed a group of uniformed men walking along the railway carrying a variety of objects . It later transpired that this was the band , who had left their wagon when it had been commandeered to carry the injured Huskisson . The train which had carried the Duke of Wellington to Roby had not had space for them , and had left them to wait for the other trains which they believed were following . The band had eventually given up waiting and walked home , along a grass verge that was turning to mud under the heavy rain . As the train passed Sutton the three engines were unable to haul the combined weight of the train up an incline , and 400 of the men aboard were obliged to get out of the train and walk for a mile , illuminated only by the sparks flying from the locomotives , as the engines slowly hauled the empty carriages up the gradient . The train finally arrived in Liverpool at 10 @.@ 30 pm . Many of the guests had planned to return home in daylight following the completion of the journey , and set out into the pitch @-@ black city in search of somewhere to sleep . 
 The group who had watched the departure of the trains from the top of the Liverpool tunnel <unk> , meanwhile , had been forgotten in the confusion , and were unable to get down from their vantage point . Eventually at around 8 @.@ 00 pm John Harrison , a teacher of gymnastics and swordsmanship , lowered himself down the rope hand @-@ over @-@ hand , and coaxed the others to follow him down in the same manner . The angry group then set out in search of the worker who had been supposed to bring them down . 
 James Radley , owner of Liverpool 's landmark Adelphi Hotel , had laid on a banquet for 7 @.@ 00 pm to celebrate " the success and promotion of steam power " . He had prepared food for 230 , and sold 60 advance tickets . By 9 @.@ 00 pm , with most of the passengers still on the train back from Manchester including Liverpool trade magnate William Brown who was to chair the meeting , only 20 people had turned up . Businessman and politician John Ashton Yates was drafted in to replace Brown , and the 20 diners began a subdued two @-@ hour meal , frequently interrupted by riders bringing the latest news from Eccles . During the main course messages were brought that an operation had been performed successfully and that Huskisson was recovering ; by dessert another messenger brought the message that no operation had been performed after all , and that Huskisson was worsening . By the time the meal concluded at around 11 @.@ 00 pm , no reliable news of Huskisson 's condition had arrived . Following a toast to the King and to Huskisson 's recovery , steamship pioneer Francis B. Ogden , at the time the American Consul in Liverpool , gave a speech about the planned Baltimore and Ohio Railroad and of forthcoming schemes to connect New Orleans with the Great Lakes by rail . Although they did not know it , by this time Huskisson was already dead . 
 = = Death of William Huskisson = = 
 As the evening progressed Huskisson continued to weaken . The doctors had concluded that without amputation he would continue to deteriorate , but that he had no realistic chance of surviving major surgery , and broke this news to the <unk> . William Huskisson already believed that he was dying and had resigned himself to his fate ; Emily Huskisson at first caused " a dreadful scene ... but at last she calmed herself and during the rest of the time sat weeping by the couch " . Huskisson told Brandreth " You see I shall never live to make any return for your kindness . You have done all that is possible , but it is all in vain . " After further laudanum , he complained " Why endeavour to support my strength ? I must die , it is only prolonging my sufferings . " 
 At about 11 @.@ 00 pm that night William Wainewright sat down in Blackburne 's study at Eccles vicarage to write a brief letter to the Mayor of Liverpool . 
 Sir , 
 With the deepest grief , I have to acquaint you , for the information of yourself , and of the community over which you preside , that Mr Huskisson breathed his last at 9 o 'clock this evening . He was attended from the moment of the accident , with indefatigable assiduity , by Dr Brandreth of Liverpool , Dr Hunter of Edinburgh , and Mr Ransome , Mr Whatton , Mr <unk> and Mr White , of Manchester . 
 His last moments were soothed by the devoted attentions of his now distracted widow , and by the presence of some of his distinguished and faithful friends . 
 I have the honour to be , Sir 
 Your most obedient humble servant . 
 At 7 : 30 am the next morning , the Duke of Wellington wrote to the Mayor of Liverpool from his lodgings in nearby Roby . He had been due to receive the Freedom of the City , but felt that under the circumstances any kind of celebration would be inappropriate , and said that he would not be attending any of the planned events in the city that day . The planned parades and ceremonial dinner were cancelled , but in the absence of rapid transit or mass communication there was no way to notify most of the city 's population . While some shops had heard the news and remained shuttered , the ships in Liverpool 's docks remained festooned with brightly coloured streamers , and sounded their horns at the time the Duke was expected to be passing . 
 = = = Inquest = = = 
 Given Huskisson 's importance , and the potential impact on the future of Liverpool and Manchester 's industries and on the embryonic railway industry of any findings of liability on the part of the railway , a swift determination of the causes of the accident was considered essential . By 9 @.@ 00 am on the morning after the accident , a hastily convened coroner 's jury was assembled in the Grapes public house in Eccles . The coroner himself , Mr Milne , arrived at 10 @.@ 00 am and was in a hurry to proceed as he had another inquest scheduled that afternoon , but proceedings were unable to begin as Lord Wilton , the only sworn witness scheduled to attend the inquest , could not be found . In the meantime , Milne sent the jury to the vicarage to view Huskisson 's body . 
 After his death Huskisson 's body had been moved from the sofa on which he had died to an upstairs bedroom . On arrival at the vicarage Emily Huskisson refused to allow the jury to view the body , insisting on being allowed to remain alone with her husband . Eventually she had to be forcibly removed from the room , and the jury went into the bedroom in small groups to view the body . As " they did not think it necessary to look at the injured parts at all " , they took only a brief glance at the body , and soon afterwards returned to the Grapes . 
 Eventually a little after noon Wilton arrived at the inquest , and gave a full account of the incident . Lord Granville ( half @-@ brother of the Marquess of Stafford ) told the jury that Huskisson had been suffering from numbness in his leg from a previous operation , and that this may have caused his apparent problems with movement . No witnesses recollected seeing any signal flags raised from any of the locomotives involved , including Rocket , although a system of warning flags was supposed to have been in place . 
 Although some eyewitnesses expressed the view that Joseph Locke , driving Rocket , was at fault , following a few words from the coroner the jury returned a verdict of accidental death . The directors and engineers of the L & M were explicitly absolved of all blame , and no <unk> was to be attached to the locomotive or the railway . 
 After the inquest was over , Emily Huskisson found two speeches in William Huskisson 's jacket pocket , which he had been planning to deliver following the inaugural journey . The first was a brief tribute to James Watt , the inventor of the condensing steam engine , and to all that his invention had made possible . The second was a longer speech . It was marked " to be burnt at my death " , but as it was one of the last things her husband had written Emily Huskisson felt herself unable to do so . 
 ... From the first I was a warm but disinterested advocate for the present great experiment . Now that it has been made , and difficulties of no ordinary nature overcome , I may be permitted to look back with satisfaction on the humble but zealous part I took in first promoting the attempt ... I felt that the application to Parliament for this Railway , though technically a private petition , involved great public interests — those interests which it is the special duty of the Board of Trade to countenance and encourage , and avowedly on this ground not consider it inconsistent with my character of a Minister ... Need I in the present state of the Commerce of the Country , specify what these interests are ? Most of those who hear me know well with what difficulties we have to struggle in maintaining a successful competition with foreign rivals . They know well that it can only be maintained by incessant industry , by unwearied diligence , by constantly increasing skill in our manufacturing population ; but they know well that all their efforts would be unavailing without the greatest economy not of money only but of time , in all the operations of trade ... In short , the principle of a Railway is that of commerce itself — it multiplies the enjoyment of Mankind by increasing the facilities and diminishing the labour by which [ goods ] are produced and distributed throughout the world . 
 Huskisson 's death was a major incident , and was reported worldwide . ( William Huskisson is often reported as the first railway fatality , including in ordinarily reliable sources . This is untrue ; at least two people were killed on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway prior to its opening to the public . The earliest recorded fatality caused by a steam locomotive was an unnamed woman , described as " a blind American beggar " , fatally injured by a train on the Stockton and Darlington Railway on 5 March 1827 . As a high profile figure killed at a high profile event , Huskisson was the first railway fatality to be widely reported . ) As news of the incident gradually spread across the country , railways and steam power , matters which had previously been of interest only to those involved in industries directly affected by them , became a major topic for discussion across Britain . For the first time , the population as a whole became aware that cheap , rapid travel was possible , and that a journey which had previously been extremely expensive and taken the better part of a day was now affordable and took less than two hours . In the afternoon of 16 September , the day after the inauguration of the line , the Liverpool and Manchester Railway began operating a regular scheduled service . The first train carried 130 passengers ( mainly members of the Society of Friends attending a meeting in Manchester ) , with tickets from Liverpool to Manchester costing 7s ( about £ 28 in 2016 terms ) apiece . By the end of the first week of operation , 6 @,@ 104 passengers had travelled on the railway . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 Emily Huskisson planned for William Huskisson to be buried near the family home in Eartham in a small service . On 17 September , three days after Huskisson 's death , Lord Granville and a delegation of Liverpool clergymen visited Eccles vicarage to present Emily Huskisson with a petition , signed by 264 Liverpool dignitaries , " requesting that his remains may be interred within the precincts of this town , in which his distinguished public worth and private virtue secured for him the respect and esteem of the whole community " , and she agreed to his burial in Liverpool instead . She refused to allow any form of parade or pageantry , or a suggested gun salute . 
 On 18 September Huskisson 's body was placed in a coffin and covered with black silk . Shortly before midnight a team of men prepared to move the coffin to a hearse which had been parked outside since the afternoon , but Emily Huskisson refused to allow them to take the body . Instead , she spent another night in the vicarage with the coffin . The next morning she left in a horse @-@ drawn carriage with the windows covered . The coffin , meanwhile , set off in the hearse for Liverpool . Although the funeral party changed horses only at remote and quiet coaching inns to avoid attention , it gathered followers as it progressed ; by the time it reached Liverpool Town Hall late that evening , the hearse was followed by at least 10 carriages and more than 500 mourners on foot . 
 For William Huskisson 's funeral on Friday 24 September , almost every business in Liverpool was closed . Huskisson had been a popular figure in Liverpool , and the authorities expected large numbers of people wishing to attend . In an effort to control numbers it was announced that anyone wishing to join the cortège submit a written request in writing to the Town Hall . This proved impractical , and the authorities put up posters around the town advising that anyone in mourning dress would be allowed to join the procession . Colour coded tickets were issued to those wishing to attend the burial , with each colour representing a different section of the cemetery , in an effort to control crowd numbers at the burial service ; a total of 3 @,@ 000 tickets were issued . 
 Although Emily Huskisson had wanted to keep the service small @-@ scale and free from pageantry , William Huskisson had been an instrumental figure in the development of Liverpool and there was a huge amount of sympathy and respect for him . Almost all the city 's inhabitants who were in a position to attend the funeral lined the route ; it was estimated that 69 @,@ 000 people , roughly half the city 's population , attended . Reports spoke of all available space at every window being packed with onlookers , other than the house in Duke Street in which Huskisson had stayed for the 10 days before the journey , and of people climbing trees and crowding onto roofs for a better view , despite rain and hail . 
 Huskisson 's coffin was placed on a trestle table in the Town Hall , draped with black velvet and covered with feathered plumes . Between 9 @.@ 00 and 10 @.@ 00 am a stream of mourners were guided to the coffin by a group of truncheon men . At 10 @.@ 00 two mutes guided the mourners out of the town hall and mounted horses ; the rain and hail had by now eased . The mutes led the procession , followed by the mourners from the town hall and around 1 @,@ 100 other mourners who had waited outside . These mourners marched six abreast , and were followed by the funeral committee , 28 local clergymen and two more mutes . Behind this group marched Joseph Brandreth and the Rev Blackburne , and behind them came carriages carrying the pall @-@ bearers , a group of local dignitaries who had known and worked with Huskisson , followed by two more mutes . Behind this pair of mutes was a hearse carrying the coffin , followed by Huskisson 's colleagues and his surviving brothers Thomas and Samuel . These in turn were followed by around 900 locals in mourning dress who had decided to join the procession , bringing the cortège to around half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) in length . The Duke of Wellington , pleading a prior commitment to attend a dinner in Birmingham , did not attend . 
 The procession left the town hall and slowly went the 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) via Hope Street to an iron @-@ lined grave in St James Cemetery , accompanied by muffled church bells . Iron rails were erected along the length of the funeral procession to hold back the crowd of around 50 @,@ 000 people who lined the route . Emily Huskisson , devastated by grief , did not attend the funeral . Despite her objection to gun salutes a 32 @-@ pounder cannon was fired to mark the departure of the coffin from the town hall and a 6 @-@ pounder was fired to mark the body 's arrival at the cemetery , and smaller guns were fired as the procession passed . On arrival at the cemetery a short 15 minute service was held , after which Huskisson 's close mourners moved to the graveside and Huskisson was placed in his grave , to the accompaniment of weeping from his brothers . Shortly before 1 @.@ 00 pm another cannon shot marked the end of the service , and the crowd dispersed ; pubs and restaurants throughout Liverpool remained shut for the rest of the day . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Twelve days after the opening of the L & M , Liverpool surgeon Thomas Weatherill wrote to The Lancet questioning the official version of Huskisson 's death and calling the behaviour of the doctors who had attended Eccles vicarage " unscientific , inefficient and imbecilic " . He had spoken to eyewitnesses , and concluded that Huskisson 's weakness and spasms following the accident were caused by blood loss , not internal injury , and that amputation would have stemmed the blood loss and saved Huskisson 's life . He went on to claim that those eyewitnesses he had spoken to had seen Huskisson bleeding heavily , but that no effort had been made to stem the bleeding other than Lord Wilton 's makeshift tourniquet of handkerchiefs . He argued that those doctors attending should at least have made an attempt at amputation when it became clear that other measures were not working . 
 Two weeks later William Whatton replied . He disputed Weatherill 's claim that the only action taken to staunch the blood flow had been the handkerchief , and pointed out that his first action on arrival at Eccles vicarage had been to seal Huskisson 's femoral artery . He stated that he had great experience with similar injuries from his time as an army doctor during the Peninsular War , and that " none of them [ military surgeons ] would have ventured upon an operation where the chances were so decidedly against its success " . He pointed out that the survival rate for amputations among soldiers with similar injuries — considerably healthier than the elderly Huskisson — was no better than 15 % when attempted immediately after the injury . Instead , he cited the advice of leading surgeon George James Guthrie that amputation was not generally survivable until the patient 's pulse had stabilised and the initial shock settled . Whatton pointed out that Huskisson 's pulse did not stabilise and that he was in convulsions for the entire time Whatton attended him . 
 Weatherill did not accept Whatton 's defence . He continued to maintain that the delays in <unk> the blood flow were " unforgivable " , and that with Huskisson obviously dying there had been nothing to lose by attempting surgery . He also pointed out that if Huskisson had been fit enough to dictate a will , he may well have been fit enough to withstand an operation . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The accidents on its opening day gave the Liverpool and Manchester Railway huge amounts of publicity , and greatly increased public awareness of the potential of rapid transport . The L & M 's passenger service proved immediately successful . In October the Duke of Wellington 's special train was put into use as a dedicated first @-@ class train , making four journeys each day between Liverpool and Manchester in each direction . On 4 December 1830 goods operations on the L & M began , with Planet hauling 75 tons of freight from Liverpool to Manchester . In the first six months of 1831 the L & M carried 188 @,@ 726 passengers and 35 @,@ 800 tons of goods ; in the year from the opening in September 1830 to September 1831 , almost 500 @,@ 000 passengers were carried . At George Stephenson 's insistence new locomotives bought by the L & M were fitted with handbrakes from 1831 . 
 The original Crown Street terminus soon proved unable to handle the growing popularity of the railway , and was replaced by Liverpool Lime Street railway station in 1836 . With more advanced locomotives no longer needing to stop midway to take on water Parkside station soon closed , and little trace of it remains . The Liverpool and Manchester Railway remains operational as the northern of the two Liverpool to Manchester Lines . The opening of the L & M is now considered the dawn of the age of mechanised transport ; in the words of industrialist and former British Rail chairman Peter Parker , " the world is a branch line of the pioneering Liverpool – Manchester run " . 
 Spurred by the L & M 's success , within a month of its opening schemes were announced to link Liverpool and Manchester to other major cities , including London , Leeds , Birmingham and Bradford , uniting the key industrial centres of England . The London and Birmingham Railway ( also built by George Stephenson ) , the first railway to link the north and south of England , was completed in 1838 . By 1840 1 @,@ 775 miles ( 2 @,@ 857 km ) of track had been laid in Britain . The Railway Regulation Act 1844 limited passenger fares to one penny ( 1 ⁄ 240 of a pound ) per mile on the entire British railway network , enabling mass population movements , migration to the cities and long @-@ distance commuting , and the social revolution of mass rapid transit began . In 1846 alone 272 new railways were authorised in Britain , and by 1850 over 6 @,@ 200 miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km ) of railways were in place and Britain 's transformation into an industrial superpower was complete . The expertise of Britain 's railway pioneers itself became a major export , and British engineers ( including Stephenson ) supplied almost all the locomotives and rails for the railways then being built across Europe and North America . 
 = = = Rocket = = = 
 Rocket remained in use with the L & M after the accident , albeit rarely used for anything other than internal engineering duties . The more advanced Planet design was better suited to heavy loads , and Rocket became redundant . In 1834 it was used for experiments with new drive systems , after which it was put in storage . In 1836 it was sold to the <unk> Colliery , and used to haul coal until 1844 . 
 Subsequently recognised as the design from which all later locomotives are derived , Rocket eventually came to be considered one of the most important symbols of the Industrial Revolution . It was returned to Robert Stephenson and Company in 1851 with the intention of displaying it at The Great Exhibition , but this did not take place . It was loaned to the Patent Office for display in 1862 . Moved to the Science Collection of the South Kensington Museum in 1876 ( renamed the Science Museum in 1885 ) , it has remained there ever since other than a brief display at the National Railway Museum . 
 In 1929 a replica Rocket was commissioned from Robert Stephenson and Company by Henry Ford , using Stephenson 's original construction techniques . It was intended as a centrepiece of the Henry Ford Museum , where it remains . Another fully functioning replica was built in the 1970s for the National Railway Museum . In 1999 , to mark the 170th anniversary of the Rainhill Trials , the Trials were re @-@ enacted on the Llangollen Railway using this replica and replicas of Novelty and Sans Pareil , the other serious contenders in 1829 . Rocket again won . 
 As of 2010 the original Rocket is one of the main exhibits of the Science Museum 's showpiece Making the Modern World gallery . Although much altered , it retains the original wheels which crushed Huskisson . 
 = = = Duke of Wellington = = = 
 Huskisson 's supporters refused an offer to return to the Duke of Wellington 's cabinet after his death , and at the beginning of November Wellington announced to Parliament that " the constitution needed no improvement and that he would resist any measure of parliamentary reform as long as he was in office " . Fearing serious social unrest , large numbers of Tory MPs rebelled in a vote on governmental expenses . On 15 November 1830 , exactly two months after the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , Wellington lost a vote of no confidence and was replaced as Prime Minister a week later by Earl Grey . Grey set about reforming Britain 's corrupt and antiquated electoral procedure , the issue over which Huskisson had resigned . In 1832 the Representation of the People Act ( commonly known as the Reform Act ) was finally passed . 
 Wellington spent the remainder of his life implacably opposed to railways , complaining that they would " encourage the lower classes to travel about " . He avoided them for more than a decade , before agreeing in 1843 to accompany Queen Victoria for a trip on the London and South Western Railway ( designed by Joseph Locke , driver of Rocket on 15 September 1830 ) . He died of a stroke on 14 September 1852 ; it is estimated that one and a half million people attended his funeral . 
 = = = William and Emily Huskisson = = = 
 William Huskisson 's death made him one of the most famous British politicians of the period . Within a year his first biography was published , as was a volume of his collected speeches . His policies on free trade and minimal government interference were a major influence on Robert Peel and William Ewart Gladstone ( who grew up in Liverpool and whose father Sir John Gladstone had been a close colleague of Huskisson ) and consequently on the later emergence of the Liberal Party and the doctrine of Gladstonian Liberalism . Forty years after his death Huskisson was still sufficiently well @-@ remembered to be featured in novels , including Middlemarch and the novels of Mrs Henry Wood , with no accompanying explanation . The Australian town of Huskisson , New South Wales is named for him . Huskisson Dock , named in his honour in 1852 , remains in operation as part of the Port of Liverpool . In 1880 Huskisson railway station in Liverpool opened , closing to passengers five years later but remaining operational as a goods depot until 1975 . Today he is principally remembered for the manner of his death , and monuments to him stand in Pimlico , Chichester Cathedral , and Liverpool . In 1982 , at a time of high racial tension following the Toxteth riots , his memorial in Liverpool was pulled down by a group of local people in the mistaken belief that it commemorated a slave trader ; it was re @-@ erected around 20 years later in Duke Street , near where he had stayed for his final nights in Liverpool . 
 Emily Huskisson returned to Eartham and lived a quiet life , dedicated to keeping alive her husband 's memory . She died in 1856 . She never returned to Liverpool , and never again travelled by train . 
 On the ruins of Parkside station stands a white stone memorial , once badly damaged by vandals but since restored . The original inscription from the memorial has been removed for safekeeping , and is now displayed in the National Railway Museum . 
 THIS <unk> 
 A tribute of personal respect and affection 
 Has been placed here to mark the spot where on the 15th of <unk> 1830 the day of the opening of this rail road 
 THE <unk> <unk> WILLIAM <unk> M.P. 
 Singled out by the decree of an inscrutable providence from the midst of the distinguished multitude that surrounded him . 
 In the full pride of his talents and the perfection of his usefulness met with the accident that occasioned his death ; 
 Which deprived England of an illustrious statesman and Liverpool of its most honored representative which changed a moment of the noblest exultation and triumph that science and Genius had ever achieved into one of desolation and mourning ; 
 And striking terror into the hearts of assembled thousands , brought home to every bosom the forgotten truth that 
 " IN THE <unk> OF LIFE WE ARE IN <unk> . " 
 = Malagasy Uprising = 
 The Malagasy Uprising ( French : Insurrection malgache ) was a Malagasy nationalist rebellion against French colonial rule in Madagascar , lasting from March 1947 to December 1948 . 
 Starting in late 1945 , Madagascar 's first French National Assembly deputies , Joseph Raseta , Joseph Ravoahangy and Jacques Rabemananjara of the Mouvement démocratique de la rénovation malgache ( MDRM ) political party , led an effort to achieve independence for Madagascar through legal channels . The failure of this initiative and the harsh response it drew from the Socialist Ramadier administration radicalized elements of the Malagasy population , including leaders of several militant nationalist secret societies . On the evening of 29 March 1947 , coordinated surprise attacks were launched by Malagasy nationalists , armed mainly with spears , against military bases and French @-@ owned plantations in the eastern part of the island concentrated around Moramanga and Manakara . The nationalist cause was rapidly adopted in the south and spread to the central highlands and the capital of Antananarivo by the following month , with the number of Malagasy nationalist fighters estimated at over one million . 
 By May 1947 the French began to counter the nationalists . The French tripled the number of troops on the island to 18 @,@ 000 , primarily by transferring soldiers from French colonies elsewhere in Africa . The colonial authorities sought to fight on the physical and psychological fronts and engaged in a variety of terror tactics designed to demoralize the population . The French military force carried out mass execution , torture , war rape , torching of entire villages , collective punishment and other atrocities such as throwing live Malagasy prisoners out of an airplane ( death flights ) . The estimated number of Malagasy casualties varies from a low of 11 @,@ 000 to a high of over 100 @,@ 000 . The nationalists killed approximately 550 French nationals , as well as 1 @,@ 900 supporters of PADESM , a pro @-@ France Malagasy political party created with support from the colonial authorities to compete with MDRM . By August 1948 , the majority of the nationalist leaders were killed or captured , and the Uprising was effectively put down by December 1948 . 
 The violent repression of the nationalist insurgency left deep scars in Malagasy society . A generation of the managerial class was wiped out , creating challenges for the country when it achieved independence in 1960 . Madagascar 's first three deputies were arrested , tortured and kept in prison until they were given amnesty in 1958 . Another leader who survived the conflict , Monja Jaona , was also jailed for nine years and then founded the Madagascar for the Malagasy Party ( MONIMA ) , which has had considerable influence on Malagasy politics . France classified most documents related to the Uprising , and the French government maintained silence on the subject until French president Jacques Chirac termed it " unacceptable " during an official visit to Madagascar in 2005 . Several Malagasy directors have set films in the period of the Uprising . In 1967 the Malagasy government declared 29 March an annual holiday , and in 2012 a museum dedicated to the Uprising was inaugurated in Moramanga . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the close of the 19th century , Madagascar was largely under the control of the Kingdom of Imerina , with its royal palaces at its capital in Antananarivo . Although the kingdom had existed since the early 16th century , it expanded its control beyond its traditional borders in the 1820s under King Radama I , who the British government officially recognized as the sovereign over the entire island of Madagascar . After several failed attempts to impose its authority over the island , France used military force to capture the royal palace in September 1894 and exiled Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony upon officially colonizing the island in February 1895 . Queen Ranavalona III was allowed to remain as a figurehead until the emergence of a popular uprising , termed the Menalamba rebellion , for which the queen was held responsible . The rebellion was harshly crushed and the queen was exiled in 1897 . 
 The Menalamba rebellion was only the first manifestation of ongoing opposition to French rule that occasionally erupted in violent clashes between the Malagasy and the colonial authorities in Madagascar . Secret nationalist societies began to form in the 1910s . Conscription of Malagasy soldiers to fight for France in World War I strengthened resentment of foreign rule , and in the interwar period these nationalist organizations proliferated . Germany 's defeat of the French army and occupation of France in 1940 , the imposition of a Vichy regime on Madagascar and the subsequent occupation of the island by the British in 1942 further tarnished the colonial government 's image . Popular anger was especially aroused by its policies of forced labor in lieu of taxes , involuntary conscription into the army to fight in World War II , and the required contribution of large quantities of rice per head annually . Malagasy hopes for greater sovereignty were stirred by remarks given by General Charles de Gaulle at the Brazzaville Conference in 1944 , where de Gaulle announced all colonies were thereafter French overseas territories entitled to representation in the French National Assembly , and promised citizenship rights to residents of its overseas colonies . Despite the partial implementation of these reforms , forced labor on French @-@ owned plantations and other rights abuses in Madagascar continued unabated . The nationalist secret society Panama ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was founded in 1941 , followed in 1943 by another called Jiny after a type of local red bird . Both organizations , which sought to achieve independence by force if necessary , saw their membership swell during this period . 
 Following the end of the Second World War , several key Malagasy nationalist leaders attempted to achieve independence for Madagascar through legal means . At the first post @-@ war constituent assembly convened in Paris in November 1945 to draft the constitution of the French Fourth Republic , Madagascar was represented by two doctors named Joseph Raseta and Joseph Ravoahangy . Together with future writer Jacques Rabemananjara , in early 1946 they formed the Mouvement démocratique de la rénovation malgache ( MDRM ) political party , whose platform was built on national independence from France . All three leaders were the descendents of Hova who had been politically prominent in the former Merina royal court . The movement was pacifist , and while it sought independence for Madagascar , it embraced the French vision of the island as part of the global Francophone economic and cultural community . Their platform garnered mass support that cut across geographic , ethnic and class divisions , and in November 1946 the trio were elected to represent Madagascar as deputies ( <unk> ) in the French National Assembly . The Malagasy deputies submitted a bill to liberate Madagascar from French rule , but French deputies rejected it . 
 The deputies attracted the disapproval of France 's Socialist Prime Minister , Paul Ramadier , and the Minister of the Colonies , Marius Moutet . The French had humiliatingly had to ask Britain to yield Madagascar after World War II ended , and French political leaders suspected that Britain or South Africa would attempt to wrest Madagascar from France . The MDRM quest for independence was therefore received as a blow to French prestige and authority , and it raised the specter of the violent conflict launched by Vietnamese nationalists in French Indochina the month before . Moutet responded stridently , declaring a " war against the Malagasy autonomy movement " . The refusal of the French government to support a democratic process toward independence for Madagascar drew criticism from the United States government , which strongly denounced the French reaction and criticized its leadership . It also radicalized the leadership of the militant nationalist groups in Madagascar . Sensing the worsening mood in the country , on 27 March 1947 deputies Raseta , Ravoahangy and Rabemananjara jointly issued a statement , urging the public to " maintain absolute calm and coolness in the face of manoeuvrings and provocations of all kind destined to stir up troubles among the Malagasy population and to sabotage the peaceful policy of the MDRM . " 
 = = Independence movement = = 
 = = = Nationalist insurgency = = = 
 The Malagasy Uprising began on the evening of 29 March 1947 , the evening before Palm Sunday . The timing had additional significance as the historic date of the traditional Merina Kingdom fandroana new year 's festival , historically celebrated by a ritual period of anarchy followed by the Merina sovereign 's reestablishment of order . Malagasy nationalists , chief among them the members of the nationalist secret societies Vy <unk> <unk> ( VVS ) and Jiny , coordinated surprise attacks in the eastern part of the island at the <unk> police camp near the rail line at Moramanga , in the coastal town of Manakara and at several points along the lower <unk> River where key French plantations were located . Most historians share the view that the militants escalated the conflict toward violence on the basis of false information transmitted by duplicitous individuals or groups attempting to neutralize the nationalist influence . Members of VVS and Jiny involved in the initial attacks have stated that their organizations were obliged to attack after the signal to take action was transmitted to them by a group that was later discovered to have secret ties to the national police . Researchers have documented reports of nationalists whose member organizations joined the conflict upon commands issued by the police , British nationals , and French settlers living in Madagascar . Despite the role of the militants in leading the uprising , the colonial authorities immediately held MDRM responsible for the movement and responded by targeting the party 's members and supporters . 
 The attacks in the east were immediately followed by similar actions in the south of the island before rapidly spreading throughout the country . By early April , when violence first erupted in Antananarivo , the number of nationalist fighters was estimated at around 2 @,@ 000 . Attacks against French military bases multiplied over the course of the month throughout the central highlands as far south as Fianarantsoa and as far north as Lake Alaotra . The movement enjoyed particularly strong support in the south , where the revolt attracted as many as one million peasants to fight for the nationalist cause . 
 Two guerrilla zones were established in the eastern rainforest and the fighters extended their control from these points . The nationalists grouped together under various established or new configurations , including several militias with their own leadership structure , including generals and war ministers . Militias were sometimes led by traditional leaders ( <unk> ) of local communities . Many of the insurgents were demobilized soldiers ( tirailleurs <unk> ) returning from World War II and frustrated with the limited recognition and opportunity afforded them by the French colonial government . Numerous others were railway workers who hid themselves in the dense eastern rainforest and made use of guerrilla tactics to attack French interests along the rail line connecting Antananarivo to the eastern port town of Toamasina . At the height of the movement , nationalist insurgents gained control of one third of the island . 
 The eruption of the conflict provided the pretext for violence between highland Merina and coastal Malagasy of other ethnic groups that were linked to precolonial history and politics . Merina Hova elites founded the MDRM not only in the interest of ending French rule , but also in regaining the political dominance of the Merina upon independence . In reaction to the founding of the MDRM , in 1946 the Party for the Disinherited of Madagascar ( Parti des déshérités de Madagascar , PADESM ) was formed . It attracted membership from members of coastal communities formerly subjugated by the Merina empire , as well as highland @-@ based descendents of former Merina slaves . Initially a non @-@ nationalist party , PADESM eventually favored a gradual process toward independence that would preserve close ties to France and prevent the reemergence of the precolonial Merina hegemony . The French authorities tacitly supported PADESM , which accused MDRM of launching the uprising to re @-@ establish Merina rule . By aligning itself with PADESM , Socialist @-@ dominated French politicians sought to cast themselves as champions of the oppressed masses against the exploitative Hova elites . 
 = = = French response = = = 
 French security forces were initially taken by surprise and were unable to organize an effective response to contain the uprising . By May 1947 , however , the French military had begun to counter the nationalists ' attacks . Five North African battalions arrived in Madagascar at the end of July 1947 , enabling the French to take the initiative . However , French army strength remained modest with soldiers numbering 18 @,@ 000 in April 1947 . The number of troops increased to about 30 @,@ 000 in 1948 . The French forces now included paratroopers , soldiers of the French Foreign Legion , and tirailleurs ( colonial infantry ) brought in from the French territories of Comoros and Senegal . 
 The French strategy followed the " oil spot " method of General Joseph Gallieni , the first governor of the island ( 1896 – 1905 ) to root out , demoralize and crush the guerrilla fighters . In addition , the security forces adopted a strategy of terror and psychological warfare involving torture , collective punishment , the burning of villages , mass arrests and executions , and war rape . Many of these practices were later employed by the French military during the Algerian War . The intensity and cruelty of the French response was then unprecedented in the colonial history of France . On 6 May 1947 , in Moramanga , soldiers machine @-@ gunned MDRM officials detained in wagons , killing between 124 and 160 mostly unarmed MDRM activists . In Mananjary , hundreds of Malagasy were killed , among them 18 women and a group of prisoners thrown alive out of an airplane . Other massacres of 35 to 50 people occurred in Farafangana , Manakara , and Mahanoro . 
 The Malagasy nationalists were mostly equipped with spears and had little protection from the firearms of the French military . They had expected that the United States might intervene in their favor , but no such action was taken by Washington . In addition , the majority of the population did not rise up to join them in their fight . Between July and September 1948 , most of the key leaders of the Uprising were captured or killed . The last rebel stronghold , named <unk> ( " That which is inaccessible to Europeans " ) , fell in November 1948 . Defeated , most of the remaining nationalist fighters disappeared into the eastern rainforest in December 1948 . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The French government 's first official estimate of the number of Malagasy killed in the conflict was 89 @,@ 000 . In 1949 the High Commissioner of Madagascar added to this figure the estimated number who fled into the forest and were believed dead , declaring the true number of dead at over 100 @,@ 000 . Many Malagasy believe this to be an underestimate of the actual number killed . The population of Madagascar at the time of the Uprising was approximately four million , and these estimated losses represented nearly two percent of the population . In 1950 , the colonial administration revised the casualty number to 11 @,@ 342 " known dead " . According to official French figures 4 @,@ 928 of these had been killed in rioting while the remainder had died of starvation or exhaustion after fleeing the fighting . 
 Historians continue to disagree over the number of casualties during the Malagasy Uprising . The original figure of 89 @,@ 000 casualties is often quoted . Historian Jean Fremigacci contested the 89 @,@ 000 estimate , noting that losses of this magnitude normally should have manifested on the demographic curve , but in Madagascar population growth began again and even accelerated from 1946 to 1949 . He estimates 30 – 40 @,@ 000 Malagasy deaths , of which 30 @,@ 000 were violent and the remainder attributable to disease and starvation in the conflict areas . Fremigacci 's interpretation was challenged by demographer Alfred Sauvy , who suggested the trauma to population growth that would normally be observed by these casualties may have been masked by improvements in malaria survival rates resulting from a major colonial anti @-@ malaria campaign undertaken in the same period . According to Fremigacci , " There were war crimes in Madagascar in 1947 but without intent to exterminate . " 
 An estimated 550 French nationals died during the conflict , of whom 350 were soldiers . In addition , an estimated 1 @,@ 900 Malagasy PADESM supporters were killed by their pro @-@ MDRM nationalist countrymen during the conflict . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although the MDRM leadership consistently maintained its innocence , the party was outlawed by the French colonial rulers . The French government classified the Malagasy Uprising documentation of the military , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of the Colonies . 
 The French media reported little on the event as it happened , and relatively little mention of the nationalist struggle was mentioned in Les Temps <unk> , the leftist publication that would become considered the leading anti @-@ colonial advocate after the launch of the French offensive in Indochina . Other private publications served as forums for the Francophone intelligentsia to express their condemnation of the French government 's response to the Uprising . The most commentary appeared in the left @-@ leaning Catholic monthly L 'Esprit , with criticisms also published in other leftist publications like <unk> , Combat , Franc @-@ <unk> and <unk> Chrétien . Albert Camus penned a seething rebuke of the French colonial administration that was published on 10 May 1947 in Combat . Very few details of the rising and subsequent repression were reported at the time outside France . 
 Over the decades that followed independence the French government and news sources in France remained largely silent on the issue of the Malagasy Uprising . In 1997 , a Malagasy official criticized the French for never having had a diplomat present at the annual commemoration ceremonies . The first official condemnation of the Uprising 's suppression by the French colonial authorities was expressed by president Jacques Chirac during his official visit to Madagascar on 21 July 2005 , when he met with Malagasy president Marc Ravalomanana and qualified the repression of the Malagasy uprising as " unacceptable " . On the 65th anniversary of the Uprising in 2012 , Malagasy Prime Minister Omer <unk> issued a request to the French government to declassify their archival materials related to the Uprising , but the request was not approved . 
 = = = Trials and executions = = = 
 From July to October 1948 in Antananarivo , the French organized a large public trial of the uprising , charging 77 officials of the MDRM . The French authorities claimed that MDRM appeals for calm immediately prior to the outbreak of violence had been a diversion tactic to mask their involvement in organizing the rebellion , which the French alleged was secretly launched by way of an encoded MDRM telegram . Deputies Ravoahangy and Rabemananjara were arrested and imprisoned on 12 April 1947 , followed two months later by Raseta ( who was in Paris when the Uprising began ) , in violation of their right to diplomatic immunity . Debates about the Malagasy Uprising in the French National Assembly on 1 August 1947 concluded with the decision to revoke this immunity for all three deputies , who were tortured in prison . 
 The trial , which was held from 22 July to 4 October 1948 , was marked by numerous irregularities . The principal witness for the prosecution was shot dead three days before the trial , and much of the evidence against the defendants was obtained through torture . All three were found guilty of conspiracy against the state and endangering national security . Although these points were raised at the trial , Ravoahangy was sentenced to death , along with Raseta and four other nationalists , while Rabemananjara was sentenced to life in prison . In July 1949 , the convicts ' death sentences were commuted to life in prison , and the trio remained imprisoned until they were granted amnesty in 1958 . Few individuals , with the notable exception of Monja Jaona , the founder of Jiny in the south , have claimed responsibility for a leadership role in the insurrection . 
 Beside this " trial of the parliamentarians " , military courts relayed by civilian courts condemned 5 @,@ 765 Malagasy nationals ( 865 by military courts and 4 @,@ 891 by civilians ) . The military courts delivered 44 death penalties but carried out only eight executions , while 16 of the 129 death penalties pronounced by the civilian courts were enacted . Through amnesties and remissions , all prisoners ( except the leaders ) were freed in 1957 . 
 = = = National trauma = = = 
 The Uprising and its repression caused trauma that continues to manifest in the Malagasy population . Many Malagasy nationals fought each other and struggle to reconcile themselves to the remorse and guilt . Healing at the national level is further complicated by the fact that the same leaders who proclaimed Madagascar 's independence in 1960 were those who had been major players in the PADESM political party , which had been favored by the colonial administration after the crushing of the revolt . 
 According to historian Philippe <unk> , the French crushing of the Uprising resulted in the near annihilation of the managerial class in Madagascar , with consequences that continued to reverberate for decades after the country 's independence . Many of the leading figures in the Uprising went on to dramatically shape the political and social landscape of Madagascar after independence . Monja Jaona , who was jailed by the French for nine years , founded the Madagascar for the Malagasy Party ( MONIMA ) in 1958 shortly after his release . His party was key in leading the rotaka peasant uprising against President Philibert Tsiranana which brought down his neo @-@ colonial administration the following year . After initially supporting Admiral Didier Ratsiraka , Tsiranana 's successor , in 1992 Jaona led demonstrations against it and in favor of federalism , being severely wounded in the process . His son , Monja <unk> , is also an active member of MONIMA and served as Prime Minister under Andry Rajoelina . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 The Malagasy government has organized official annual commemorations of the Uprising since 1967 , when 29 March was first declared a day of mourning by President Tsiranana . It is now observed as Martyrs ' Day . The annual commemorations under his administration brought together perpetrators of war crimes , their surviving victims , former nationalist guerrillas and leaders , and family members of those killed , and characterized the Uprising as a tragic mistake . In the late 1970s under the Ratsiraka administration , the commemorations took on a new tone of pride and gratitude to nationalist fighters who sacrificed for their ideals and paved the way for later nationalist leaders . A national museum dedicated to the Uprising was inaugurated in 2012 by President Andry Rajoelina at Moramanga , 100 kilometers east of Antananarivo . The town has long been the site of the national monument to the conflict , as well as a mausoleum at the town entrance near <unk> containing the remains of an estimated 2 @,@ 500 local nationalists killed in the conflict . 
 The Malagasy Uprising has been commemorated in print and cinema . The film Tabataba ( 1989 ) , directed by Raymond <unk> , relates the experience of the insurrection through the eyes of an adolescent boy named Solo . It won awards at the Cannes Film Festival and the Festival of Carthage . The term <unk> means " noise " or " troubles " in the Malagasy language , and remains a common euphemism to refer to the Uprising . The film Ilo <unk> Very by director Solo <unk> also depicts the Uprising , and was remade in 2011 to include references to the 2009 Malagasy political crisis . In 1994 , French directors Danièle <unk> and Corinne Godeau produced a documentary on the Uprising entitled L <unk> de l 'île rouge , Madagascar 1947 . 
 = Paris – Roubaix = 
 The Paris – Roubaix is a one @-@ day professional bicycle road race in northern France , starting north of Paris and finishing on the Belgian frontier . It is one of cycling 's oldest races , and is one of the ' Monuments ' or classics of the European calendar , and contributes points towards the UCI World Ranking . 
 The Paris – Roubaix is famous for rough terrain and cobblestones ( setts ) , being , with the Tour of Flanders , E3 Harelbeke and Gent – Wevelgem , one of the cobbled classics . It has been called the Hell of the North , a Sunday in Hell ( also the title of a film about the 1976 race ) , the Queen of the Classics or la Pascale : the Easter race . Since 1977 , the winner of Paris – Roubaix has received a sett ( cobble stone ) as part of his prize . 
 The terrain has led to the development of specialised frames , wheels and tyres . Punctures and other mechanical problems are common and often influence the result . Despite the esteem of the race , some cyclists dismiss it because of its difficult conditions . The race has also seen several controversies , with winners disqualified . 
 From its beginning in 1896 until 1967 it started in Paris and ended in Roubaix ; in 1966 the start moved to Chantilly ; and since 1977 it starts in Compiègne , about 85 kilometres ( 53 mi ) north @-@ east from Paris centre . The finish is still in Roubaix . The race is organised by the media group Amaury Sport Organisation annually in mid @-@ April . 
 The course is maintained by Les Amis de Paris – Roubaix , a group of fans of the race formed in 1983 . The forçats du pavé seek to keep the course safe for riders while maintaining its difficulty . 
 = = History = = 
 Paris – Roubaix is one of the oldest races of professional road cycling . It was first run in 1896 and has stopped only for the two world wars . The race was created by two Roubaix textile manufacturers , Théodore Vienne ( born 28 July 1864 ) and Maurice Perez . They had been behind the building of a velodrome on 46 @,@ 000 square metres at the corner of the rue Verte and the route d <unk> , which opened on 9 June 1895 . 
 Vienne and Perez held several meetings on the track , one including the first appearance in France by the American sprinter Major Taylor , and then looked for further ideas . In February 1896 they hit on the idea of holding a race from Paris to their track . This presented two problems . The first was that the biggest races started or ended in Paris and that Roubaix might be too provincial a destination . The second was that they could organize the start or finish but not both . 
 They spoke to Louis Minart , the editor of Le Vélo , the only French daily sports paper . Minart was enthusiastic but said the decision of whether the paper would organize the start and provide publicity belonged to the director , Paul Rousseau . Minart may also have suggested an indirect approach because the mill owners recommended their race not on its own merits , but as preparation for another . They wrote : 
 Dear M. Rousseau , Bordeaux – Paris is approaching and this great annual event which has done so much to promote cycling has given us an idea . What would you think of a training race which preceded Bordeaux – Paris by four weeks ? The distance between Paris and Roubaix is roughly <unk> , so it would be child 's play for the future participants of Bordeaux – Paris . The finish would take place at the Roubaix vélodrome after several laps of the track . Everyone would be assured of an enthusiastic welcome as most of our citizens have never had the privilege of seeing the spectacle of a major road race and we count on enough friends to believe that Roubaix is truly a hospitable town . As prizes we already have subscribed to a first prize of 1 @,@ 000 francs in the name of the Roubaix velodrome and we will be busy establishing a generous prize list which will be to the satisfaction of all . But for the moment , can we count on the patronage of Le Vélo and on your support for organising the start ? 
 The proposed first prize represented seven months ' wages for a miner at the time . 
 Rousseau was enthusiastic and sent his cycling editor , Victor Breyer , to find a route . Breyer travelled to Amiens in a Panhard driven by his colleague , Paul <unk> . The following morning Breyer — later deputy organiser of the Tour de France and a leading official of the Union Cycliste Internationale - continued by bike . The wind blew , the rain fell and the temperature dropped . Breyer reached Roubaix filthy and exhausted after a day of riding on cobbles ( setts ) . He swore he would send a telegram to Minart urging him to drop the idea , saying it was dangerous to send a race the way he had just ridden . But that evening a meal and drinks with the team from Roubaix changed his mind . 
 = = = Easter mystery = = = 
 Vienne and Perez scheduled their race for Easter Sunday . The Roman Catholic Church objected to it being held on the most sacred day of the liturgical year , suggesting that riders would not have time to attend mass and that spectators might not bother to attend either . Tracts were distributed in Roubaix decrying the venture . 
 What happened next is uncertain . Legend says that Vienne and Perez promised a mass would be said for the riders in a chapel 200m from the start , in the boulevard <unk> . This story is repeated by Pascal Sergent , the historian of the race , and by Pierre Chany , historian of the sport in general . Sergent goes as far as saying that Victor Breyer , who he says was there , said the service , scheduled for 4am , was cancelled because it was too early . Neither Chany nor Sergent mentions if the date of the race was subsequently changed , however the first Paris – Roubaix ( according to Sergent ) was held on 19 April 1896 , whereas Easter Sunday in 1896 occurred two weeks earlier , on the 5 April . 
 The first Paris – Roubaix on Easter Sunday was the next year , 1897 . 
 = = = The first race = = = 
 News of Breyer 's ride to Roubaix may have spread . Half those who entered did not turn up at the <unk> de l 'Espérance , the race headquarters at the start . Those who dropped out before the race began included Henri Desgrange , a prominent track rider who went on to organize the Tour de France . The starters did include Maurice Garin , who went on to win Desgrange 's first Tour and was the local hope in Roubaix because he and two brothers had opened a cycle shop in the boulevard de Paris the previous year . 
 Garin came third , 15 minutes behind Josef Fischer , the only German to have won the race until 2015 . Only four finished within an hour of the winner . Garin would have come second had he not been knocked over by a crash between two tandems , one of them ridden by his pacers . Garin " finished exhausted and Dr <unk> was obliged to attend the man who had been run over by two machines , " said Sergent . 
 = = = The second race = = = 
 Garin won the following year , beating Dutchman Mathieu Cordang in the last two kilometres of the velodrome at Roubaix . Sergent said : 
 As the two champions appeared they were greeted by a frenzy of excitement and everyone was on their feet to acclaim the two heroes . It was difficult to recognise them . Garin was first , followed by the mud @-@ soaked figure of Cordang . Suddenly , to the stupefaction of everyone , Cordang slipped and fell on the velodrome 's cement surface . Garin could not believe his luck . By the time Cordang was back on his bike , he had lost 100 metres . There remained six laps to cover . Two miserable kilometres in which to catch Garin . The crowd held its breath as they watched the incredible pursuit match . The bell rang out . One lap , there remained one lap . 333 metres for Garin , who had a lead of 30 metres on the <unk> . 
 A classic victory was within his grasp but he could almost feel his adversary 's breath on his neck . Somehow Garin held on to his lead of two metres , two little metres for a legendary victory . The stands exploded and the ovation united the two men . Garin exulted under the cheers of the crowd . Cordang cried bitter tears of disappointment . 
 = = = Hell of the North = = = 
 The race usually leaves riders caked in mud and grit , from the cobbled roads and rutted tracks of northern France 's former coal @-@ mining region . However , this is not how this race earned the name l 'enfer du Nord , or Hell of the North . The term was used to describe the route of the race after World War I. Organisers and journalists set off from Paris in 1919 to see how much of the route had survived four years of shelling and trench warfare . <unk> reported : 
 They knew little of the permanent effects of the war . Nine million had died and France lost more than any . But , as elsewhere , news was scant . Who even knew if there was still a road to Roubaix ? If Roubaix was still there ? The car of organisers and journalists made its way along the route those first riders had gone . And at first all looked well . There was destruction and there was poverty and there was a strange shortage of men . But France had survived . But then , as they neared the north , the air began to reek of broken drains , raw sewage and the stench of rotting cattle . Trees which had begun to look forward to spring became instead blackened , ragged stumps , their twisted branches pushed to the sky like the crippled arms of a dying man . Everywhere was mud . Nobody knows who first described it as ' hell ' , but there was no better word . And that 's how it appeared next day in the papers : that little party had seen ' the hell of the <unk> 
 The words in L 'Auto were : 
 We enter into the centre of the battlefield . There 's not a tree , everything is flattened ! Not a square metre that has not been hurled upside down . There 's one shell hole after another . The only things that stand out in this churned earth are the crosses with their ribbons in blue , white and red . It is hell ! ' 
 This wasn 't a race . It was a pilgrimage . 
 = = = History of the cobbles = = = 
 Seeking the challenge of racing on cobbles is relatively recent . It began at the same time in Paris – Roubaix and the Tour of Flanders , when widespread improvements to roads after the second world war brought realisation that the character of both races were changing . Until then the race had been over cobbles not because they were bad but because that was how roads were made . André Mahé , who won in 1949 ( see below Controversies ) , said : 
 After the war , of course , the roads were all bad . There were cobbles from the moment you left Paris , or Senlis where we started in those days . There 'd be stretches of surfaced roads and often there 'd be a cycle path or a pavement and sometimes a thin stretch of something smoother . But you never knew where was best to ride and you were for ever switching about . You could jump your bike up on to a pavement but that got harder the more tired you got . Then you 'd get your front wheel up but not your back wheel . That happened to me . And then you 'd go sprawling , of course , and you could bring other riders down . Or they 'd fall off and bring you down with them . And the cycle paths were often just compressed cinders , which got soft in the rain and got churned up by so many riders using them and then you got stuck and you lost your balance . And come what may , you got covered in coal dust and other muck . No , it 's all changed and you can 't compare then and now . 
 The coming of live television prompted mayors along the route to surface their cobbled roads for fear the rest of France would see them as backward and not invest in the region . Albert Bouvet , the organiser , said : " If things don 't change , we 'll soon be calling it Paris – Valenciennes , " reference to a flat race on good roads that often ends in a mass sprint . L 'Équipe said : " The riders don 't deserve that . " Its editor , Jacques Goddet , called Paris – Roubaix " the last great madness of cycling . " Bouvet and Jean @-@ Claude Vallaeys formed Les Amis de Paris Roubaix ( see below ) . Its president , Alain Bernard , led enthusiasts to look for and sometimes maintain obscure cobbled paths . He said : 
 Until the war , Paris – Roubaix was all on routes nationales . But many of those were cobbled , which was the spirit of the race , and the riders used to try to ride the cycle paths , if there were any . So Paris – Roubaix has always been on pavé , because pavé was what the roads were made of . Then in 1967 things began to change . There was less pavé than there had been . And so from 1967 the course started moving to the east to use the cobbles that remained there . And then those cobbles began to disappear as well and we feared that Bouvet 's predictions were going to come true . That 's when we started going out looking for old tracks and abandoned roads that didn 't show up on our maps . In the 1970s , the race only had to go through a village for the mayor to order the road to be surfaced . Pierre <unk> , when he was mayor of Lille , said he wanted nothing to do with the race and that he 'd do nothing to help it . A few years ago , there was barely a village or an area that wanted anything to do with us . If Paris – Roubaix came their way , they felt they were shamed because we were exposing their bad roads . They went out and surfaced them , did all they could to obstruct us . Now they can 't get enough of us . I have mayors ringing me to say they 've found another stretch of cobbles and would we like to use them . 
 It was Alain Bernard who found one of the race 's most significant cobbled stretches , the Carrefour de l 'Arbre . He was out on a Sunday ride , turned off the main road to see what was there and found the last bad cobbles before the finish . It is a bleak area with just a bar by the crossroads . Bernard said : 
 " Until then , it [ the bar ( ' Cafe de l 'Arbre ' ) ] was open only one day a year . In France , a bar has to open one day a year to keep its licence . That 's all it did , because it 's out in the middle of nowhere and nobody went there to drink any more . With the fame that the race brought it , it 's now open all year and a busy restaurant as well . " 
 The Amis de Paris – Roubaix spend € 10 @-@ 15 @,@ 000 a year on restoring and rebuilding cobbles . The Amis supply the sand and other material and the repairs are made as training by students from horticulture schools at Dunkirk , Lomme , Raismes and Douai . Each section costs € 4 @-@ 6 @,@ 000 , paid for equally by the Amis , the organisers and the local commune . Bernard said : 
 " The trouble is that the Belgians then come out to see the race and they pull up a cobble stone each and take it home as a souvenir . They 've even gone off with the milestones . It 's a real headache . But I 'm confident now that Paris – Roubaix is safe , that it will always be the race it has always been . " 
 = = = Strategic places of historic races = = = 
 The strategic places where earlier races could be won or lost include <unk> Hill , Arras , Carvin and the Wattignies bend . Some sections of cobbles have deteriorated beyond the point of safety and repair or have been resurfaced and lost their significance . Other sections are excluded because the route of the race has moved east . 
 = = = Pacers = = = 
 Early races were run behind pacers , as were many competitions of the era . The first pacers were other cyclists , on bicycles or tandems . Cars and motorcycles were allowed to pace from 1898 . The historian Fer Schroeders says : 
 In 1898 , even cars and motorcycles were allowed to open the road for the competitors . In 1900 , the race was within a hair 's breadth of disappearing , with only 19 riders at the start . The following year , the organisation therefore decided to allow help only from pacers on bicycles . And in 1910 , help from pacers were stopped for good . An option which lifted Paris – Roubaix out of the background and pushed it , in terms of interest , ahead of the prestigious Bordeaux – Paris . 
 = = Course = = 
 Originally , the race was from Paris to Roubaix , but in 1966 the start moved to Chantilly , 50 km north , then in 1977 to Compiègne , 80 km north . From Compiègne it now follows a 260 km winding route north to Roubaix , hitting the first cobbles after 100 km . During the last 150 km the cobbles extend more than 50 km . The race culminates with 750m on the smooth concrete of the large outdoor velodrome in Roubaix . The route is adjusted from year to year as older roads are resurfaced and the organisers seek more cobbles to maintain the character of the race — in 2005 , for example , the race included 54 @.@ 7 km of cobbles . 
 = = = The start = = = 
 The race has started at numerous places : 
 The opening kilometres ( the départ <unk> ) have often been a rolling procession . Racing has started further into the ride ( départ réel ) . The start of open racing has been at : 
 = = = Main cobbled sectors = = = 
 The organisers grade the cobbles by length , irregularity , the general condition and their position in the race . 
 = = = = Troisvilles to <unk> = = = = 
 This sector is now usually the first cobbled section , typically about 100 km into the race , and was first used 1987 . It is the highest of all the cobbles at 136 m . 
 = = = = Wallers <unk> = = = = 
 A 2 @.@ 5 km sector named after Bernard Hinault , the 1981 winner , which also features frequently in the Quatre Jours de Dunkerque race . It starts at 31m and finishes at <unk> . It begins with a gentle rise and finishes with a gentle fall . 
 = = = = Trouée d 'Arenberg = = = = 
 The Trouée d 'Arenberg , <unk> d 'Arenberg , ( Trench of Arenberg ) , <unk> de Wallers Arenberg , has become the symbol of Paris – Roubaix . Officially ' La <unk> des Boules d <unk> ' , the <unk> of cobbles were laid in the time of Napoleon I through the Raismes Forest @-@ Saint @-@ Amand @-@ Wallers , close to Wallers and Valenciennes . ( 50 @.@ 399 ° N 3 @.@ <unk> ° E ﻿ / 50 @.@ 399 ; 3 @.@ <unk> ) The road was proposed for Paris – Roubaix by former professional Jean Stablinski , who had worked in the mine under the woods of Arenberg . The mine closed in 1990 and the passage is now preserved . Although almost 100 km from Roubaix , the sector usually proves decisive and as Stablinski said , 
 A memorial to Stablinski stands at one end of the road . 
 Introduced in 1968 , the passage was closed from 1974 to 1983 by the Office National des <unk> . Until 1998 the entry to the Arenberg pavé was slightly downhill , leading to a sprint for best position . The route was reversed in 1999 to reduce the speed . This was as a result of Johan <unk> 's crash in 1998 as World Cup leader , which resulted in gangrene so severe that amputation of his leg was considered . In 2005 the Trouée d 'Arenberg was left out , organisers saying conditions had deteriorated beyond safety limits as abandoned mines had caused sections to subside . The regional and local councils spent € 250 @,@ 000 on adding 50 cm to restore the original width of three metres and the race continued using it . The Italian rider Filippo Pozzato said after trying the road after its repairs : 
 It 's the true definition of hell . It 's very dangerous , especially in the first kilometre when we enter it at more than <unk> . It 's unbelievable . The bike goes in all directions . It will be a real spectacle but I don 't know if it 's really necessary to impose it on us . 
 In 2001 a French rider , Philippe Gaumont , broke his femur after falling at the start of the Trouée when leading the peloton . He said : 
 What I went through , only I will ever know . My knee cap completely turned to the right , a ball of blood forming on my leg and the bone that broke , without being able to move my body . And the pain , a pain that I wouldn 't wish on anyone . The surgeon placed a big support [ un gros matériel ] in my leg , because the bone had moved so much . Breaking a femur is always serious in itself but an open break in an athlete of high level going flat out , that tears the muscles . At 180 beats [ a minute of the heart ] , there was a colossal amount of blood being pumped , which meant my leg was full of blood . I 'm just grateful that the artery was untouched . 
 Gaumont spent a month and a half in bed , unable to move , and was fitted with a 40 mm section fixed just above the knee and , to the head of the femur , with a 12 mm screw . So many fans have taken away cobbles as souvenirs that the Amis de Paris – Roubaix have had to replace them . 
 = = = = Mons @-@ en @-@ Pévèle = = = = 
 The second of three sectors usually graded as five star difficulty , this 3 km sector includes a 16m rise and 2 right @-@ angled turns . It was first used in 1978 and , as of 2016 , has been used every year since except 2001 . 
 = = = = Carrefour de l 'Arbre = = = = 
 Le Carrefour de l 'Arbre ( or <unk> de Luchin ) is the last section of pavé of the hardest level of difficulty , five stars . The crossroads ( <unk> ) is on open land between Gruson and Camphin @-@ en @-@ Pévèle . The route departs westward from Camphin @-@ en @-@ Pévèle along the rue de <unk> towards Camphin de l 'Arbre . The first half is a series of corners , then along irregular pavé towards Luchin . The second half finishes at the Café de l 'Arbre restaurant and has more even pavé . This 2 @.@ 1 km sector has often proved decisive due to its proximity to Roubaix ( 15 km ) and cumulative difficulty . 
 = = = = Roubaix , Espace Charles Crupelandt = = = = 
 The final stretch of cobbles before the stadium is named after a local rider , Charles Crupelandt , who won in 1912 and 1914 . The organiser of the Tour de France , Henri Desgrange , predicted he would win his race . Crupelandt then went to war and returned a hero , with the Croix de Guerre . 
 This 300 m sector was created for the centenary event in 1996 by laying a strip of smooth new cobbles down the centre of a wide street . Among the cobbles are plaques to every race winner , giving the road an official name of ' Chemin des <unk> , ' [ Road of the Giants ] . 
 = = = The finish = = = 
 The finish until 1914 was on the original track at Croix , where the Parc clinic now stands . There were then various finish points : 
 1896 – 1914 : Rue Verte / route d <unk> , Croix , Roubaix 
 1919 : avenue de Jussieu , Roubaix , behind the dairy 
 1920 – 1921 : Stadium Jean <unk> , Roubaix 
 1922 – 1928 : avenue des Villas ( now the avenue Gustave Delory ) , Roubaix 
 1929 : Stade Amédée <unk> , <unk> 
 1930 – 1934 : avenue des Villas , Roubaix 
 1935 – 1936 : Flandres horse track , Marcq 
 1937 – 1939 : avenue Gustave Delory ( former avenue des Villas ) , Roubaix 
 1943 – 1985 : Roubaix Velodrome 
 1986 – 1988 : avenue des Nations @-@ <unk> 
 1989 – present ( as of March 2016 ) : Roubaix Velodrome 
 The race moved to the current stadium in 1943 , and there it has stayed with the exceptions of 1986 , 1987 and 1988 when the finish was in the avenue des Nations @-@ <unk> , outside the offices of La Redoute , the mail @-@ order company which sponsored the race . 
 The shower room inside the velodrome is distinctive for the open , three @-@ sided , low @-@ walled concrete stalls , each with a brass plaque to commemorate a winner . These include Peter Van Petegem , Eddy Merckx , Roger De Vlaeminck , Rik van Looy and Fausto Coppi . 
 When I stand in the showers in Roubaix , I actually start the preparation for next year . 
 A commemorative plaque at 37 avenue Gustave Delory honours Émile Masson Jr . , the last to win there . 
 = = Bicycles = = 
 Paris – Roubaix presents a technical challenge to riders , team personnel , and equipment . Special frames and wheels are often used . Some have wider tires , cantilever brakes , and dual brake levers . Many teams disperse personnel along the course with spare wheels , equipment and bicycles to help in locations not accessible to the team car . 
 André Mahé , winner in 1948 , said such specialisation is recent : 
 Riders have experimented , however . After the Second World War many tried wooden rims of the sort used at the start of cycle racing . Francesco Moser wrapped his handlebars with strips of foam in the 1970s . Gilbert Duclos @-@ Lassalle and Greg LeMond experimented with suspension in their front forks in the 1990s . 
 Some top riders receive special frames to give more stability and comfort . Different materials make the ride more comfortable . Tom Boonen , using a Time frame with longer wheelbase for the first time , won the race in 2005 and has since continued to use a bike with a longer wheelbase . George Hincapie had a frame featuring a 2 mm <unk> insert at the top of the seat stays . The manufacturers claimed this took nearly all the shock out of the cobbles . Hincapie 's Trek bicycle fared less well in 2006 : his aluminum steerer tube snapped with 46 km to go , the crash injuring his shoulder . 
 The bicycle made for Peter Van Petegem in 2004 was a Time . The distance from bottom bracket to rear axle was 419 mm rather than his normal 403 . The distance from the bottom bracket to the front hub was 605 mm instead of 600 mm . The depth of the front forks was 372 mm instead of 367 @.@ 5 mm The forks were spaced to take 28 mm tyres . The sprockets were steel rather than alloy and the steerer column was cut 5 mm higher than usual to raise the handlebars if needed before the start . 
 The bad roads cause frequent punctures . A service fleet consisting of four motorcycles and four cars provides spares to riders regardless of team . Yves <unk> of <unk> the equipment company which provides the coverage , said : 
 Every year we change fewer wheels , because the wheels and tyres are getting better and better . We changed about 20 wheels today . Five years ago , it was much worse — we 'd be choosing about a hundred . Tyres are becoming much better than before . So , yes , our job is easier — except that the race generally goes faster now , so we 're under a bit more pressure . Every year , there 's new types of gears , new aluminium frames , new titanium frames , so it 's getting more complex for us to offer neutral service . We have a list in the car of who is riding <unk> or Shimano or Campagnolo ; the moment someone gets a flat tyre we need to think of a lot of things at once . Is it a titanium frame or a carbon frame or a steel frame ? 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = 1907 – The wrong gendarme = = = 
 In 1907 , Georges Passerieu broke away from a small leading group just before Douai because he knew he couldn 't outsprint them if they all finished together . He was chased all the way to Roubaix by a Belgian , Cyrille van <unk> , and tension in the velodrome was high . The crowd heard that Passerieu had reached the stadium but nobody rode on to the track . The leader was just about to ride in when a gendarme stepped into his path to check if his bicycle had the obligatory tax plate attached to it . Passerieu had already had a hard day and a shouting match broke out before he was allowed to continue . 
 = = = 1930 – The wrong team = = = 
 In 1930 , Jean Maréchal finished 24 seconds ahead of Belgian Julien Vervaecke but was moved to second because , while Maréchal was trying to pass Vervaecke , the Belgian tumbled into a ditch . According to some , Maréchal hit the Belgian 's shoulder , causing his fall . Jacques <unk> , historian of the Tour de France , said Maréchal , who was 20 , " was riding as an individual for a little bike @-@ maker , Colin , and he got to Roubaix alone . His happiness was short @-@ lived . <unk> accused of having provoked a fall by Julien Vervaecke , with whom he had broken away , he was disqualified without any sort of hearing . Important detail : Vervaecke belonged to the all @-@ powerful Alcyon team , run by the no less powerful Ludovic <unk> ... " 
 = = = 1934 – The wrong bike = = = 
 In 1934 Roger <unk> was disqualified for changing bicycles . Second placed rider Gaston <unk> was awarded the victory once officials discovered that <unk> 's bike was missing a race sticker . 
 = = = 1936 – The wrong man = = = 
 In 1936 the Belgian , Romain Maes , appeared to win but judges declared Frenchman Georges Speicher the winner and Maes second . Shouting began in the stands and for a moment it looked as though fighting would start , but calm returned and the result was upheld . A Belgian may not have won but there were seven Belgians in the first ten . 
 = = = 1949 – The wrong route = = = 
 The result in 1949 took several months and two international conferences to sort out . André Mahé was first but his win was challenged because he took the wrong course . Mahé was in a break of three that reached Roubaix velodrome in the lead , but he was misdirected by officials and entered the track by the wrong gate . Mahé was declared winner but a few minutes later other riders arrived using the correct route and Serse Coppi , brother of famous Fausto , won the sprint for what was assumed to be the minor placings . After a protest and several months , Serse Coppi was named joint winner with Mahé . Mahé said in 2007 : 
 C 'est trop bête d 'en <unk> ( It 's too stupid to talk about ) . There was a break . Coppi attacked . His brother Fausto gave him a push to get him away . He wanted his brother to win . I waited a bit and then I attacked and I caught him and the break . Then I went off by myself . I was going to win Paris – Roubaix . At the entrance to the vélodrome , there were crowds everywhere , blocking the way . I looked around for where to go and I was directed round the outside wall of the track , to where the team cars had to park . It wasn 't like nowadays , when there 's television and everything . Then it was more chaotic and the whole road was blocked . People said I should have known the way into the track . But how do you know a thing like that at the end of Paris – Roubaix , when you 've raced all day over roads like that ? A gendarme signalled the way to go and that 's the way I went . 
 It was a journalist on a motorbike who managed to get up to me . He was shouting ' Not that way ! Not that way ! ' And I turned round in the road and I rode back beneath the outside wall of the grandstand and I saw a gateway that went into the track , a gateway for journalists . And that 's the way I went , except that it came out on the other side of the track from the proper entrance . The bunch came in and Serse won the sprint . But then his brother told Serse to go to the judges to object . He told Serse that I hadn 't ridden the entire and precise course and that therefore I should be déclassé . But that was below him . Coppi wanted his brother to have a big victory . He was a great champion , Coppi , but to do what he did , to protest like that to get a victory for his brother , that wasn 't dignified for a champion . That was below him . A champion like that should never have stooped that low . I never spoke to him about it . Never did . Why should I ? 
 = = = 1981 – The wrong race = = = 
 In 1981 Bernard Hinault said after winning the race : 
 The only other times he rode it were in 1980 , when he finished fourth , and in 1982 , as the defending champion . When he was criticised , he said : " I don 't go into offices and tell people to work harder , yet people ask me to be the strongest on the cobbles . " Hinault fell seven times in that race , including 13 km from the finish when a small black dog called Gruson ran out in a bend and ran under his wheel . Hinault had been clear with Roger De Vlaeminck , Hennie Kuiper and Marc <unk> . The incident made Hinault angry and he raced back to the others and won in Roubaix . 
 He was not the first star to refuse . Jacques Anquetil called it a lottery after puncturing 13 km from the end in 1958 and never took it seriously again . 
 In 2002 only two of the top 20 riders in the UCI table - Jens Voigt and Erik Zabel - were on the start line . The following year only Zabel was there . In 2004 he had stayed at home as well . Philippe Brunel wrote in L 'Équipe : 
 We won 't go as far as say that the five @-@ time winner of the Tour [ Hinault ] - who every year gives the winner his celebration cobble stone on behalf of the organisers — has contributed to the dilution [ <unk> ] of the queen of classics , which would offend him , but his words have contributed to the snub , or the indifference , of those who stay away . The fact isn 't new but the phenomenon is getting worse and is concerning . The peloton of <unk> has grown to the point where Paris – Roubaix is now only for a tight group of specialists ... especially the Belgians , capable of maintaining high speed on the cobbles . 
 = = = 1988 – The wrong place and time = = = 
 The 1988 race contained a rare spectacle where an early morning breakaway group held on until the finish : 27 kilometres into the race a group of unknown riders broke away and the pack did nothing to chase them down throughout the race . It was on a section of cobblestones outside Roubaix that Thomas Wegmuller ( <unk> ) and Dirk Demol ( BEL ) broke away from the lead group to try for the victory . As if the success of the breakaway wasn 't enough , Paris – Roubaix was about to deliver a cruel irony . 
 When the two entered Roubaix , Wegmuller ran over a plastic bag that flew out in front of him , which became jammed in his derailleur . Wegmuller was unable to change gears which was crucial for a sprint finish . He got assistance from his team car to remove the bag , but his gears still would not change . Knowing that a bicycle change would be suicidal to his chances , Wegmuller continued on his damaged bike ; Demol continued to draft behind him . 
 When it came down to the final sprint , Wegmuller could only watch as Demol sprinted past him to take the victory . Laurent Fignon finished third after a late breakaway from the chasing peloton . 
 = = = 2006 – The wrong train = = = 
 In 2006 Leif Hoste , Peter Van Petegem and Vladimir Gusev were disqualified for riding through a closed train crossing 10 km before the finish and just ahead of an approaching freight train . Fabian Cancellara won and Tom Boonen and Alessandro Ballan were given the remaining places on the podium . 
 I know the rules , yes , but I don 't understand why nobody stopped us , and why nothing was said to us in the <unk> that followed . All that just to be told two minutes before going to the podium that we had been disqualified . Cancellara deserved his victory but for me , I will always be in second place even though I have been disqualified . 
 " It 's crazy . In Belgium they would have stopped the train . " 
 = = Comments = = 
 = = = Theo de Rooij = = = 
 The American television channel CBS covered Paris – Roubaix in the 1980s . Theo de Rooij , a Dutchman , had been in a promising position to win the 1985 race but had then crashed , losing his chance of winning . Covered in mud , he offered his thoughts on the race to CBS ' John Tesh after the race : 
 “ It 's a bollocks , this race ! ” said de Rooij . “ You 're working like an animal , you don 't have time to piss , you wet your pants . You 're riding in mud like this , you 're slipping ... it ’ s a pile of shit . ” 
 When then asked if he would start the race again , de Rooij replied : 
 “ Sure , it 's the most beautiful race in the world ! ” 
 = = = Other observations = = = 
 " A Paris – Roubaix without rain is not a true Paris – Roubaix . Throw in a little snow as well , it 's not serious . " - Sean Kelly 
 " Paris @-@ Roubaix is a horrible race to ride but the most beautiful one to win . " - Sean Kelly 
 " Let me tell you , though — there 's a huge difference between the Tour of Flanders and Paris – Roubaix . They 're not even close to the same . In one , the cobbles are used every day by the cars , and kept up , and stuff like that . The other one — it 's completely different ... The best I could do would be to describe it like this — they plowed a dirt road , flew over it with a helicopter , and then just dropped a bunch of rocks out of the helicopter ! That 's Paris – Roubaix . It 's that bad — it 's ridiculous . " - Chris Horner 
 " This is a race that suits me when I 'm having a good day . On the other hand , if you don 't have the legs , this is the worst place you could possibly be . " - Jo Planckaert , 2004 
 " It 's a circus , and I don 't want to be one of the clowns . " - Chris Boardman ( speaking before the start on British Eurosport ) . 
 = = Les Amis de Paris – Roubaix = = 
 Les Amis de Paris – Roubaix – the " friends " of the race – is an enthusiasts ' group founded by Jean @-@ Claude Vallaeys in 1983 . It is based in France but open to members all over the world . It has its roots in the Paris – Roubaix <unk> @-@ <unk> of 1972 . By 1982 there were 7 @,@ 242 participants . There and at other events on the course , a petition calling for the cobbles to be saved gathered 10 @,@ 000 signatures . Jean @-@ Claude Valleys , Jean @-@ François <unk> and the Vélo @-@ club de Roubaix , which Vallaeys founded in 1966 , formed Les Amis de Paris – Roubaix in 1982 at a photo exhibition at the Maison du Nord @-@ Pas de Calais in Paris . 
 Its aim was to find enough stretches of cobbled road to preserve the nature of the race . So many roads had been resurfaced that , as the organiser said , there was a risk that it would become a fast race on smooth roads won by sprinters rather than those who had fought through hell . Alain Bernard , who succeeded Vallaeys , says : " We have succeeded in that . Today , the association looks after the maintenance of these paths of legend , working with local administrations to preserve them . But alongside that , we also do other things to preserve the value of the race , building up an impressive collection of documents , holding exhibitions , honouring former winners , holding tours of the route . " 
 Les Amis says it is too late to save the sector of <unk> , which was removed from the race because of its dangerous state in 2007 . The situation is becoming critical , it says , at the Pont <unk> at Wallers , at Mons @-@ en @-@ Pévèle , Pont Thibaut at <unk> , the pavé of the Duclos @-@ Lassalle section at <unk> , and at Camphin @-@ en @-@ Pévèle . 
 " Their disappearance would be a fatal blow to the Queen of Classics , " says the association . 
 = = = Les forçats du pavé = = = 
 The weather is often bad for the riders ; it is frequently worse for the forçats du pavé ( literally ' convicts of the cobbles ' ) , as they call themselves In March 2008 , " Les Amis " published an account of their work thus : 
 Saturday 22 March : a cold wind sweeps the plain of Pévèle ; alternating showers of hail , melted snow and cold rain . Not a day to venture outside ... Nevertheless , at the foot of the Mons @-@ en @-@ Pévèle ridge , silhouettes busy themselves along the soaked cobble roadway . Backs bent against the gusts , they tirelessly scratch at the ground with primitive tools . Who are these dozen souls — A work @-@ gang from a <unk> era ? Automatons ? Treasure @-@ hunters ? 
 No , these are members of the " Amis de Paris Roubaix " , trying to clean off the mud and crusted earth left on the cobbles by farm work . They are on an important section of Paris – Roubaix and , without their intervention , the greatest of cycling classics , due to be held in only a few days , will not be able to come through ... And without these cobbled routes , the Paris – Roubaix would disappear , depriving the whole world of one of sport 's most intense and gripping events . This they know , and they 'll be back again the two weekends before the race , far from the media and officials who will soon bustle here . 
 The passion that drives them is much stronger than the bad weather . It has nothing to do with the current storms in the cycling world . These discreet servants of the " Queen of the Classics " have only one ambition — to clean the stones so that the when the day comes for the champion to be crowned they can hold their cobbled trophy high . 
 = = Winners and records = = 
 = = = Winners by year = = = 
 = = Other cobbled races = = 
 Paris – Roubaix is sometimes compared to the other famous cobbled race , the Tour of Flanders in Belgium . Paris – Roubaix is flatter and has more difficult cobbles while the Tour of Flanders contains a series of hills , many on cobbles , like the Koppenberg or <unk> . 
 In addition to Paris – Roubaix and the Tour of Flanders , called the cobbled classics , other spring races like Omloop Het Nieuwsblad and Gent – Wevelgem feature extensive cobbles . 
 = = Related events = = 
 The U23 Paris – Roubaix or Paris – Roubaix <unk> is raced in the early summer . 
 The Paris – Roubaix <unk> is organised by the Velo Club de Roubaix every other June . This allows amateurs to experience the cobbles , the finishing laps in the vélodrome , and the showers . There is a choice of three levels : 120 km , most of the cobbled sectors ; 190 km all the cobbles ; or the full 261 km . All finishers receive a small cobblestone on a wooden plinth . The Paris – Roubaix Skoda Classic Challenge is organised the day before the pro race in April . 
 = Allow Me ( Portland , Oregon ) = 
 Allow Me , also known as Umbrella Man , is an iconic 1983 bronze sculpture by John Seward Johnson II , located in Pioneer Courthouse Square in Portland , Oregon , United States . The sculpture , one of seven Allow Me casts , was donated anonymously to the City of Portland in 1984 for display in the Square . It depicts a life @-@ sized man dressed in a business suit , hailing a cab and holding an umbrella . Constructed from bronze , aluminum and stainless steel , the sculpture stands six feet , ten inches tall and weighs 460 pounds . The sculpture is one of many works of art generated by the city 's Percent for Art program , and is considered part of the City of Portland and Multnomah County Public Art Collection courtesy of the Regional Arts & Culture Council . 
 After ten years , in 1995 , the sculpture was removed from its pedestal and transferred to California for its first major restoration . To maintain its shine , Allow Me receives cold wax coatings every year . It is a popular tourist attraction and local landmark which serves as a reference point for gatherings , or political rallies . Allow Me has received a positive reception and is renowned for its realistic appearance ; the ' Umbrella Man ' has been called the " most photographed man in Portland " , and serves as a symbol of the city and its residents . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The Portland sculpture is one of seven casts of John Seward Johnson II 's Allow Me . It was designed and completed by Johnson in 1983 and is constructed from bronze , aluminum and stainless steel . In 1984 , the sculpture was donated anonymously , but in the name of Harry H. Schwartz , to the City of Portland and dedicated for display at Pioneer Courthouse Square . This square is one of the most popular and often visited squares in the state of Oregon . In 2004 the square was named the fourth best public square in the world by New York 's Project for Public Spaces . Allow Me is situated on the south side of the Square just above the amphitheatre and is seen as welcoming visitors there . The sculpture depicts a life @-@ sized man dressed in a business suit , " hurrying across the square " and hailing a cab . He holds an umbrella , which some people have interpreted as an offering . He wears a watch and a rhubarb @-@ colored tie ; his index finger points towards the Meier & Frank Building , adjacent to the Square . Allow Me measures 82 " x 45 " x 50 " and weighs 460 pounds . The sculpture is part of the City of Portland and Multnomah County Public Art Collection courtesy of the Regional Arts & Culture Council . It is one of many works of art generated by Portland 's Percent for Art program . 
 In July 1995 , the sculpture was removed from its pedestal and shipped to Stellar Artworks in Van Nuys , California for cleaning and restoration . It received a <unk> <unk> to remove the effects of birds , human hands , pollution and precipitation , plus a coat of <unk> , a lacquer @-@ based acrylic resin coating . The restoration was funded by an anonymous donor and involved Art Work Fine Art Services , Industrial Craters & Packers , O 'Neill Transfer Co . , Smith Masonry Contractors and the Regional Arts & Culture Council . This marked the sculpture 's first restoration since 1985 . Allow Me receives cold wax coatings each year to maintain its shine . 
 The sculpture has been used as a reference point for gatherings . There have been instances when the sculpture was used to make a statement or act as a prop . In 2011 , Occupy Portland demonstrators outfitted Allow Me with a peace sign , a Guy Fawkes mask and a " We are the 99 % " sign . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Architecture Foundation of Oregon called the sculpture a " popular icon " for Portland . ' <unk> ' suggested that the depicted subject could be the " most photographed man in Portland " ; the project described Allow Me as one of the " most recognized and beloved " sculptures in Portland , serving as a symbol of the city for both residents and tourists . Elaine S. Friedman , contributor to The Oregon Encyclopedia , wrote that Allow Me mimics Portland 's pedestrians . In its guide of Portland 's public art and architecture , Moon Publications described the sculpture as being " so realistic that you 'll look twice " . Another description by Portland Community College asserted that the work is so lifelike that people have attempted to initiate conversation with the ' Umbrella Man ' . Spencer Heinz of The Oregonian wrote that the sculpture " serves for some as a symbol of the civility that frames the city 's incomplete image of itself . " 
 In 2011 , Sunday <unk> presented spoke cards to donors depicting the sculpture , among four additional cards showing other iconic images of the city . In Willamette Week 's annual " Best of Portland " feature for 2011 , the " Best Portland Tattoo " award went to one resident whose Portland @-@ themed sleeve tattoo included Allow Me , among its other landmarks . 
 = The Boat Race 1972 = 
 The 118th Boat Race took place on 1 April 1972 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) tidal stretch of the River Thames in south @-@ west London . Umpired by former Cambridge Blue Philip Carpmael , the race was won by Cambridge , who passed the finishing post nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead of Oxford in a time of 18 minutes and 36 seconds , their fifth consecutive victory . The win took the overall record since 1829 to 66 – 51 in favour of Cambridge . 
 The race was variously described as an " anti @-@ climax " and " a bore " given the ease with which Cambridge secured the win . Their crew was the heaviest in Boat Race history and included siblings for the first time since 1935 . In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Oxford by ten lengths in the previous year 's race . Cambridge also held the overall lead with 65 victories to Oxford 's 51 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Oxford were coached by Dick Fishlock who had coxed Great Britain in the men 's eight in the 1960 Summer Olympics . He was assisted by John <unk> , John Peake , Peter Reynolds ( who had coxed for the Dark Blues in the 1960 and 1961 races ) and Peter Sutherland . Cambridge were being coached by Lou Barry for the fifth consecutive year , along with James Crowden ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1951 and 1952 races ) , David Jennens ( who had represented the Cantabrigians three times between 1949 and the 1951 race , Donald Legget ( who rowed in the 1963 and 1964 races , Mike Sweeney ( who rowed in the 1965 and 1966 races ) and Robin Winckless ( who rowed in the 1967 , 1968 and 1969 races ) . The umpire for the race was Philip Carpmael who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1930 and 1931 races . 
 Writing in The Times , Jim Railton suggested that Cambridge looked " invincible " before their arrival at the Thames , and former Oxford Blue and author Dickie Burnell suggested that the Light Blues were " reckoned to be unbeatable " . However , Oxford rowed a number of record practice times , while Cambridge met with several " disasters " ( including catching some " mammoth crabs " and experiencing outings " spoilt by shipwrecks " ) . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed 8 @.@ 5 pounds ( 3 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents , averaging just over 13 st 11 lb ( 75 @.@ 6 kg ) , making them the heaviest crew in the history of the race . Both boats contained four Blues ; Oxford saw Keith <unk> , D. d 'A Willis , Andrew Hall and J. <unk> return , while Cambridge 's crew included Chris Baillieu ( whose grandfather had rowed in the 1913 race ) , Neil James , David Maxwell and Graham Hughes . American Olympic rower Gardiner Cadwalader ( who finished fifth in the men 's coxed four in the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico ) along with four British Olympic team candidates ( Maxwell , <unk> , Michael Hart and James ) brought experience to the Light Blue boat . Cambridge 's crew also contained brothers Michael and James Hart , the first time a pair of siblings had rowed for Cambridge since the Kingsford 's in the 1935 race . Along with Cadwalader , Oxford cox Fred Yalouris was American , while the Dark Blue bow Michael Magarey was Australian ; all the other participants were British . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge were pre @-@ race favourites . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , from which the previous ten winning crews had commenced , handing the Middlesex side of the river to the Light Blues . At the scheduled start time of 3 : 15 p.m. , Cambridge were still practising downstream and hence the event was delayed . Fishlock remarked that he believed this to be " plain bad manners " . Within a minute of the start , Cambridge held a lead of a canvas length and despite reducing their stroke rate , they continued to pull away from Oxford . At the Mile Post , the lead was seven seconds , and at Hammersmith Bridge the Light Blues held a lead of three lengths ; they extended this to 21 seconds by Chiswick Steps , and 24 seconds by Barnes Bridge . By the finishing post , Cambridge were 34 seconds ahead , recording a nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half length victory in a time of 18 minutes 36 seconds . Oxford 's stroke , Mike Baines , collapsed at the end of the race . Railton wrote that " the race was once again an anti @-@ climax , painful to watch , with a merciful release as Oxford crawled past the timber post marking the race finish . " The Guardian report Mike Rodda described the race as " a bore " . 
 In the tenth edition of the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes and 19 seconds , their sixth consecutive victory which made the overall record 6 – 2 . In the 27th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , their tenth consecutive victory , and their fifteenth in eighteen years taking the overall record to 17 – 10 in their favour . 
 = Music of the Chocobo series = 
 The Chocobo video game series is a spin @-@ off series composed of over a dozen games developed by Square Co. and later by Square Enix featuring a super deformed version of the Chocobo , a Final Fantasy series mascot and fictional bird , as the protagonist . Several of the titles have received separate album releases of music from the game . The music of the Chocobo series includes soundtrack albums for the Chocobo 's Mysterious Dungeon sub @-@ series — comprising Chocobo 's Mysterious Dungeon , Chocobo 's Dungeon 2 , and Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo 's Dungeon — and soundtrack albums of music from Chocobo Racing , Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo Tales , and Chocobo and the Magic Picture Book : The Witch , The Maiden , and the Five Heroes , as well as an album of arranged music from Chocobo 's Mysterious Dungeon and a single entitled Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon Toki Wasure No <unk> : Door Crawl for the theme song of Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo 's Dungeon . 
 The first album of the discography released was the soundtrack to Chocobo 's Mysterious Dungeon , Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon Original Soundtrack . It was released by DigiCube in 1997 and was reprinted by Square Enix in 2006 . An arranged album of music from that game was released in under the title Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon Coi Vanni Gialli by DigiCube in 1998 , and soundtrack albums to Chocobo 's Dungeon 2 and Chocobo Racing were released the following year , also by DigiCube . There were no further album releases in the series until 2006 , when Square Enix produced a download @-@ only soundtrack to Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo Tales . The latest releases in the series are the soundtrack to Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo 's Dungeon and a combined soundtrack for Chocobo Tales and The Witch , The Maiden , and the Five Heroes , both of which were released by Square Enix in 2008 . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Masashi Hamauzu , the composer for Chocobo 's Mysterious Dungeon , was not expecting to be assigned the soundtrack to the game . In the liner notes for the original soundtrack album , he states that he was " still in high school when that lovable character first made his debut in Final Fantasy " , but that the " Chocobo Theme " made a big impression on him , leading him to often think to himself that he would " love to try doing this kind of work " . The soundtrack was the first solo album that Hamauzu had produced . When he wrote his own Chocobo themes for the Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon Original Soundtrack , he decided to arrange the opening and ending of the album for a fifty @-@ piece orchestra , which lead to the creation of the orchestrated Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon Coi Vanni Gialli album . In the liner notes for that album , he explains that his motivation for creating the orchestral works was because " Demand for classical music in Japan is still low compared with other countries " and he wanted " to spread the word on this style of music by any means necessary " . He ends the note by exhorting his listeners to " take your time " with classical music such as the album , so that one day they will appreciate it . 
 Hamauzu has not been involved in the production of any other Chocobo soundtracks . Chocobo 's Dungeon 2 's soundtrack was composed by a group of five composers , and was the last Chocobo game soundtrack to not be mainly composed of remixes of previous Final Fantasy and Chocobo music . Hamauzu was not involved in the creation of either the remixes or original tracks for these albums . His role was filled by Kumi Tanioka for Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo 's Dungeon , Kenji Ito for Chocobo Racing , and Yuzo Takahashi for Chocobo and the Magic Picture Book : The Witch , The Maiden , and the Five Heroes . 
 Unlike the soundtracks to the numbered Final Fantasy games , no tracks from the Chocobo soundtracks have appeared in any compilation albums produced by Square Enix . Pieces from the series have also not appeared in any of the official Final Fantasy music concerts , although a piece based on the " Chocobo theme " , " Swing de Chocobo " , has been played at the 2005 More Friends concert in Los Angeles , the 2006 Voices concert in Japan , and in the worldwide Distant Worlds concert tour from 2007 to date . On February 6 , 2011 the Australian Eminence Symphony Orchestra played a concert in Tokyo as part of the Game Music Laboratory concert series as a tribute to the music of Kenji Ito and Hiroki Kikuta . The concert included " Treasure Chest of the Heart " from Chocobo Racing , sung by Jillian Aversa . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Chocobo 's Mysterious Dungeon = = = 
