 = = Honours = = 
 As a player 
 PFA Third Division Team of the Year : 1982 – 83 
 Awards 
 Fulham 
 Football League Third Division Manager of the Season : 1996 – 97 
 Brentford 
 Football League Second Division Manager of the Month : March 1998 
 Brighton & Hove Albion 
 Football League Third Division Manager of the Month : September 2000 
 Football League Third Division Manager of the Season : 2000 – 01 
 Football League Second Division Manager of the Month : September 2001 
 Leicester City 
 Football League First Division Manager of the Month : September 2002 
 Coventry City 
 Football League Championship Manager of the Month : April 2005 
 Port Vale 
 Football League Two Manager of the Month : September 2010 , November 2010 & September 2012 
 Promotions 
 1996 – 97 : Third Division Runner Up ( promotion to the Second Division ) – Fulham 
 2000 – 01 : Third Division Champion ( promotion to the Second Division ) – Brighton & Hove Albion 
 2002 – 03 : First Division Runner Up ( promotion to the Premier League ) – Leicester City 
 2012 – 13 : League Two third @-@ place ( promotion to the League One ) – Port Vale 
 = Duke of Marmalade = 
 Duke of Marmalade ( foaled 12 March 2004 ) is a retired Irish Thoroughbred racehorse and active sire . He is best known for winning five consecutive Group One races in 2008 , for which he was named European Champion Older Horse . Upon retirement at the end of the 2008 racing season he stood as a stallion for Coolmore Stud , being moved between stud farms in Ireland and Australia ( a practice known as shuttling ) . In July 2014 he was sold and relocated to Drakenstein Stud in South Africa where he currently stands . 
 Duke of Marmalade was owned during his racing career by Sue Magnier and Michael Tabor , winning his first two races as a two @-@ year @-@ old in June 2006 . He did not win again until the spring of his four @-@ year @-@ old season , almost twenty @-@ two months later . During this winless period he was sometimes regarded as little more than a pacemaker for more celebrated stable companions such as Dylan Thomas . In his final year of racing he recorded wins in the Prix <unk> , the Tattersalls Gold Cup , the Prince of Wales 's Stakes , the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes and International Stakes . He was retired in October 2008 after running in the Breeders ' Cup Classic . Duke of Marmalade sired four European Classic winners in 2015 , namely Nutan , Star of Seville , Simple Verse and Sound of Freedom . 
 = = Background = = 
 Duke of Marmalade is a bay horse standing 16 hands high bred in Ireland by Southern <unk> a division of his owners ' Coolmore Stud organisation . Duke of Marmalade weighed 540 kg during his racing career and was trained by Aidan O 'Brien at Ballydoyle . 
 Duke of Marmalade was one of the last crop of foals sired by <unk> one of the most successful stallions of the last twenty years , producing the winners of more than a thousand races , including one hundred and fifty @-@ six at Group One / Grade I level . Among his best offspring are Dylan Thomas , Rock of Gibraltar , George Washington and North Light . Love Me True is a half @-@ sister to <unk> ( Winter Hill Stakes ) , Madison 's Charm ( Comely Stakes ) and Bite The Bullet ( Sanford Stakes ) , and , as a granddaughter of Lassie Dear , is closely related to Summer Squall , A. P. Indy and Lemon Drop Kid . 
 The name " Duke of Marmalade " is derived from a title created by Henri Christophe for a member of the new Haitian nobility following the Haitian Revolution . The name had previously been used for an Italian thoroughbred racehorse which won the Premio Roma in 1975 and 1976 . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 2006 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Duke of Marmalade began his career with three races in the summer of 2006 . In June he made his debut in a six furlong maiden race at Leopardstown . Ridden by <unk> Heffernan and starting at odds of 11 / 4 ( 2 @.@ 75 @-@ 1 ) favourite , he was towards the back of the field in the early stages before making progress in the last two furlongs to finish second to Chanting . Nine days later he reappeared in a maiden race over seven furlongs at The Curragh for which he was made 4 / 6 favourite ( approximately 0 @.@ 67 @-@ 1 ) . He " stayed on well " to record his first win , beating <unk> by a neck ( approximately a quarter of a length ) , under Kieren Fallon . 
 Duke of Marmalade was then moved directly into Group Two class ; he was sent to England for the Vintage Stakes at Goodwood in July , where his opponents included the July Stakes winner Strategic Prince . Ridden by Michael Kinane he raced just behind the leaders before being moved forward to challenge the leaders in the straight . He made ground steadily , but was unable to reach the front and finished second , beaten by a neck by Strategic Prince . Before his run at Goodwood , Duke of Marmalade had been supported in the betting for the following year 's 2000 Guineas , but shortly after the race he suffered a pastern injury which required surgery ; as a result , he did not race again in 2006 . 
 = = = 2007 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 In 2007 Duke of Marmalade did not record a victory in six starts . However , he was never further back than fourth and ran exclusively in Group One races . He was often part of a multiple entry by the Ballydoyle team . Instead of running in a trial race , Duke of Marmalade was sent straight to Newmarket for the 2000 Guineas . The field of twenty @-@ four runners split into two groups , one on either side of the wide Newmarket course . Duke of Marmalade tracked the leaders of the stands side group before staying on to finish fourth to Cockney Rebel . Having returned from an absence of more than nine months , the colt was expected to improve for the run , but later in the same month he finished fourth again to Cockney Rebel in the Irish 2000 Guineas . 
 At Royal Ascot , Duke of Marmalade showed improved form in the St. James 's Palace Stakes . Michael Kinane tried to lead all the way on the colt @-@ and was still in front inside the final furlong @-@ before being caught and beaten a neck by Jamie Spencer on his stable companion Excellent Art , with another O 'Brien @-@ trained runner , Astronomer Royal in third , and Cockney Rebel in fifth . Two months later , Duke of Marmalade was moved up in distance and took on older horses for the first time in the International Stakes at York . He ran up to his best form in a highly competitive race to finish fourth behind the Derby winner Authorized , Dylan Thomas and <unk> . 
 Duke of Marmalade raced against his stable companion Dylan Thomas again in the Irish Champion Stakes at Leopardstown in September . He led into the straight before being overtaken by Dylan Thomas , and although he had no chance with the winner he stayed on to take second ahead of notable winners such as Red Rocks ( Breeders ' Cup Turf ) , <unk> ( Hardwicke Stakes ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1000 Guineas ) . O 'Brien was pleased with the run and said that Duke of Marmalade was still improving . On his final start of the year he was brought back to one mile for the Queen Elizabeth II Stakes in which he led until the last quarter mile , setting a strong pace , before finishing third to <unk> and Excellent Art . 
 During the winter it was discovered that a metal pin used to repair his previous injury had been causing the horse discomfort and was restricting his movement . The pin was removed , allowing Duke of Marmalade to run free of pain as a four @-@ year @-@ old . 
 = = = 2008 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 = = = = Spring = = = = 
 As a four @-@ year @-@ old Duke of Marmalade had a notable run of success , winning his first five races . In all these races he was ridden by Johnny Murtagh and was usually accompanied by his pacemaker Red Rock Canyon . In April he was sent to Longchamp for the Group One Prix <unk> . He raced behind Spirit One before making his challenge in the straight and running on strongly under pressure to beat <unk> by half a length . It was his first major win , and his first win of any kind for more than twenty @-@ one months . After the race , O 'Brien called Duke of Marmalade " a horse to look forward to " . At the Curragh a month later , he justified odds of 1 / 3 ( 0 @.@ 33 @-@ 1 ) in the Tattersalls Gold Cup , being driven out by Murtagh to beat the filly <unk> <unk> by one and a quarter lengths . 
 = = = = Summer = = = = 
 In the Prince of Wales 's Stakes at Royal Ascot he produced what his trainer considered his best performance to date , taking over from Red Rock Canyon in the straight where he " stormed clear " to win by four lengths from Phoenix Tower . The Guardian called it a " brilliant victory " while Murtagh described the colt as among the best he had ridden . 
 He then stepped up to twelve furlongs for Britain 's most prestigious weight @-@ for @-@ age race , the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes , for which he was made 4 / 6 ( 0 @.@ 67 @-@ 1 ) favourite . With no three @-@ year @-@ old in the field , the race did not appear to be up to its usual standard , and his main opponent was expected to be <unk> who had finished second in the Ascot race and the Prix de l 'Arc de Triomphe in 2007 and had more recently won the Grand Prix de Saint @-@ Cloud . Duke of Marmalade was settled by Murtagh in the middle of the field before being switched to the outside in the straight and overtaking Red Rock Canyon entering the final furlong . He was immediately challenged and headed by the Michael Stoute @-@ trained Papal Bull but " rallied gamely " to regain the lead close to the finish and win by a half a length . Murtagh was keen to praise the horse 's speed and attitude , saying " mine has all that makes a real champion . He looked the other horse in the eye and ate ground . He has that will to win . " 
 Duke of Marmalade was then brought back in distance from twelve furlongs to ten and a half furlongs for the International Stakes . The race also attracted the Epsom Derby winner New Approach , and the meeting of the two champions was much anticipated by the press as a " clash of the titans " . Bad ground conditions forced the race to be abandoned , and it was rescheduled for Newmarket four days later . Duke of Marmalade took the lead three furlongs out and was driven out by Murtagh to beat Phoenix Tower by three @-@ quarters of a length , with New Approach , who had pulled hard and failed to settle in the early stages , two and a half lengths further back in third . The colt 's toughness and strong constitution were singled out for praise , with the press referring to him as the " Iron Duke " . 
 O 'Brien and his jockeys were later found guilty of using unfair tactics in the race and were punished by the British Horseracing Authority . While pacemakers are allowed , it is considered unfair to provide additional assistance , for instance manoeuvring a horse to ensure a clear run for a stable companion . O 'Brien defended himself " fervently " , calling the charges " fantasy ... a load of nonsense . " 
 = = = = Autumn = = = = 
 It was expected that Duke of Marmalade would meet New Approach again in the Irish Champion Stakes in September , but following heavy rain in the build @-@ up to the race O 'Brien withdrew the colt , saying " we don 't want to subject him to soft ground now , with the rest of the year in mind . " 
 Duke of Marmalade did not appear again until the Prix de l 'Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp in October , for which he was made 4 / 1 second favourite despite O 'Brien expressing concern over the soft ground . He was settled on the outside , but when Murtagh attempted to have him move forward in the straight , he made no progress and finished seventh of the sixteen runners behind <unk> . 
 On his final start , he was sent to California for the Breeders ' Cup Classic at Santa Anita . Racing on a synthetic track for the first time , he ran in third place for much of the distance and briefly headed the field turning into the straight , but faded in the closing stages to finish ninth of the twelve runners behind Raven 's Pass . Murtagh and O 'Brien characterised the performance as typifying " the end of a long , hard season " and Duke of Marmalade 's retirement was announced immediately . 
 = = Race record = = 
 . 
 = = Assessment , honours and awards = = 
 In November 2008 , Duke of Marmalade was named European Champion Older Horse at the Cartier Racing Awards . 
 In the World Thoroughbred Racehorse Rankings for 2007 , Duke of Marmalade was assessed on a mark of 120 , placing him just outside the world 's top thirty horses . In the 2008 Rankings , he was rated the fifth best horse in the world with a mark of 127 Duke of Marmalade was given an end of year rating of 132 by <unk> in 2008 . A rating of 130 or above is regarded as the mark of a real " top @-@ <unk> . " 
 = = Stud career = = 
 He was retired from racing at the end of 2008 and stood as a stallion for Coolmore Stud where he used to shuttle between their main base in County Tipperary , Ireland during the Northern Hemisphere breeding season and Coolmore 's Australian stud farm in the Hunter Region , New South Wales , during the Southern Hemisphere breeding season . His first foals were born in 2010 . In 2014 he relocated to Drakenstein Stud in South Africa where his first South African foals were born in 2015 . His offspring have included Group 1 winners Nutan ( Deutsches Derby ) , Star of Seville ( Prix de Diane ) and Simple Verse , as well as G2 winners Big Orange , Big Memory and Italian 1000 Guineas winner Sound of Freedom . On 10 November 2015 , Simple Verse was named Cartier Champion <unk> at the 25th edition of the Cartier Racing Awards . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Like all of <unk> 's offspring Duke of Marmalade is inbred 4x4 to the mare <unk> . This means that she occurs twice in the fourth generation of his pedigree . 
 Through his dam he is also inbred 4x4 to Raise A Native . 
 = Looking for par 'Mach in All the Wrong Places = 
 " Looking for par 'Mach in All the Wrong Places " is the third episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , originally airing on October 14 , 1996 in broadcast syndication . The story was written by Ronald D. Moore and directed by actor Andrew J. Robinson , who played the recurring character Garak . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 7 percent , a slight decrease from the previous week . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In the episode , Worf ( Michael Dorn ) becomes infatuated with Grilka , but is unable to pursue her as a result of his dishonor among Klingons . In an adaption of the 19th @-@ century play Cyrano de Bergerac , Worf instead helps Quark ( Armin Shimerman ) win Grilka 's love . When Quark — wholly inexperienced in Klingon fighting and mating rituals — is forced to fight Grilka 's bodyguard to legitimize their relationship , Worf employs a device to remotely control Quark 's body movements in combat , enabling him to defeat his opponent . Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) attempts to console the dejected Worf , and becomes the aggressor in a romantic scene between the two . It is revealed that " par 'Mach " is the Klingon word for " love " with an aggressive connotation . 
 Michael Dorn had originally proposed a story along the lines of Cyrano de Bergerac . Writers were deliberately vague in their depiction of the technology used to help Quark defend himself ; viewers are shown a transmitting device on Worf 's head and a receiver concealed behind Quark 's head , but given no indication of its workings . " Looking for par 'Mach " has been met with mixed critical reception . Many reviewers enjoyed the whimsical nature of the episode , but it has been criticized for a weak plot and the characterisations were both praised and criticized by different critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Grilka ( Mary Kay Adams ) , the Klingon ex @-@ wife of Quark ( Armin Shimerman ) from a " marriage of convenience " ( see " The House of Quark " ) , unexpectedly boards Deep Space Nine . Although her intentions are unknown , Worf ( Michael Dorn ) is immediately attracted to her , but is dismayed at her friendliness toward Quark . After unsuccessfully attempting to impress Grilka , Worf is admonished by her adviser , <unk> , who says that Worf 's dishonor precludes her from mating with him . In pursuing Grilka romantically , Quark finds himself completely unfamiliar with Klingon mating rituals , so he asks Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) for help . Worf , eager to prove himself capable of courting a Klingon woman , joins Dax in coaching Quark to win Grilka 's affections . Through diligent efforts to learn Klingon culture , including the holosuite reenactment of an ancient Klingon battle scene , Quark is successful with Grilka . However , her bodyguard , <unk> ( Phil Morris ) , becomes outraged at the unconventional relationship , and challenges Quark to a fight . 
 Completely unskilled at combat , Quark stands to either lose Grilka or be killed . Worf again helps the Ferengi ; using a special device implemented by Dax , Worf is able to control Quark 's body movements from an adjacent holosuite and help Quark defend himself with a bat 'leth . Although the device temporarily malfunctions , he ultimately defeats the bodyguard . The scene concludes with Grilka and Quark alone and enamored with one another . Worf opines to Jadzia that Quark is unworthy of such a great Klingon woman , and she counters that Worf 's interest in Grilka is superficial , asserting that there are better options awaiting him . Observing that Worf still fails to see the subtext in her hints , Dax initiates an aggressive romantic encounter . In the next scene , both couples are shown in the infirmary ; Doctor Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) treats their wounds and quickly deduces the source of their injuries . 
 In a subplot , Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) is faced with the increasingly uncomfortable situation of Major Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) carrying his baby and living with him and his wife , Keiko ( Rosalind Chao ) ( see " Body Parts " ) . The two begin to develop feelings of attraction , which are apparent to both Doctor Bashir and Odo ( René Auberjonois ) , though Keiko remains oblivious . O 'Brien and Kira try to avoid growing closer , but Keiko insists that O 'Brien accompany Kira on a brief retreat to Bajor . As their shuttle is about to depart , Kira reveals that their destination is in a highly romantic setting , which prompts Miles to back out of the trip ; Kira also changes her plans and decides to visit her boyfriend , First Minister <unk> , instead . 
 = = Production and themes = = 
 The episode boasts the longest title of the series and the second @-@ longest of all Star Trek television installments , behind " For the World Is Hollow and I Have Touched the Sky " of the 1960s series . " Looking for par 'Mach " drew inspiration from the 1897 play Cyrano de Bergerac , in which a brilliant Frenchman , resigned to the fact that the woman he adores will never be able to look past his <unk> large nose , helps another man win the lady 's heart by dictating beautiful language from nearby . The idea for a modern adaption of Cyrano de Bergerac was proposed by Michael Dorn . " Looking for par 'Mach " was directed by Andrew Robinson , who plays the Cardassian Elim Garak on Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . This marked the first time that the actor of a recurring ( but not main ) Star Trek character had directed an episode in the franchise . Having just received two Los Angeles Drama Critics Circle Awards for theatrical directing , Robinson personally asked executive producer Rick Berman to direct an episode of Deep Space Nine ; Robinson was pleased to have been assigned this particular episode . 
 Challenged with inventing an original way for Quark to survive the fight without directly paralleling prior material , writers devised a " holographic puppeteer " system . Worf is seen wearing a headset which allows him to control the body movements of Quark , who is wearing a concealed receiver . It is not made clear how the " virtual control device " works . Indeed , Ronald D. Moore clarified : " I wasn 't interested in explaining it to the viewers . We just buy the premise and move on . " However , science consultant André Bormanis agreed that the " web of sensors and actuators " was conceptually sound . Dan Curry , who originally designed the bat 'leth and helped developed Klingon fighting techniques , was instrumental in choreographing the combat scene between Quark and <unk> . Despite his character 's apparent ineptitude at hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , Shimerman practiced extensively with a bat 'leth to make Worf 's influence over Quark seem convincing . Shimerman also enlisted the help of a mime artist to improve his technique . 
 Guest star Joseph Ruskin played <unk> in " Looking for par 'Mach " , and had previously appeared in the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " The Gamesters of Triskelion " as well as earlier in " Deep Space Nine " in " Improbable Cause " . He went on to appear both in the film Star Trek : Insurrection and the Star Trek : Voyager episode " Gravity " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Looking for par 'Mach in All the Wrong Places " was first broadcast on October 14 , 1996 in broadcast syndication . It received a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 7 percent , placing it ninth in its timeslot . This represented a slight decrease in viewership from the previous week ; " The Ship " garnered a rating of 6 @.@ 0 percent . In contrast , " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " was the most @-@ watched episode of the season , with a rating of 7 @.@ 7 percent . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club in April 2013 . Handlen remarked on the episode 's farcical title and content , noting that the script was largely without substance . However , he granted that the episode served as a welcome change of pace from the ongoing " agonies of war " in the series . He notes that the main plot involving Grilka was " wafer thin " but nonetheless effective in creating humor and introducing the relationship between Dax and Worf . Still , Handlen thought Worf 's strong attraction to Grilka lacked sufficient justification , given Worf 's long @-@ standing desire to maintain solitude on the station . In addition , Handlen disliked the subplot concerning Miles O 'Brien and Major Kira , suggesting that the romantic tension between the two was forced and inconsistent with their personalities . 
 On his website Jammer 's Reviews , Jamahl Epsicokhan praised the episode as being among the show 's " most purely amusing " , while acknowledging the weak plot . Epsicokhan enjoyed Quark 's interactions with other characters , which were rare in that Quark had other motives than his usual lust for monetary profit . Unlike Handlen , Epsicokhan liked the Kira and O 'Brien scenes , especially near the episode 's close when the characters were set to depart for Bajor . He gave the episode a score of three out of four stars . For the website TrekNation , Michelle Erica Green wrote that she strongly disliked the episode and considered some of its sexual implications " repulsive " . She felt the episode inappropriately objectified its female characters — having depicted both Quark and Worf as " players " — and that Worf had neglected to discuss with Dax the risks inherent to Klingon sex rituals . Green was somewhat more receptive to the O 'Brien / Kira storyline , and was fond of the portrayal of pregnancy . Science fiction writer Keith DeCandido reviewed " Looking for par 'Mach " for Tor.com , lauding Ronald D. Moore 's sense of humor on display in the episode , as well as the performances by Nana Visitor and Colm Meaney . In contrast with some other reviewers , DeCandido thought the story stayed true to all involved characters . 
 The first home media release of " Looking for par 'Mach " was part of a two @-@ episode VHS cassette alongside " ... Nor the Battle to the Strong " in the United Kingdom on October 1 , 1999 . In the United States and Canada , this was followed by a single @-@ episode release on July 10 , 2001 . It was later released on DVD as part of the season 5 box set on October 7 , 2003 . 
 = Julia Gillard = 
 Julia Eileen Gillard ( born 29 September 1961 ) is a former Australian politician who served as the 27th Prime Minister of Australia from 2010 to 2013 , as leader of the Australian Labor Party . She previously served as the 13th Deputy Prime Minister of Australia , and held the cabinet positions of Minister for Education , Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and Minister for Social Inclusion from 2007 to 2010 . She was the first and to date only woman to hold the positions of deputy prime minister , prime minister and leader of a major party in Australia . 
 Born in Barry , Wales , Gillard migrated with her family to Adelaide , South Australia , in 1966 . She attended Mitcham Demonstration School and Unley High School . Subsequently , Gillard studied at the University of Adelaide , but cut short her courses to move to Melbourne , Victoria , in 1982 , where she worked with the Australian Union of Students and served as the organisation 's president from 1983 to 1984 . Gillard later graduated from the University of Melbourne , with a Bachelor of Laws degree ( 1986 ) and a Bachelor of Arts degree ( 1989 ) . In 1987 , she joined the law firm Slater & Gordon and became a partner in 1990 , specialising in industrial law . A departure from the law firm in 1996 saw Gillard serve as chief of staff to the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria John Brumby , which preceded her own entry into federal politics . 
 Gillard was first elected to the House of Representatives at the 1998 federal election for the seat of Lalor . Following the 2001 federal election , she was elected to the Shadow Cabinet and was given the portfolio of Population and Immigration . In 2003 , she took on the responsibility for both Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs and Health . In December 2006 , when Kevin Rudd was elected as Labor Leader and became Leader of the Opposition , Gillard was elected unopposed as his deputy . Upon Labor 's victory in the 2007 federal election , Gillard became the first female Deputy Prime Minister of Australia , and held the cabinet portfolios of Minister for Education , Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and Minister for Social Inclusion . On 24 June 2010 , after Rudd lost the support of his party and resigned , Gillard was elected unopposed as the Leader of the Labor Party , thus becoming the 27th Prime Minister of Australia . The subsequent 2010 federal election saw the first hung parliament since the 1940 federal election . Gillard was able to form a minority government with the support of a Green MP and three independent MPs . On 26 June 2013 , after a leadership spill , Gillard lost the leadership of the Labor Party to Rudd . Her resignation as Prime Minister took effect the following day . Gillard retired from politics on 5 August 2013 , before the impending federal election . 
 Following her departure from politics , in August 2013 Gillard became an honorary visiting professor at the University of Adelaide , and a <unk> senior fellow at the Brookings Institution 's Center for Universal Education in October . Gillard released her political memoirs , My Story , in September 2014 . She has been on the board of mental health organisation <unk> from December 2014 , and was made an honorary fellow of Aberystwyth University in June 2015 . In addition to her various appointments , Gillard has served as the chairwoman of the Global Partnership for Education since February 2014 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Gillard was born on 29 September 1961 , in Barry , Wales . After she suffered from bronchopneumonia as a child , her parents were advised it would aid her recovery if they were to live in a warmer climate . This led the family to migrate to Australia in 1966 , settling in Adelaide . In 1974 , eight years after they arrived , Gillard and her family became Australian citizens . As a result , Gillard held dual Australian / British citizenship until she renounced her British citizenship prior to entering Parliament in 1998 . Her father , John Oliver Gillard ( 1929 – 2012 ) , was of English , Irish and Welsh descent , and worked as a psychiatric nurse . Gillard 's mother , Moira Gillard ( née Mackenzie ) , worked at the local Salvation Army nursing home and currently lives in Pasadena , South Australia . Moira 's ancestry is Scottish and Irish . Gillard also has a sister , Alison , who is three years older . 
 = = = Education , career and political aspirations = = = 
 Gillard and her sister attended Mitcham Demonstration School , and Julia went on to attend Unley High School . She later studied at the University of Adelaide , during which she served as the President of the Adelaide University Union from 1981 to 1982 . In her second year at the university , Gillard was introduced to politics by the daughter of a State Labor Minister . Accordingly , she joined the Labor Club and became involved in a campaign to fight federal education budget cuts . Gillard cut short her courses in 1982 , and moved to Melbourne to work with the Australian Union of Students . 
 After moving to Melbourne , in 1983 Gillard became the second woman to lead the Australian Union of Students , until the organisation 's discontinuation in 1984 . She was also the secretary of the left @-@ wing organisation Socialist Forum . From 1985 to 1989 , Gillard served as President of the Carlton branch of the Labor Party . 
 Gillard commenced studying at the University of Melbourne , graduating with a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1986 , and a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1989 . In 1987 , Gillard joined the law firm Slater & Gordon in <unk> , Victoria , working in industrial law . In 1990 , she was admitted as a partner ; at the age of 29 , she was the youngest partner within the firm , and one of the first women to hold the position . 
 Gillard <unk> Labor Party preselection twice for seats in the House of Representatives during the early 1990 's ; however , she did not succeed in either attempt . In 1995 , Gillard took a leave of absence from Slater & Gordon to contest the 1996 federal election . Gillard stood as a Senate candidate , having been preselected for the third position on Labor 's ticket , although she was not elected to the position . 
 Some time later , in 1996 , Gillard resigned from her position with Slater & Gordon in order to serve as the Chief of Staff to John Brumby , at that time the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria . She was responsible for drafting the affirmative @-@ action rules within the Labor Party in Victoria that set the target of pre @-@ selecting women for 35 per cent of " winnable seats " . She also played a role in the foundation of <unk> 's List , the pro @-@ choice fund @-@ raising and support network for Labor women . 
 The Welsh Labour politician Aneurin Bevan remains one of her political heroes . 
 = = Member of Parliament , 1998 – 2010 = = 
 Gillard was first elected to the House of Representatives at the 1998 federal election representing Lalor , a safe Labor seat near Melbourne , replacing Barry Jones who retired . She made her maiden speech to the House on 11 November 1998 . 
 Following her election to Parliament in 1998 , Gillard served in various Australian House of Representatives committees . Gillard was a member of the Standing committee for Employment , Education and Workplace Relations from 8 December 1998 to 8 December 2001 , in addition to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs from 20 March 2003 to 18 August 2003 . Within the Joint committees , she was a member of the Public Accounts and Audit from 8 December 1998 to 11 February 2002 , in addition to the Native Title and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Land Fund from 20 March 2003 to 11 August 2003 . 
 = = = Shadow minister ( 2001 – 07 ) = = = 
 After Labor 's defeat at the 2001 federal election , Gillard was elected to the Shadow Cabinet under then @-@ Labor Leader Simon Crean , where she was given responsibility for Population and Immigration . In February 2003 , she was given additional responsibilities for Reconciliation and Indigenous Affairs . In these roles , in the wake of the Tampa and Children Overboard affairs , which were partly credited with Labor 's 2001 election loss , Gillard developed a new immigration policy for the Labor Party . 
 Gillard was later promoted to the position of Shadow Minister for Health and Deputy Manager of Opposition Business in the House ( to Mark Latham ) on 2 July 2003 . During this time , she shadowed Tony Abbott , with the rivalry between the two often attracting attention from the media . She was later given additional responsibility for managing opposition business in the House of Representatives by Latham , who had succeeded Beazley as Labor Leader . 
 In the aftermath of Labor 's fourth consecutive defeat in the 2004 federal election it was widely speculated that Gillard might challenge Jenny Macklin for the deputy leadership , but she did not do so . Gillard had been spoken of as a potential future leader of the party for some years , but never stood in a leadership contest . After Mark Latham resigned as Labor Leader in January 2005 , Gillard appeared on ABC 's Australian Story in March 2006 , after which an Ipsos Mackay poll conducted for Network Ten 's Meet the Press found that more respondents would prefer Gillard to be Labor Leader ; she polled 32 % compared with Beazley 's 25 % and Kevin Rudd 's 18 % . Although she had significant cross @-@ factional support , she announced on 25 January 2005 that she would not contest the leadership , allowing Beazley to be elected unopposed . 
 = = = = Deputy Opposition leader , 2006 – 07 = = = = 
 On 1 December 2006 , as part of a cross @-@ factional political partnership with Kevin Rudd , Gillard challenged Jenny Macklin for the deputy leadership . After Rudd successfully replaced Beazley as Labor Leader on 4 December 2006 , Macklin chose to resign , allowing Gillard to become Deputy Leader unopposed . In the subsequent reshuffle , Gillard was allocated responsibility for Employment , Workplace Relations and Social Inclusion , as well as being made Deputy Leader of the Opposition . 
 = = = Deputy Prime Minister ( 2007 – 10 ) = = = 
 After the Labor Party 's victory in the 2007 federal election , Gillard was sworn in as the first ever female Deputy Prime Minister of Australia on 3 December 2007 . In addition to being made Deputy Prime Minister , Gillard was given responsibility for a so @-@ called " super ministry " , the Department of Education , Employment and Workplace Relations . 
 In her role as Minister for Education , Gillard travelled to Washington D.C. in 2009 , where she signed a deal with US Secretary of Education Arne Duncan to encourage improved policy collaboration in education reform between both countries . The establishment of the Australian Curriculum , Assessment and Reporting Authority ( <unk> ) , an independent authority responsible for the development of a national curriculum , was amongst her first policy pursuits in 2008 . She launched the government 's " Digital Education Revolution " ( DER ) program , which provided laptops to all public secondary school students and developed quality digital tools , resources and infrastructure for all schools . In conjunction with DER , Gillard oversaw the " Building the Education Revolution " ( BER ) program , which allocated $ 16 billion to build new school accommodation including classrooms , libraries and assembly halls . Gillard also ensured the implementation of the National Assessment Program – Literacy and <unk> ( <unk> ) in 2008 , whereby a series of standardised tests focused on basic skills are administered annually to Australian students . This was followed by the introduction of the My School website ; launched in January 2010 , the website reports on data from <unk> and displays information such as school missions , staffing , financial information , its resources and its students ' characteristics . 
 As Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations , Gillard removed the <unk> industrial relations regime introduced by the Howard Government , and replaced it with the Fair Work Act . This established a single industrial relations bureaucracy called Fair Work Australia . She was a member of the Strategic Priorities Budget Committee ( <unk> ) – also referred to as " Gang of Four " – which comprised Rudd and his most senior ministers : Gillard , Treasurer Wayne Swan and Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner . Formed in late @-@ 2007 as a result of an internal review , the <unk> was responsible for the government 's handling of the 2007 – 08 global financial crisis . 
 On 11 December 2007 , she temporarily assumed the duties of the Prime Minister while Kevin Rudd attended the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Bali , becoming the first woman ever to do so . She assumed these duties for a total of 69 days throughout Rudd 's tenure , during his various overseas travel engagements . Gillard quickly became known as a highly regarded debater , with her performances during parliamentary question time prompting Peter van <unk> to call her " the best parliamentary performer on the Labor side " . 
 = = Prime Minister ( 2010 – 13 ) = = 
 = = = 2010 leadership vote = = = 
 Prime Minister Kevin Rudd suffered a decline in his personal ratings , and a perceived loss of support among his own MPs , following the failure of the Government 's insulation program , controversy regarding the implementation of a tax on mining , the failure of the government to secure passage of its carbon trading scheme and some policy debate about immigration policy . Significant disaffection had arisen within the Labor Party as to the leadership style and direction of Rudd . On 23 June 2010 he announced that Gillard had asked him to hold a leadership ballot the following day to determine the leadership of the Labor Party , and hence the Prime Ministership of Australia . 
 As late as May 2010 , prior to challenging Rudd , Gillard was quipping to the media that " There 's more chance of me becoming the full @-@ forward for the Dogs than there is of any change in the Labor Party " . Consequently , Gillard 's move against Rudd on 23 June appeared to surprise many Labor backbenchers . Daryl Melham , when asked by a reporter on the night of the challenge if indeed a challenge was on , replied : " Complete garbage . ABC have lost all credibility . " As he was being deposed , Rudd suggested that his opponents wanted to move Labor to the right , saying on 23 June : " This party and government will not be lurching to the right on the question of asylum seekers , as some have counselled us to do . " 
 Initially , The Sydney Morning Herald reported that the final catalyst for the move on Rudd was sparked by a report that Rudd had used his chief of staff to sound out back <unk> on his level of support , thus implying that " he did not trust the repeated assurances by Ms Gillard that she would not stand " . Later , ABC 's 7 : 30 Report said the seeds for the challenge to Rudd came from " factional heavyweights " Bill Shorten and Senator David Feeney , who secured the support of " New South Wales right power broker " Mark <unk> and that Feeney and <unk> went to discuss a challenge with Gillard on the morning of 23 June and a final numbers count began for a challenge . Accounts have continued to differ as to the extent of Gillard 's foreknowledge and planning of the replacement of Rudd . 
 Rudd initially said that he would challenge Gillard , but it soon became apparent that he did not have enough support within the party to survive in his position . Hours before the vote on 24 June , he resigned as Prime Minister and Leader of the Labor Party , leaving Gillard to assume the leadership unopposed . Treasurer Wayne Swan was at the same time elected unopposed to succeed Gillard as Deputy Leader . 
 Shortly afterward , Gillard was sworn in as the 27th Prime Minister of Australia by Governor @-@ General Quentin Bryce , with Swan being sworn in as Deputy Prime Minister . The members of the Rudd Ministry , with the exception of Rudd himself who returned to the backbenches , subsequently became the members of the First Gillard Ministry . 
 Later that day , in her first press conference as Prime Minister , Gillard said that at times the Rudd Government " went off the tracks " , and " [ I ] came to the view that a good Government was losing its way " . Gillard offered wider explanation of her motivations for replacing Rudd during the 2012 Labor leadership spill in which Rudd challenged Gillard to regain the Labor leadership , telling the media that the Rudd Government had entered a " period of paralysis " and that Rudd 's work patterns were " difficult and chaotic " . 
 Upon her election by the Labor Party , Gillard said that she wouldn 't move into The Lodge until she was elected Prime Minister in her own right , instead choosing to divide her time between a flat in Canberra and her home in Altona , a western suburb of Melbourne . Gillard moved into The Lodge on 26 September 2010 . 
 As well as being the first female Prime Minister , and the first never to have married , Gillard is the first Prime Minister since Billy Hughes to have been born overseas . 
 The leadership question remained a feature of the Gillard Government 's terms in office , and amidst ongoing leadership speculation following an ABC TV Four Corners examination of the events leading up to Rudd 's replacement which cast doubt on Gillard 's insistence that she did not actively campaign for the Prime Ministership , Attorney @-@ General Nicola Roxon spoke of Rudd 's record in the following terms : " I don 't think we should whitewash history – while there are a lot of very good things our government did with Kevin as prime minister , there were also a lot of challenges , and it 's Julia who has seen through fixing a lot of those problems . " 
 = = = 2010 election = = = 
 On 17 July 2010 , 23 days after becoming prime minister and after receiving the agreement of the Governor @-@ General Quentin Bryce , Gillard announced the next federal election would be held on 21 August 2010 . Gillard began campaigning with a speech utilising the slogan " moving forward " . In the early stages of the campaign , a series of leaks were released by purported Labor Party sources , indicating apparent divisions within Cabinet over the replacement of Kevin Rudd by Gillard . Mid @-@ way through the campaign , Gillard offered journalists a self @-@ assessment of her campaign by saying that she had been paying too much attention to advisers in her strategy team , and she wanted to run a less " stage @-@ managed " campaign : 
 I think it 's time for me to make sure that the real Julia is well and truly on display , so I 'm going to step up and take personal charge of what we do in the campaign from this point . 
 Gillard met Opposition leader Tony Abbott for one official debate during the campaign . Studio audience surveys by Channel Nine and the Seven Network suggested a win to Gillard . Unable to agree on further debates , the leaders went on to appear separately on stage for questioning at community forums in Sydney , New South Wales and Brisbane , Queensland . An audience exit poll of the <unk> Hill RSL audience indicated an Abbott victory . Gillard won the audience poll at the Broncos Leagues Club meeting in Brisbane on 18 August . Gillard also appeared on the ABC 's Q & A program on 9 August . On 7 August , Gillard was questioned by former Labor leader turned Channel Nine reporter Mark Latham . 
 Gillard officially " launched " Labor 's campaign in Brisbane five days before polling day , outlining Labor policies and utilising the slogan : " Yes we will move forward together " . 
 Labor and the Coalition each won 72 seats in the 150 @-@ seat House of Representatives , four short of the requirement for majority government , resulting in the first hung parliament since the 1940 election . Labor suffered an 11 @-@ seat swing , even though it won a bare majority of the two @-@ party vote . Both major party leaders sought to form a minority government . 
 Six crossbench MPs held the balance of power . Four crossbench MPs , Greens Adam <unk> and independents Andrew Wilkie , Rob Oakeshott and Tony Windsor declared their support for Labor on confidence and supply , allowing Gillard and Labor to remain in power with a minority government . Governor @-@ General Bryce swore in the Second Gillard Ministry on 14 September 2010 . 
 = = = Domestic policies = = = 
 = = = = Economy = = = = 
 Gillard came to office in the aftermath of the global financial crisis of 2007 – 2008 . Government receipts fell during the international downturn and the Rudd Government had employed pump priming expenditure . Upon taking over as leader of the Labor Party on 24 June 2010 , Gillard said she could " assure " Australians that the Federal Budget would be in surplus in 2013 . The Government continued to promise this outcome until December 2012 . Gillard initially ruled out a " carbon tax " but said that she would build community consensus for a price on carbon and open negotiations with the mining industry for a re @-@ vamped mining profits tax . Following the 2010 hung parliament election result , the Labor Party elected to adopt the Australian Greens preference for a carbon tax to transition to an emissions trading scheme , establishing a carbon price via the Clean Energy Act 2011 . The government also introduced a revised Minerals Resource Rent Tax and the Queensland Flood Levy . 
 The Gillard Government stressed a need to return the Federal Budget to surplus for the 2012 – 13 financial year , and Gillard said that there would be " no ifs no <unk> " about this promise and that " failure is not an option here and we won 't fail " . In his 2012 – 13 Budget , Treasurer Swan announced that the government would deliver a $ 1 @.@ 5 billion surplus . The government cut defence and foreign aid spending . In December 2012 , Swan announced that the government no longer expected to achieve a surplus , citing falling revenue and global economic conditions . 
 = = = = Health = = = = 
 Like her predecessor Rudd , Gillard had said that health is a priority in her agenda . She announced during the 2010 election , that there would be an increase of 270 placements for emergency doctors and nurses and 3 @,@ 000 extra nursing scholarships over the following 10 years . She also said mental health would be a priority in her second term , with a $ 277 million suicide @-@ prevention package which would target high @-@ risk groups . As the election delivered a hung parliament , a $ 1 @.@ 8 billion package was given to rural hospitals , which was agreed to by the independents to support her re @-@ election . 
 In October 2010 , her government introduced legislation to reform funding arrangements for the health system , with the intention of giving the Commonwealth responsibility for providing the majority of funding to public hospitals and 100 per cent of funding for primary care and GP services . In February 2011 , Gillard announced extensive revision of the original health funding reforms proposed by the Rudd Government , which had been unable to secure the support of all state governments . The revised Gillard government plan proposed that the federal government move towards providing 50 % of new health funding ( and not 60 per cent as originally agreed ) and removed the requirement of the states to cede a proportion of their GST revenue to the Federal Government in order to fund the new arrangement . The new agreement was supported by all state premiers and chief ministers and signed on 2 August . 
 = = = = Asylum seekers = = = = 
 In relation to population targets for Australia , Gillard told Fairfax Media in August 2010 that while skilled migration is important : " I don 't support the idea of a big Australia " . Gillard also altered the nomenclature of Tony Burke 's role as " Minister for Population " to that of " Minister for Sustainable Population " . 
 After winning leadership of the Labor Party , Gillard identified addressing the issue of unauthorised arrivals of asylum seekers as a priority of her government . She announced that negotiations were underway for a return to " offshore processing " of asylum seeker claims . Gillard ruled out a return to processing at Nauru and named East Timor as a preferred location for new detention and processing facilities . The East Timorese Government rejected the plan . 
 In October 2010 , her government announced that it would open two detention centres for 2000 immigrants , due to the pressures in allowing women and children to be released into the community . One was to be opened in <unk> , South Australia , and one in Northam , Western Australia . She said it would be a short @-@ term solution to the problem and that temporary detention centres would be closed . 
 On 15 December 2010 , a ship containing 89 asylum seekers crashed on the shore of Christmas Island , killing up to fifty people . Refugee and migrant advocates condemned the government 's hardline policy as responsible for the tragedy , and Labor Party President Anna Bligh called for a complete review of the party 's asylum seeker policy . Gillard returned early from holidays in response to the crash , and to review asylum seeker policy . Some months later Gillard would announce " The Malaysia Solution " in response . 
 In April 2011 , the Federal Government confirmed that a detention centre for single men would be built at the old army barracks at <unk> , 45 minutes north of Hobart , Tasmania . This immigration detention centre would house up to 400 refugees . Also in April 2011 , immigration detainees at the <unk> detention centre rioted in protest of their treatment , setting fire to several buildings . 
 In May 2011 , Gillard announced that Australia and Malaysia were finalising an arrangement to exchange asylum seekers . Gillard and Immigration Minister Chris Bowen said they were close to signing a bilateral agreement which would result in 800 asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat being taken to Malaysia instead . Australia would take 4 @,@ 000 people from Malaysia who have previously been assessed as being refugees . However , on 31 August , the High Court ruled that the agreement to transfer refugees from Australia to Malaysia was invalid , and ordered that it not proceed . Australia would still accept 4 @,@ 000 people who have been assessed as refugees in Malaysia . 
 The asylum seeker debate returned during August 2012 following the report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers , led by retired Air Chief Marshall Angus Houston . Accepting the panel 's recommendation , Gillard on 12 August 2012 announced that a bill then before Parliament would be amended to allow the Government to choose sites for off @-@ shore processing . At the same time she announced the Government would nominate Nauru and Manus Island , Papua New Guinea to be re @-@ opened . The amended bill passed with the support of the Opposition on 16 August 2012 . 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 Gillard held the responsibilities of the Education portfolio for four days after becoming Prime Minister , before appointing Simon Crean as Education Minister on 28 June 2010 . Following the 2010 election , Peter Garrett assumed the role of Minister for Education , where he remained until June 2013 . Gillard also altered the nomenclature of " Minister for Innovation , Industry , Science and Research " to comprise tertiary education ; Chris Evans , Chris Bowen , and later , Craig Emerson , each served as Minister for Tertiary Education , Skills , Science and Research in the Gillard Government . 
 At the July 2010 National Press Club , Gillard stated " I will make education central to my economic agenda because of the role it plays in developing the skills that lead to rewarding and satisfying work – and that can build a high @-@ productivity , high @-@ participation economy . " The Gillard Government in January 2011 extended tax cuts to parents to help pay for stationery , textbooks or computer equipment under the Education Tax <unk> scheme . 
 As Education Minister under Rudd , Gillard commissioned David Gonski to be chairman of a committee to make recommendations regarding funding of education in Australia . The findings and recommendations of the committee were later presented to the Gillard Government in November 2011 , whereafter deliberations were entered into by the Federal and state governments to consider its content . The committee 's report is known as the Gonski Report . Subsequently , the proposed reforms ( an increase in funding ) became known as " Gonski " and supporters urged governments to " Give a Gonski " . The report was removed from the government website by the newly elected Abbott Government after the 2013 Federal election and is preserved by Australia 's Pandora Archive . 
 Gillard continued to put the My School website centre of her education agenda , which was controversial at the time when she implemented it as Minister for Education . Although it was popular amongst parents , the website helped parents view statistics of the school their children attended . She had since unveiled the revamped version , My School 2 @.@ 0 , promising better information to parents . 
 Universities also placed highly on her education agenda . Legislation which would have been voted on in November 2010 would have seen the introduction of a national universities regulator ; however , this was delayed until 2011 following criticisms from the higher education sector . It was also announced by her government that legislation to establish the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency would also be introduced early 2011 . 
 = = = = Climate change = = = = 
 The Rudd Labor opposition promised to implement an emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) before the 2007 federal election which Labor won . Rudd , unable to secure support for his scheme in the Senate , dropped it . During his 2012 leadership challenge against Gillard 's prime ministership , Rudd said that it was Gillard and Swan who convinced him to delay his Emissions Trading Scheme . 
 In the 2010 election campaign , Gillard pledged to build a " national consensus " for a carbon price by creating a " citizens assembly " , to examine " the evidence on climate change , the case for action and the possible consequences of introducing a market @-@ based approach to limiting and reducing carbon emissions " , over the course of one year . The assembly was to be selected by an independent authority who would select people from the electoral roll using census data . The plan was never implemented . After the 2010 Election , Gillard agreed to form a minority government with the Greens and Independents and replaced her " citizens assembly " plan with a climate change panel consisting of Labor , Greens and Independent members of Parliament . The panel ultimately announced backing for a temporary carbon tax , leading up to an Emissions Trading Scheme . 
 During the 2010 Election campaign , Gillard said that no carbon tax would be introduced under a government she led . In the first hung parliament result in 70 years , the Gillard Government , with the support of the Australian Greens and some cross bench independents , negotiated the implementation of a carbon tax ( the preferred policy of the Australian Greens ) , by which a fixed @-@ price carbon tax would proceed to a floating @-@ price ETS within a few years under the plans . The government proposed the Clean Energy Bill in February 2011 , which the opposition claimed to be a broken election promise . 
 The bill was passed by the Lower House in October 2011 and the Upper House in November 2011 . 
 = = = = Poker machines = = = = 
 In 2010 , Gillard agreed with Nick Xenophon , Andrew Wilkie and the Australian Greens to introduce poker machine reform legislation , to curb problem gambling , into the Parliament by May 2012 . After members of the cross bench advised that they would not support this bill in the House of Representatives , Gillard withdrew her support . Wilkie said that many Australians felt " very let down by the PM " , and fellow anti @-@ gambling campaigner Xenophon accused the Prime Minister of " backstabbing the person who put her in office " . 
 On 21 January 2012 , Wilkie announced that he was withdrawing his support for the Gillard Government after it broke the agreement he had signed with Gillard to implement mandatory pre @-@ commitment for all poker machines by 2014 . He stated that he would support the government 's alternative plan to trial pre @-@ commitment in the ACT and require that pre @-@ commitment technology be installed in all poker machines built from 2013 , but that this fell short of what he had been promised in return for supporting the government . In response , Gillard and Minister for Families , Housing , Community Services and Indigenous Affairs Jenny Macklin argued that there was not enough support in the House of Representatives for Wilkie 's preferred option for it to be passed , and that they had been advised it was technically unfeasible to implement mandatory commitment within the time frame he had specified . 
 = = = = Same @-@ sex marriage = = = = 
 The triennial Labor conference held in December 2011 saw Gillard successfully negotiate an amendment on same @-@ sex marriage to see the party introduce a conscience vote to parliament through a private member 's bill , rather than a binding vote . Despite Gillard , who had previously stated her personal objection to same @-@ sex marriage , the motion passed narrowly by 208 votes to 184 . In February 2012 , two bills to allow same @-@ sex marriage in Australia were introduced in the 43rd Parliament . 
 On 19 September 2012 , the House of Representatives voted against passing its same @-@ sex marriage bill by a margin of 98 @-@ 42 votes . On 21 September 2012 , the Senate also voted down its same @-@ sex marriage legislation , by a vote of 41 @-@ 26 . 
 = = = = Forced adoptions = = = = 
 On 21 March 2013 , Gillard delivered a national apology on behalf of the Australian Parliament to all those affected by the forced adoption practices that took place in Australia from the late – 1950s to the 1970s . The apology , held in the Great Hall of Parliament House , was well – received by the 800 attendees , most of whom were victims or shared a connection to these practices . Gillard opened her speech by announcing that the Parliament would take responsibility for the practice of forced adoptions : 
 Today , this Parliament , on behalf of the Australian people , takes responsibility and apologises for the policies and practices that forced the separation of mothers from their babies which created a lifelong legacy of pain and suffering . 
 In the speech , Gillard committed to $ 5 million worth of specialist support and records tracing for victims of forced adoptions , and an additional $ 1 @.@ 5 million towards the National Archives of Australia " to record the experiences of those affected by forced adoption through a special exhibition . " 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 During her first major international tour as Prime Minister , Gillard told ABC TV 's 7 @.@ 30 Report : 
 Foreign policy is not my passion . It 's not what I 've spent my life doing . You know , I came into politics predominantly to make a difference to opportunity questions , particularly make a difference in education . So , yes , if I had a choice I 'd probably more be in a school watching kids learn to read in Australia than here in Brussels at international meetings . 
 When Gillard replaced Rudd in 2010 , Stephen Smith retained the portfolio of Foreign Affairs up until the 2010 election . Following her 2010 election victory , Gillard selected her former leader Kevin Rudd ( a career diplomat ) as Foreign Minister . After Rudd 's unsuccessful leadership challenge in February 2012 , Gillard appointed Bob Carr to succeed Rudd as Foreign Affairs Minister . 
 The Gillard Government released the Asian Century White Paper in October 2012 , offering a strategic framework for " Australia 's navigation of the Asian Century " . The report included focus on Australia 's relations with China , India , the key ASEAN countries as well as Japan and South Korea . 
 On 19 October 2012 , Australia secured election to a seat as a Non @-@ Permanent Member of the United Nations Security Council . The initiative had been launched by the Rudd Government , and further pursued under the Gillard Government . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 In November 2011 , Gillard announced a desire to allow uranium exports to India , as a matter of " national interest , a decision about strengthening our strategic partnership with India in this the Asian century . " The Rudd Government had previously blocked uranium sales to India due to the Indian Government not being a signatory of the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty . The change in policy was supported a month later at the Labor Party National Conference , and Gillard reversed Australia 's ban on exporting uranium to India on 4 December 2011 . Gillard further expressed that any future agreement to sell uranium to India would include strict safeguards to ensure it would only be used for civilian purposes , and not end up in nuclear weapons . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 In relations with the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth , Gillard represented Australia at the Wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton in London in April 2011 and hosted the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting ( CHOGM ) in Perth in October of that year . The Perth CHOGM saw the historic announcement , by Gillard and British Prime Minister David Cameron , of changes to the succession laws regarding to thrones of the Commonwealth realms , overturning rules privileging male over female heirs to the line of succession and removing a ban on Roman Catholic consorts . At the CHOGM , Gillard also hosted Queen Elizabeth II , for what was suggested to be the Monarch 's final visit to Australia , due to her age . 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 In a 2008 speech in Washington , Gillard endorsed the ANZUS Alliance and described the United States as a civilising global influence . Her former colleague and leader Mark Latham wrote in a 2009 article for the Australian Financial Review that these comments were " hypocritical " , given past private communications Gillard had exchanged with him which apparently mocked elements of American foreign policy : " One of them concerned her study tour of the US , sponsored by the American Government in 2006 — or to use her moniker — ' a CIA re @-@ education course ' . She asked me to ' stand by for emails explaining George Bush is a great statesman , torture is justified in many circumstances and those Iraqi insurgents should just get over it ' . " 
 On 9 March 2011 , Gillard travelled to the United States to mark the 60th Anniversary of the ANZUS Alliance . Gillard addressed a joint session of the United States Congress , becoming the fourth Australian leader to do so and first foreign dignitary to address the 112th congress . In her speech to Congress , Gillard reiterated Australia 's diplomatic and security alliance with the United States , and noted that the United States has " a true friend down under ... In both our countries , true friends stick together – in both our countries real mates talk straight ... So as a friend I urge you only this – be worthy to your best traditions . Be bold . " 
 = = = = Afghanistan = = = = 
 During her first day as Prime Minister , Gillard reassured US President Barack Obama of Australia 's continuing support for the military campaign in Afghanistan . She visited Afghanistan on 2 October 2010 and met with Australian forces in Tarin Kowt and President Hamid Karzai in Kabul . The visit formed part of her first overseas trip as prime minister . 
 A parliamentary debate was conducted for four sitting weeks of parliament in November 2010 , with the agreement between Gillard and Abbott that it would be necessary for Australian soldiers to stay in Afghanistan and prevent it from becoming a safe haven for terrorists . 
 = = = Gender politics = = = 
 During the course of Gillard 's prime ministership , sexism had been a contentious issue for a number of Labor and Greens Party figures , as well as some commentators . Former Labor Party advisor Anne Summers said in 2012 that " Gillard is being persecuted both because she is a woman and in ways that would be impossible to apply to a man " . In reply , journalist Peter <unk> wrote , " She was a woman when she was popular ; she can 't be unpopular now because she 's a woman . The change is a result of her actions in office , not her gender . " 
 = = = = <unk> speech = = = = 
 In an August 2012 press conference regarding the AWU affair , Gillard was critical of The Australian newspaper for writing about her connection to the affair and of what she called " misogynist nut jobs on the internet " . Gillard said that she had been " the subject of a very sexist smear campaign " . In early October , the Opposition Leader 's wife , Margie Abbott , accused the Gillard Government of a deliberate campaign to smear Tony Abbott , on gender issues . 
 On 9 October 2012 , Gillard also raised " sexism and misogyny " in a speech opposing a motion to remove Peter Slipper , her choice as Speaker of the House of Representatives , after revelations of inappropriate conduct on his part became public . Gillard linked the speech to the context of the then ongoing Alan Jones " died of shame " <unk> speech was widely reported around the world . In Laos soon after for an Asian @-@ European leaders conference , Gillard described comments by François Hollande and Helle <unk> @-@ Schmidt : " The president of France congratulated me on the speech , as did the Prime Minister of Denmark , and some other leaders , just casually as I 've moved around , have also mentioned it to me . " US President Barack Obama reportedly " complimented " Gillard on the speech in a private conversation following his re @-@ election , and his Secretary of State , Hillary Clinton , praised the speech as " very striking " with Gillard going " chapter and verse " . 
 Labor had secured the defection of Slipper from the Liberal National Party of Queensland ( <unk> ) to sit in the Speaker 's chair a year earlier , but he was forced to stand aside from his main duties in April 2012 pending the conclusion of a criminal investigation . After a week of controversy , Gillard announced that she was asking Slipper to delay his return to the Chair pending the conclusion of concurrent civil proceedings , in an effort to dispel what she described as a " dark cloud " over her government ( a reference also to the ongoing Craig Thomson affair involving a Labor MP linked to corruption allegations ) . 
 = = = 2012 leadership vote = = = 
 In the light of poor polling results for the Gillard Government , speculation that Foreign Minister and former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd wished to challenge Gillard for the leadership culminated with Rudd resigning from the Cabinet on 22 February 2012 . Rudd told the media " I can only serve as Foreign Minister if I have the confidence of Prime Minister Gillard and her senior ministers " after Gillard failed to repudiate cabinet ministers who publicly criticised Rudd and his tenure as Prime Minister . The situation had been further exacerbated by the revelation on Four Corners that Gillard 's staff wrote her victory speech for the 2010 leadership election two weeks prior to her challenge , contradicting Gillard 's earlier claims that she had only resolved to challenge Rudd the day before the vote . This revelation caused particular conflict between Labor factions to surface , with Labor MP Darren Cheeseman calling on Gillard to resign , while his colleague Steve Gibbons called Rudd a " psychopath with a giant ego " . 
 After resigning , Rudd stated that he did not think Gillard could defeat the Coalition at the next election and that , since his resignation , he had received encouragement from Labor MPs and Cabinet Ministers to contest the leadership . Gillard responded to these developments by announcing a leadership ballot for the morning of 27 February 2012 , saying that if she lost the vote she would return to the backbench and renounce any claims to the leadership . She asked that Rudd make the same commitment . 
 At the leadership ballot , Gillard won comfortably by a vote of 71 to 31 . 
 = = = March 2013 leadership vote = = = 
 Despite Gillard 's defeating Kevin Rudd comfortably in the 2012 leadership spill , tensions remained in the Labor Party regarding Gillard 's leadership . After Labor 's polling position worsened in the wake of Gillard announcing the date of the 2013 election , these tensions came to a head when former Labor Leader and Regional Minister Simon Crean called for a leadership spill and backed Rudd on 21 March 2013 . In response , Gillard sacked Crean from his position , and called a leadership spill for 4.30pm that same day . 
 Ten minutes before the ballot was due to occur , Rudd publicly announced that he would not contest the leadership , in line with the commitment he had made following the 2012 contest . As such , Gillard and Wayne Swan were the only candidates for the Leadership and Deputy Leadership of the Labor Party , and were elected unopposed . This marked the first time in history that an incumbent Labor Leader was elected unopposed at a leadership ballot . Several ministers subsequently resigned from the government , including Chief Government Whip Joel Fitzgibbon , Human Services Minister Kim Carr , and Energy Minister Martin Ferguson . 
 Gillard declared that the question of the Labor leadership was now " settled " . Nevertheless , speculation on Gillard 's leadership remained a major issue , with polling results indicating an electoral disaster were she to lead the Labor Party into the election . In light of this , media attention once more turned to Kevin Rudd as a possible replacement in the short term . It was reported that Gillard 's supporter Bill Shorten was under pressure to ask her to resign , creating a vacancy that Rudd would contest . 
 = = = June 2013 leadership vote = = = 
 By the end of June 2013 , Labor 's standing in the polls had worsened , and the Coalition had been leading in most opinion polls for two years ; one poll in early June showed that Labor would be reduced to as few as 40 seats after the next election . With a general election due later that year , even some staunch Gillard supporters began to believe that Labor faced almost certain defeat if Gillard continued as leader . According to the ABC 's Barrie Cassidy , the question was not whether Gillard would be ousted as Labor leader , but when the ousting would take place . 
 Following further speculation over her leadership , on 26 June a rumour emerged that supporters of Kevin Rudd were collecting signatures for a letter demanding an immediate leadership vote . That afternoon , before any letter had been published , Gillard called a leadership spill live on television . She challenged any would @-@ be opponent to join her in a pledge that , while the winner would become leader , the loser would immediately retire from politics . Despite his earlier comments that he would not return to the leadership under any circumstances , Kevin Rudd announced that he would challenge Gillard for the leadership , and committed to retiring from politics if he lost . In the party @-@ room ballot later that evening , Rudd defeated Gillard by a margin of 57 votes to 45 . 
 = = = Resignation and retirement from politics = = = 
 Following her defeat in the leadership vote on 26 June 2013 , Gillard congratulated Rudd on his win and announced that she would immediately tender her resignation as Prime Minister to the Governor @-@ General , Quentin Bryce . She also announced , in keeping with her pledge before the leadership vote , that she would not re @-@ contest her seat of Lalor at the upcoming election , and thus would retire from politics . In her final speech , she reflected on the honour of being the first female head of government in Australia and expressed confidence for the future of women leaders in Australia : 
 There 's been a lot of analysis about the so @-@ called ' gender wars ' . Me playing the so @-@ called ' gender card ' because heavens knows no @-@ one noticed I was a woman until I raised it [ ... ] I 've been a little bit bemused by those colleagues in the newspapers who have admitted that I have suffered more pressure as a result of my gender than other prime ministers in the past but then concluded that it had zero effect on my political position or the political position of the Labor Party . It doesn 't explain everything , it doesn 't explain nothing , it explains some things . And it is for the nation to think in a sophisticated way about those shades of grey . What I am absolutely confident of is it will be easier for the next woman and the woman after that and the woman after that . And I 'm proud of that . 
 Her resignation as Prime Minister took effect the following day , upon the swearing in of Rudd , and she made her final appearance in the House of Representatives shortly thereafter . Gillard 's parliamentary service ended at the dissolution of the Parliament on 5 August . Subsequent to the federal election held on 7 September 2013 , Gillard was succeeded as the Member for Lalor by her preferred replacement , Joanne Ryan , a former school principal . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 = = = Political philosophy = = = 
 Although nominally a member of the Victorian Left faction of the Labor Party , her election to Prime Minister occurred because of support from the Right factions of the party , with the hard Left planning to support Rudd in the Caucus vote had there actually been one . Analyses of Jacqueline Kent 's 2009 biography of Gillard suggest that her membership in the Left faction is " more organisational than ideological " . In July 2010 , historian Ross Fitzgerald said , " ... at least since [ 2009 ] Gillard has sought to reposition herself more towards the Labor Right . " 
 = = = Civil liberties and democracy = = = 
 Gillard supports Australia becoming a republic and has suggested that the end of Queen Elizabeth II 's reign would be " probably the appropriate point for a transition " . Following the elevation of republican Malcolm Turnbull to the prime @-@ ministership in September 2015 , Gillard along with Rudd tweeted their support for Peter FitzSimons , the head of the Australian Republican Movement , and his call for new members to join the movement . 
 Following the November 2010 release of secret United States diplomatic cables , Gillard stated , " I absolutely condemn the placement of this information on the WikiLeaks website . It 's a grossly irresponsible thing to do and an illegal thing to do . " After an Australian Federal Police investigation failed to find WikiLeaks had broken any Australian laws by publishing the US diplomatic documents , Gillard maintained her stance that the release of the documents was " grossly irresponsible " . 
 = = = Social policy = = = 
 Gillard , in 2005 , expressed support for legal abortion , saying that " Women without money would be left without that choice or in the hands of backyard abortion providers " and that she understood " the various moral positions " regarding abortions . Pertaining to unplanned pregnancies and counselling , Gillard is of the view that women ought to be <unk> by someone of their choice – as opposed to only trained professionals referred to by their general practitioners . In August 2012 , Gillard reiterated her position in support of abortion , stating that " Women must have the right to healthcare and women must have the right to choose . " 
 In response to a 2012 report by think @-@ tank Australia 21 , which recommended the relaxation of illicit drug laws in Australia , Gillard rejected the report and claimed that " drugs kill people they rip families apart , they destroy lives ... I am not in favour of decriminalisation of any of our drug laws . " 
 Concerning euthanasia , Gillard warned that it may " open the door to exploitation and perhaps callousness towards people in the end stage of life " and that she is not convinced that the policy of pro @-@ euthanasia advocates contain " sufficient safeguards " . 
 Gillard , as a Member of Parliament , voted against a bill that would have legalised same @-@ sex marriage in Australia in 2011 . In 2010 she stated " the Marriage Act is appropriate in its current form , that is recognising that marriage is between a man and a woman " and that marriage being between a man and woman " has a special status " . The triennial Labor conference held in December 2011 saw Gillard successfully negotiate an amendment on same @-@ sex marriage to see the party introduce a conscience vote to parliament through a private member 's bill , rather than a binding vote . When the private members bill was introduced by Labor backbencher Stephen Jones , it was defeated in the House of Representatives on 19 September 2012 . In September 2014 , Gillard said that the " course of human history now is that we are going to see same @-@ sex marriage here and in , you know , most parts of the developed world . " She declared her support for same @-@ sex marriage in August 2015 . 
 = = Post @-@ political career ( 2013 – present ) = = 
 In July 2013 , Gillard signed a book deal for her memoirs with Penguin Australia . The autobiography , My Story , was published in 2014 by Random House . In the book , Gillard reflects on various personal aspects of her life and career , including her own analysis of the people and key players during the Rudd – Gillard Governments . Senator Nick Xenophon was said to have been " infamously excluded from university for a period as punishment for stuffing a ballot box full of voting papers he had somehow procured " , which was denied by Xenophon . In February 2015 , Random House issued a public apology to Xenophon and paid a confidential cash settlement . Following requests from Xenophon for a personal apology from Gillard , on 6 August 2015 she published a personal apology to him in a number of Australian newspapers . 
 She has been appointed an honorary Visiting Professor of Politics at the University of Adelaide in 2013 , and now resides in Adelaide . In October 2013 , Gillard joined the Brookings Institution 's Center for Universal Education as a <unk> senior fellow . In February 2014 , Gillard was appointed chairwoman of the Global Partnership for Education , an international organisation focused on getting all children into school for a quality education in the world 's poorest countries . In April 2014 , she was admitted to the degree of Doctor of Victoria University , honoris causa , for her accomplishments surrounding education and disability reform as a political leader . Later that year , in December , Gillard joined the board of the mental health organisation <unk> , chaired by former Victorian Premier Jeff Kennett . 
 On 11 February 2015 , Gillard received an honorary doctorate from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel " for her achievements as a woman committed to education and to social inclusion , and for the impact of her commitment on the situation of children , youngsters and women worldwide " ; and she also held a <unk> Development Lecture on " the importance of education in development contexts " at the said university . In June 2015 , Gillard participated in Sarah Ferguson 's The Killing Season , a three @-@ part documentary series which chronicles the events of the Rudd – Gillard years in power . The television series featured in @-@ depth interviews with key Labor Party officials during the Rudd – Gillard Governments , including Gillard . On 30 June she was conferred with a fellowship from Aberystwyth University in recognition of her " significant contribution to political life " . In October , she received an honorary doctorate from the University of Canberra , for her work in " education and gender equality . " 
 She has been a supporter of Hillary Clinton 's Democratic Party candidacy for President of the United States , from as early as September 2014 when Gillard announced that she would " loudly barrack from the sidelines " should Clinton run . Gillard congratulated Clinton after she announced her candidacy in April 2015 , and in October of that year , she appeared in a campaign video endorsing the presidential candidate for her leadership surrounding women 's issues . Gillard attended the first day of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia on 25 July 2016 , alongside former US Secretary of State , Madeleine Albright . 
 Following her departure from parliament at the 2013 election , Gillard has remained engaged with the Labor Party . After Labor 's defeat at the federal election held in September 2013 , Gillard penned an op @-@ ed for Guardian Australia , wherein she wrote about her legacy and how she believes the Labor Party ought to rebuild . Prior to the 2016 election campaign , Gillard offered her assistance to the Labor party , whereby a video was released of her endorsing and seeking donations for the party 's education policy . She later joined former Labor Prime Ministers Bob Hawke and Paul Keating at Bill Shorten 's Labor campaign launch on 19 June 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gillard met Tim Mathieson in 2004 , and they have been in a relationship since 2006 . 
 Gillard 's mother told ABC TV 's Australian Story program that Gillard had spoken from a young age of never wanting children . Gillard herself told the program that while she admired women who could balance child rearing with a career , " I 'm not sure I could have . There 's something in me that 's focused and single @-@ minded and if I was going to do that , I 'm not sure I could have done this . " 
 Gillard owned a single @-@ storey home in the south @-@ western Melbourne suburb of Altona which she occupied prior to The Lodge and sold in December 2013 . She is a public supporter of the Western Bulldogs Australian rules football team and the Melbourne Storm rugby league team . She currently resides in Adelaide , in the beachside suburb of Brighton . 
 Gillard was brought up in the Baptist tradition , but is non @-@ religious . In a 2010 interview , when asked if she believed in God , she stated : " No , I don 't ... I 'm not a religious person ... I 'm a great respecter of religious beliefs but they 're not my beliefs . " In a 2013 interview with The Washington Post , she stated : " I think it would be inconceivable for me if I were an American to have turned up at the highest echelon of American politics being an atheist , single and childless . " In her 2014 autobiography , My Story , Gillard stated , " Kevin had to be the leader in our alliance because I understood that I was not what Labor needed at that point : a woman , not married , an atheist . " 
 = = = AWU affair = = = 
 Gillard worked in the industrial department of the law firm Slater & Gordon from 1988 through to 1995 . In the early 1990s , she was in a relationship with Bruce Wilson , an official of the Australian Workers ' Union ( AWU ) . Gillard provided pro @-@ bono legal assistance to help establish the AWU Workplace Reform Association for Wilson and his associate Ralph Blewitt . She was also involved in providing legal services in relation to the purchase of a Fitzroy property by Wilson and Blewitt . Wilson and Blewitt have been accused of creating the association in order to use a slush fund for personal benefit , including diverting funds for the purchase of the house in Fitzroy . 
 Slater & Gordon investigated Gillard 's conduct and concluded that Gillard had no case to answer . Gillard has denied any wrongdoing . A subsequent Royal Commission into union corruption found that Gillard had not committed or known of any criminal activity , but had displayed a lapse in professional judgement . 
 = = Works = = 
 Gillard , Julia ( 2014 ) . My Story . Random House Australia . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 391 @-@ 6 . 
 = Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child = 
 Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child is the third compilation album by American R & B girl group Destiny 's Child . It was released on October 9 , 2012 through Columbia Records matching with the fifteenth anniversary of Destiny 's Child 's formation . The compilation contained fourteen songs from the group 's repertoire consisting of four studio albums . 
 Upon its release , the received positive reviews from critics who praised its track list featuring the band 's most popular songs ; however some of them noted the lack of new material as a downside . It peaked at numbers 77 and 17 on the Billboard 200 and the magazine 's Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart respectively , becoming the highest ranking release of the playlist album series through Legacy Recordings . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 On July 7 , 2012 , Mathew Knowles , the music manager of the group , revealed that Destiny 's Child would reunite after a seven @-@ year @-@ long hiatus saying , " We still have our joint venture with Sony , and in November , we 're putting out two Destiny 's Child catalog records with new material " . During the interview , he also mentioned plans for a possible tour . Later it was confirmed through a press release by Music World Entertainment , Columbia Records and Legacy Recordings on September 19 , 2012 that the album would be a greatest hits compilation album titled Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child and it would be released on October 9 , 2012 to mark the group 's fifteenth anniversary since its formation . 
 The album contains fourteen songs from Destiny 's Child 's four studio albums : Destiny 's Child ( 1998 ) , The Writing 's on the Wall ( 1999 ) , Survivor ( 2001 ) and Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) . Group members Beyoncé , Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams served as the producers for Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child along with Mathew Knowles . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the website AllMusic praised Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child along with their other greatest hits compilation # 1 's for being " excellent overviews of the biggest and best female R & B group of their time " . He further noted similarities in their content as they shared twelve same songs on their respective track listings . James Robertson of Daily Mirror magazine described the album as " amazing " and added that " unlike other albums that recycle good songs to ship some of their rubbish new material it 's actually awesome " . Consequence of Sound writer Jeremy D. Larson described the compilation as " hit @-@ heavy " . Chris Martins of Spin felt that the album " sans any big surprises " due to lack of newly recorded material by the group . Gerrick D. Kennedy writing for the Los Angeles Times felt that " sadly , [ the album ] won 't feature any goodies that a fan of the sassy pop @-@ R & B group didn 't already own " further noting that it covered " largely the same ground " as # 1 's . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the Billboard 200 albums chart in the United States , Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child debuted and peaked at number 77 on the chart issue dated December 8 , 2012 . The album also spent an additional week on the chart . The album performed better on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums where it peaked at number 17 and charted for a total of nine weeks . In November 2012 , Billboard magazine revealed that Playlist - The Very Best of Destiny 's Child was the highest ranking album in Legacy Recording 's Playlist series . Following Destiny 's Child reunion performance at the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show on February 3 , 2013 , the compilation climbed to number 66 on the iTunes Albums chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child are adapted from the album 's liner notes and the website AllMusic . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Silent Hill ( video game ) = 
 Silent Hill is a survival horror video game for the PlayStation published by Konami and developed by Team Silent , a Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo group . The first installment in the Silent Hill series , the game was released in North America in January 1999 , and in Japan and Europe later that year . Silent Hill uses a third @-@ person view , with real @-@ time 3D environments . To mitigate limitations of the hardware , developers liberally used fog and darkness to muddle the graphics . Unlike earlier survival horror games that focused on protagonists with combat training , the player character of Silent Hill is an " everyman " . 
 The game follows Harry Mason as he searches for his missing adopted daughter in the eponymous fictional American town of Silent Hill ; stumbling upon a cult conducting a ritual to revive a deity it worships , he discovers her true origin . Five game endings are possible , depending on actions taken by the player , including one joke ending . 
 Silent Hill received positive reviews from critics on its release and was commercially successful . It is considered a defining title in the survival horror genre , moving away from B movie horror elements , toward a psychological style of horror emphasizing atmosphere . Various adaptations of Silent Hill have been released , including a 2001 visual novel , the 2006 feature film Silent Hill , and a 2009 reimagining of the game , titled Silent Hill : Shattered Memories . The game was followed by Silent Hill 2 in 2001 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective of the player is to guide main protagonist and player character Harry Mason through a monster @-@ filled town as he searches for his lost daughter , Cheryl . Silent Hill 's gameplay consists of combat , exploration , and puzzle @-@ solving . The game uses a third @-@ person view , with the camera occasionally switching to other angles for dramatic effect , in pre @-@ scripted areas . This is a change from older survival horror games , which constantly shifted through a variety of camera angles . Because Silent Hill has no heads @-@ up display , the player must consult a separate menu to check Harry 's " health " . If a DualShock controller is used a heart beat rhythm can be felt signifying that the player is at low health . 
 Harry confronts monsters in each area with both melee weapons and firearms . An ordinary man , Harry cannot sustain many blows from enemies , and gasps for breath after sprinting . His inexperience in handling firearms means that his aim , and therefore the player 's targeting of enemies , is often unsteady . A portable radio collected early in the game alerts Harry to the presence of nearby creatures with bursts of static . 
 The player can locate and collect maps of each area , stylistically similar to tourist maps . Accessible from the menu and readable only when sufficient light is present , each map is marked with places of interest . Visibility is mostly low due to fog and darkness ; the latter is prevalent in the " Otherworld " . The player locates a pocket @-@ size flashlight early in the game , but the light beam illuminates only a few feet . Navigating through Silent Hill requires the player to find keys and solve puzzles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Harry is driving to Silent Hill with his daughter Cheryl for a vacation . At the town 's edge , he swerves his car to avoid hitting a girl in the road ; as a result , he crashes the vehicle and loses consciousness . Waking up in town , he realizes that his daughter is missing , so he sets out to look for her in the town . He meets police officer Cybil Bennett , who works in a nearby town . Finding that the town is deserted and foggy , with snow falling out of season , Harry meets several other people in the monster @-@ filled town : Dahlia Gillespie , who gives him a charm , the " Flauros " ; Doctor Michael Kaufmann , director of Silent Hill 's Alchemilla Hospital ; and nurse Lisa Garland , who worked at Alchemilla . He also encounters a symbol throughout the town , which Dahlia claims will allow darkness to take over the town if it continues to multiply . Eventually , this darkness begins taking over the town . According to Dahlia , the girl from the road is a demon responsible for the symbol 's duplication . She urges him to stop the demon , because if he does not , Cheryl will die . Harry soon finds himself attacked by Cybil , who is parasitized by a creature ; the player must choose whether to save her or not . 
 When the girl appears again , she is trapped by the Flauros . Dahlia reveals that she manipulated Harry into trapping it , since only he could approach it . It is a <unk> of her daughter Alessa , who possesses vast supernatural powers . Harry awakens in a <unk> void known officially only as " nowhere " and encounters Lisa again , who realizes she is " the same as them " and begins transforming ; he flees , horrified . Her diary reveals that she nursed Alessa during a secret , forced hospitalization . Harry soon finds Dahlia along with the apparition of Cheryl and Alessa , charred . Seven years earlier , Dahlia had conducted a ritual that impregnated Alessa with the cult 's deity through immolation ; Alessa survived because her status as the deity 's " vessel " rendered her immortal . Alessa 's resistance to the ritual caused her soul to be bisected , preventing the birth . One half of her soul went to baby Cheryl , whom Harry and his wife had adopted . Dahlia then cast a spell that would draw it back to Alessa . Sensing Cheryl 's return , Alessa manifested the symbols in the town to prevent the birth . During the endings in which Cybil survives , Dahlia reveals these symbols to be repellent . With Alessa 's plan thwarted and her soul rejoined , the deity is revived and possesses her . 
 Four different endings are available depending on whether Harry saves Cybil or discovers a bottle of Aglaophotis at Kaufmann 's apartment , or both . Aglaophotis is a red liquid that is obtained from the refinement of a plant of the same name ; it can dispel demonic forces and grant protection against such forces to those who use the item . The " bad " ending occurs if neither is done ; Alessa electrocutes Dahlia and then attacks Harry , who ultimately defeats her . Cheryl 's voice thanks Harry for freeing her and Alessa vanishes . Harry collapses , and the game cuts to his corpse in the crashed car - suggesting that all that happened in the game was a delusion of Harry 's dying mind . The " bad + " ending finds Cybil alive and Kauffman missing ; after the echoing of Cheryl 's voice and Alessa 's disappearance , Cybil walks to Harry and convinces him to flee . The " good " ending finds Cybil dead , and Kaufmann shows up with the bottle of Aglaophotis which he then uses to force the deity out of Alessa ; Kaufmann is revealed to have secretly allied with Dahlia and enabled Alessa 's hospitalization . Feeling betrayed , he forces the deity out of Alessa , also causing her to vanish . After Harry defeats it , the deity disappears , and Alessa appears , who manifests a baby reincarnation of herself and Cheryl , gives it to Harry , enables their escape from the depths of " nowhere " and her nightmare , and then dies . In the " good + " ending , Harry escapes with Cybil and the baby . In both " good " endings , a transformed Lisa prevents Kaufmann from leaving and throws him into a pit . The joke ending sees an abduction of Harry by extraterrestrials . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Development of Silent Hill started in September 1996 . The game was created by Team Silent , a group of staff members within the Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo studio . The new owners of its parent company Konami sought to produce a game that would be successful in the United States . For this reason , a Hollywood @-@ like atmosphere was proposed for Silent Hill . The staff members that were assigned to the game 's development had failed at their previous projects . They intended to leave Konami , as they were not allowed to realize their own ideas , and were not compatible with the company 's other teams . According to composer Akira Yamaoka , the developers did not know how to proceed with the Silent Hill project , either . As the time passed , the personnel and management of Konami lost their faith in the game , and the members of Team Silent increasingly felt like outsiders . Despite the profit @-@ oriented approach of the parent company , however , the developers of Silent Hill had much artistic freedom because the game was still produced as in the era of lower @-@ budget 2D titles . Eventually , the development staff decided to ignore the limits of Konami 's initial plan , and to make Silent Hill a game that would appeal to the emotions of players instead . 
 For this purpose , the team introduced a " fear of the unknown " as a psychological type of horror . The plot was made vague and occasionally contradictory to leave its true meaning in the dark , and to make players reflect upon unexplained parts . Director Keiichiro Toyama created the game 's scenario , while programmer Hiroyuki Owaku wrote the text for the riddles . Toyama did not have much experience of horror movies but was interested in UFOs , the occult and David Lynch movies which influenced the game 's development . 
 The localization company Latina International , which had previously worked on Final Fantasy VII , translated the script into English . The town of Silent Hill is an interpretation of a small American community as imagined by the Japanese team . It was based on Western literature and films , as well as on depictions of American towns in European and Russian culture . The game 's joke ending came out of a suggestion box created to find alternative reasons for the occurrences in Silent Hill . 
 Artist Takayoshi Sato corrected inconsistencies in the plot , and designed the game 's cast of characters . As a young employee , Sato was initially restricted to basic tasks such as font design and file sorting . He also created 3D demos and presentations , and taught older staff members the fundamentals of 3D modeling . However , he was not credited for this work as he did not have as much respect within Konami as older employees . Sato eventually approached the company 's higher @-@ ups with a short demo movie he had rendered , and threatened to withhold this technical knowledge from other staff members if he was not assigned to 3D work . As a consequence , his superior had to give in to his demand , and he was allowed to do character designs . Instead of relying on illustrations , Sato conceived the characters of Silent Hill while creating their computer @-@ generated models . He gave each their own distinctive characteristics , but made Harry almost completely neutral as he wanted to avoid forcing interpretations of the game on the players . Creating the skull shapes for the faces of the American cast was difficult because he had no Caucasian co @-@ workers to use for reference . Although Sato was largely responsible for the game 's cinematics and characters at this point , his superior still did not want to fully credit his work , and intended to assign a visual supervisor to him . To prevent this from happening , Sato volunteered to create the full @-@ motion videos of Silent Hill by himself . Over the course of two and a half years , he lived in the development team 's office , as he had to render the scenes with the approximately 150 Unix @-@ based computers of his coworkers after they left work at the end of a day . 
 Sato estimated the game 's budget at US $ 3 – 5 million . He said that the development team intended to make Silent Hill a masterpiece rather than a traditional sales @-@ oriented game , and that they opted for an engaging story , which would persist over time – similar to successful literature . The game debuted at the 1998 Electronic Entertainment Expo in Atlanta , Georgia , United States , where the presentations of movies and in @-@ game scenes garnered applause from the audience . This favorable reception persuaded Konami to allot more personnel and public relation initiatives to the project . Konami later showcased Silent Hill at the European Computer Trade Show in London , and included a demo with its stealth game Metal Gear Solid in Japan . 
 The names and designs of some Silent Hill creatures and puzzles are based on books enjoyed by the character of Alessa , including The Lost World by Arthur Conan Doyle and Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . The game contains several real @-@ life references , particularly in characters ' names . Cheryl Mason 's first name is based on actress Sheryl Lee 's first name , and Lisa Garland 's surname is taken from actress Judy Garland . " Michael Kaufmann " is a combination of Troma Studios producers Michael Herz 's and Lloyd Kaufmann 's first name and surname , respectively . Alessa 's original name was " Asia " , and Dahlia 's was " Daria " , based on the first names of actresses Asia Argento and Daria Nicolodi – Argento 's mother . Harry 's name was originally " Humbert " , and Cheryl 's was " Dolores " , in reference to the protagonist and title character of Vladimir Nabokov 's novel Lolita . The American staff altered these names , as they considered them too uncommon . Fictitious religious items appearing in the game have used various religions as a basis : the evil spirit @-@ dispelling substance Aglaophotis , which is said to be made from a medicinal herb , is based on a herb of similar name and nature in the Kabbalah ( Jewish mysticism ) ; the " Seal of Metatron " ' s name references the angel Metatron ; and the name of the " Flauros " ' was taken from the eponymous demon appearing in the <unk> , a book on magic said to have been compiled by writings of King Solomon . Certain items and doors in the " nowhere " dimension of the game were given names based on occult elements in order to symbolize magical traits of Dahlia . The names of these doors were taken from the names of the angels <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , who appear in a medieval book of black magic and are supposed to rule over planets . This motif of giving names that suggest planets was used to signify that " a deeper part of the realm of Alessa 's mind is being entered , " according to Owaku . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack for Silent Hill was composed by sound director Akira Yamaoka , who requested to join the development staff after the original musician had left . In addition to the music , he was in charge of tasks such as sound effect creation and audio mastering . Yamaoka did not watch game scenes , but created the music independently from its visuals . The style of his compositions was influenced by Twin Peaks composer Angelo Badalamenti . To differentiate Silent Hill from other games as much as possible , and to give it a cold and rusty feel , Yamaoka opted for industrial music . When he presented his musical pieces to the other staff members for the first time , they misinterpreted their sound as a game bug . Yamaoka had to explain that this noise was intended for the music , and the team only withdrew their initial objection after he elaborated on his reasons for choosing this style . 
 On March 5 , 1999 , the album Silent Hill Original Soundtracks was released in Japan . The 41st track on the CD , the ending theme " <unk> " , was composed by Rika Muranaka . After Yamaoka had approached her to create a piece of music for the game , she suggested the use of <unk> , violins , and a Spanish @-@ speaking singer . It was decided to make the song a tango , and Muranaka composed the melody for the English lyrics she had conceived . When she arrived in Buenos Aires , Argentina , to record the translated Spanish lyrics with Argentine singer <unk> Quiroz , Muranaka realized that the syllables did not match the melodic line any more , and she had to recompose it in five minutes . 
 On October 29 , 2013 , Perseverance Records released a " Best Of " album , which features 16 newly interpreted instrumental tracks composed by Akira Yamaoka and arranged and performed by Edgar <unk> . The 17th track on the album is the ballad " I Want Love " performed by Romina Arena . 
 = = Release = = 
 Silent Hill had difficulty passing censors before it could be released outside Japan . The " Grey Child " monster went through two design changes for the North American release and four design changes for the European release , before it was finally approved by censors . Originally designed to resemble knife @-@ wielding , nude children , these monsters were deemed too graphic , particularly because the player would have been allowed to kill them . The North American version of the game features a faceless , grey , " somewhat larger " version of them with a " modified head " . In the European version of Silent Hill , the Grey Child monsters were replaced by " <unk> " monsters , which appear later in the North American version . Near the end of the European version , however , Grey Child monsters can still be seen as transparent silhouettes that are similar to the " Larval Stalkers " . 
 Silent Hill was released for the PlayStation in North America on January 31 , 1999 ; in Japan on March 4 , 1999 ; and in Europe on August 1 , 1999 . It was included in the Japanese Silent Hill Complete Set in 2006 . On March 19 , 2009 , Silent Hill became available for download from the European PlayStation Network store of the PlayStation 3 and the PlayStation Portable . Two days later , the game was removed due to " unforeseen circumstances " . On September 10 , 2009 , Silent Hill was released on the North American PlayStation Network . On October 26 , 2011 it was re @-@ released on the European PlayStation Network . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 A radically altered version of Silent Hill was released for the Game Boy Advance . Titled Play Novel : Silent Hill and released only in Japan in 2001 , it is a gamebook @-@ style visual novel . It contains a retelling of Silent Hill 's story through text @-@ based gameplay , with the player occasionally confronted with questions concerning what direction to take the character , as well as the puzzles , which are a major part of Silent Hill 's gameplay . After completing the game once , the player has the option of playing as Cybil in a second scenario , with a third made available for download once the second scenario has been completed . When the game was exhibited , Western critics were unimpressed , and criticized the lack of any soundtrack as severely detracting from the " horror " factor of the game . 
 A film adaptation , also titled Silent Hill , was released on April 21 , 2006 . The film , directed by Christophe Gans , was based largely but loosely on the game , incorporating elements from Silent Hill 2 , 3 , and 4 . Gans replaced Harry Mason with a female main protagonist , Rose Da Silva , because he felt Harry had many qualities typically perceived as feminine . When designing the film 's visual elements , Gans was influenced by fellow directors Michael Mann , David Lynch , and David Cronenberg . The film 's soundtrack includes music composed by Yamaoka . Although critical reaction was mostly negative , the film was a financial success and was praised by fans , especially for its visuals . 
 A " reimagining " of Silent Hill , titled Silent Hill : Shattered Memories , was developed by Climax Studios and published by Konami Digital Entertainment . The game was released on December 8 , 2009 , for the Wii and on January 19 , 2010 , for the PlayStation 2 and the PlayStation Portable , to mostly positive reviews . Although it retains the premise of a man 's search for his missing daughter , Shattered Memories branches off into a different plot with altered characters . It features psychological profiling which alters various in @-@ game elements depending on the player 's response to questions in therapy , lacks the combat of Silent Hill , and replaces the " Otherworld " with a series of chase sequences through an alternate frozen version of the town . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Silent Hill received generally positive reviews , gaining an 86 / 100 and 84 @.@ 99 percent aggregate at ratings websites Metacritic and GameRankings , respectively . The game sold over two million copies , which gained Silent Hill a place in the American PlayStation Greatest Hits budget releases . 
 Silent Hill has been compared to the Resident Evil series of survival horror video games . <unk> Fatt of GamePro labeled Silent Hill a " shameless but slick Resident Evil clone " . Others felt that Silent Hill was Konami 's answer to the Resident Evil series in that , while they noted a similarity , Silent Hill utilized a different form of horror to induce fear , attempting to form a disturbing atmosphere for the player , in contrast to the visceral scares and action @-@ oriented approach of Resident Evil . Adding to the atmosphere was the audio , which was well @-@ received ; Billy <unk> of <unk> described the ambient music as " engrossing " ; a reviewer for Game Revolution also praised the audio , commenting that the sound and music " will set you on edge " . Less well @-@ received was the voice acting which , although some reviewers remarked it was better than that found in the Resident Evil series , was found poor overall by reviewers , and accompanied by pauses between lines that served to spoil the atmosphere . 
 Reviewers noted that Silent Hill used real @-@ time 3D environments , in contrast to the pre @-@ rendered environments found in Resident Evil . Fog and darkness were heavily used to disguise the limitations of the hardware . Along with the grainy textures — also from hardware limitations — most reviewers felt that these factors actually worked in the game 's favor ; Francesca Reyes of IGN described it as " adding to the atmosphere of dilapidation and decay " . In using 3D environments , however , controls became an issue , and in " tougher " areas , maneuverability became " an exercise in frustration " . 
 The game 's popularity as the first in the series was further recognized long after its release ; a list of the best PS games of all time by IGN in 2000 listed it as the 14th @-@ best PS game , while a 2005 article by GameSpy detailing the best PS games listed Silent Hill as the 15th @-@ best game produced for the console . A GameTrailers video feature in 2006 ranked Silent Hill as number one in its list of the top ten scariest games of all time . In 2005 , the game was credited for moving the survival horror genre away from B movie horror elements to the psychological style seen in art house or Japanese horror films , due to the game 's emphasis on a disturbing atmosphere rather than visceral horror . In November 2012 , Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time . 
 = Gillingham F.C. = 
 Gillingham Football Club is a professional association football club based in the town of Gillingham , Kent , England . The only Kent @-@ based club in the Football League , the " Gills " play their home matches at the Priestfield Stadium . The team compete in League One , the third tier of the English football league system . 
 The club was founded in 1893 and joined the Football League in 1920 . They were voted out of the league in favour of Ipswich Town at the end of the 1937 – 38 season , but returned to it 12 years later after it was expanded from 88 to 92 clubs . Twice in the late 1980s they came close to winning promotion to the second tier of English football , but a decline then set in and in 1993 they narrowly avoided relegation to the Football Conference . Between 2000 and 2005 , Gillingham were in the second tier of the English football league system for the only time in their history , achieving a club record highest league finish of eleventh place in 2002 – 03 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The local success of a junior football side , Chatham Excelsior F.C. , encouraged a group of businessmen to meet with a view to creating a football club which could compete in larger competitions . New Brompton F.C. was formed at the meeting , held on 18 May 1893 . The founders also purchased the plot of land which later became Priestfield Stadium . The new club played its first match on 2 September 1893 , losing 1 – 5 to Woolwich Arsenal 's reserve side in front of a crowd of 2 @,@ 000 . New Brompton were among the founder members of the Southern League upon its creation in 1894 , and were placed in Division Two . They were named Champions in the first season ( 1894 – 95 ) going on to defeat Swindon Town in a test match to win promotion . 
 In the seasons that followed , the club struggled in Division One , finishing bottom in the 1907 – 08 season , avoiding relegation only due to expansion of the league . Whilst the club 's league performance was disappointing , the side did manage a famous cup victory over Football League First Division Sunderland and held Manchester City to a draw before losing in the replay . In 1912 the directors passed a resolution to change the club 's name to Gillingham F.C. , and the team played under this name throughout the 1912 – 13 season , although the change was not officially ratified by the shareholders until the following year . The team finished bottom of Division One in the 1919 – 20 season but for a third time avoided relegation , due to the subsequent elevation of all Southern League Division One clubs to form the new Football League Division Three . 
 = = = First spell in the Football League = = = 
 In the first season of the newly created Football League Division Three , the 1920 – 21 season , Gillingham again finished bottom , and in the years to follow there was little improvement on this , the club continually finishing in the lower reaches of the bottom division . In 1938 the team finished bottom of the Third Division ( South ) and were required to apply for re @-@ election for the fifth time since joining the league . This bid for re @-@ election failed , with Gillingham returning to the Southern League and Ipswich Town being promoted in their place . Gillingham quickly established themselves as one of the stronger sides in the league , winning a local double of the Kent League and Kent Senior Cup in the 1945 – 46 season . In the 1946 – 47 season the team won both the Southern League Cup and the Southern League championship , during which they recorded a club record 12 – 1 victory over Gloucester City . The Gills also won the league title in 1948 – 49 . 
 = = = Return to the Football League = = = 
 In 1950 , plans were announced to expand the Football League Division Three ( South ) from 22 to 24 teams and , taking into account their local success in the interim , Gillingham were re @-@ elected to the Football League with a landslide vote . The team spent eight seasons in Division Three ( South ) before the restructuring of the league system for the 1958 – 59 season saw them placed in the newly created Fourth Division . They remained in this division until 1964 , when manager Freddie Cox led them to promotion , winning the first championship in the club 's history . The team finished the season level on 60 points with Carlisle United , but with a fractionally better goal average ( 1 @.@ 967 against 1 @.@ 948 ) , which was the tightest league title finish in Football League history . 
 After relegation back to the Fourth Division in 1970 – 71 , the Gills were soon promoted back to the Third Division in the 1973 – 74 season . After this the club seemed to find its level in Division Three , regularly mounting a challenge for promotion which ultimately fell short each time , never more so than in 1986 – 87 when they reached the play @-@ offs only to lose in the final to Swindon Town . During this period the club produced future stars Steve Bruce and Tony Cascarino , who was famously bought from non @-@ league <unk> in exchange for a set of tracksuits . 
 In 1987 , the Gills hit the headlines when , on consecutive Saturdays , they beat Southend United 8 – 1 and Chesterfield 10 – 0 , the latter a club record for a Football League match . Just a few months later , however , manager Keith Peacock was controversially sacked , and within 18 months the club had fallen into Division Four . The ensuing spell in the lower division brought little success , and in the 1992 – 93 Division Three campaign the Gills narrowly avoided relegation to the Football Conference . 
 = = = Recent highs and lows = = = 
 Beset with financial problems , the club went into administration in January 1995 , and by the end of the 1994 – 95 season faced the threat of being expelled from the Football League and closed down . In June 1995 , however , a London @-@ based businessman , Paul Scally , stepped in and bought the club . He brought in new manager Tony Pulis , who led Gillingham to promotion in his first season , finishing second in the old Division Three ( now Football League Two ) . In 1999 the Gills made the play @-@ offs but lost in the Division Two play @-@ off final to Manchester City . The Gills were 2 – 0 up with less than two minutes left only to see City score twice , the equaliser in injury time , and go on to win 3 – 1 in a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 Soon after the play @-@ off loss , Pulis was sacked for gross misconduct , and Peter Taylor appointed manager . In the 1999 – 00 season Gillingham qualified for the play @-@ offs again , where they faced Wigan Athletic in the final at Wembley Stadium . The game finished 1 – 1 after 90 minutes , but , thanks to goals in extra time from substitutes Steve Butler and Andy Thomson , the Gills won 3 – 2 and were promoted to Division One for the first time . 
 Taylor then left to manage Leicester City , and Andy Hessenthaler was appointed as player @-@ manager . He led the club to their best ever league finish of eleventh in the 2002 – 03 season , but the following season saw the club narrowly avoid relegation on goal difference . Hessenthaler resigned as manager in November 2004 , and new boss Stan Ternent was unable to prevent the Gills ' relegation to League One . At the end of the 2007 – 08 season the club was relegated again , this time to League Two , but an immediate return to the third level was secured via the play @-@ offs after beating Shrewsbury Town . In the 2009 – 10 season , however , the Gills slipped into the bottom four on the last day , and were relegated back to League Two , having failed to win a single away game in the league all season . This resulted in manager Mark Stimson having his contract terminated , and Andy Hessenthaler was appointed as manager of the club for the second time . At the start of the 2012 – 13 season Hessenthaler was replaced by Martin Allen , who led the club to promotion as League Two champions in his first season in charge . However , shortly after winning League Two , Martin Allen was sacked in what many saw as a " surprise sacking " after a poor start to the season . Peter Taylor returned for a second spell in charge , but following his sacking in December 2014 he was replaced by Justin Edinburgh . 
 = = = = Finances = = = = 
 Since 2002 , the club has faced severe financial difficulties as a result of various events including the collapse of ITV Digital , relegation from the Championship , and the cost of refurbishing the stadium . In 2006 EDF Energy cut off power to the stadium as a result of unpaid bills of approximately £ 100 @,@ 000 . By 2008 , the club 's level of debt had reached approximately £ 13 million , although this was reduced dramatically as a result of the sale of Priestfield Stadium to a new holding company . In 2011 , however , the club bought the stadium back for £ 1 million , considerably less than the £ 10 million for which it was sold in 2008 . The club also resolved not to hold any more <unk> or allow any formal discussion on the business of the club . 
 During the 2012 – 13 season , however , Gillingham 's financial position improved as the club received several unexpected cash windfalls , with the sale of Paulo Gazzaniga to Southampton , a large profit due from a sell @-@ on clause for Matt Jarvis and ongoing add @-@ ons in the deal that saw Ryan Bertrand head to Chelsea . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 The Gills have played at Priestfield Stadium throughout their existence . The ground was originally purchased by the founders of the club through an issue of 1 @,@ 500 £ 1 shares . Sources differ on whether the ground was named after the road on which the land stood , Priestfield Road , or whether the road was named after the ground ; if the latter is the case then the origin of the ground 's name is unknown . The ground was extensively developed prior to the 1930s , but there was then little change until the late 1990s and the arrival of Paul Scally as chairman . Three of the four stands were demolished and rebuilt between 1995 and 2000 . The fourth stand , known as the Town End , was demolished to make way for a new stand , to be named the Brian Moore Stand after television sports commentator Brian Moore , who was a well @-@ known Gills fan , but the club 's financial situation has not allowed the new stand to be built and a temporary stand has been in place since 2004 . From 2007 until 2010 the stadium was officially named KRBS Priestfield Stadium as part of a sponsorship deal with the Kent Reliance Building Society . In 2011 it was rebranded again , this time , to MEMS Priestfield Stadium under another such agreement . 
 At its peak in the 1940s the official capacity of the stadium was listed as " between 25 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 " but subsequent redevelopments , the removal of terraces and building of new facilities have seen this reduced to a current capacity of 11 @,@ 582 . In the 2007 – 08 season , the average attendance at home matches was 6 @,@ 077 , just 52 % of capacity . The ground has also hosted home fixtures of the England women 's national football team . 
 The club 's training ground is <unk> Cross , in Grange Road , Gillingham . In 2012 the club was involved in a dispute with the local council , who alleged that Gillingham owed over £ 30 @,@ 000 in unpaid bills relating to the facility . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Although Gillingham have long been associated with the colours blue and white , the original New Brompton side wore a strip consisting of black and white striped shirts with black shorts . In 1913 the black and white strip was dropped in favour of red shirts with blue sleeves , emblazoned with the borough 's coat of arms . The striped shirts returned after World War One , before finally being replaced with the now @-@ familiar combination of plain blue shirts and white shorts in 1931 . More recent years have seen several variations on the blue and white colour scheme . In the late 1990s the team wore blue and black striped shirts , recalling the original New Brompton stripes . In the summer of 2003 it was controversially announced that the club 's first choice shirts for the following season would be predominantly white , rather than blue . The announcement received such a hostile response from supporters that the white strip was replaced by one featuring blue and black hoops , which had originally been earmarked as the team 's third choice kit . In March 2010 the club announced a return to the black and blue stripes for the 2010 – 11 season . In recognition of the centenary of the renaming of the club , the 2012 – 13 kit was red with blue sleeves and collar , and the club 's crest was replaced by the town 's crest . After winning the League Two title in 2012 – 13 , the club gave season ticket holders the chance to vote on what colours the club would play in for the 2013 – 14 season , with the fans choosing to return to a blue and white kit . 
 The club 's current crest is a shield divided vertically into halves of black and white stripes and solid blue , reflecting the club 's original and modern kits . On the blue half is the county emblem of Kent , a white horse rampant , albeit slightly altered from its normal form as its mane is stylised into the letters of the word " Gills " . This side has been sometimes given a red or pink background , to coordinate with away kits featuring those colours . The club 's motto , which appears on a scroll below the crest , is Domus <unk> , the Latin for " the home of the shouting men " , a traditional epithet associated with the town of Gillingham . In keeping with the crest , the club 's mascot , Tommy <unk> , takes the form of a horse . He first appeared at a match against Macclesfield Town in October 1998 . 
 The first sponsor 's name to appear on Gillingham shirts was that of Italian home appliance manufacturers Zanussi , who sponsored the club in the mid @-@ 1980s . Subsequent sponsors have included Chatham Maritime , Medway Toyota , Cannon Tool Hire , Invicta FM , Kool , Medway News , SeaFrance , MHS Homes Group , Kent Reliance Building Society , Automatic Retailing , and MEMS Power Generation . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Notable former players = = = 
 The club launched a Hall of Fame prior to the 2008 – 09 season . The first five players to be elected were chosen by a fan vote in 2009 . One new inductee was to be elected every year thereafter , but this has not been done . 
 John Simpson 
 Andy Hessenthaler 
 Brian Yeo 
 Tony Cascarino 
 Steve Bruce 
 = = = International players = = = 
 The club recognises thirteen players as having gained full international caps during their time at Priestfield , although other sources indicate that Freddie Fox had in fact left the club by the time he made his only appearance for England . 
 In 2006 , Sancho became the first Gillingham player ever to play in the World Cup finals , and technically the first to score in the World Cup when he scored an own goal in the 2 – 0 group defeat to Paraguay . 
 = = Club officials = = 
 As at 22 July 2016 
 = = = Management = = = 
 = = = Technical staff = = = 
 = = Managers = = 
 For the first three years of the club 's existence , team matters were handled by a committee . In 1896 William Ironside Groombridge , the club 's secretary , took sole charge of team affairs to become Gillingham 's first recognised manager . Former England international Stephen Smith was appointed as full @-@ time manager in 1906 , but left in 1908 , with Groombridge once again taking on team responsibilities . Groombridge was associated with the club , as manager and secretary , for over 25 years . When the club was admitted to the Football League in 1920 , Robert Brown was appointed as manager , but he resigned a month later before the season had even begun . His replacement , Scotsman John McMillan , thus became the first manager to take charge of the team in a Football League match . 
 In 1939 , a year after the club was voted back out of the Football League , Archie Clark took over as manager , and was still in charge when the club was elected back to the Football League in 1950 . Clark remained in the job until 1957 . Freddie Cox took over in 1962 and led the club to the Football League Fourth Division championship in the 1963 – 64 season , making him the first manager to win a Football League divisional title with the club . Basil Hayward was sacked in 1971 after the club was relegated back to the Fourth Division in the 1970 – 71 season , but his successor Andy Nelson led the club to promotion back to Division Three three years later before controversially resigning . 
 Tony Pulis took over in 1995 , with Gillingham once again in the bottom division , and managed the club to promotion in his first season in charge . Three years later he led the team to the Second Division play @-@ off final , but was sacked immediately after this after being accused of gross misconduct . Peter Taylor replaced him and took the club to a second consecutive play @-@ off final , where Gillingham gained promotion to the second tier of English football for the first time . In 2013 Martin Allen became the second manager to lead the Gills to a divisional title in the Football League , as the team won the championship of League Two . 
 = = Chairmen = = 
 The following men have been chairman of the club 's Board of Directors : 
 = = Honours = = 
 Third tier of English football ( Football League Third Division / Third Division South from 1920 – 1992 , Football League Second Division from 1992 – 2004 , Football League One since 2004 ) 
 Play @-@ off winners 1999 – 00 , play @-@ off finalists 1986 – 87 & 1998 – 99 
 Fourth tier of English football ( Football League Fourth Division from 1958 – 1992 , Football League Third Division from 1992 – 2004 , Football League Two since 2004 ) 
 Champions 1963 – 64 & 2012 – 13 , runners @-@ up 1973 – 74 & 1995 – 96 , play @-@ off winners 2008 – 09 
 Southern Football League 
 Champions 1946 – 47 & 1948 – 49 , runners up 1947 – 48 
 Southern Football League Division Two 
 Champions 1894 – 95 
 Southern League Cup 
 Winners 1946 – 47 
 Kent League 
 Champions 1945 – 46 
 Kent League Cup 
 Winners 1945 – 46 
 Kent Senior Cup 
 Winners 1945 – 46 & 1947 – 48 , runners @-@ up 1938 – 39 , 1948 – 49 , 1949 – 50 & 1994 – 95 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Goalkeeper Ron Hillyard holds the record for Gillingham appearances , having played 657 matches in all competitions between 1974 and 1990 , while the record for appearances solely in the Football League is held by another goalkeeper , John Simpson , with 571 between 1957 and 1972 . Brian Yeo is the club 's all @-@ time leading league goalscorer , having scored a total of 136 goals between 1963 and 1975 . He also jointly holds the club record for the most Football League goals scored in a single season , having scored 31 goals in the 1973 – 74 season , equalling the record set by Ernie Morgan in 1954 – 55 . The highest number of goals scored by a player in a single game at a professional level is the six registered by Fred <unk> against Merthyr Town in April 1930 . 
 The club 's record home attendance is 23 @,@ 002 , for an FA Cup match against QPR on 10 January 1948 , a record which will almost certainly never be broken unless the club relocates to a larger ground , given that Priestfield Stadium 's current capacity is approximately half that figure . 
 The team 's biggest ever professional win was a 10 – 0 defeat of Chesterfield in September 1987 , although they had previously registered a 12 – 1 win against Gloucester City in the Southern League in November 1946 . 
 The Gills hold the record for the fewest goals conceded by a team in the course of a 46 @-@ game season , having conceded just 20 in the 1995 – 96 season , during which goalkeeper Jim Stannard kept 29 clean sheets . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 The 2003 Football Fans Census revealed that no other team 's supporters considered Gillingham to be among their club 's main rivals . Millwall are considered to be the closest the Gills have to local rivals . Swindon Town are seen by many fans as the club 's biggest rivals , stemming from bad @-@ tempered matches between the two teams in the past . While Swindon fans generally do not consider Gillingham their biggest rivals , there was violence when they met at Priestfield in the 2005 – 06 season , their first meeting since a promotion play @-@ off match in 1987 . Following their promotion in 1989 , Maidstone United became Kent 's second League side . A rivalry with Gillingham developed over the following seasons , until Maidstone 's financial troubles forced them to resign from the League in 1992 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 1956 , comedian Fred Emney filmed a scene for his sitcom Emney Enterprises prior to the start of a match between Gillingham and Brighton & Hove Albion . The footage featured the overweight Emney , wearing a flat cap and monocle and smoking a cigar , dribbling the ball past the entire Gills defence and scoring a goal . In the Sky1 television series Dream Team , fictional team <unk> United lost 2 – 0 to the Gills in an episode broadcast in 2004 . The 2005 film Green Street ( known as Green Street Hooligans in the USA ) makes use of action sequences filmed during a match between Gillingham and West Ham United , although for unknown reasons the dialogue states that the team playing West Ham is Birmingham City . A film entitled The Shouting Men , released in March 2010 , centres on a group of Gillingham fans and features scenes shot at Priestfield . 
 = Rita Bennett = 
 Rita Bennett ( née Brandon ; later Morgan ) is a fictional character created by Jeff Lindsay for his book series about a vigilante serial killer named Dexter Morgan . She also appeared in the television series Dexter , based on Lindsay 's books . She was the girlfriend and later wife of Dexter in both media . Portrayed by Julie Benz , Rita was a series regular in the first four seasons . The character made her last television appearance in 2010 ; she was a special guest star in Dexter 's season five opener entitled " My Bad " . The character has appeared in all of the Dexter novels . 
 In the novels , Dexter initially considers Rita little more than part of his disguise as a normal human being , and the perfect cover for his secret life as a serial killer . He later admits to growing quite fond of Rita , whom he married in the third book , Dexter in the Dark . In the television series , Rita is portrayed as a loving and caring mother who is emotionally damaged due to physical abuse by her former husband , Paul Bennett . Rita is the mother of Astor Bennett ( Christina Robinson ) and Cody Bennett ( Preston Bailey ) , and later in the television series , gives birth to Dexter 's son , Harrison . In the book series , she and Dexter have a daughter , Lily Anne . 
 Benz received positive reviews for her portrayal of Rita , winning a Satellite Award and Saturn Award , and receiving a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination . Dexter executive producer Clyde Phillips claimed the staff did not know how Rita would leave until late in the fourth season , but that it began to feel inevitable as the story evolved . Benz was notified the day before the script was distributed to the cast and was disappointed , but found the scene revealing her departure to be " very poetic " . The character 's departure was considered controversial by some reviewers ; E ! writer Kristin Dos Santos said that it " might go down as one of the most shocking ever on television . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Rita Bennett was a character in the Dexter series of novels written by author Jeff Lindsay . As of 2011 there are five books in the Dexter series , all of which include Rita . Rita first appears in the original novel Darkly Dreaming Dexter . In the book series , Dexter Morgan 's " love " for Rita seems less sincere than it does in the television series ; he primarily considers her a part of his " disguise " . In the TV series , Dexter initially begins dating Rita to seem like a normal person , but later admits he has grown " fond " of her , to the extent that he talks with a psychiatrist about his relationship issues — albeit to a psychiatrist he plans to kill . 
 In Darkly Dreaming Dexter , the two are already together , but it is explained that Dexter started dating her solely to improve his " disguise " as a normal person . Because she was brutalized by her now @-@ jailed ex @-@ husband , Rita fears intimacy and does not expect much of Dexter ; this suits the asexual Dexter perfectly . By the novel 's climax , Dexter admits that he is fond of her children , Astor and Cody , the closest he can get to feeling love . By a humorous misunderstanding , the couple become engaged in Dearly Devoted Dexter and married at the end of Dexter in the Dark . In the TV series , it is explicitly stated that Debra introduced them ( after responding to the domestic dispute call ) in the hope they would start dating . The books do not explain how they met . In the books , Rita is a physical fitness buff ; she and Dexter regularly go for 5 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) runs , long bike rides , and weightlifting sessions together . In the fifth book , Dexter is Delicious , she gives birth to Dexter 's daughter Lily Anne . In Dearly Devoted Dexter , Dexter discovers that Rita 's children , Cody and Astor , are budding sociopaths and decides to provide them with the same " guidance " that his adoptive father Harry gave to him ; namely , to teach them how to be careful , efficient killers of those who " deserve it " . Rita is kept in the dark about the true nature of their relationship . She suspects that something is wrong with the children when she discovers them torturing a cat , but Dexter is able to reassure her that they didn 't understand what they were doing . The television series is based on Darkly Dreaming Dexter . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Rita Bennett appears in the premiere episode of Dexter , entitled " Dexter " and is introduced as Dexter Morgan 's girlfriend . It is revealed early on that Rita was physically and sexually abused by Paul Bennett ( Mark Pellegrino ) , her ex @-@ husband and the father of her children , Astor ( Christina Robinson ) and Cody ( Preston Bailey ) . Dexter 's sister Debra Morgan answered a domestic violence call and saved her life . Rita , who is ignorant of Dexter 's secret life as a serial killer , appears regularly throughout the first season as his main source of support . She plays a much larger role in the episode " Return to Sender " , in which Paul is released from prison and demands to be at Astor 's birthday party . Rita asks that he not come to the party . In " Circle of Friends " , Rita tells Paul he can see his children only through supervised visits for six months before she will consider letting him have unsupervised visitation rights . She hands him divorce papers that include that clause , and Paul signs them . In " Father Knows Best " , however , Paul begins threatening Rita again when she prevents him from seeing the children . He forces his way into her house , where she defends herself by hitting him over the head with a baseball bat . In " Seeing Red " , Paul presses charges against Rita for assault . When Paul visits Rita 's house , he threatens Dexter when they are alone in the kitchen ; Dexter reacts by hitting him with a frying pan . After Paul loses consciousness , Dexter drives him back to his hotel and plants drugs on him . Dexter alerts the police and Paul is sent back to prison . 
 In the second season premiere Rita takes Astor and Cody to see Paul in prison . He insists that Dexter dragged him out of Rita 's house before drugging him and tipping off the police — and that if she could find his missing shoe it would prove his innocence . Rita tells him that there is no shoe , despite having found it more than a month previously . She later admits that she found the shoe , but refuses to acknowledge that Dexter is involved . That night she receives a call from the prison and learns that Paul was killed in an inmate altercation . In " Waiting to Exhale " , after Paul 's funeral , Rita confronts Dexter about his involvement in Paul 's death , and he is forced to admit to having a heroin addiction in order to cover up his real secret . Rita threatens to leave Dexter if he does not commit to a program to deal with his " addiction " . He starts attending Narcotics Anonymous meetings , where a mysterious woman named Lila Tournay ( Jaime Murray ) volunteers to be his sponsor . In " See @-@ Through " Rita 's visiting mother , Gail ( JoBeth Williams ) , suspects that Dexter is hiding something from the family . In " Dex , Lies , and Videotape " , Rita breaks up with Dexter after he admits that he cheated on her with Lila . 
 In " That Night , a Forest Grew , " Rita stands up to her mother and insists that she move out of the house . Rita tells Dexter that he is no longer welcome to visit her house or her children . He apologizes , admitting that his affair with Lila was a mistake , but she is still hesitant to forgive him . When Dexter breaks up with Lila , she retaliates by pursuing his co @-@ worker and friend , Angel Batista . In " There 's Something About Harry , " Rita and Dexter reconcile and visit the beach together . In the second season finale , Dexter is forced to lie about running away with Lila , in front of Debra . Lila , feeling hurt , leaves with what she recognizes as Dexter 's bag of murder equipment . She goes to Rita 's house and drugs the babysitter in order to abduct the children . When Dexter realizes that Astor and Cody are missing , he goes to Lila 's apartment . She starts a fire and locks the three of them inside . Rita calls Debra for help and Debra decides to skip her flight to Oregon , with her boyfriend Frank Lundy . Dexter manages to pass Astor and Cody through a small window to the outside , and escapes after breaking down a thin wall . 
 In the season three opener " Our Father , " Rita realizes that she is pregnant with Dexter 's child . In " All In The Family " , after an unsuccessful marriage proposal , Dexter tries to convince Rita that he is looking for more than a convenient merger of finances and parenthood . In " Turning <unk> , " Rita is hospitalized after a medical emergency and Dexter cannot be found . Dexter is hesitant when Rita suggests that they buy a house and move in together . Rita becomes angry at Dexter 's refusal to help organize their wedding . In the third season finale , " Do You Take Dexter Morgan ? " , Rita and Dexter get married . 
 In the fourth season opener , Rita and Dexter are living happily together in a suburban neighborhood with Astor , Cody , and new baby Harrison . In " Remains to be Seen " Dexter is in a terrible car accident , and Rita demands that he give her his keys so that she can drive him . In " If I Had a Hammer , " friction begins to develop in the couple 's relationship , and Dexter seeks guidance from Arthur Mitchell , a family man who appears to balance his responsibilities with his secret life as the " Trinity Killer " . In " Hungry Man , " Rita works hard to prepare Thanksgiving dinner . She shares a kiss with the next door neighbor , Elliot , when she asks if she can use his stove . Dexter arrives for an appointment with Rita for marriage counseling , but gets called to a crime scene as soon as he arrives . Soon after , Rita confesses that she and Elliot kissed , although Dexter tries to brush it off . Rita later admits that she felt hurt that he did not seem to care about her indiscretion . Dexter then punches Elliot and warns him to stay away from Rita , which reassures her that Dexter loves her . In the fourth season finale , Dexter asks her to go out of town so they can have a belated honeymoon ; in reality , Dexter wants to keep her safe from Mitchell , who has learned his real identity and threatened to kill him and his family . After killing Mitchell , Dexter returns home and finds a message from Rita that she returned to pick up her identification for the flight . Dexter finds her dead in the bathtub — Mitchell 's last victim . In the fifth season premiere " My Bad " , Dexter realizes , much to his own surprise , that he genuinely loved Rita and is devastated by her death . Julie Benz reprised her role as Rita as a special guest star in a flashback to her and Dexter 's first date , and as a corpse . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and characterization = = = 
 The character of Bennett was originally invented by Jeff Lindsay for his series of novels about sociopath Dexter Morgan and she is featured in every book in the series . Clyde Phillips and Melissa Rosenberg wanted to bring the character into the television series when casting for the TV version , Dexter . Julie Benz was given a copy of the script in 2005 and was asked to audition for the part . She was surprised because the script was " one of the best pilot scripts [ she ] ever read . " She also read for the part of Debra and joked that she would have auditioned for Dexter 's role . Benz had been a fan of Michael C. Hall from his role in Six Feet Under . She said in an interview with Vanity Fair , " I was such a fan , to the point where my cell @-@ phone ring was the show ’ s theme song . I had to change it once I got cast ! " . Benz performed for four seasons , until her character was killed in the series . 
 Rita is presented in the series as a loving and caring mother . As a result of her abuse from her husband , Rita has no interest in sex , which Dexter is secretly comfortable about . She developed a strong character . At the beginning of season two , the producers approached Benz about character growth . They wanted to make Rita stronger and less shattered than she was in the first season . Benz has said that she was " Very sad to hear that . Because I loved playing her in season one where she was this very damaged , fragile bird who was just struggling so hard to make a better world for her kids , but just could not do it . " 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Rita 's death was alluded to by Dexter producers , who told media outlets " The Getaway " included a series @-@ changing twist , leading to widespread speculation about it . Security precautions were taken to prevent the finale 's secrets from becoming exposed . Network staff members were forced to sign non @-@ disclosure agreements , and decoy scripts were drafted and disseminated to protect the twist ending . In one of the alternatives , Dexter learned about a child murderer escaping from prison , and tried to decide whether to join Rita on vacation or go after the escaped killer . Nobody but essential cast and staff were allowed on the set during filming of the episode , and the scripts and DVDs of the episode were watermarked before they were taken off the set . 
 Clyde Phillips claimed the Dexter staff did not know how the finale would conclude until late in the season , but he said Rita 's death began to feel inevitable as the story evolved . Benz said she had been told that Lithgow knew about it from the beginning of the season . Phillips said the staff felt obligated to do more than kill the Trinity Killer in the final episode , especially because he felt the death of the third season antagonist ( played by Jimmy Smits ) was not handled " as well as we could have " . The writers discussed the idea of having Debra find out about Dexter 's secret life , but decided they could not anticipate how drastically the series would be changed by that . Benz heard rumors from David Zayas that her character would be killed in the episode , but she was not notified until much later . The producers met with her the day before the season finale script was distributed to the cast . She said , " It was a tough meeting . In a bizarre way , it felt like a scene from Defending Your Life . " Benz described the death scene as " very poetic " . Clyde Philips said , " She wasn ’ t happy . She loved being with us . We loved having her with us . She took it ... professionally . She was greatly disappointed . She ’ s a professional . She works in television . She knew that this was a possibility . " 
 The mystery writer J.A. <unk> wrote in the Los Angeles Times , " Yes , it 's a bit of a shock to discover that some of the TV series ' characters who died last season or the season before are back among the living between the covers of Lindsay 's new book . Rita , Dexter 's long @-@ suffering wife who died a terrible death in a bathtub in last year 's season finale , is alive and well and having a baby in Dexter Is Delicious . But my advice to readers is this : Don 't quibble . Get over it . After all , fiction is an alternate universe to begin with , and Lindsay 's dark , comedic fiction is an alternate universe once removed . Patrick McCann and Colin <unk> were very upset about her death in Season 4 of the hit TV show , Dexter , but Colin Whelan did not care for her . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The character of Rita has been well received by critics , who praised Benz ’ s portrayal . Eric Goldman of IGN has said , “ Dexter does a solid job of developing the roles of the supporting cast , with Rita , Deb , Doakes and LaGuerta all getting a good amount of development ” . He added , “ There were a couple of forced moments in " Popping Cherry " , most notably the drug dealer who came to Rita 's house , in broad daylight , demanding money for her ex @-@ husband 's debts ; it was all a bit over the top and cliché . On the other hand , it was interesting to note Dexter 's inaction in that scene , making one wonder if perhaps he fears that any public display of physical defense , even for Rita , might result in him going too far and revealing what he is . " Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post has said , " Rita always felt like the light in that dark show " , and " In the beginning Rita was the vessel through which the audience could love Dexter . " UGO.com placed Rita Bennett 7th on a list of " Top 11 Girlfriends on TV " . Zap2it created a poll entitled " Best Mom " as part of their " Greatest TV Characters " series of polls ; Rita was voted 12th on a list of 14 characters . 
 The TV.com staff were less appreciative , listing her as 7th out of the " Ten Most Annoying Characters on TV " . They noted that " While we mostly love the beatific Julie Benz , her complaining <unk> character has been reduced to little more than whimpering and murmuring about Dexter 's commitment to the family ... " and summarised with " Might Rita die next week ? For the first time since the series began , we really feel like we wouldn 't miss her . " 
 Rita was killed in the fourth season finale " The Getaway . " This was a subject of controversy since the character continuing living in the books . E ! writer Kristin Dos Santos called the ending " horrifying " and said , " This death just might go down as one of the most shocking deaths ever on television . " Claire Zulkey said that the twist ending was intense , and the teleplay was woven with feature several moments that had led him to expect different conclusions . He praised what he expected to be a " re @-@ set " of the series after Rita 's death . Marcia White of The Express @-@ Times declared Dexter " one of the best cable dramas on TV " and called the final scene between Dexter and Rita completely shocking . Mark Dawidziak of The Plain Dealer said the episode was shocking and suspenseful , calling Dexter " a series that leaves you guessing as the psychological ambiguities run deeper and darker " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Julie Benz has been well received for her portrayal of Rita Bennett , winning and being nominated for a multitude of awards . These including one Satellite Award win for Best Supporting Actress and a Saturn Award win for Best Supporting Actress . She was also nominated for a Scream Award for Best Horror Actress and was jointly nominated , in 2009 and 2010 , for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Ensemble in a Drama Series . 
 = BlackBerry Bold 9700 = 
 The BlackBerry Bold 9700 ( codenamed Onyx ) is a smartphone developed by telecommunication company BlackBerry , formerly known as Research in Motion ( RIM ) . The second device in the Bold series , it succeeds the model 9000 and precedes the Bold <unk> . The device , which runs on the BlackBerry OS , features several improvements over the 9000 , including introduction of an optical trackpad , and a reduced size overall . Other visual changes were carried out in order to appeal both men and women . 
 Upon release , the BlackBerry Bold 9700 received mostly positive reviews from critics . The smartphone was commended for its design and most changes were favored , such as the trackpad . However , critics were ambivalent towards the dated software and the slow browser , and some concluded that the device did not set itself apart from previous models . 
 The BlackBerry Bold 9700 was succeeded by the upgraded version , the BlackBerry Bold <unk> , introduced in October 2010 . The BlackBerry Bold 9700 was discontinued in December 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Rumors and prototypes = = = 
 Starting April 2009 , various rumors circulated regarding the smartphone and other reportedly planned models for the BlackBerry line @-@ up . The first rumor reported that a trio of devices were being developed as high @-@ end smartphones , codenamed Onyx , Driftwood and Magnum . All of them were rumored to contain a " hybrid concept " with a touch screen and a QWERTY keyboard , with similar prototype designs but destined to different networks . Onyx was rumored to be released only for AT & T markets . 
 An image of one of Onyx 's early prototypes surfaced online , with a similar hardware to the 9000 's , including the same trackball . That prototype was early reviewed by website <unk> , which confirmed diverse details about the device , such as the 480 × 360 display , the 3 @.@ 2 megapixels camera and connectivity features — Wi @-@ Fi and GPS . The same day , other information regarding technicalities were revealed on a surfaced AT & T <unk> about the smartphone . Already known as the BlackBerry <unk> and having started production , a photo of the device surfaced , though it replaced the trackball with a trackpad . A previous prototype with a trackball was put up for sale on eBay , where it passed the mark of $ 600 ; four days later , a pre @-@ launch list of then @-@ upcoming smartphones for AT & T surfaced online on August 9 , 2009 , which listed the device . A T @-@ Mobile press image was leaked on September 8 . 
 = = = Announcement and release = = = 
 On October 7 , 2009 , technology website Engadget reported that mobile carriers T @-@ Mobile and AT & T would publicly announce the Bold 9700 on October 21 , 2009 . Two days later , the website posted that rumors were circulating on the Internet , which predicted that the smartphone would be released to the United States T @-@ Mobile on November 11 , 2009 . The aforementioned carrier was then revealed to be sending invitations to " executive briefing " events — taking place in Los Angeles on November 3 , 2009 ; in New York City . T @-@ Mobile Germany announced on October 15 , 2009 that the Bold 9700 would be released in that country in November . 
 The device was officially presented in Bochum , Germany — where it was developed — on October 21 , 2009 . The launch event was hosted by BlackBerry ( then known as RIM ) vice chairman Mike <unk> . Boy Genius Report reported on November 4 of that year that the smartphone would be available early five days later for " select business costumers " . On November 16 , it was officially released to the general public in the United States under T @-@ Mobile ; AT & T released it on November 22 . A new white version of the Bold 9700 was hinted at by Research In Motion ( RIM ) ' s Thai website , which posted an image of that version . On April 7 , 2010 , it was exclusively released on T @-@ Mobile Netherlands . It was first released in North America by operator Rogers Communications in Canada , followed by its first release in the United States by T @-@ Mobile , in May 2010 , at a retail price of $ 100 with a contract . The AT & T release occurred on the 26th of that month . A special " Team Canada " edition of the Bold 9700 was also given to Future Shop employees once they reached a certain number of sales . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The smartphone considerably reduces its predecessor 's sizes , measuring 4 @.@ 3 by 2 @.@ 4 by 6 inches ( 10 @.@ 92 , 6 @.@ 09 and 15 @.@ 24 centimeters , respectively ) . The Bold 9700 has a 624 MHz processor and a <unk> Flash memory . The device uses a 2 @.@ 44 inch <unk> ( approximately 6 @.@ 1 cm ) non @-@ touch LCD display at a resolution of 480 × 360 pixels . The resolution of the display was compared to that of HTC Magic , as it has also <unk> quality . The model changes its predecessor 's trackball to an optical trackpad , with simple functionalities such as swiping the thumb to move it and press it to make a selection . This change prevented problems including the accumulation of dust behind the trackball . Similarly to previous BlackBerry models , BlackBerry 9700 has a 35 @-@ key QWERTY @-@ type physical keyboard , which is smaller than that of Bold 9000 . On the top of the device , there are two buttons that respectively lock or mute it ; on the right side of it , rubberized keys are found , which can either control the audio volume or the music player ; further down , there is a camera shutter key . Cosmetic changes including the addition of a leatherette battery cover were carried out in order to appeal both sexes . 
 The 3 @.@ 2 @-@ megapixels camera is accompanied by a LED flash , and allows <unk> and video recording . More features include a microSD slot and a headphone port . Relatively to its connectivity , the BlackBerry Bold 9700 has support for 3G HSDPA networks and integrates Wi @-@ Fi and GPS . The T @-@ Mobile version of the Bold 9700 supports UMA technology — unlicensed mobile access , which allows making voice calls with a Wi @-@ Fi network and not just with a <unk> network . 
 = = = Software = = = 
 Upon release , the smartphone came with version 5 of BlackBerry 's operating system , the BlackBerry OS . For the Bold 9700 , the system came with upgrades , specifically for Messaging , Calendar and Browser applications ; support for BlackBerry Enterprise Server ( BES ) and BlackBerry Internet Service , the latter allowing having up to 10 personal or business @-@ oriented POP3 or <unk> e @-@ mail accounts registered . The software also comes with " personal information management tools " and pre @-@ loaded applications , such as a calculator , a clock , a task list and Documents To Go ; along with more downloads found in BlackBerry World ( then BlackBerry App World ) , though extra applications can only be downloaded to the smartphone 's main memory and not to the microSD memory card . The phone 's browser contains a faster JavaScript and enabled CSS processing , which allows faster page loading ; it also supports widgets , streaming and Google Gears . The device also features speed dialing . The media player , which has basic functionalities such as searching , creating playlists and shuffle and repeat modes , supports MP3 , WMA , WMA <unk> , AAC , AAC + and <unk> + songs ; it also plays <unk> , WMV , and H.264 video files which can be played in a full @-@ screen mode . Users ' personal libraries can be synced from desktop / laptop media players through BlackBerry Media Sync . 
 An updated version of the operating system , BlackBerry 6 , was announced by Research In Motion on August 3 , 2010 . It was initially announced for the Bold 9700 , Bold <unk> and Pearl 3G models , while it debuted on the BlackBerry Torch smartphone . It improves several functionalities of BlackBerry 5 , such as : icons on the home screen are arranged in five different views , which the user can view separately by swiping the trackpad ; a search tool ( " Universal Search " ) ; an improved web browser , based on layout engine software WebKit , which contains diverse tabs that can be open simultaneously ; pre @-@ loaded social networking apps and enabling " rich content " on text messages , which are displayed in a chat @-@ like format . It was released by T @-@ Mobile on March 4 , 2011 ; AT & T released it for Bold 9700 and Curve 3G models on April 29 , 2011 ; 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Gareth Beavis of TechRadar awarded the smartphone four stars out of five . He pointed out that users who would upgrade to the phone from its predecessor could experience difficulties with typing , due to the reduced size of the keyboard , which he called " a little cramped for [ his taste ] " . Beavis stated that he liked its " solid build quality [ , which ] cradles a battery with unrivalled lasting ability " , the screen quality and the new optical trackpad . However , he opined that the device " still feels like the <unk> of old " and felt it needed to be upgraded , along with its software features . Laura June from Engadget said that the " device feels nice in the hand " due to the " smaller , more sleek form factor of the whole package " . Unlike Beavis from TechRadar , she felt " typing on [ the keyboard ] is a joy " , while she agreed that " the larger @-@ handed among us [ could feel ] pretty cramped " . She wrote : 
 And , at the end of the day , that 's one thing we can 't get past — serious BlackBerry enthusiasts will tell you that the interface is doing just fine , and there are plenty of reasons to get hooked on these devices . For us , however , the BlackBerry UI is showing its age , and ultimately , beautiful hardware aside , this device is essentially exactly the same as every other BlackBerry . 
 Digital Trends ' Nick <unk> referred to the Bold 9700 as a " recommended product " . Awarding it four stars out of five , he stated that the overall " solid feel of the phone helps " stand out an " overall aura of quality " . He found that the keyboard was " bordering on too small " , although he named it the " finest " keyboard that can be " fold [ ed ] into a space this size " . He also called the screen " amazing " and its call voice quality " excellent " . Concluding the review , <unk> compared the smartphone to a Curve <unk> with a better battery , keyboard , a trackpad and what was missing on that phone — 3G Internet coverage . He wrote : " Although the Bold 9700 lacks the frills of an iPhone or Palm Pre , for utilitarian business users , it ’ s one of the most polished smartphones on the market today . " 
 Jamie Lendino and Sascha <unk> from PC Magazine , who respectively reviewed the AT & T and T @-@ Mobile versions , gave the smartphone a rating of four out of five points . The former described the Bold 9700 as " powerful , comfortable , and even somewhat chic " and its keyboard as " comfortable , quiet , and accurate " . Emphasizing the quality of the voice calls , Lendino wrote they were " crisp , clear , and with plenty of gain in both direction " . She regarded the Internet browser as " poor " , noting that some pages take more than one minute to fully load ; she also claimed the video playback was problematic . Sascha <unk> named it " evolutionary , not revolutionary " , having a similar opinion to Lendino though remarking that the video player ran with no problems and emphasizing the photo camera power . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 371 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 371 ( designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR <unk> ) is a 23 @.@ 5 mi ( 37 @.@ 8 km ) long state highway located in Susquehanna and Wayne Counties . The western terminus is at an intersection with Route 171 and Route 374 near the community of Union Dale in Herrick Center . The eastern terminus is at the New York state line in Damascus Township where it crosses the Delaware River on the Cochecton – Damascus Bridge . It continues into Sullivan County , New York , as County Route 114 ( CR 114 ) , which heads east toward New York State Route 97 ( NY 97 ) . 
 Route 371 originates as a road cut in 1791 and later used for the Newburgh and Cochecton Turnpike in 1806 . The new turnpike was finished in 1811 and renamed as the Great Bend and Newburgh Turnpike in accordance for the extension to Great Bend , Pennsylvania . The turnpike was abandoned in 1853 . Route 371 was originally designated along the turnpike route in 1936 by the Department of Highways from Great Bend to Damascus . The route remained intact until 1954 , when the route was truncated back to Route 171 in Herrick Center . The route was replaced by Route 374 and Route 848 in 1961 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 371 begins at an intersection with PA 171 and PA 374 in the community of Herrick Center . The route heads eastward , progressing through rural forests north of Union Dale . PA 371 begins in Susquehanna County , but just a short distance from Herricks Center , crosses into Wayne County . The route heads to the east , but soon begins to curve to the north , entering the community of Belmont Corners . PA 371 becomes known as the Great Bend Turnpike , leaving Belmont Corners at an intersection with PA 670 ( Belmont Turnpike ) . At the intersection , Route 371 and Route 670 becomes concurrent for a distance . The routes head eastward through the forests in northern Wayne County . A short distance later , Routes 371 and 670 enter the community of Pleasant Mount , where the alignment becomes surrounded by residences . 
 In Pleasant Mount , Routes 371 and 670 head eastward as the main street in the community until a split at the eastern end of the community . There , PA 371 continues eastward along the Great Bend Turnpike while Route 670 forks to the southeast along the Bethany Turnpike . PA 371 heads eastward through fields until an intersection with " Crossroad " , where it turns to the southeast towards the center of Mount Pleasant Township . The highway continues on the southeast pattern for a distance , past a large farm and into more forests nearby . At an intersection with Bush Road , PA 371 changes direction , heading to the northwest along the Turnpike . A short distance later , the highway heads through the rural farmlands until entering the community of Niagara . In the small community , the highway intersects with PA 247 , where they start a short concurrency . The two routes head northward for a short distance , until PA 371 splits to the east . 
 PA 371 continues eastward through the rural regions , continuing its way through Mount Pleasant Township . The highway intersects with Township Road 613 , where the highway makes a hairpin turn to the south . The route continues to the southeast into a denser portion of Lebanon Township . The route continues for a distance to the east until an intersection with Lebanon Township Road 614 in the community of Cold Spring . In Cold Spring , PA 371 turns to the southeast through deep forests until an intersection with Township Roads 612 and 617 . There , the forests break , and the route continues to the southeast . A short distance later , PA 371 intersects with PA 191 ( Hancock Highway ) in the community of <unk> . There , the route begins to follow the alignment of the Newburgh and Cochecton Turnpike . PA 371 continues through rural farmlands until a hairpin turn in the deep forests nearby . 
 After leaving the deep forests , the route re @-@ emerges in Damascus Township 's community of West Damascus . The route heads to the southeast even further into <unk> , where it passes two large ponds and several athletic fields . At the end of the eastern pond , PA 371 turns to the northeast crossing a creek and into the community of Tyler Hill . The route heads to the northeast through a small developed portion of the community before turning to the southeast and soon to the northeast again . The route continues to the northeast for a short distance before reaching the Delaware River , where PA 371 ends at the New York state line on the Cochecton – Damascus Bridge and continues into Sullivan County as CR 114 . 
 = = History = = 
 Records indicate that the alignment of PA 371 was first constructed as a cut from the Delaware River to the community of Great Bend , Pennsylvania , in 1791 through Wayne and Susquehanna Counties . In 1801 , the state legislature of New York and Pennsylvania brought up the proposal for the Newburgh and Cochecton Turnpike ( later the Great Bend and Newburgh Turnpike ) to connect the Hudson River to the Delaware River . Although the route was finished in New York , the portion in Pennsylvania was not legislated until March 29 , 1804 . Construction through Wayne and Susquehanna Counties commenced in 1806 , with completion of the roadway coming in 1811 . At that point , the turnpike was extended onto the cut in Pennsylvania to the Susquehanna River . The turnpike was used for transportation of farmers ' goods and stock along with a route for pioneers to use for heading westward . After construction of the original Cochecton – Damascus Bridge in 1817 ( and later in 1821 ) , the area around the bridge became a bustling community . The alignment of what is now PA 371 eventually became littered with a large rate of development , with nineteenth @-@ century style buildings constructed in Damascus . The turnpike itself fared poorly later on , and was abandoned in 1853 . Although the roadway itself was abandoned , the turnpike corporation that was supposed to maintain the roadway remained intact until 1868 , when it was dissolved . Even afterwards , the roadway remained the only physical route in the area until at least the 1890s . 
 On August 14 , 1992 , the stretch of PA 371 from Galilee Road to the Delaware River was entered into the National Register of Historic Places as the Damascus Historic District . The record for the National Register included the roadway and forty different structures along the roadway for its historical significance . 
 Originally , a short portion of PA 371 was part of PA 170 in the 1928 mass numbering of state highways in Pennsylvania . 83 years after the abandonment of the Great Bend and Newburgh Turnpike ( 1936 ) , the Pennsylvania Department of Highways took over the alignment of the highway for the designation of Legislative PA 371 . The route at that point began at an intersection of U.S. Route 11 in Great Bend to the state line on the Delaware River in Damascus . The route remained intact along the turnpike for only eighteen years when in 1954 , the Department of Highways truncated PA 371 back to the intersection with Route 171 in the community of Herrick Center . Seven years later , the Department of Highways designated both PA 374 on the alignment from Royal to Herrick Center and PA 848 from the community of New Milford ( south of Great Bend ) to Gibson . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Marcus Trescothick = 
 Marcus Edward Trescothick , MBE ( / <unk> / ; born 25 December 1975 in Keynsham , Somerset ) is an English cricketer . He plays first @-@ class cricket for Somerset County Cricket Club , and represented England in 76 Test matches and 123 One Day Internationals . A left @-@ handed opening batsman , he made his first @-@ class debut for Somerset in 1993 and quickly established himself as a regular member of the team . Trescothick made his One Day International ( ODI ) debut seven years later , against Zimbabwe in July 2000 . His Test debut , against the West Indies , followed in August . Although former England captain Nasser Hussain likened Trescothick 's build and batting temperament to that of Graham Gooch , his stroke play is more reminiscent of David Gower . An aggressive opener : as of March 2014 he holds the record for the most ODI centuries of any English player , and for the fastest half @-@ century in English Twenty20 cricket . Trescothick is also an accomplished slip fielder and occasional right @-@ handed medium pace bowler who has kept wicket for England in five ODIs , and deputised as England captain for two Test matches and ten ODIs . 
 Trescothick was an automatic choice for England between 2000 and 2006 , before a stress @-@ related illness threatened his career and forced him to pull out of the national squad . He began the process of rebuilding his career with Somerset in 2007 , and scored two double @-@ centuries that season . However , he continued to remain uneasy about returning to international cricket , and announced his retirement from internationals in March 2008 , opting to continue playing at county level for Somerset . Since then , media speculation has continued as to a possible international return – however , Trescothick has repeatedly voiced his intent to remain in retirement , and has suffered recurrences of his condition in both 2008 and 2009 when Somerset toured abroad . He nevertheless continues to play for Somerset into 2016 , working as a commentator and analyst for Sky Sports in the off @-@ season . 
 = = Early years and personal life = = 
 Trescothick was immersed into cricket from an early age . His father , Martyn , played two matches for Somerset 's Second XI and was a good amateur player , appearing for Bristol and District Cricket Association between 1967 and 1976 . They played together in competitive Western League matches while his mother , Lin , made the club teas . He was educated at the Sir Bernard Lovell School in <unk> Common near Bristol , where his exceptional scores for the school were rewarded with a Somerset contract in 1993 . He was nicknamed Tresco and Banger , the latter deriving from his diet as a young player : 
 My diet was sausages then , in no particular order , sausages , chips , sausages , toast , sausages , beans , sausages , cheese , sausages , eggs , and the occasional sausage . 
 Trescothick married Hayley Rowse in Trull , Somerset , on 24 January 2004 , and the couple have two daughters , Ellie Louise ( born April 2005 ) and Millie Grace ( born January 2008 ) . He lives in Taunton , and also owns property in Barbados , near similar properties owned by Michael Vaughan and Andrew Flintoff . Trescothick is an honorary vice @-@ president of Bristol City F.C. , as well as being a keen golfer . Outside sport , he has been recognised with a Taunton Deane Citizenship Award , and was granted the Freedom of his home town , Keynsham . 
 = = Early domestic career = = 
 Trescothick 's first full season at Somerset in 1994 was one of his best , where he scored a total of 925 runs , including two centuries and eight half @-@ centuries at an impressive batting average of 48 @.@ 63 . Having played for the English U @-@ 19 cricket team against the West Indies in 1993 , and Sri Lanka and India in 1994 , Trescothick was named captain for the two Under @-@ 19 series against West Indies and South Africa in 1995 . His career aggregate of 1 @,@ 032 runs for England U @-@ 19 is second only to John Crawley 's 1 @,@ 058 . 
 Trescothick was not as successful in domestic cricket in 1995 , although there were still some highlights including an innings of 151 against Northamptonshire ( a third of his season 's total ) , and a hat @-@ trick , including the wicket of century @-@ maker Adam Gilchrist , for Somerset against Young Australia . Trescothick 's England Under @-@ 19 form was still excellent , averaging 74 @.@ 62 with the bat in six matches . His Under @-@ 19 team mates would often mock him for wearing an England blazer after his matches ; Trescothick would reply by saying that " it might be the closest I get to playing for England " . 
 The following five years were mixed for Trescothick . Averaging about 30 runs per innings , he was often criticised for a lack of foot movement . David Gower described Trescothick 's technique by saying " he does not need to move a long way but needs to move enough . When he is playing well ... he is very good at transferring weight . When he is not playing well , his feet get stuck " . However , Trescothick was awarded the NBC Denis Compton Award for Somerset 's most promising young county player in the 1996 and 1997 seasons . In 1997 , Somerset Second XI were set 612 to win by Warwickshire Second XI , and Trescothick scored 322 to bring the Seconds to 605 . 
 In 1999 , Trescothick impressed Glamorgan coach Duncan Fletcher in a county match at Taunton , by scoring 167 in a low @-@ scoring match where the next @-@ highest innings was 50 . When England opening batsman Nick Knight sustained a finger injury in 2000 , Fletcher , who had been appointed England coach , called on Trescothick to make his England debut in the NatWest Series against Zimbabwe and the West Indies . Trescothick 's regular selection for England meant that he was rarely available for domestic selection between 2000 and 2006 , often playing only a few matches for Somerset at the start of the season . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Debut and centuries on maiden tour = = = 
 Trescothick participated in two England A tours during the winter of 1999 , but his full One Day International debut came against Zimbabwe at The Oval on 9 July 2000 , when he scored 79 . He continued his good form in the tournament with a Man of the Match @-@ winning 87 not out against the West Indies at Chester @-@ le @-@ street , amassing 288 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 00 and taking two wickets against Zimbabwe at Old Trafford . 
 As a result of his good form in the NatWest series , Trescothick was given his Test match debut later that summer in the third Test against the West Indies at Old Trafford . He displayed a calm temperament when England lost early wickets , scoring 66 and forming a partnership of 179 with Alec Stewart . Journalist <unk> Petropoulos observed that there was " poise and durability ... just as there had been enterprise and verve to his impressive start in the one @-@ day arena . " He ended the Test series with an average of 47 @.@ 50 . 
 England began the 2000 – 2001 winter tour with the 2000 ICC <unk> Trophy at Nairobi Gymkhana Club . Trescothick did not score highly in the tournament , and England were knocked out at the quarter @-@ final stage against South Africa . Trescothick was named the Professional Cricketers ' Association Player of the Year for his performances for Somerset throughout 2000 . 
 Trescothick 's maiden international century came against the Sindh Governor 's XI in October 2000 , during the first warm @-@ up match to the Pakistan series . Trescothick reached his highest score ( 71 ) of the three Test matches in the opening innings of the first Test . He took his sole Test wicket in the third Test , when Ashley Giles caught the Pakistan opener Imran Nazir . 
 Trescothick started the Sri Lanka tour with a century against a Sri Lanka ' Colts XI ' . He was the top scorer in both innings of the first Test with 122 and 57 , although this was overshadowed by Marvan Atapattu 's 201 not out in Sri Lanka 's innings . Trescothick averaged 41 @.@ 33 in the Test series , but only 16 @.@ 00 in the three subsequent ODIs . 
 England played two Test matches against Pakistan in June 2001 . Although Trescothick scored 117 in the second Test , it was not enough for England to win the match . His ODI form improved at the start of the 2001 NatWest Series against Australia and Pakistan , with scores of 69 and 137 respectively . However , his series ended with two consecutive ducks , and England lost all their matches in the tournament . 
 = = = England 's leading batsman , 2001 – 02 = = = 
 Although Trescothick was England 's second highest run scorer in the 2001 Ashes series , he displayed a tendency to give his wicket away when " well set " . England lost the series 4 – 1 , with the majority of the England batsmen 's contributions being overshadowed by Mark Butcher 's 173 not out to win the fourth Test . Trescothick 's apparent inability to make major scores was again apparent in the 2001 – 02 One Day International series in Zimbabwe , where he only passed 50 on one occasion despite scoring consistently . He also captained the side for the first time in this series , deputising for the injured Nasser Hussain . 
 Trescothick really came into his own on the winter tour of India in 2001 . The three @-@ Test series saw him averaging 48 @.@ 00 , with a highest score of 99 . He was England 's best batsman in the ODI series , averaging 53 @.@ 00 with a strike rate of over 100 . He scored a century in the first ODI , although England lost by 22 runs . He established a reputation for keeping his composure while the rest of the team were failing ; at this point , none of Trescothick 's four international centuries had resulted in an England win . He was also man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match in the final ODI , setting up an England victory , with 95 runs from 80 balls . This tour established Trescothick 's reputation as one of England 's best batsmen against spin bowling : according to David Gower , he was " judging line and length very well " . Indian Cricket named him one of their five Cricketers of the Year for 2002 . The following tour of New Zealand was less successful for Trescothick , only once reaching double figures in a poor ODI series , coupled with an average Test match performance . 
 Trescothick had been playing well in 2002 , scoring 161 in the Sri Lankan series and being awarded the Player of the Series in the tri @-@ nation NatWest Series ( including a century in the final ) , until his season was cut short when he fractured his thumb while fielding . He returned for the fourth Test against India , scoring two half @-@ centuries . Trescothick had mixed fortunes in the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy ; he followed his century in the NatWest final with a man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match winning 119 against Zimbabwe , but failed to score as England lost to India and exited the tournament . 
 In October , Trescothick was one of 11 players awarded " central contracts " by the ECB , which compensate a player 's county for their lack of domestic appearances . 
 Trescothick was overshadowed by Michael Vaughan during the 2002 – 03 Ashes series , averaging only 26 @.@ 10 with a top score of 72 in comparison to Vaughan 's average of 63 @.@ 30 and three centuries . Trescothick averaged 31 @.@ 60 across 10 matches in the VB Series , but England were outplayed by Australia throughout the tour . Trescothick failed to excel in the 2003 World Cup as England failed to qualify for the knock @-@ out stages . In his five matches , Trescothick 's top score was 58 against Namibia , with a tournament average of 23 @.@ 20 . 
 = = = Continued success in 2003 and 2004 = = = 
 Trescothick played well against a weak Zimbabwe side in the two @-@ Test series in May – June 2003 , and scored an unbeaten century in the three ODIs against Pakistan averaging over 100 . His form continued in the 2003 NatWest Series , with 114 not out against South Africa . The opening stand with Vikram Solanki of 200 runs was the highest first @-@ wicket partnership for England and provided the first instance of both England openers scoring centuries in the same innings . Trescothick maintained his form in the South Africa Test matches ; a career @-@ best 219 at The Oval completed a successful series in which he averaged 60 @.@ 87 . 
 In Bangladesh , scores in the nineties against both the President 's XI and Bangladesh A were followed by a century in the first Test , and 60 in the second . He scored one half century in the three ODIs , although England only used five batsman in the comfortable victories . England played poorly against Sri Lanka , with Trescothick finding it hard to build a large innings . He attempted to take control of the match with 70 at Colombo , as England tried to get something from the series , but was also criticised for his poor catching . 
 His form in the tour to the West Indies in March and April 2004 was mixed . After several low scores in the Test series — Trescothick started with only 20 runs from his first five innings — he reached two half @-@ centuries , but failed to make a substantial match @-@ winning contribution . This poor touring form may have been the start of the troubles that would rule him out of international cricket in the future . Trescothick said , " The hardest thing for me has been the pitches . So far nets and the matches have been on average surfaces and runs have been hard work ... In England you get used to good practice surfaces so the rhythm of batting comes pretty easy [ sic ] . " However , he topped the England batting averages in the 7 @-@ match one @-@ day series , with 267 runs including 130 in the 5th ODI and 82 from 57 balls in the 7th . 
 Back in England , Trescothick was called upon to captain England after Michael Vaughan sustained a knee injury . Although other England captains had seemed to suffer a lack of batting form , the extra authority did not affect Trescothick , and he forged a good partnership with debutant Andrew Strauss against New Zealand . This understanding developed in the second Test with a first @-@ wicket partnership of 153 ; Trescothick went on to score 132 , his sixth Test century . Trescothick 's partnerships with Strauss were to average 52 @.@ 35 in 52 innings . His first century against the West Indies followed in the second Test , and Trescothick became the first player to make centuries in both innings of a Test match at Edgbaston , and the ninth England player to score a century in each innings of a Test match . Trescothick was again England 's best One Day International batsman in the 2004 ICC Champions Trophy , scoring 261 runs in just four innings , including a century in the final ; he also took his fourth ODI wicket . 
 = = = 2004 and 2005 Ashes = = = 
 The 2004 – 5 tour of Zimbabwe caused several players to voice their concerns about the Robert Mugabe regime , the security issues in the country , and the standard of the Zimbabwean side . Steve Harmison was the first to boycott the tour for " political and sporting reasons " , and Flintoff was reported to be considering taking a moral stand himself . The England Chairman of Selectors David Graveney denied that the selectors would leave out players unhappy with touring Zimbabwe and would put their absences down to injury . Flintoff and Trescothick were , however , " rested " allowing Kevin Pietersen to make his debut . 
 Trescothick used the time to prepare for the following series in South Africa , even took up yoga in attempt to bolster his performances abroad . In December 2004 , he made 85 not out against an N.F. Oppenheimer XI in South Africa . A partnership of 152 with Strauss in the opening Test against South Africa was followed by a partnership of 273 in the second , in which they both scored over 130 . This was a record opening partnership at Durban and England 's first 200 opening stand since Gooch and Mike Atherton in 1991 . Before this , the difference between his home and abroad average was over 20 , and his third overseas century went a long way to counter this . With regard to his touring difficulties , Trescothick stated " I wouldn 't say I 've put it to rest , but I 've made a big step forward to putting it to rest . It 's a mental battle for me , something I have to deal with and work hard to try to understand what is different . He made a further improvement with an even larger score of 180 , as England won the fourth Test . After batting slowly with Ashley Giles , the fall of Hoggard 's wicket soon afterwards spurred Trescothick to start " unleashing ferocious shots " , setting up an unlikely victory with Steve Harmison partnering him . In the matches preceding the 2005 Ashes series , England wrapped up two easy victories against Bangladesh . Trescothick scored 194 in the first Test , and 151 in the second . He also scored 100 not out against Bangladesh in his 100th ODI , surpassing Gooch 's record of eight ODI centuries for England . 
 Trescothick fared better in 2005 than in the previous Ashes series , becoming the second highest run scorer in the series ( behind the prolific Kevin Pietersen ) . During the third Test , he became the fastest player to reach 5 @,@ 000 runs in Test cricket , and also achieved the notable feat of scoring over 1 @,@ 000 Test runs in a calendar year for the third consecutive year : 1 @,@ 004 in 2003 , 1 @,@ 003 in 2004 , and 1 @,@ 323 in 2005 . He also had the dubious honour of becoming both Glenn McGrath 's 500th and Shane Warne 's 600th Test wicket during the series . Trescothick was named as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year for his achievements in 2005 , and was awarded an MBE in the 2006 New Year honours list with the rest of the English team . 
 For the Test series against Pakistan , Trescothick was offered the captaincy once more due to an injury to Vaughan . He was unsure whether to accept but realised that as " unofficial second in command ... I believe it was the right thing to step up . It is exciting to think I could be in charge for a few weeks ... I know there is a chance I maybe won 't be a one @-@ match wonder this time – it could be the whole series , but being very close to Michael , I 've seen the things it [ captaincy ] does to you . " As it transpired , Trescothick scored 193 in the first innings ( although England lost the match ) , and Vaughan returned for the second Test . Trescothick had considered leaving the tour early when his father @-@ in @-@ law had a serious accident , but stayed in Pakistan as fellow opener Andrew Strauss returned home to attend the birth of his first child . 
 = = Illness and depression throughout 2006 = = 
 During England 's tour of India in February 2006 , Trescothick abruptly returned home citing personal reasons . He later blamed a virus . 
 Trescothick returned to Test cricket in May , scoring 106 against Sri Lanka to become the first Test centurion of the 2006 English season . The century proved to be the high point of Trescothick 's Test summer , however , as he reached a half @-@ century just once in the subsequent six Tests against Sri Lanka and Pakistan . This run of form was lifted later in the year by two ODI centuries , one apiece against Ireland and Sri Lanka . In September , he withdrew from the remaining ODIs against Pakistan and asked not to be considered for the forthcoming ICC Champions Trophy squad because of a stress @-@ related illness . It was later believed likely that Trescothick had been suffering from clinical depression , which was also the cause of much of his trouble throughout 2006 . 
 Returning once again to the international arena , Trescothick was included in the squad for the 2006 – 07 Ashes in Australia , and played in the first two tour matches against the Prime Minister 's XI and New South Wales . On 14 November , following the match against New South Wales , England announced Trescothick was flying home due to a " recurrence of a stress @-@ related illness " . Geoffrey Boycott later stated that depression amongst cricketers is rarely documented , but with the current congested ICC schedule , player " burnout " and similar illnesses were becoming more commonplace . 
 Trescothick 's uncertainty over his place in the England squad drew varied criticism . However , he also received support from respected players , including Somerset captain Justin Langer , Alec Stewart , Mike Gatting , and Bob Woolmer . 
 = = Recovery then international retirement in 2007 — 2008 = = 
 Trescothick ended some speculation about his international career by announcing that he would like to be considered for a place in the national side in the future . England 's management staff continued to support him , and named him in the initial 25 @-@ man squad for the 2007 Test series against the West Indies . Having recovered from a double hernia operation , and proving himself fit for the start of the county season , Trescothick began his comeback to cricket by scoring 256 from 117 balls in a 50 over match against Devon on 8 April 2007 , helping Somerset to 502 – 4 off their 50 overs . 
 His comeback to the County Championship continued with a 44 @-@ ball half @-@ century against Middlesex on 19 April 2007 , while in May he hit a career @-@ best 284 against Northamptonshire , although Trescothick stated then that he did not feel ready for an international Test match position . Trescothick followed this double century with a knock of 76 off 35 balls against Northamptonshire , with five fours and seven sixes . 
 Debate over Trescothick 's place in the England squad continued amid an end @-@ of @-@ series reshuffle in the England batting lineup . This included the dropping of fellow opener Strauss from the one @-@ day side , and the rise of Alastair Cook as a Test and ODI opener for England . Trescothick stated that he would see how he progresses before committing to the international scene : " Of course I 'd love to play for England again .... Clearly , if I want to continue my career I have to undertake another tour . But for now , if and when I get back to full fitness and I think I am OK and ready to play , I 'll make myself available for England . " He added that he was " desperate to play for England again " but was waiting until he was " as convinced as I can be that I am ready to take on the challenge of international cricket " . 
 In July 2007 , Trescothick was named in the preliminary squad for the Twenty20 World Championship in South Africa , with the full squad to be confirmed on 11 August . However , Trescothick pulled himself out of the squad before the final confirmation date , stating that " [ I am ] now clear that I should take more time to complete my recovery " . The England selectors confirmed that they remained in favour of including Trescothick at some point , looking " forward to his making himself available again for England when the time is right " . Trescothick , however , said that he knows England cannot wait for him forever , and on 10 September 2007 he went into his second year without an England contract . 
 Meanwhile , his good domestic form continued with a fast 146 and 69 not out during a four @-@ day match against Northamptonshire , giving Somerset an unlikely victory . A score of 49 from 83 balls followed in the four @-@ day match against Nottinghamshire , and a score of 84 from 79 balls against Durham was followed by a man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match winning 124 which saw Somerset promoted to the first division of the NatWest Pro40 . Of his 2007 season , Somerset director of cricket Brian Rose stated that Trescothick had made " terrific progress " . Trescothick maintained prolific form throughout the season despite a foot injury , scoring 1 @,@ 343 runs at an average of 61 @.@ 04 to guide Somerset to the Division 2 championship . He was awarded a benefit year in 2008 , following on from successful surgery on an injured metatarsal . He remains firm , however , on his decision to stay out of the England team for the sake of his health . 
 On 15 March 2008 , Somerset announced that Trescothick had decided to pull out of the county 's pre @-@ season tour of the UAE after suffering a recurrence of his condition , leading many to speculate that , given this latest setback , it seemed increasing unlikely that Trescothick would represent England again . Somerset 's director of cricket Brian Rose , however , stated that he didn 't " see the setback as a major problem " and that Trescothick would be able to play for Somerset in the following season , and " for many years " after . He would never return to international level , however , and announced his retirement from international cricket on 22 March 2008 . He stated that he had " tried on numerous occasions to make it back to the international stage and it has proved a lot more difficult than [ he ] expected " and repeated his desire to continue playing domestic cricket . He later stated that it was his decision to withdraw from Somerset 's tour of Dubai that prompted his decision . 
 In response , Angus Fraser wrote : " Obviously , it is sad to see such a dedicated , patriotic and likeable man forced to give up something that patently meant so much to him , but the inner torment that came with attempting to overcome the mental illness that prevented him from touring with England for more than two years had to be brought to an end . It was doing Trescothick and his family no good at all . Representing your country is a source of huge pride , but there are far more important things in life " . Fraser also wrote : " It was in Pakistan that Marcus Trescothick 's mental illness began to stir and the opener has not played an overseas test since " . 
 After an excellent domestic season for Somerset , including 184 in a 40 @-@ over match against Gloucestershire ( his highest List A score ) , Trescothick released his autobiography , Coming Back to Me , on 1 September 2008 , explaining that he had suffered from anxiety attacks since the age of 10 , and that playing domestic cricket meant that , at all times , he was only ever three hours away from his family . He said , 
 The book has been widely commended for its honesty , with Trescothick 's difficulties drawing comparison with Harold Gimblett 's similar mental health problems . Despite attempts by Pietersen to entice Trescothick back into the England set @-@ up , Trescothick confirmed that his decision has been made and that he is putting his health and family first . In November 2008 Coming Back to Me was named the 2008 William Hill Sports Book of the Year . In April 2009 , Trescothick turned down another request from new England captain Andrew Strauss to consider making himself available for England 's World Twenty20 Championship campaign . 
 = = Later county career = = 
 Trescothick continued his career with Somerset into 2009 , having received a benefit year from his county , as well as a new stand in his name . During his benefit year he averaged 46 @.@ 59 in the 4 @-@ day game , including three centuries , and he started 2009 with 52 against Warwickshire . It was also announced on 20 April 2009 that Trescothick has become a patron of Anxiety UK , following the revelations of his biography . As the season progressed , Trescothick found success in all forms of the game . On 1 June , he scored 69 from 47 balls as part of a 129 @-@ partnership with Craig Kieswetter against Glamorgan ; on 3 June he scored 52 against Worcestershire ; he was stumped five short of his second Championship century of the season against Lancashire ; and then scored 78 against Yorkshire on 14 June . By 16 June , he had scored a hundred apiece in the Friends Provident Trophy and the County Championship , both with averages in the high 50s . On 31 July , he became the first player in the country to accrue 1 @,@ 000 first @-@ class runs in the 2009 season during the 1st innings of the County Championship match against Nottinghamshire . He also performed well in the one day arena , taking Somerset to the final of the Twenty20 championship while continuing to reject any suggestions of returning for the final Test of the 2009 Ashes series . He finished the season as the leading run scorer in the County Championship , scoring 1 @,@ 817 runs . With the departure of Justin Langer , Trescothick was named as Somerset captain from 2010 onwards . 
 " Being made captain is a huge honour for me , particularly as I am Keynsham @-@ born and have been associated with the club since my school days ... I 've been a player for 17 years and I believe the time is right for me to take on the role . I am really looking forward to the challenge . " 
 Trescothick was also named Most Valuable Player by the Professional Cricketers ' Association for his 2 @,@ 934 runs in all competitions in the 2009 season , 1 @,@ 745 of these in the County Championship . Over the winter he starred in a short film to promote Somerset , commissioned by inward investment agency Into Somerset . 
 = = = 2009 Champions League Twenty20 = = = 
 With Somerset runners @-@ up in the English 2009 Twenty20 Cup , Trescothick and his county travelled to India to partake in the Champions League Twenty20 in October . Though both Kieswetter and Hildreth were anticipated as successes , it was Trescothick who was described as having " been in sparkling form all season " and began the tournament under media scrutiny given his previous difficulties playing on tour . There was much speculation regarding any " recurrence of his stress @-@ related illness that originally occurred in 2006 " , as this was to be his first overseas outing since an aborted attempt in 2008 . Trescothick himself responded to the media by making a statement to the BBC World Service which read " I know the risk and I know what happens when it goes wrong . In the last couple of times I have tried to go on tour it 's failed , so of course [ it is a risk ] ... Let 's try and break the tradition of what has happened over the last few times ... I can only try . It 's a big competition for the players and for the club . I have got to try and make it happen . " Meanwhile , Langer assured the media that Trescothick could pull out whenever he wished to . Somerset , who began the tour without Trescothick as he was arriving later than most of the squad , commenced their warm up with a victory over the Otago Volts . The opener arrived three days later , confident in his ability to complete the tour . Somerset began with a close victory against the Deccan Chargers on 10 October , winning from the last ball . Trescothick was dismissed for 14 from 12 in his first match outside England since 2006 , " after offering a fleeting glimpse of his talent " according to ESPNcricinfo . 
 Trescothick was unable to avoid a recurrence of his previous difficulties when travelling abroad , however , and returned home on 15 October , citing the same " stress related illness " . Brian Rose , who Trescothick had approached initially after Somerset 's defeat by Trinidad and Tobago on 12 October , released a statement to the media stating " Marcus admitted a couple of days ago that he wasn 't 100 % so that 's fair enough . I think his future will be in domestic cricket and that may even help him with this particular form of illness . I think over the next two or three years you 'll see Marcus Trescothick performing wonderfully well in county cricket . " Michael Vaughan , who had by then retired from cricket , praised Trescothick 's " courageous " decision , as did Vikram Solanki , then PCA chairman . Journalist Andrew Miller called for an end to the rising criticism of Trescothick 's decision from the public , while Paul Hayward of the Guardian also derided those critical of the Somerset player 's actions . Despite returning home , Trescothick continued to affirm his commitment to the club by signing a new three @-@ year contract with optional fourth year , in December . He was named captain for the 2010 season . 
 = = = Captaincy 2010 – present = = = 
 Trescothick led Somerset into the 2010 season as captain , and began strongly in the County Championship with a century and four half @-@ centuries from his first eight games , though he struggled in the newly formed Clydesdale Bank 40 with only 95 runs from the first five matches , and in the Friends Provident T20 173 runs at 21 @.@ 62 with a best of 50 . This half century came on 25 June , where together with Kieron Pollard helped secure victory over Sussex , and was scored from 31 balls . Despite Trescothick 's four @-@ day form , however , Somerset struggled early on , with only one victory over Yorkshire . In a Twenty20 match against Hampshire on 9 July at Taunton , Trescothick hit a half @-@ century from 13 deliveries , including five sixes and five fours – a record fastest fifty in English domestic Twenty20 cricket . He was eventually dismissed for 78 from only 32 balls . He went on to lead Somerset to runners @-@ up position for all three English domestic competitions , losing out to Nottinghamshire in the County Championship , Hampshire in the Twenty20 and Warwickshire in the <unk> competition . 
 In 2011 Trescothick started off the county championship season very strongly and was the first batsman in the country to score 1000 championship runs . He was awarded the 2011 season MVP ( Most Valuable Player ) award for his performances throughout the season . He ended 2011 with six centuries in the County Championship , batting with an average of 79 @.@ 66 across the year . Somerset earned record financial returns that year , but again failed in the semi @-@ final and final stages of all major competitions . 
 Across all three formats , Trescothick took 2 @,@ 518 runs for his county . ESPNcricinfo 's George Dobell noted in their end of season round @-@ up that " He continues to dominate county attacks in a way that only Graeme Hick and Mark Ramprakash - of recent batsmen - could match . There are times when he makes the bowlers ' job appear impossible . " However , as 2012 - Trescothick 's 19th season at Somerset - approached , there was talk of resting him from the newly formed one @-@ day cricket championship that following year . Trescothick did not travel with the rest of the side to the Champions League T20 in India . He missed part of the 2012 domestic season due to an ankle injury , and struggled for form going seven four @-@ day matches without a half @-@ century until passing fifty against Sussex in August and going on to score a century . By the end of the season he had played only five one day games , scoring 118 runs at 39 @.@ 33 , two T20 matches making only 31 runs in total , and nine County Championship games in which he scored 506 runs at 38 @.@ 92 , including two centuries . This was his lowest home @-@ season aggregate since 1995 . He nevertheless made a statement to the media voicing his wish to continue playing into his forties , and took up a winter commentary stint with Sky Sports to cover England 's tour of India . The 2013 season , however , found Trescothick averaging only in the mid @-@ twenties , and failed to score a century for the first time since 1998 . He remained , however , the second @-@ highest run maker for Somerset , behind only Nick Compton , and retained the captaincy for the 2014 season . He continued to appear as a commentator and analyst for Sky Sports in the off @-@ season , in particular during coverage of the 2014 World T20 . He also publicly lent his support to England 's Jonathan Trott during the latter 's departure from the 2013 – 14 Ashes series , empathising with Trott 's stress @-@ related illness in a statement to Sky Sports which recalled his own experiences , recalling that " you just can 't take any more , you just can 't get through the day let alone go out there and play a Test match and win a Test match . " 
 Trescothick began the 2014 season strongly . He scored 112 in a warm @-@ up game against Middlesex , followed by 95 against a university team . Subsequent scores of 20 , 17 and five in the next three innings prompted George Dobell of ESPNcricinfo to comment that " Trescothick does not look anything like the batsman he once was , " but he returned to form on 28 April with a further century against Sussex . It was his first in the County Championship since 2012 , and was followed on 22 May with a second hundred , against Durham at Taunton . This century came 618 days after the last time he scored a hundred at his home ground . He passed 1 @,@ 000 runs for the season on 25 September against Yorkshire , in the final game of the year 's County Championship . 
 In 2015 , Trescothick scored over 1 @,@ 000 runs for the season , including three centuries and eight 50s , and completed the milestone yet again in July 2016 against Nottinghamshire . 
 = = Career records and statistics = = 
 = = = Test matches = = = 
 Records : 
 1 @,@ 000 runs in a calendar year : 1 @,@ 003 ( 2003 ) , 1 @,@ 004 ( 2004 ) , 1 @,@ 323 ( 2005 ) 
 First player to score a century in both innings at Edgbaston ( and the ninth player for England ) , 2004 v West Indies . 
 M.A. Aziz Stadium , Chittagong 1st wicket partnership record : 126 with Michael Vaughan , 2003 – 04 v Sri Lanka 
 Century by both openers in same innings , and Kingsmead first wicket partnership record : 273 with Andrew Strauss , 2004 – 5 v South Africa 
 Multan Cricket Stadium second wicket partnership record : 180 with Ian Bell , 2005 – 06 v Pakistan 
 Riverside Ground third wicket partnership record : 155 with Ian Bell , 2005 v Bangladesh 
 The Oval third wicket partnership record : 268 with Graham Thorpe , 2003 v South Africa 
 Man of the match awards : 
 Man of the Series awards : 
 Career performance : 
 = = = One Day Internationals = = = 
 Records : 
 Most consecutive ODIs for England : 92 ( 8 July 2000 – 25 September 2004 ) . 
 Most centuries in ODI cricket by an England player : 12 . 
 Beausejour Stadium fourth wicket partnership record : 110 with Andrew Flintoff , 2003 – 04 v West Indies 
 Bellerive Oval first wicket partnership record : 165 with Nick Knight , 2002 – 03 v Australia 
 Civil Service Cricket Club , Stormont fourth wicket partnership record : 142 with Ian Bell , 2006 v Ireland 
 Riverside Ground first wicket partnership record : 171 with Alec Stewart , 2000 v West Indies 
 County Ground , Bristol second wicket partnership : 124 with Nick Knight , 2001 v Australia 
 England and The Oval first wicket partnership record : 200 with Vikram Solanki , 2003 v South Africa 
 Rose Bowl fourth wicket partnership record : 53 with Paul Collingwood , 2004 v Sri Lanka 
 Man of the match awards : 
 Man of the Series awards : 
 Career performance : 
 = Jones Very = 
 Jones Very ( August 28 , 1813 – May 8 , 1880 ) was an American poet , essayist , clergyman , and mystic associated with the American Transcendentalism movement . He was known as a scholar of William Shakespeare and many of his poems were Shakespearean sonnets . He was well @-@ known and respected amongst the Transcendentalists , though he had a mental breakdown early in his career . 
 Born in Salem , Massachusetts to two unwed first cousins , Jones Very became associated with Harvard University , first as an undergraduate , then as a student in the Harvard Divinity School and as a tutor of Greek . He heavily studied epic poetry and was invited to lecture on the topic in his home town , which drew the attention of Ralph Waldo Emerson . Soon after , Very asserted that he was the Second Coming of Christ , which resulted in his dismissal from Harvard and his eventual institutionalization in an insane asylum . When he was released , Emerson helped him issue a collection called Essays and Poems in 1839 . Very lived the majority of his life as a recluse from then on , issuing poetry only sparingly . He died in 1880 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Very was born on August 28 , 1813 , in Salem , Massachusetts and spent much of his childhood at sea . He was the oldest of six children , born out of wedlock to two first cousins . His mother , Lydia Very , was known for being an aggressive freethinker who made her atheistic beliefs known to all . She believed that marriage was only a moral arrangement and not a legal one . His father , also named Jones Very , was a captain during the War of 1812 and was held in Nova Scotia for a time by the British as a prisoner of war . When the younger Jones Very was ten , his father , by then a shipmaster , took him on a sailing voyage to Russia . A year later , his father had Very serve as a cabin boy on a trip to New Orleans , Louisiana . His father died on the return trip , apparently due to a lung disease he contracted while in Nova Scotia . 
 As a boy , Very was studious , well @-@ behaved , and solitary . By 1827 , he left school when his mother told him he must take the place of his father and care for the family . After working at an auction house , Very became a paid assistant to the principal of a private school in Salem as a teenager . The principal , Henry Kemble Oliver , exposed his young assistant to philosophers and writers , including James Mackintosh , to influence his religious beliefs and counteract his mother 's atheism . He composed a poem for the dedication of a new Unitarian church in Salem : " O God ; On this , our temple , rest thy smile , Till bent with days its tower shall nod " . 
 = = = Harvard years = = = 
 Very enrolled at Harvard College in 1834 . During his college years , he was shy , studious , and ambitious of literary fame . He had become interested in the works of Lord Byron , William Wordsworth , Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich Schiller . His first few poems were published in his hometown newspaper , the Salem Observer , while he completed his studies . He graduated from Harvard in 1836 , ranked number two in his class . He was chosen to speak at his commencement ; his address was titled " Individuality " . After graduating , Very served as a tutor in Greek before entering Harvard Divinity School , thanks to the financial assistance of an uncle . Though Very never completed his divinity degree , he held temporary pastorates in Maine , Massachusetts , and Rhode Island . 
 Very became known for his ability to draw people into literature , and was asked to speak at a lyceum in his hometown of Salem in 1837 . There he was befriended by Elizabeth Peabody , who wrote to Emerson suggesting Very lecture in Concord . In 1838 , Ralph Waldo Emerson arranged a talk by Very at the Concord Lyceum . Very lectured on epic poetry on April 4 of that year , after he had walked twenty miles from Salem to Concord to deliver it . Emerson made up for the meager $ 10 payment by inviting Very to his home for dinner . Emerson signed Very 's personal copy of Nature with the words : " Har [ mony ] of Man with Nature Must Be Reconciled With God " . 
 For a time , Very tried to recruit Nathaniel Hawthorne as a brother figure in his life . Though Hawthorne treated him kindly , he was not impressed by Very . Unlike Hawthorne , Emerson found him " remarkable " and , when Very showed up at his home unannounced along with Cornelius Conway Felton in 1838 , Emerson invited several other friends , including Henry David Thoreau , to meet him . Emerson , however , was surprised at Very 's behavior in larger groups . " When he is in the room with other persons , speech stops , as if there were a corpse in the apartment " , he wrote . Even so , in May 1838 , the same month Very published his " Epic Poetry " lecture in the Christian Examiner , Emerson brought Very to a meeting of the Transcendental Club , where the topic of discussion was " the question of mysticism " . At the meeting , held at the home of Caleb Stetson in Medford , Massachusetts , Very was actively engaged in the discussion , building his reputation as a mystic within that circle . 
 = = = Mental health = = = 
 Very was known as an eccentric , prone to odd behavior and may have suffered from bipolar disorder . The first signs of a breakdown came shortly after meeting Emerson , as Very was completing an essay on William Shakespeare . As Very later explained , " I felt within me a new will ... it was not a feeling of my own but a sensible will that was not my own ... These two consciousnesses , as I may call them , continued with me " . In August 1837 , while traveling by train , he was suddenly overcome with terror at its speed until he realized he was being " borne along by a divine engine and undertaking his life @-@ journey " . As he told Henry Ware , Jr . , professor of pulpit eloquence and pastoral care at Harvard Divinity School , divine inspiration helped him suddenly understand the twenty @-@ fourth chapter of the Gospel of Matthew and that Christ was having his Second Coming within him . When Ware did not believe him , Very said , " I had thought you did the will of the Father , and that I should receive some sympathy from you — But I now find that you are doing your own will , and not the will of your father " . Very also claimed that he was under the influence of the Holy Spirit and composed verse while in this state . Emerson did not believe Very 's claim and , noting the poor writing , he asked , " cannot the spirit parse & spell ? " Very said he was also tormented by strong sexual desires which he believed were only held in check by the will of God . To help control himself , he avoided speaking with or even looking at women — he called it his " sacrifice of Beauty " . 
 One of Very 's students , a fellow native of Salem named Samuel Johnson , Jr . , said that people ridiculed Very behind his back since he had " gained the fame of being cracked ( or crazy , if you are not acquainted with Harvard technicalities ) " . During one of his tutoring sessions , Very declared that he was " infallible : that he was a man of heaven , and superior to all the world around him " . He then cried out to his students , " <unk> to the mountains , for the end of all things is at hand " . Harvard president Josiah Quincy III relieved Very of his duties , referring to a " nervous collapse " that required him to be left in the care of his younger brother Washington Very , himself a freshman at Harvard . After returning to Salem , he visited Elizabeth Peabody on September 16 , 1838 , apparently having given up his rule " not to speak or look at women " . As she recalled , 
 He looked much flushed and his eyes very brilliant and unwinking . It struck me at once that there was something unnatural — and dangerous in his air — As soon as we were within the parlor door he laid his hand on my head — and said " I come to baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire " — and then he prayed . 
 After this , Very told her she would soon feel different , explaining , " I am the Second Coming " . He performed similar " baptisms " to other people throughout Salem , including ministers . It was finally Reverend Charles Wentworth Upham who had him committed . 
 Very was institutionalized for a month at a hospital near Boston , the McLean Asylum , as he wrote , " contrary to my will " . While there , he finished an essay on Hamlet , arguing that the play is about " the great reality of a soul unsatisfied in its longings after immortality " and that " Hamlet has been called mad , but as we think , Shakespeare thought more of his madness than he did of the wisdom of the rest of the play " . During his stay at the hospital , Very lectured his fellow patients on Shakespeare and on poetry in general . 
 He was released on October 17 , 1838 , though he refused to renounce his beliefs . His fellow patients reportedly thanked him as he left . McLean 's superintendent Luther Bell took credit for saving him " from the delusion of being a prophet extraordinaire " , which Luther thought was caused by Very 's digestive system being " entirely out of order " . The same month he was released , Very stayed with Emerson at his home in Concord for a week . While he was visiting , Emerson wrote in his journal on October 29 , " J. Very charmed us all by telling us he hated us all . " 
 Amos Bronson Alcott wrote of Very in December 1838 : 
 I received a letter on Monday of this week from Jones Very of Salem , formerly Tutor in Greek at Harvard College — which institution he left , a few weeks since , being deemed insane by the Faculty . A few weeks ago he visited me .... He is a remarkable man . His influence at Cambridge on the best young men was very fine . His talents are of a high order .... Is he insane ? If so , there yet linger glimpses of wisdom in his memory . He is insane with God — <unk> in the contemplation of the holiness of Divinity . He distrusts intellect ... Living , not thinking , he regards as the worship meet for the soul . This is mysticism in its highest form . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Emerson saw a kindred spirit in Very and defended his sanity . As he wrote to Margaret Fuller , " Such a mind cannot be lost " . Emerson was sympathetic with Very 's plight because he himself had recently been ostracized after his controversial lecture , the " Divinity School Address " . He helped Very publish a small volume , Essays and Poems in 1839 . The poems collected in this volume were chiefly Shakespearean sonnets . Very also published several poems in the Western Messenger between 1838 and 1840 as well as in The Dial , the journal of the Transcendentalists . He was disappointed , however , that Emerson , serving as editor of the journal , altered his poems . Very wrote to Emerson in July 1842 , " Perhaps they were all improvements but I preferred my own lines . I do not know but I ought to submit to such changes as done by the rightful authority of an Editor but I felt a little sad at the aspect of the piece . " He was never widely read , and was largely forgotten by the end of the nineteenth century , but in the 1830s and 1840s the Transcendentalists , including Emerson , as well as William Cullen Bryant , praised his work . 
 Very continued writing throughout his life , though sparingly . Many of his later poems were never collected but only distributed in manuscript form among the Transcendentalists . In January 1843 , his work was included in the first issue of The Pioneer , a journal edited by James Russell Lowell which also included the first publication of Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Tell @-@ Tale Heart " . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Jones Very believed his role as a prophet would last only twelve months . By September 1839 , his role was complete . Emerson suggested that Very 's temporary mental instability was worth the message he had delivered . In his essay " Friendship " , Emerson referred to Very : 
 I knew a man who under a certain religious frenzy cast off this drapery , and spoke to the conscience of every person he encountered , and that with great insight and beauty . At first , all men agreed he was mad . But persisting , he attained to the advantage of bringing every man of his acquaintance into true relations with him ... To stand in true relations with men in a false age is worth a fit of insanity , is it not ? 
 The last decades of Very 's life were spent in Salem as a recluse under the care of his sister . It was during these years that he held roles as a visiting minister in Eastport , Maine and North Beverly , Massachusetts , though these roles were temporary because he had become too shy . By age 45 , he had retired . In his last forty years , Very did very little . As biographer Edwin <unk> wrote , " Although he lived until 1880 , Very 's effective life was over by the end of 1840 . " He died on May 8 , 1880 and , upon hearing of Very 's death , Alcott wrote a brief remembrance on May 16 , 1880 : 
 The newspapers record the death of Jones Very of Salem , Mass . It was my fortune to have known the man while he was tutor in Harvard College and writing his Sonnets and Essays on Shakespeare , which were edited by Emerson , and published in 1839 . Very was then the dreamy mystic of our circle of Transcendentalists , and a subject of speculation by us . He professed to be taught by the Spirit and to write under its inspiration . When his papers were submitted to Emerson for criticism the spelling was found faulty and on Emerson 's pointing out the defect , he was told that this was by dictation of the Spirit also . Whether Emerson 's witty reply , " that the Spirit should be a better speller , " qualified the mystic 's vision does not appear otherwise than that the printed volume shows no traces of illiteracy in the text . 
 Very often came to see me . His shadowy aspect at times gave him a ghostly air . While walking by his side , I remember , he seemed spectral , — and somehow using my feet instead of his own , keeping as near me as he could , and jostling me frequently . His voice had a certain hollowness , as if echoing mine . His whole bearing made an impression as if himself were detached from his thought and his body were another 's . He ventured , withal , to warn me of falling into <unk> , while he brought a sonnet or two ( since printed ) for my benefit . 
 His temperament was delicate and nervous , disposed to <unk> and a dreamy idealism , stimulated by over @-@ studies and the school of thought then in the ascendant . His sonnets and Shakespearean essays surpass any that have since appeared in subtlety and simplicity of execution . 
 = = Critical assessment = = 
 The first critical review of Very 's book was written by Margaret Fuller and published in Orestes Brownson 's Boston Quarterly Review ; it said Very 's poems had " an elasticity of spirit , a genuine flow of thought , and unsought nobleness and purity " , though she admitted she preferred the prose in the collection over the poetry . She mocked the " sing song " style of the poems and questioned his religious mission . She concluded : " I am ... greatly interested in Mr Very . He seems worthy to be well known . " James Freeman Clarke admired Very 's poetry enough to have several published in his journal , the Western Messenger , between 1838 and 1840 . William Ellery Channing admired Very 's poetry as well , writing that his insanity " is only superficial " . Richard Henry Dana , Sr. also commented positively on Very 's poetry : " The thought is deeply spiritual ; and while there is a certain character of peculiarity which we so often find in like things from our old writers , there is a freedom from quaintness ... Indeed , I know not where you would ... find any thing in this country to compare with these Sonnets . " 
 Editor and critic Rufus Wilmot Griswold was impressed enough by Very 's poetry to include him in the first edition of his anthology The Poets and Poetry of America in 1842 . He wrote to Emerson asking for more information about him and expressing his opinion of his poetry : " Though comparatively unknown , he seems to be a true poet . " 
 The modern reassessment of Jones Very as an author of literary importance can be dated to a 1936 essay by Yvor Winters who wrote of the poet , “ In the past two decades two major American writers have been rediscovered and established securely in their rightful places in literary history . I refer to Emily Dickinson and Herman Melville . I am proposing the establishment of a third . ” Winters , in speaking of Very ’ s relations with Emerson and his circle , concluded , “ The attitude of the Transcendentalists toward Very is instructive and amusing , and it proves beyond <unk> how remote he was from them . In respect to the doctrine of the submission of the will , he agreed with them in principle ; but whereas they recommended the surrender , he practised it , and they regarded him with amazement . ” Subsequently , William Irving Bartlett , in 1942 , outlined the basic biographical facts of Very ’ s life in Jones Very , Emerson ’ s “ Brave Saint . ” A complete scholarly edition of Very ’ s poetic works belatedly appeared , over a century after the poet ’ s death , in 1993 . 
 = Privity in English law = 
 Privity is a doctrine in English contract law that covers the relationship between parties to a contract and other parties or agents . At its most basic level , the rule is that a contract can neither give rights to , nor impose obligations on , anyone who is not a party to the original agreement , i.e. a " third party " . Historically , third parties could enforce the terms of a contract , as evidenced in Provender v Wood , but the law changed in a series of cases in the 19th and early 20th centuries , the most well known of which are Tweddle v Atkinson in 1861 and Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre v Selfridge and Co Ltd in 1915 . 
 The doctrine was widely seen as unfair , for various reasons - it made no exception for cases where the parties to a contract obviously intended for it to be enforced by a third party , and it was so inconsistently applied that it provided no solid rule and was therefore " bad " law . The doctrine attracted criticism from figures such as Lord Scarman , Lord Denning , Lord Reid and Arthur Linton Corbin , and as early as 1937 the Law Revision Committee recommended that it should be significantly altered . With the passing of the Contracts ( Rights of Third Parties ) Act 1999 on 11 November 1999 the doctrine was significantly altered , and it now allows a third party to enforce the terms of a contract if the third party is specifically authorised to do so by the contract or if the contractual terms " purport to confer a benefit " on such third party . 
 = = Original doctrine = = 
 The original doctrine of privity consisted of two rules - first , that a third party may not have obligations imposed by the terms of a contract , and second , that a third party may not benefit from the terms of a contract . The first rule is not something that is contested , while the second was described as " one of the most universally disliked and criticised blots on the legal landscape " . The second rule was not originally held to be valid , and in the 17th Century third parties were allowed to enforce terms of a contract that benefited them , as shown in Provender v Wood [ 1627 ] <unk> 30 , where the judgement stated that " the party to whom the benefit of a promise <unk> , may bring his action . " The first reversal of this was in Bourne v Mason [ 1669 ] 1 Vent . , where the Court of King 's Bench found that a third party had no rights to enforce a contract that benefited him . This case was quickly reversed , and decisions immediately after Bourne v Mason took the view that third parties could enforce contracts that benefited them . 
 Over the next 200 years , judicial decisions differed as to whether or not a third party could enforce a contract that benefited them . The issue was settled in 1861 by Tweddle v Atkinson [ 1861 ] 121 ER 762 , that confirmed that a third party could not enforce a contract that benefited him . This decision was affirmed by the House of Lords in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre v Selfridge and Co Ltd [ 1915 ] AC 847 in 1915 , where Lord Haldane stated that only a person who was party to a contract could sue on it . This version of the doctrine is commonly known as the original or basic doctrine . 
 = = = Views of the original doctrine = = = 
 Supporters of the original doctrine of privity say that it is reasonable not to allow third parties to enforce contracts , arguing that to allow them to do so would hamper the rights of the original parties in relation to amending or terminating contracts . Another argument put forward is that the doctrine was deliberately retained by judges to protect consumers from exclusion clauses designed to protect third party manufacturers from liability . The general view of academics , however , is that no legal argument has yet been advanced as to why the original doctrine should be good law . Patrick Atiyah argues that the doctrine came from a time of rising trade through middlemen , and was designed to simplify commercial transactions and encourage enterprise liability . 
 The second rule of privity , that a third party cannot claim benefits from a contract , was widely criticised by academics , members of the judiciary and legal professionals . One problem was that the rule made no exceptions for cases where it was obviously intended for the third party to claim a benefit , such as in Beswick v Beswick , where an uncle gave his nephew a business , on the condition that the nephew would pay the uncle a certain amount per week , and in the event of the uncle 's death , give a similar amount to his widow . 
 A second argument used to undermine the doctrine of privity is the large number of exceptions to the rule created by Acts of Parliament , which seemed to indicate that Parliament itself had an issue with the doctrine . Critics also argued that with the large number of inconsistencies and exceptions with the doctrine of privity , it was " bad " law , as it provided no reliable rule ; the way that the law works in theory is hugely different from the way it was enforced by the courts . The doctrine is also not found in many other legal systems , such as that of the United States . 
 The doctrine came under criticism from many academics and judges , including Lord Scarman , Lord Denning , Lord Reid and Arthur Linton Corbin . As early as 1937 the Law Revision Committee recommended that the doctrine be completely abolished by an act of parliament . Lord Diplock called the doctrine " an anachronistic shortcoming that has for many years been regarded as a reproach to English private law " , and Stephen Guest wrote that " [ I ] t is said that it serves only to defeat the legitimate expectations of the third party , that it undermines the social interest of the community in the security of bargains and it is commercially inconvenient " . 
 = = = Loopholes = = = 
 With the unpopularity of the doctrine , the judiciary developed several ways around it . These were at times both complex and extremely artificial , and used the law relating to trusts and agencies , along with other areas and ideas such as collateral contracts . These exceptions , however , were extremely limited in how they could be used . 
 = = = = Trusts = = = = 
 Trusts have been used as a way around the original doctrine of privity . A trust is an arrangement where the owner of property gives it to a second party ( a trustee ) to manage on behalf of a third party ( a beneficiary ) . In this situation the House of Lords decided ( in Les <unk> v Walford [ 1919 ] AC 801 ) that the trustee 's ability to sue the owner of the property is to be exercised on behalf of the beneficiary , a third party . This is known as a " trust of the promise " , and , while artificial , it bypassed the doctrine of privity . The trust exception has been heavily undermined by the decision in Re <unk> [ 1944 ] Ch 83 , which requires a court to find evidence of an intent to create a trust of the promise rather than simply using the requirement as an intention as a fiction to allow the courts to enact the trust exception . 
 = = = = Estates = = = = 
 In Beswick v Beswick an uncle gifted his nephew a business , on the condition that the nephew would pay the uncle ( Mr Beswick ) a certain amount per week , and in the event of the uncle 's death , give a similar amount to his widow ( Mrs Beswick ) . When the uncle died the nephew refused to pay the widow the money required , arguing that as she was not party to the original agreement she could not benefit from it . The Court of Appeal under Lord Denning tried to use this as an opportunity to claim that the doctrine of privity was invalid , something the House of Lords rejected . However , the Lords did agree that Mrs Beswick could sue , not as a third party to the contract but as the executrix of her husband 's estate . As executrix she would be acting as a representative of Mr Beswick , and the doctrine of privity would not apply . 
 = = = = Claiming on behalf of another = = = = 
 A second exception was created in Jackson v Horizon Holidays Ltd [ 1975 ] 1 WLR 1468 . Jackson had booked a family holiday in his own name from Horizon Holidays . The holiday did not match the specifications given in the contract , and Jackson sued Horizon Holidays . The company accepted liability , but claimed that they should not have to pay damages to the family as the doctrine of privity meant they were not allowed to sue on the contract . The Court of Appeal said that the loss of enjoyment suffered by the family was a loss to Jackson himself . He had paid for a family holiday but not received it , and so damages were awarded . 
 This created fairly limited circumstances in which a party could sue on behalf of another , if the other party would have benefited from the contract . 
 = = = = Collateral contracts = = = = 
 A collateral contract is a contract where the consideration is the entry into another subordinate contract , which co @-@ exists side by side with the main contract . Because this normally involves parties who are not part of the main contract , it has been used as a way around the doctrine of privity . The habit of the courts finding collateral contracts to allow an injured third party to sue has been criticised , however , as " exceedingly artificial " , and in light of the Contracts ( Rights of Third Parties ) Act 1999 the use of this has been predicted to decrease . 
 In Shanklin Pier Ltd v Detel Products Ltd [ 1951 ] 2 KB 854 , Shanklin Pier were having their pier refurbished . Shanklin contacted a painting company and asked them to repaint the pier with paint produced by Detel Products , based on assurances from Detel that the paint would last for at least seven years . The painters bought the paint from Detel and used it to repaint the pier . Within three months the paint had almost completely flaked off . Shanklin had no contractual relationship with Detel Products , but the Court of Appeal found like there was a collateral contract they could use to sue . 
 As a loophole the use of collateral contracts are limited , because the courts must first find evidence to imply some kind of collateral contract , as well as consideration . Attempts by the courts to do this have added to the perception of this as an artificial device - the decision in Charnock v Liverpool Corporation [ 1968 ] 1 WLR 1498 , which used collateral contracts , has been described by Guenter Treitel as " invented " consideration , and by Patrick Atiyah as " fictitious " . In certain commercial contracts , such as goods sold to consumers by a dealer , there is automatically a collateral contract between the consumer and the manufacturer of the goods . 
 = = = = Insurance contracts = = = = 
 Parliament is not bound by the common law , and as a result several acts of parliament unwittingly create valid exceptions to the doctrine of privity . Under the Road Traffic Act 1988 , motorists are obliged to take out third party liability insurance . This means that victims of car accidents can claim money from the insurer of the driver at fault , even though they are not part of the original contract . Under the Married Women 's Property Act 1882 a husband can take out insurance in his own name , but make it enforceable by his wife and children despite the doctrine of privity . 
 = = = Exceptions = = = 
 There are several ways around the original doctrine which were not loopholes created by case law but situations which by their very nature must involve three parties . Broadly speaking these are agency , assignment and negotiable instruments . 
 = = = = Agency = = = = 
 An agency relationship is between three parties - a principal , who authorises an agent to make a contract on his behalf with a third party . In agency situations an agent can make a contract with a third party that is binding on the principal , even though he was not privy to the original contract . The right of an agent to make this sort of agreement is found in statute , such as the Consumer Credit Act 1974 which allows a dealer for a financial company to set up credit agreements as a representative of that company . 
 It can be argued that this is not a true exception to the doctrine because once the contract is made the " agent " plays no further part , leaving it as an agreement between two parties . Certain elements of the doctrine of agency have been said to clash with privity , however . In some circumstances the principal can sue the third party even when the agent has not disclosed to the third party that he is acting as an agent to the principal . In this situation , the third party can be sued by somebody that he had no idea was involved in the contract . 
 = = = = Assignment = = = = 
 Assignment is an area of both English contract law and the law of real estate that governs the transfer of rights from one party to another . This can include the right to enforce a debt . In this situation the party who is assigned the debt can sue the debtor despite any contractual agreement between them . Again , this is permitted by statute , specifically the Law of Property Act 1925 . 
 = = = = <unk> instruments = = = = 
 A negotiable instrument is a type of contract that allows the transfer of money , such as a cheque . With a cheque there are three parties - the person holding the bank account who gives the cheque ( the drawer ) , the party the cheque is made out to ( the payee ) and the drawer 's bank which promises to pay the money to the payee ( the <unk> ) . 
 = = Contracts ( Rights of Third Parties ) Act 1999 = = 
 The doctrine of privity was significantly reformed by the Contracts ( Rights of Third Parties ) Act 1999 , which received the Royal Assent on 11 November 1999 and " thereby [ removed ] one of the most universally disliked and criticised blots on the legal landscape " . The first proposal to reform the doctrine of privity was made in 1937 by the Law Revision Committee in its Sixth Interim Report , which proposed an act of Parliament to allow third parties to enforce terms of a contract that specifically allowed them to do so . The report was not acted on - as late as 1986 the assumption was that Parliament would not act , and any reform would come from judicial sources ( particularly the House of Lords ) . 
 In 1991 the Law Commission published Consultation Paper No. 121 " Privity of Contract : Contracts for the Benefit of Third Parties " , which proposed a similar change , and in 1996 the final report ( No. 242 ) , along with a draft Bill , were published . The proposed changes were supported by the legal profession and academics alike , and the Bill was finally introduced to parliament in January 1999 . It came into law on 11 November 1999 , but the full provisions of the Act did not come into force until May 2000 . The act made it clear that contracts made in the six @-@ month " twilight period " could be enforced by the act if they made it clear in the contract that it was made under the terms of the Act . 
 Section 1 of the Act allows a third party to enforce terms of a contract in one of two situations : firstly if he is specifically mentioned in the contract as someone authorised to do so , and secondly if the contract " purports to confer a benefit " on him . An exception to the second rule is if the contract makes it clear that the third party is not meant to be able to enforce the term . In Nisshin Shipping Co Ltd v Cleaves & Co Ltd [ 2003 ] <unk> 2602 the High Court decided that in situations where there are questions over whether or not the second rule has been disapplied by a statement in the contract , the onus is on the party claiming that it has been disapplied . In the same decision the court decided that simply arranging an alternative way of enforcing the terms does not indicate that the 1999 Act was not meant to be used . 
 The third party can be identified by name or as a member of a particular group , and does not need to exist when the contract was made . The Act specifically excludes certain types of contract , such as contracts for the transport of goods across national lines , as these fall under international trade laws . 
 The second situation , that a third party can enforce terms that " purport to confer a benefit on him " , has been described as too broad , and one view put forward in the parliamentary debates was that it was " un @-@ workable " in situations such as complex construction contracts involving dozens of sub @-@ contractors with chains of contracts between them . This argument , and a proposal to exempt the construction industry from the Act , was rejected by both the Law Commission and Parliament . 
 Section 2 gives the third party various protections once they have chosen to enforce the act - the parties cannot alter or end the contract if the third party has told them that he wishes to enforce the contract or relied on the contract ( and the promisor knows this or could be expected to have known this ) . If the contract is breached , the third party has all the rights that he would have if he had been a party to the initial contract . 
 The act had various consequences - as well as allowing third parties to enforce terms it also made a number of exceptions to the basic rule unnecessary , such as claiming on behalf of another party as seen in Jackson v Horizon Holidays Ltd [ 1975 ] 1 WLR 1468 . It does not repeal or abolish these exceptions , however , and this allows the courts to accept cases based on the old common law exceptions as well as the 1999 Act . The Act specifically allows parties to exempt the provisions of the Act from contracts , allowing them a way out if they so choose . 
 = = Privity and consideration = = 
 It has been argued that privity is not even a distinct doctrine , but rather simply part of consideration . Consideration is a rule that there must be a " benefit or detriment " involved in any contract , and that this must initially come from the promisee . It is argued that this rule and the doctrine of privity are two ways of saying the same thing - that to say someone is not a party to the contract is the same as saying that they gave no consideration in the initial agreement . This attitude is found in decisions by the Judiciary of England and Wales - in , Tweddle v Atkinson , Crompton and Blackburn JJ made the decision that they did because the claimant had not provided consideration , and the majority in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co Ltd v Selfridge & Co Ltd based their judgment on a similar point . It is worth noting , however , that Lord Haldane maintained in his judgement in Dunlop that , independent of consideration , it was a rule in English law that " only a person who is party to a contract can sue on it " . 
 General consensus , however , is that privity is distinct from consideration . As well as Haldane 's judgment in Dunlop , the courts have stated a similar principle in other cases such as <unk> Ltd v Midland <unk> Ltd [ 1962 ] AC 446 and Beswick v Beswick - that privity is separate from consideration . Supporters of this view concede that while privity and consideration are distinct doctrines , there is a strong relationship between the two . This causes problems with the idea that the doctrine of privity should be abolished , as the idea that third parties can claim benefits from promises that they gave nothing for clashes with the doctrine of consideration , which prevents parties who did not contribute something to the agreement from benefiting from it . 
 = Procellariidae = 
 The family Procellariidae is a group of seabirds that comprises the fulmarine petrels , the gadfly petrels , the prions , and the shearwaters . This family is part of the bird order Procellariiformes ( or tubenoses ) , which also includes the albatrosses , the storm petrels , and the diving petrels . 
 The procellariids are the most numerous family of tubenoses , and the most diverse . They range in size from the giant petrels , which are almost as large as the albatrosses , to the prions , which are as small as the larger storm petrels . They feed on fish , squid and crustacea , with many also taking fisheries discards and carrion . All species are accomplished long @-@ distance foragers , and many undertake long trans @-@ equatorial migrations . They are colonial breeders , exhibiting long @-@ term mate fidelity and site philopatry . In all species , each pair lays a single egg per breeding season . Their incubation times and chick @-@ rearing periods are exceptionally long compared to other birds . 
 Many procellariids have breeding populations of over several million pairs ; others number fewer than 200 birds . Humans have traditionally exploited several species of fulmar and shearwater ( known as muttonbirds ) for food , fuel , and bait , a practice that continues in a controlled fashion today . Several species are threatened by introduced species attacking adults and chicks in breeding colonies and by long @-@ line fisheries . 
 = = <unk> biology = = 
 = = = Taxonomy and evolution = = = 
 According to the famous DNA hybridization study into avian phylogenetic relationships by Sibley and Ahlquist , the split of the Procellariiformes into the four families occurred around 30 million years ago ; a fossil bone often attributed to the order , described as the genus Tytthostonyx , has been found in rocks dating around the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary ( 70 @-@ 60 mya ) , but the remains are too incomplete for placement within the Procellariiformes to be certain . The molecular evidence suggests that the storm petrels were the first to diverge from the ancestral stock , and the albatrosses next , with the procellariids and diving petrels splitting most recently . Many taxonomists used to retain the diving petrels in this family also , but today their distinctiveness is considered well supported . 
 However , modern procellariid genera began to appear possibly just as early as the proposed splitting of the family , with a <unk> ( Early Oligocene ) fossil from Belgium tentatively attributed to the shearwater genus Puffinus , and most modern genera were established by the Miocene . Thus , a basal radiation of the Procellariiformes in the Eocene at least ( as with many modern orders of birds ) seems likely , especially given that significant anomalies in molecular evolution rates and patterns have been discovered in the entire family ( see also Leach 's storm petrel ) , and molecular dates must be considered extremely tentative . Some genera ( <unk> , <unk> ) are only known from fossils . <unk> from the Late Paleocene is sometimes placed in the Procellariidae , but even its placement in the Procellariiformes is quite doubtful . 
 Sibley and Ahlquist 's taxonomy has included all the members of the Procellariiformes inside the Procellariidae and that family in an enlarged Ciconiiformes , but this change has not been widely accepted . 
 The procellariid family is usually broken up into four fairly distinct groups ; the fulmarine petrels , the gadfly petrels , the prions , and the shearwaters . 
 The fulmarine petrels include the largest procellariids , the giant petrels , as well as the two fulmar species , the snow petrel , the Antarctic petrel , and the Cape petrel . The fulmarine petrels are a diverse group with differing habits and appearances , but are linked morphologically by their skull features , particularly the long prominent nasal tubes . 
 The gadfly petrels , so named due to their helter @-@ skelter flight , are the 37 species in the genus Pterodroma and have traditionally included the two species in the genus <unk> . The species vary from small to medium sizes , 26 – 46 cm ( 10 – 18 in ) , and are long winged with short hooked bills . The genus Pterodroma is now split into four sub genera , and some species have been split out of the genus ( see below ) . 
 The prions comprise six species of true prion in the genus <unk> and the closely related blue petrel . Often known in the past as <unk> , three species have large bills filled with lamellae that they use to filter plankton somewhat as baleen whales do , though the old name derives from their association with whales , not their bills ( though " prions " does , deriving from Ancient Greek for " saw " ) . They are small procellariids , 25 – 30 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) , with grey , patterned plumage , all inhabiting the Southern Ocean . 
 The shearwaters are adapted for diving after prey instead of foraging on the ocean 's surface ; one species has been recorded diving as deep as 70 m ( 230 ft ) . The shearwaters are also well known for the long trans @-@ equatorial migrations undertaken by many species . The shearwaters include the 20 or so species of the genus Puffinus , as well as the five large Procellaria species and the three <unk> species . While all these three genera are known collectively as shearwaters , the Procellaria are called petrels in their common names . A recent study splits the shearwater genus Puffinus into two separate clades or subgroups , Puffinus and Neonectris . Puffinus are the ' smaller ' Puffinus shearwaters ( Manx , little and Audubon 's shearwaters , for example ) , and the Neonectris are the ' larger ' Puffinus shearwaters ( sooty shearwaters , for example ) ; in 2004 it was proposed that Neonectris be split into its own genus , <unk> . This split into two clades is thought to have occurred soon after Puffinus split from the other procellariids , with the genus originating in the north Atlantic Ocean and the Neonectris clade evolving in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 The more traditional taxonomy of the family , particularly the split into four groups , has been challenged by recent research . A 1998 study by Gary Nunn and Scott Stanley showed that the fulmarine petrels were indeed a discrete group within the family , as were the gadfly petrels in the genus Pterodroma . However the two petrels in the genus <unk> are no longer considered close to the gadfly petrels , instead being moved closer to the shearwaters in the genus Procellaria . Two genera , <unk> and <unk> , have been split from the gadfly petrel genus Pterodroma , with <unk> being phylogenetically closer to the Puffinus shearwaters than the Pterodroma gadfly petrels , and <unk> ( the Kerguelen petrel ) possibly being closely related to the shearwaters or the fulmars . The prions , according to Nunn and Stanley , were among the larger shearwater group . The <unk> shearwaters were placed close to the two Puffinus clades ( closer to the Puffinus , or small , clade ) and both were distant to the Procellaria shearwaters . The relationships between the genera and within the genera are still the subject of debate , with researchers lumping and splitting the species and genera within the family and arguing about the position of the genera within the family . Many of the confusing species are among the least known of all seabirds ; some of them ( like the Fiji petrel ) have not been seen more than 10 times since their discovery by science , and others ' breeding grounds are unknown ( like the <unk> 's shearwater ) . 
 There are around 80 species of procellariid in 14 genera . For a complete list , and notes on different taxonomies , see List of Procellariidae . 
 = = = Morphology and flight = = = 
 The procellariids are small- to medium @-@ sized seabirds . The largest , the giant petrels with a wingspan of 81 to 99 cm ( 32 to 39 in ) , are almost as large as albatrosses ; the smallest , such as the fairy prion have a wingspan of 23 to 28 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 to 11 @.@ 0 in ) , are slightly bigger than the diving petrels . There are no obvious differences between the sexes , although females tend to be slighter . Like all Procellariiformes , the procellariids have a characteristic tubular nasal passage used for olfaction . This ability to smell helps to locate patchily distributed prey at sea and may also help locate nesting colonies . The plumage of the procellariids is usually dull , with greys , blues , blacks and browns being the usual colours , although some species have striking patterns ( such as the Cape petrel ) . 
 The technique of flight among procellariids depends on foraging methods . Compared to an average bird , all procellariids have a high aspect ratio ( meaning their wings are long and narrow ) and a heavy wing loading . Therefore , they must maintain a high speed in order to remain in the air . Most procellariids use two techniques to do this , namely , dynamic soaring and slope soaring . Dynamic soaring involves gliding across wave fronts , thus taking advantage of the vertical wind gradient and minimising the effort required to stay in the air . Slope soaring is more straightforward : the procellariid turns to the wind , gaining height , from where it can then glide back down to the sea . Most procellariids aid their flight by means of flap @-@ glides , where bursts of flapping are followed by a period of gliding ; the amount of flapping dependent on the strength of the wind and the choppiness of the water . <unk> and other larger petrels , which have lower aspect ratio , must make more use of flapping to remain airborne than gadfly petrels . Because of the high speeds required for flight , procellariids need to either run or face into a strong wind in order to take off . 
 The giant petrels share with the albatrosses an adaptation known as a shoulder @-@ lock : a sheet of tendon that locks the wing when fully extended , allowing the wing to be kept up and out without any muscle effort . Gadfly petrels often feed on the wing , snapping prey without landing on the water . The flight of the smaller prions is similar to that of the storm petrels , being highly erratic and involving weaving and even looping the loop . The wings of all species are long and stiff . In some species of shearwater the wings are also used to power the birds underwater while diving for prey . Their heavier wing loadings , in comparison with surface @-@ feeding procellariids , allow these shearwaters to achieve considerable depths ( below 70 m ( 230 ft ) in the case of the short @-@ tailed shearwater ) . 
 Procellariids generally have weak legs that are set back , and many species move around on land by resting on the breast and pushing themselves forward , often with the help of their wings . The exception to this is the two species of giant petrel , which like the albatrosses , have strong legs used to feed on land ( see below ) . The feet of shearwaters are set far back on the body for swimming and are of little use when on the ground . 
 = = = Distribution and range at sea = = = 
 The procellariids are present in all the world 's oceans and most of the seas . They are absent from the Bay of Bengal and Hudson Bay , but are present year round or seasonally in the rest . The seas north of New Zealand are the centre of procellariid biodiversity , with the most species . Among the four groups , the fulmarine petrels have a mostly polar distribution , with most species living around Antarctica and one , the northern fulmar ranging in the Northern Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . The prions are restricted to the Southern Ocean , and the gadfly petrels are found mostly in the tropics with some temperate species . The shearwaters are the most widespread group and breed in most temperate and tropical seas , although by a biogeographical quirk are absent as breeders from the North Pacific . 
 Many procellariids undertake long annual migrations in the non @-@ breeding season . Southern species of shearwater such as the sooty shearwater and short @-@ tailed shearwater , breeding on islands off Australia , New Zealand and Chile , undertake <unk> migrations of millions of birds up to the waters off Alaska and back each year during the austral winter . Manx shearwaters from the North Atlantic also undertake <unk> migrations from Western Europe and North America to the waters off Brazil in the South Atlantic . The mechanisms of navigation are poorly understood , but displacement experiments where individuals were removed from colonies and flown to far @-@ flung release sites have shown that they are able to home in on their colonies with remarkable precision . A Manx shearwater released in Boston returned to its colony in <unk> , Wales within 13 days , a distance of 5 @,@ 150 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 200 mi ) . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The diet of the procellariids is the most diverse of all the Procellariiformes , as are the methods employed to obtain it . With the exception of the giant petrels , all procellariids are exclusively marine , and the diet of all species is dominated by either fish , squid , crustaceans and carrion , or some combination thereof . 
 The majority of species are surface feeders , obtaining food that has been pushed to the surface by other predators or currents , or have floated in death . Among the surface feeders some , principally the gadfly petrels , can obtain food by dipping from flight , while most of the rest feed while sitting on the water . These surface feeders are dependent on their prey being close to the surface , and for this reason procellariids are often found in association with other predators or oceanic convergences . Studies have shown strong associations between many different kinds of seabirds , including wedge @-@ tailed shearwaters , and dolphins and tuna , which push shoaling fish up towards the surface . 
 The fulmarine petrels are generalists , which for the most part take many species of fish and crustacea . The giant petrels , uniquely for Procellariiformes , will feed on land , eating the carrion of other seabirds and seals . They will also attack the chicks of other seabirds . The diet of the giant petrels varies according to sex , with the females taking more krill and the males more carrion . All the fulmarine petrels readily feed on fisheries discards at sea , a habit that has been implicated in ( but not proved to have caused ) the expansion in range of the northern fulmar in the Atlantic . 
 Three of the six prion species have bills filled with lamellae , which act as filters to sift zooplankton from the water . Water is forced through the lamellae and small prey items are collected . This technique is often used in conjunction with a method known as hydroplaning where the bird dips its bill beneath the surface and propels itself forward with wings and feet as if walking on the water . 
 Many of the shearwaters in the genus Puffinus are proficient divers . While it has long been known that they regularly dive from the surface to pursue prey , using both their wings and feet for propulsion , the depth that they are able to dive to was not appreciated ( or anticipated ) until scientists began to deploy maximum @-@ depth recorders on foraging birds . Studies of both long @-@ distance migrants such as the sooty shearwater and more sedentary species such as the black @-@ vented shearwater have shown maximum diving depths of 67 m ( 220 ft ) and 52 m ( 171 ft ) . Tropical shearwaters , such as the wedge @-@ tailed shearwater and the Audubon 's shearwater , also dive in order to hunt , making the shearwaters the only tropical seabirds capable of exploiting that ecological niche ( all other tropical seabirds feed close to the surface ) . Many other species of procellariid , from white @-@ chinned petrels to slender @-@ billed prions , dive to a couple of metres below the surface , though not as proficiently or as frequently as the shearwaters . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 = = = = <unk> colonies = = = = 
 The procellariids are colonial , nesting for the most part on islands . These colonies vary in size from over a million birds to just a few pairs , and can be densely concentrated or widely spaced . At one extreme the greater shearwater nests in concentrations of 1 pair per square metre in three colonies of more than 1 million pairs , whereas the giant petrels nest in clumped but widely spaced territories that barely qualify as colonial . Colonies are usually located near the coast , but some species nest far inland and even at high altitudes ( such as the Barau 's petrel ) . 
 Most seabirds are colonial , and the reasons for colonial behaviour are assumed to be similar , if incompletely understood by scientists . Procellariids for the most part have weak legs and are unable to easily take off , making them highly vulnerable to mammalian predators . Most procellariid colonies are located on islands that have historically been free of mammals ; for this reason some species cannot help but be colonial as they are limited to a few locations to breed . Even species that breed on continental Antarctica , such as the Antarctic petrel , are forced by habitat preference ( snow @-@ free north @-@ facing rock ) to breed in just a few locations . 
 Most procellariids ' nests are in burrows or on the surface on open ground , with a smaller number nesting under the cover of vegetation ( such as in a forest ) . All the fulmarine petrels bar the snow petrel nest in the open , the snow petrel instead nesting inside natural crevices . Of the rest of the procellariids the majority nest in burrows or crevices , with a few tropical species nesting in the open . There are several reasons for these differences . The fulmarine petrels are probably precluded from burrowing by their large size ( the crevice @-@ nesting snow petrel is the smallest fulmarine petrel ) and the high latitudes they breed in , where frozen ground is difficult to burrow into . The smaller size of the other species , and their lack of agility on land , mean that even on islands free from mammal predators they are still vulnerable to skuas , gulls and other avian predators , something the aggressive oil @-@ spitting fulmars are not . The chicks of all species are vulnerable to predation , but the chicks of fulmarine petrels can defend themselves in a similar fashion to their parents . In the higher latitudes there are thermal advantages to burrow nesting , as the temperature is more stable than on the surface , and there is no wind @-@ chill to contend with . The absence of skuas , gulls and other predatory birds on tropical islands is why some shearwaters and two species of gadfly petrel can nest in the open . This has the advantages of reducing competition with burrow nesters from other species and allowing open @-@ ground nesters to nest on coralline islets without soil for burrowing . Procellariids that burrow in order to avoid predation almost always attend their colonies nocturnally in order to reduce predation as well . Of the ground @-@ nesting species the majority attend their colonies during the day , the exception being the herald petrel , which is thought to be vulnerable to the diurnal white @-@ bellied sea eagle . 
 Procellariids display high levels of philopatry , exhibiting both natal philopatry and site fidelity . Natal philopatry , the tendency of a bird to breed close to where it hatched , is strong among all the Procellariiformes . The evidence for natal philopatry comes from several sources , not the least of which is the existence of several procellariid species that are endemic to a single island . The study of mitochondrial DNA also provides evidence of restricted gene flow between different colonies , and has been used to show philopatry in fairy prions . Bird ringing also provides compelling evidence of philopatry ; a study of Cory 's shearwaters nesting near Corsica found that of nine out of 61 male chicks that returned to breed at their natal colony actually bred in the burrow they were raised in . This tendency towards philopatry is stronger in some species than others , and several species readily prospect potential new colony sites and colonise them . It is hypothesised that there is a cost to dispersing to a new site , the chance of not finding a mate of the same species , that selects against it for rarer species , whereas there is probably an advantage to dispersal for species that have colony sites that change dramatically during periods of glacial advance or retreat . There are also differences in the tendency to disperse based on sex , with females being more likely to breed away from the natal site . 
 = = = = Mate and site fidelity = = = = 
 Procellariids , as well as having strong natal philopatry , exhibit strong site fidelity , returning to the same nesting site , burrow or territory in sequential years . The figure varies for different species but is high for most species , an estimated 91 % for Bulwer 's petrels . The strength of this fidelity can also vary with sex ; almost 85 % of male Cory 's shearwaters return to the same burrow to breed the year after a successful breeding attempt , while the figure for females is around 76 % . This tendency towards using the same site from year to year is matched by strong mate fidelity , with birds breeding with the same partner for many years ; in fact it is suggested that the two are linked , site fidelity being a means by which partnered birds could meet at the beginning of the breeding season . One pair of northern fulmars bred as a pair in the same site for 25 years . Like the albatrosses the procellariids take several years to reach sexual maturity , though due to the greater variety of sizes and lifestyles , the age of first breeding stretches from just three years in the smaller species to 12 years in the larger ones . 
 The procellariids lack the elaborate breeding dances of the albatrosses , in no small part due to the tendency of most of them to attend colonies at night and breed in burrows , where visual displays are useless . The fulmarine petrels , which nest on the surface and attend their colonies diurnally , do use a repertoire of stereotyped behaviours such as cackling , preening , head waving and nibbling , but for most species courtship interactions are limited to some billing ( rubbing the two bills together ) in the burrow and the vocalisations made by all species . The calls serve a number of functions : they are used territorially to protect burrows or territories and to call for mates . Each call type is unique to a particular species and indeed it is possible for procellariids to identify the sex of the bird calling as well . It may also be possible to assess the quality of potential mates ; a study of blue petrels found a link between the rhythm and duration of calls and the body mass of the bird . The ability of an individual to recognise its mate has also been demonstrated in several species . 
 = = = = Breeding season = = = = 
 Like most seabirds , the majority of procellariids breed once a year . There are exceptions ; many individuals of the larger species , such as the white @-@ headed petrel , will skip a breeding season after successfully fledging a chick , and some of the smaller species , such as the Christmas shearwaters , breed on a nine @-@ month schedule . Among those that breed annually , there is considerable variation as to the timing ; some species breed in a fixed season while others breed all year round . Climate and the availability of food resources are important influences on the timing of procellariid breeding ; species that breed at higher latitudes always breed in the summer as conditions are too harsh in the winter . At lower latitudes many , but not all , species breed continuously . Some species breed seasonally , to avoid competition with other species for burrows , to avoid predation or to take advantage of seasonally abundant food . Others , such as the tropical wedge @-@ tailed shearwater , breed seasonally for reasons unknown . Among the species that exhibit seasonal breeding there can be high levels of synchronization , both of time of arrival at the colony and of lay date . 
 Procellariids begin to attend their nesting colony around one month prior to laying . Males will arrive first and attend the colony more frequently than females , partly in order to protect a site or burrow from potential competitors . Prior to laying there is a period known as the pre @-@ laying exodus in which both the male and female are away from the colony , building up reserves in order to lay and undertake the first incubation stint respectively . This pre @-@ laying exodus can vary in length from 9 days ( as in the Cape petrel ) to around 50 days in Atlantic petrels . All procellariids lay one egg per pair per breeding season , in common with the rest of the Procellariiformes . The egg is large compared to that of other birds , weighing 6 – 24 % of the female 's weight . Immediately after laying the female goes back to sea to feed while the male takes over incubation . Incubation duties are shared by both sexes in shifts that vary in length between species , individuals and even the stage of incubation . The longest recorded shift was 29 days by a Murphy 's petrel from Henderson Island ; the typical length of a gadfly petrel stint is between 13 and 19 days . <unk> petrels , shearwaters and prions tend to have shorter stints , averaging between 3 and 13 days . Incubation takes a long time , from 40 days for the smaller species ( such as prions ) to around 55 days for the larger species . The incubation period is longer if eggs are abandoned temporarily ; procellariid eggs are resistant to chilling and can still hatch after being left unattended for a few days . 
 After hatching the chick is brooded by a parent until it is large enough to thermoregulate efficiently , and in some cases defend itself from predation . This guard stage lasts a short while for burrow @-@ nesting species ( 2 – 3 days ) but longer for surface nesting fulmars ( around 16 – 20 days ) and giant petrels ( 20 – 30 days ) . After the guard stage both parents feed the chick . In many species the parent 's foraging strategy alternates between short trips lasting 1 – 3 days and longer trips of 5 days . The shorter trips , which are taken over the continental shelf , benefit the chick with faster growth , but longer trips to more productive pelagic feeding grounds are needed for the parents to maintain their own body condition . The meals are composed of both prey items and stomach oil , an energy @-@ rich food that is lighter to carry than undigested prey items . This oil is created in a stomach organ known as a proventriculus from digested prey items , and gives procellariids and other <unk> their distinctive musty smell . Chick development is quite slow for birds , with fledging taking place at around 2 months after hatching for the smaller species and 4 months for the largest species . The chicks of some species are abandoned by the parents ; parents of other species continue to bring food to the nesting site after the chick has left . Chicks put on weight quickly and some can outweigh their parents ; although , they will slim down before they leave the nest . All procellariid chicks fledge by themselves , and there is no further parental care after fledging . Life expectancy of Procellariidae is between 15 and 20 years ; although , the oldest recorded member was a northern fulmar that was over 50 years . 
 = = Procellariids and humans = = 
 = = = Exploitation of procellariids = = = 
 Procellariids have been a seasonally abundant source of food for people wherever people have been able to reach their colonies . Early records of human exploitation of shearwaters ( along with albatrosses and cormorants ) come from the remains of hunter @-@ gatherer middens in southern Chile , where sooty shearwaters were taken 5000 years ago . More recently procellariids have been hunted for food by Europeans , particularly the northern fulmar in Europe , and various species by Inuit , and sailors around the world . The hunting pressure on the Bermuda petrel , or <unk> , was so intense that the species nearly became extinct and did go missing for 300 years . The name of one species , the providence petrel , is derived from its ( seemingly ) miraculous arrival on Norfolk Island , where it provided a windfall for starving European settlers ; within ten years the providence petrel was extinct on Norfolk . Several species of procellariid have gone extinct in the Pacific since the arrival of man , and their remains have been found in middens dated to that time . More sustainable shearwater harvesting industries developed in Tasmania and New Zealand , where the practice of harvesting what are known as muttonbirds continues today . 
 = = = Threats and conservation = = = 
 While some species of procellariid have populations that number in the millions , many species are much less common and several are threatened with extinction . Human activities have caused dramatic declines in the numbers of some species , particularly species that were originally restricted to one island . According to the IUCN 36 species are listed as vulnerable or worse , with ten critically endangered . Procellariids are threatened by introduced species on their breeding grounds , marine fisheries , pollution , exploitation and possibly by climate change . 
 The most pressing threat for many species , particularly the smaller ones , comes from species introduced to their colonies . Procellariids overwhelmingly breed on islands away from land predators such as mammals , and for the most part have lost the defensive adaptations needed to deal with them ( with the exception of the oil @-@ spitting fulmarine petrels ) . The introduction of mammal predators such as feral cats , rats , mongooses and even mice can have disastrous results for ecologically naïve seabirds . These predators can either directly attack and kill breeding adults , or , more commonly , attack eggs and chicks . Burrowing species that leave their young unattended at a very early stage are particularly vulnerable to attack . Studies on grey @-@ faced petrels breeding on New Zealand 's Whale Island ( Moutohora ) have shown that a population under heavy pressure from Norway rats will produce virtually no young during a breeding season , whereas if the rats are controlled ( through the use of poison ) , breeding success is much higher . That study also highlighted the role that non @-@ predatory introduced species can play in harming seabirds ; introduced rabbits on the island caused little damage to the petrels , other than damaging their burrows , but they also acted as a food source for the rats during the non @-@ breeding season , which allowed rat numbers to be higher than they otherwise would be , resulting in more predators for the petrels to contend with . Interactions with introduced species can be quite complex . Gould 's petrels breed only on two islands , Cabbage Tree Island and <unk> Island off Port Stephens ( New South Wales ) . Introduced rabbits destroyed the forest understory on Cabbage Tree Island ; this both increased the vulnerability of the petrels to natural predators and left them vulnerable to the sticky fruits of the birdlime tree ( Pisonia <unk> ) , a native plant . In the natural state these fruits lodge in the understory of the forest , but with the understory removed the fruits fall to the ground where the petrels move about , sticking to their feathers and making flight impossible . 
 Larger species of procellariid face similar problems to the albatrosses with long @-@ line fisheries . These species readily take offal from fishing boats and will also steal bait from the long lines as they are being set , risking becoming snared on the hooks and drowning . In the case of the spectacled petrel this has led to the species undergoing a large decline and its listing as critically endangered . Diving species , most especially the shearwaters , are also vulnerable to gillnet fisheries . Studies of gill @-@ net fisheries show that shearwaters ( sooty and short @-@ tailed ) compose 60 % of the seabirds killed by gill @-@ nets in Japanese waters and 40 % in Monterey Bay , California in the 1980s , with the total number of shearwaters killed in Japan being between 65 @,@ 000 and 125 @,@ 000 per annum over the same study period ( 1978 – 1981 ) . 
 Procellariids are vulnerable to other threats as well . Ingestion of plastic flotsam is a problem for the family as it is for many other seabirds . Once swallowed , this plastic can cause a general decline in the fitness of the bird , or in some cases lodge in the gut and cause a blockage , leading to death by starvation . Procellariids are also vulnerable to general marine pollution , as well as oil spills . Some species , such as the Barau 's petrel , the Newell 's shearwater or the Cory 's shearwater , which nest high up on large developed islands are victims of light pollution . Chicks that are fledging are attracted to streetlights and are unable to reach the sea . An estimated 20 – 40 % of fledging Barau 's petrels are attracted to the streetlights on Réunion . 
 Conservationists are working with governments and fisheries in order to prevent further declines and increase populations of endangered procellariids . Progress has been made in protecting many colonies where most species are most vulnerable . On 20 June 2001 , the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels was signed by seven major fishing nations . The agreement lays out a plan to manage fisheries by @-@ catch , protect breeding sites , promote conservation in the industry , and research threatened species . The developing field of island restoration , where introduced species are removed and native species and habitats restored , has been used in several procellariid recovery programmes . Invasive species such as rats , feral cats and pigs have been either removed or controlled in many remote islands in the tropical Pacific ( such as the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands ) , around New Zealand ( where island restoration was developed ) , and in the south Atlantic and Indian Oceans . The grey @-@ faced petrels of Whale Island ( mentioned above ) have been achieving much higher fledging successes after the introduced Norway rats were finally completely removed . At sea , procellariids threatened by long @-@ line fisheries can be protected using techniques such as setting long @-@ line bait at night , dying the bait blue , setting the bait underwater , increasing the amount of weight on lines and using bird scarers can all reduce the seabird by @-@ catch . A further step towards conservation has been the signing of the 2001 treaty the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels , which came into force in 2004 and has been ratified by eight countries , Australia , Ecuador , New Zealand , Spain , South Africa , France , Peru and the United Kingdom . The treaty requires these countries to take specific actions to reduce by @-@ catch and pollution and to remove introduced species from nesting islands . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Procellariidae comes from the Latin word procella , which means a violent wind or a storm , and <unk> , which is added to symbolize family . Therefore , a violent wind or a storm refers to the fact that members of this family like stormy and windy weather . 
 = What 's So Amazing About Grace ? = 
 What 's So Amazing About Grace ? is a 1997 book by Philip Yancey , an American journalist and editor @-@ at @-@ large for Christianity Today . The book examines grace in Christianity , contending that people crave grace and that it is central to the gospel , but that many local churches ignore grace and instead seek to exterminate immorality . What 's So Amazing About Grace ? includes Bible stories , anecdotes from Yancey 's life , accounts of historical events and other stories . These include a modern retelling of the Parable of the Prodigal Son , an account of Yancey 's friendship with Mel White who came out as homosexual , a comparison of the teachings of early Christians Pelagius and Augustine of Hippo , and a summary of Karen Blixen 's short story " Babette 's Feast " . 
 Yancey was inspired to write What 's So Amazing About Grace ? after President Bill Clinton asked him , " Why do Christians hate so much ? " Although Yancey initially intended to call the book What 's So Amazing About Grace : and Why Don 't Christians Show More of It ? , Zondervan , its publisher , objected to this title despite the author 's contention that he wrote the book to communicate the belief that grace is one of the best quality Christians , like himself , have to offer but are not necessarily identified with it . The book was successful at secular and Christian stores , selling more than 15 million copies by 2006 and becoming Yancey 's best @-@ known book . In it , Yancey coined the phrase " scandal of grace " , referring to the idea that God forgives some of the worst people , citing the conversion of Paul the Apostle . 
 What 's So Amazing About Grace ? was named Book of the Year by the Evangelical Christian Publishers Association in 1998 . In 2006 , it ranked 17th on Christianity Today 's list of fifty books that have shaped Evangelicals the most . In a Publishers Weekly review , Henry Carrigan notes an anecdotal style that can be frustrating but ultimately worth reading . For the Presbyterian Record , Canadian Christian writer Phil Callaway writes that he found the book refreshing and inspirational . What 's So Amazing About Grace ? has been endorsed by a number of public figures , including Irish musician Bono , British adventurer Debra Searle , and World Vision Australia CEO Tim Costello . 
 = = Background = = 
