 Philip Yancey , an American journalist based in Colorado , was inspired to write a book about grace in Christianity when he went to the White House to interview President Bill Clinton . Clinton , a Southern Baptist from birth , told him , " I 've been in politics long enough to expect criticism and hostility . But I was unprepared for the hatred I get from Christians . Why do Christians hate so much ? " Yancey later said that , although there are many reasons for Evangelical Christians to disapprove of Clinton 's policies and lifestyle , hating him was not a valid option for Christians . 
 The author was further prompted to write about grace when a friend told him about encountering a homeless prostitute in Chicago who began to cry as she told him that she had raised money for drugs by prostituting her two @-@ year @-@ old child . When Yancey 's friend asked the woman if she had sought help at a local church , she answered , " Church ? Why would I ever go there ? I was already feeling terrible about myself . They 'd just make me feel worse . " This story convinced Yancey that Christians are doing a poor job of communicating the message that God is willing to accept people , regardless of what they have done ; the story haunted him , he said , because the woman was " the type of person who would have gone to Jesus . The more unrighteous a person was , the more comfortable they felt around Jesus " . 
 Yancey researched the subject of grace , asking non @-@ Christians what they associated with Evangelical Christianity . None of their responses mentioned grace ; most cited political stances , such as opposition to LGBT rights and abortion . The author initially intended to call his book What 's So Amazing About Grace : and Why Don 't Christians Show More of It ? Zondervan , its eventual publisher , objected to the title 's forcefulness , despite Yancey 's argument that he wrote the book about how " we Christians are simply not known by the greatest gift we have " . On February 3 , 1997 , Christianity Today published an essay by Yancey , the magazine 's editor @-@ at @-@ large , with the title " A State of <unk> " , saying that it was the basis of two chapters of Yancey 's upcoming book with the working title of What 's So Amazing About Grace and Why the World Needs More of It . The book was published later that year with the shorter title What 's So Amazing About Grace ? 
 According to the author , he began writing the book in the same way he began most of his books : by exploring a question that was unresolved for him . In this case , the question became the book 's title . In What 's So Amazing About Grace ? , Yancey answers this question by writing that God gives grace to people unconditionally , without their need to earn it . His book includes Bible stories , anecdotes from Yancey 's life and accounts of historical events . Similar to his other works , What 's So Amazing About Grace ? has a self @-@ deprecating tone . It describes Yancey 's upbringing in a judgmental church , a theme Yancey previously explored in The Jesus I Never Knew and later returned to in Reaching for the Invisible God and Soul Survivor . 
 What 's So Amazing About Grace ? sold well at secular and Christian stores . Its popularity in the United Kingdom grew in 2003 , when the impending Iraq War boosted sales of religious literature in the country . That March , it was the seventh @-@ bestselling religious book in the UK , behind Rick Warren 's The Purpose Driven Life , John <unk> 's If You Want to Walk on Water , You 've Got to Get Out of the Boat and Eugene H. Peterson 's The Message . What 's So Amazing About Grace ? is Yancey 's best @-@ known book , having sold more than 15 million copies by 2006 . Initially , the book was especially popular among baby boomers . Its popularity helped increase sales of Yancey 's 2000 book Reaching for the Invisible God , which appeared on religion bestseller lists immediately after publication . What 's So Amazing About Grace ? is one of several books by Yancey that have become international bestsellers . 
 = = Content = = 
 In What 's So Amazing About Grace ? , Yancey discusses grace , calling it " our last best word " . The book 's thesis is that , although people crave grace and it is centrally important to the gospel , many local churches ignore grace in their quest to exterminate immorality . Yancey uses the word " ungrace " to describe actions that fail to demonstrate grace . According to the author , the greatest gift the Christian Church can give the world is grace , but the church sometimes offers ungrace instead . Yancey writes that there are secular analogues to most Christian activities benefiting the world , such as social justice work and community service , but that " grace is theological ; it comes from God . It 's one thing the church can offer that isn 't found anywhere else " . He describes his experiences attempting to make grace part of the way he lived and not just part of his theology . Yancey quotes Christian counselor David <unk> : " The two major causes of most emotional problems among Evangelical Christians are these : the failure to understand , receive and live out God 's unconditional grace and forgiveness ; and the failure to give out that unconditional love , forgiveness , and grace to other people " . 
 The author describes his experiences growing up in a church that , despite preaching about grace , did not demonstrate it to others ; the church excluded African Americans , dismissed other Christians on the basis of slightly different beliefs , and depicted God as tyrannical and vengeful . Yancey writes , " I grew up with the strong impression that a person became spiritual by attending to grey @-@ area rules , " and that church was a place to look good rather than be honest . He contrasts the teachings of early Christians Pelagius and Augustine of Hippo on the subject of grace , with Pelagius believing that divine grace must be earned and Augustine contending that grace is a gift that cannot be earned . Pelagius was declared a heretic by his peers ; Augustine was canonized . According to Yancey , many Christians follow Pelagius 's teaching on grace during the week but espouse Augustine 's on Sunday . 
 Yancey writes that Christians should be politically active and should , for example , oppose abortion , " but you have to find a way to do it with grace ... If I 'm against abortion and I don 't find a way to love the woman who got the abortion and even her doctor , then I don 't understand the gospel . " Yancey recounts Jesus 's Parable of the <unk> Servant , concluding that God is only willing to forgive us if we are willing to forgive those who have wronged us . In a similar vein , he quotes William Shakespeare 's The Merchant of Venice : " How shalt thou hope for mercy , rendering none ? " 
 The author summarizes Karen Blixen 's short story " Babette 's Feast " , which was adapted into a 1987 Danish film . The story is set in a fishing village where the inhabitants avoid all pleasure for religious reasons . Two sisters take in Babette , a Parisian refugee who becomes their personal chef , but they allow her to make only simple , bland meals . Years pass ; Babette wins a lottery and spends her winnings on a delicious banquet for the villagers , who agree to eat but not enjoy the food . A banquet guest recognizes Babette as a former world @-@ renowned chef and identifies her gift to undeserving and initially unwilling recipients as grace . In another chapter Yancey similarly summarizes Gabriel García Márquez 's novel Love in the Time of Cholera . 
 Yancey describes his friendship with Mel White , who was a married pastor and Fuller Theological Seminary lecturer with two children when he came out as homosexual . White had been a ghostwriter for Christian writers including Francis Schaeffer , Billy Graham and Jerry Falwell , and Yancey was surprised by White 's self @-@ disclosure . According to the author , he and White had long discussions on the subject " because he wanted so much for me to approve . I couldn 't approve . " Yancey writes that , although he continued to cultivate his friendship with White , many other Christians shunned the pastor . One chapter , " The Lovesick Father " , retells the Parable of the Prodigal Son in a modern setting with the spendthrift child , a daughter . Yancey writes that the closest many people get to experiencing pure grace is a romantic relationship , when they believe that " someone at last feels that I — I ! — am the most desirable , attractive , companionable creature on the planet " . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Christians of many denominations treat What 's So Amazing About Grace ? as a handbook . In it , Yancey coined the phrase " scandal of grace " , referring to the idea that God may choose to forgive people who have done evil deeds , citing the conversion of Paul the Apostle who was persecuting Christians . The phrase " scandal of grace " has become widely used in Christian circles . In 2005 , the Barna Group , a California @-@ based research firm , asked senior pastors across the United States which books they had found helpful during the past three years . What 's So Amazing About Grace ? was one of nine books mentioned by at least two percent of the respondents ; the other eight included Rick Warren 's The Purpose Driven Church and The Purpose Driven Life and John C. Maxwell 's The 21 <unk> Laws of Leadership . 
 David Charlesworth , Abbot of <unk> Abbey in Devon , England , commissioned Torbay @-@ based theater company Unleashed Productions to adapt the book 's stories for the stage . Neil <unk> wrote the play and incorporated stories about apartheid , Gordon Wilson 's daughter 's death in the Remembrance Day bombing , and Holocaust survivor Simon Wiesenthal . He also included a dramatization of the chapter " The Lovesick Father " . Simon Zimmerman wrote the score for the play , which has a cast of nearly forty actors . The play , which took the name of the book , was successfully produced outdoors by <unk> Abbey in 2010 . These outdoor performances were well @-@ attended . According to the Western Morning News , the play is " by turns shocking , humorous and moving , [ and ] explores how forgiveness and grace can be found in even the most testing circumstances " . A Herald Express reviewer called the play inspiring and probably the most unique and unusual in South Devon that summer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Secular media = = = 
 For Booklist , Ray Olson called What 's So Amazing About Grace ? a " well @-@ written and engaging book [ that ] will continue to nourish readers ' hunger for spiritual sustenance long after it has answered the appetites of an initial burst of consumers " . He compared the book to Max <unk> 's The Great House of God , also published in 1997 , writing that , although Yancey and <unk> have both written several bestselling Christian books , Yancey 's book was edited better . Olson praised as pithy the author 's summaries of " Babette 's Feast " and Love in the Time of Cholera . In the Calgary Herald , David Briggs compares What 's So Amazing About Grace ? to Johann Christoph Arnold 's Seventy Times Seven : The Power of Forgiveness , also published in 1997 ; according to both books , Christians should be more charitable to others and less judgmental of them . Henry Carrigan writes in his Publishers Weekly review that " the book 's anecdotal style is often frustrating , but Yancey 's measured prose and his insights into the stories make the book worth reading " . In her 1998 Winnipeg Free Press review , Karen Toole @-@ Mitchell criticizes Yancey 's contention that everyone needs grace and that Christians have a special ability to offer it . She calls Yancey 's grace " cheap ... because it was not needed , it was not felt , and ultimately it was not received " . 
 In the Coventry Telegraph in 2001 , Barbara Goulden called the book 's title provocative . A 2003 Daily Express review called What 's So Amazing About Grace ? " a cogent , intellectually robust defence of [ Christianity ] without all the crap that goes with so many churches today " . Derick Bingham of the Belfast Telegraph recommended the book that year , calling it a liberating read . In 2006 , Terry Pluto of the Akron Beacon Journal called What 's So Amazing About Grace ? and the earlier Disappointment with God Yancey 's best books . 
 Shakespearean scholar Andy <unk> called the book part of the " spiritual self @-@ help genre " in 2007 . According to <unk> , Yancey 's quotation from The Merchant of Venice demonstrates the author 's moral universalism ; Yancey views Shakespeare as a sage who conveyed universally applicable morals , a perspective contradicting most contemporary literary critics who distrust moral universalism , using historicism to contextualize Shakespeare 's religious views . Dean Poling of The Valdosta Daily Times wrote in 2008 that , in What 's So Amazing About Grace ? , " Yancey writes about faith in a clear , honest , and inquisitive style " consistent with his other books . In 2010 , a Herald Express journalist called the book " <unk> " and " gritty " . 
 = = = Christian media = = = 
 What 's So Amazing About Grace ? was named Book of the Year by the Evangelical Christian Publishers Association in 1998 when it was chosen by Christian retailers as the title they most enjoyed selling ; Yancey 's The Jesus I Never Knew had received the same award two years earlier . In 1998 , Christianity Today compared What 's So Amazing About Grace ? to Joel A. Carpenter 's Revive Us Again , writing that both books productively analyze Christian fundamentalism . That year , Karla Vallance 's Christian Science Monitor review called the book similarly sentimental to John Newton 's hymn " Amazing Grace " . 
 In a 1998 Presbyterian Record review , Canadian Christian writer Phil Callaway writes that What 's So Amazing About Grace ? made him " thankful afresh for God 's grace and challenged to live a life reflecting it " . Callaway was haunted by Yancey 's question , " If grace is so amazing , why don 't Christians show more of it ? " and expressed his appreciation to the author at the 1998 Christian Booksellers Association convention . When he asked Yancey why he wrote the book , the author answered : " I long for the church to become a culture of grace ... A graceful church knows how to welcome failure and rewards vulnerability so that a person automatically thinks of the church when needing help . " Yancey asked Callaway if he thought the book would generate controversy , and Callaway said it would . Callaway asked Yancey why his book was so harsh in its description of Christians , and Yancey responded , " I 'm picking on Christians because I am one " . Yancey said that he knew many gracious Christians and that secular culture was filled with examples of ungrace , including media manipulation of body image and the belief that " there ain 't no such thing as a free lunch " , which contradicts the concept of undeserved grace from God as taught in Christianity . 
 A 1999 Christian Science Monitor review said that , filled with " poignant stories " that are " likely to ruffle some feathers , this compelling book challenges Christians to become a genuine healing force in society " . Presbyterian pastor John Buchanan , editor and publisher of The Christian Century , also reviewed What 's So Amazing About Grace ? that year , writing that " Yancey is such a good writer and such a generous evangelical that even though I occasionally disagree with his conclusions , I 'm glad to be in the same family with him " . 
 In 2006 , What 's So Amazing About Grace ? placed 17th on Christianity Today 's list of fifty books that had most shaped Evangelicals . That year , Robert Jeffress , pastor of First Baptist Church in Dallas , compared What 's So Amazing About Grace ? to Chuck Swindoll 's book The Grace Awakening , calling both " wonderful books on grace [ that ] did a valuable service rescuing the doctrine of grace from the legalists who say that we must earn our salvation " . Christian professor Craig Detweiler writes in his 2008 book A Purple State of Mind : Finding Middle Ground in a Divided Culture that , if he could have given his students a graduation present , it would have been a copy of What 's So Amazing About Grace ? because many of his Christian students were more concerned with avoiding the forbidden than they were with enjoying the permitted . Detweiler writes that Christianity was founded on forgiveness and that Christians should not bear the burden of guilt , and he therefore agrees with Yancey that " grace " is " our last best word " . 
 In a 2014 article in the " Spiritual Matters " section of the Australian newspaper The Daily Examiner , Reverend Chris Sparks calls What 's So Amazing About Grace ? " masterful " and writes that Yancey provides a good answer to the question raised by its title . In his 2015 book <unk> : How Just One Change Can Make All of Life Better , Christian radio personality Brant Hansen calls What 's So Amazing About Grace ? life @-@ changing and writes that Yancey 's discussion of " Babette 's Feast " inspired him to see the film . U.S. Catholic reviewer Mary Lynn Hendrickson also praised Yancey 's retelling of Karen Blixen 's story . 
 = = = Public figures = = = 
 In 2000 , Bear Grylls , the youngest Briton to survive an ascent of Mount Everest , cited What 's So Amazing About Grace ? as his " favourite holiday read " and " a book that has inspired me a lot " . In 2001 , American politician Mark Earley called it his favorite book . That year , English musician Noel Gallagher asked Irish musician Bono to explain religion to him because Gallagher knew Bono believed in and prayed to God . Bono spoke with Gallagher on the subject for two hours and sent him a copy of What 's So Amazing About Grace ? Gallagher later said that he was " going to have a good read of this book " , that Bono " made a lot of sense " , and that the gift was particularly meaningful because Bono 's father had recently died . 
 During Christmas 2001 , while Debra Searle was competing in the Atlantic Rowing Race by making a solo transatlantic crossing from Tenerife to Barbados , her twin sister Hayley sent her a copy of What 's So Amazing About Grace ? as part of a Christmas package that was delivered at sea . Although she had belonged to a local church as a child , Debra had become irreligious by 2001 . After reading Yancey 's book while she was alone on the ocean that Christmas , she said , " I felt like God was there with me protecting me " . Reading the book brought about a change in her that eventually resulted in her becoming actively involved in <unk> Baptist Church , which is noted for its community engagement . 
 In 2006 , Welsh musician Mal Pope called the book his favorite , comparing Yancey 's writing to that of British Christian apologist C. S. Lewis and saying , " The first time I read [ What 's So Amazing About Grace ? ] I ended up in tears with every new chapter " . In 2012 , Pope affirmed that it was still his favorite book . Tim Costello , CEO of World Vision Australia , said in 2008 that the book was important to him . In 2010 , American politician Bill Haslam cited What 's So Amazing About Grace ? and John <unk> 's and Mark Halperin 's Game Change as two recent books he enjoyed . Retired Northern Ireland Civil Service head Nigel Hamilton said in 2014 that What 's So Amazing About Grace ? was his favorite book . 
 = Buddy Fletcher = 
 Alphonse " Buddy " Fletcher Jr . ( born December 19 , 1965 ) is a former hedge fund manager and founder of the Fletcher Foundation . He began his career as a quantitative equity trader at Bear Stearns and later worked at Kidder , Peabody & Co . Fletcher , who is African American , sued Kidder Peabody for racial discrimination . Although his racial discrimination claims were dismissed , he eventually won an arbitration award of US $ 1 @.@ 26 million . Fletcher has also been involved in litigation centered on a dispute with the board of The Dakota apartment building in New York City . 
 Fletcher founded Fletcher Asset Management in 1991 . His main fund , Fletcher International , may have been insolvent since 2008 and was declared bankrupt in 2012 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Fletcher was raised in Waterford , Connecticut . His father , Alphonse , Sr. , was a technician at the Electric Boat Corporation in Groton , a company that makes submarines . His mother , Bettye , a long @-@ time teacher and later a social worker , dean , and school principal , received a Ph.D. in Education from Teachers College , Columbia University . Fletcher has two younger brothers , Todd , and Geoffrey , a screenwriter , film director and Academy Award winner . 
 He attended Harvard College , where he received an A.B. degree as an applied mathematics major in 1987 . He was elected first marshall , a ceremonial position , of the 1987 class . He earned a Master 's degree in Environmental Management from the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies in 2004 . 
 = = Career = = 
 After graduating from Harvard College in 1987 , Fletcher began his career at Bear Stearns as a quantitative equity trader who capitalized on dividend @-@ related arbitrage . He was recruited to Kidder Peabody as a trader in the equity trading group . 
 = = = Fletcher Asset Management = = = 
 After his tenure at Kidder Peabody , he founded Fletcher Asset Management , which makes private investments in small @-@ capitalization public companies . 
 During Fletcher Asset Management 's first four years , it traded with heavy leverage . His general strategy was trading public instruments for his own account and on behalf of clients , but he also made longer @-@ term equity investments . He used hedges with both types of investments . He has also been involved in PIPE deals . At one time , his firm 's trading activity occasionally accounted for 5 % of the volume on the New York Stock Exchange . In 1994 , Fletcher surrendered his broker @-@ dealer registration and became a registered investment adviser , which made managing money more convenient . 
 = = = Fund bankruptcy = = = 
 In July 2011 , FIA Leveraged Fund , an investment vehicle managed by Fletcher Asset Management , was unable to meet a redemption request , totaling $ 144 million , by three Louisiana pension fund investors . In April 2012 , the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands ruled that the fund was insolvent and ordered that it be wound up ( liquidated ) . 
 In June 2012 , Fletcher International Ltd . , the Bermuda @-@ based " master fund " for the Fletcher funds , filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in Manhattan . 
 = = Litigation = = 
 = = = Alphonse Fletcher vs. Kidder Peabody = = = 
 In 1991 , after working as an equity trader at Kidder Peabody , Fletcher filed a lawsuit in New York state court for employment racial discrimination . The New York Court of Appeals ruled that Fletcher 's claim must be arbitrated . In a NYSE arbitration , Fletcher was awarded $ 1 @.@ 26 million , and in a subsequent arbitration , the racial discrimination claim was dismissed . 
 = = = Dakota lawsuit = = = 
 In February 2011 , Fletcher filed a lawsuit against the Board of Directors of The Dakota co @-@ op building in Manhattan , where he had lived since 1992 and owned four apartments . Among other things , he alleged defamation and unlawful discrimination . In March 2010 , Fletcher had signed a contract to purchase a fifth apartment at The Dakota , intending to combine it with his current home . The Dakota board said it rejected Fletcher 's application based on the financial materials he provided in his application . Judge Eileen A. <unk> dismissed the suit in September 2015 and Fletcher announced his intention to appeal . 
 = = Fletcher Foundation and philanthropy = = 
 In 1993 , following the death of friend and advisor Reginald Lewis , Fletcher donated $ 1 million to the Reginald F. Lewis Memorial Endowment . The endowment had been created by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People after Lewis instructed his wife to bequeath $ 2 million to the organization . 
 In 1996 , to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Plessy v. Ferguson , 163 U.S. 537 ( 1896 ) , Fletcher endowed a University professorship at Harvard College . 
 In 2004 , Fletcher created the Alphonse Fletcher University Professor Fellowship program to financially support professors working to improve race relations at Harvard . Funded as part of the Fletcher Foundation , Henry Louis Gates Jr. is the Alphonse Fletcher University Professor at Harvard . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2007 , Fletcher married Ellen Pao , then a junior partner at venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers . Fletcher and Pao met while Aspen Institute fellows . They have a daughter , Matilda Pao Fletcher . 
 Prior to his marriage to Pao , Fletcher was in a same @-@ sex relationship with Hobart V. " Bo " <unk> Jr. for more than 10 years . 
 Fletcher and his wife have lived in the St. Regis Residence in San Francisco . Fletcher also owns homes in The Dakota in New York City . He put his Cornwall , Connecticut home up for sale in August 2013 . 
 = 1960 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1960 Atlantic hurricane season was the least active season since 1952 . The season officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 15 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The first system , an unnamed storm , developed in the Bay of Campeche on June 22 . It brought severe local flooding to southeastern Texas and was considered the worst disaster in some towns since a hurricane in 1945 . The unnamed storm moved across the United States for almost a week before dissipating on June 29 . In July , Hurricane Abby resulted in minor damage in the Leeward Islands , before impacting a few Central American counties — the remnants of the storm would go on to form Hurricane Celeste in the East Pacific . Later that month , Tropical Storm Brenda caused flooding across much of the East Coast of the United States . The next storm , Hurricane Cleo , caused no known impact , despite its close proximity to land . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Donna , which at the time was among the ten costliest United States hurricanes . After the precursor caused a deadly plane crash in Senegal , the storm itself brought severe flooding and wind impacts to the Lesser Antilles and Florida , where Donna made landfall as a Category 4 hurricane . It moved northeast and struck North Carolina and Long Island , New York , while still at hurricane intensity . Donna caused at least 227 fatalities and $ 900 million ( 1960 USD ) in damage . Hurricane Ethel reached Category 3 intensity , but rapidly weakened before making landfall in Mississippi , resulting in only 1 fatality and $ 1 @.@ 5 million in losses . The final storm , Florence , developed on September 17 . It remained weakened and moved erratically over Cuba and Florida . Only minor flooding was reported . Collectively , the tropical cyclones in 1960 caused at least 250 deaths and about $ 910 @.@ 74 million in damage . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 , 1960 . It was a below @-@ average season in which seven tropical depressions formed . All seven of the depressions attained tropical storm status , which was below the 1950 – 2000 average of 9 @.@ 6 named storms . Four of these reached hurricane status , also falling short of the 1950 – 2000 average of 5 @.@ 9 . Furthermore , two storms reached major hurricane status , which is Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Both of which became Category 5 hurricanes . Two hurricane and four tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 387 deaths and $ 396 @.@ 7 million ( 1960 USD ) in damage . 
 Season activity began on June 23 , with the development of an unnamed tropical storm . Tropical cyclogenesis resumed in July with Hurricane Abby between July 10 and July 16 , followed by Tropical Storm Brenda from July 28 to July 31 . In mid @-@ August , Hurricane Cleo developed and had an uneventful duration . At the end of that month , Hurricane Donna formed and lasted into mid @-@ September ; it was the strongest tropical cyclone of the season , peaking as a Category 5 hurricane . There was another Category 5 hurricane in September , Ethel , which briefly existed in the Gulf of Mexico . The last storm of the season , Tropical Storm Florence , dissipated on September 25 , over a month before the official end of the season on November 15 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 88 , which was the lowest total since 54 in 1954 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones , such as the first storm , are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 Observations from a reconnaissance flight on June 22 indicated that a large area of showers and thunderstorms in the Gulf of Mexico was producing winds up to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Because no circulation was reported , it was operationally classified as a tropical low , though radar stations along the Gulf Coast of Mexico indicated a circulation . Thus , the system became a tropical depression at 0600 UTC on June 22 , while located in the Bay of Campeche . The depression strengthened and was estimated to have become a tropical storm on June 23 . By early on the following day , the storm peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Later that day , it made landfall near Corpus Christi , Texas at the same intensity . The storm weakened slowly and moved across the Central United States , before dissipating over Illinois on June 29 . 
 In Texas , the storm dropped up to 29 @.@ 76 inches ( 756 mm ) of precipitation in Port Lavaca . Thus considerable flooding occurred in some areas of south and eastern Texas . Throughout the state , more than 150 houses sustained flood damage in several counties . In addition , numerous major highways were closed , including portions of U.S. Routes 59 , 87 , 90 , and 185 , and Texas State Highways 35 and 71 . In Arkansas , a few buildings in Hot Springs were damaged from high winds . Elsewhere , light to moderate rainfall was recorded in at least 11 other states , though damage was minimal . The storm was the rainiest tropical cyclone on record in the state of Kentucky , dropping 11 @.@ 25 inches ( 286 mm ) in Dunmor . Overall , the storm was attributed to 15 fatalities and $ 3 @.@ 6 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Abby = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression near the Windward Islands on July 10 . While crossing the islands later that day , the depression rapidly strengthened into Hurricane Abby . It tracked westward across the Caribbean Sea and peaked as a 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane on July 11 . Thereafter , Abby became disorganized and weakened back to a tropical storm on July 13 . The storm began to re @-@ organize starting on the following day , and re @-@ acquired hurricane status while located offshore Honduras . The storm made landfall in British Honduras ( present day Belize ) as a minimal hurricane on July 15 . Abby quickly weakened inland and by the next day , it dissipated over the Mexican state of Tabasco . However , the remnants later contributed to the development of Hurricane Celeste in the eastern Pacific . 
 Abby produced tropical storm force winds and up to 6 @.@ 8 inches ( 170 mm ) of precipitation in St. Lucia . Six people died when a roof of a house collapsed . Damage in St. Lucia reached $ 435 @,@ 000 , most of which was incurred to banana and coconut crops . In Martinique , wind gusts of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and about 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain damaged 33 % of banana and sugar cane crops . The resultant landslides from the precipitation extensively impacted roads and bridges . In Dominica , light winds and precipitation up to 5 @.@ 91 inches ( 150 mm ) reaching $ 65 @,@ 000 , entirely to roads and communications . Offshore islands of Honduras reported winds up to 52 mph ( 85 km / h ) and light rainfall . Damage in British Honduras was light , with about $ 40 @,@ 500 in losses , mostly to agriculture . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Brenda = = = 
 A weak low @-@ pressure area into the Gulf of Mexico developed into a tropical depression on July 28 . It failed to intensify significantly before making landfall near Cross City , Florida . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Brenda at around 1200 UTC on July 29 while its center was situated over southeast Georgia . Brenda tracked northward along the Georgia and South Carolina coasts , before moving inland over North Carolina . It attained its peak winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at 0000 UTC on July 30 . Several hours later , the storm emerged over the Chesapeake Bay , before crossing the Delmarva Peninsula and accelerating into southern New Jersey . The storm passed over the state and eventually crossed Long Island before making another landfall in Connecticut . Early on July 31 , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . 
 Brenda was considered the worst storm to strike West Central Florida since Hurricane Easy in 1950 . It brought wind gusts up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and rainfall amounts reaching 14 @.@ 57 inches ( 370 mm ) at the Tampa International Airport . While no casualties are directly blamed on the storm , at least one traffic @-@ related death took place . According to an American Red Cross Disaster Service report encompassing eight Florida counties , 11 houses sustained significant damage , while 567 suffered more minor damage . Around 590 families were affected overall . Total monetary damage in Florida is placed at nearly $ 5 million . Further north , other states reported strong winds and locally heavy rainfall , though no significant damage occurred . 
 = = = Hurricane Cleo = = = 
 A strong tropical wave produced rainfall and gusty winds in The Bahamas and the Greater Antilles in mid @-@ August . The wave was closely monitored for possible tropical cyclogenesis and special bulletins were issued by the United States Weather Bureau . At 1800 UTC on August 17 , Tropical Storm Cleo developed near Cat Island in The Bahamas . The storm headed northeastward and immediately began to intensify . Operationally , the United States Weather Bureau at the hurricane warning center in Miami did not initiate advisories on Cleo until 1500 UTC on August 18 . Sustained winds were already 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) at the time , as recorded by a reconnaissance aircraft flight . By 1800 UTC on August 18 , Cleo strengthened into a hurricane . 
 Throughout its duration , Cleo remained a relatively small tropical cyclone . Because the storm posed a significant threat to New England , a " hurricane watch " was issued for southeastern Massachusetts and Rhode Island on August 19 . Various gale warnings were also put into effect from Block Island , Rhode Island , to Portland , Maine . However , this was unnecessary because Cleo remained well offshore . Early on August 20 , Cleo peaked with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Thereafter , the storm began to weaken and fell to tropical storm intensity while south of Nova Scotia later that day . Cleo curved east @-@ northeastward on August 20 . The storm passed near Sable Island early on August 21 , before dissipating later that day . 
 = = = Hurricane Donna = = = 
 A tropical wave , which was attributed to 63 deaths from a plane crash in Senegal , developed into a tropical depression centered south of Cape Verde late on August 29 . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Donna by the following day . Donna moved west @-@ northwestward at roughly 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) and by September 1 , it reached hurricane status . Significant deepening occurred during the next 30 hours , with Donna being a moderate Category 4 hurricane by late on September 2 . Thereafter , it weakened some and brushed the Lesser Antilles later that day . On Sint Maarten , the storm left a quarter of the island homeless and killed 7 people . An additional 5 deaths were reported in Anguilla and there were 7 other deaths throughout the Virgin Islands . In Puerto Rico , severe flash flooding led to 107 fatalities , 85 of them in Humacao alone . Donna further weakened to a Category 3 hurricane late on September 5 , but eventually became a Category 4 hurricane again . While passing through The Bahamas , several small island communities in the central regions of the country were leveled , but no damage total or fatalities were reported . 
 Early on September 10 , Donna made landfall near Marathon , Florida on Vaca Key with winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) , hours before another landfall between Fort Myers and Naples at the same intensity . Florida bore the brunt of Hurricane Donna . In the Florida Keys , coastal flooding severely damaged 75 % of buildings , destroyed several subdivisions in Marathon . On the mainland , 5 @,@ 200 houses were impacted , which does not include the 75 % of homes damaged at Fort Myers Beach ; 50 % of buildings were also destroyed in the city of Everglades . Crop losses were also extensive . A total of 50 % of grapefruit crop was lost , 10 % of the orange and tangerine crop was lost , and the avocado crop was almost completely destroyed . In the state of Florida alone , there were 13 deaths and $ 300 million in losses . Donna weakened over Florida and was a Category 2 hurricane when it re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic from North Florida . By early on September 12 , the storm made landfall near Topsail Beach , North Carolina with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . Donna brought tornadoes and wind gusts as high as 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , damaging or destroying several buildings in Eastern North Carolina , while crops were impacted as far as 50 miles ( 80 km ) inland . Additionally , storm surge caused significant beach erosion and structural damage Wilmington and Nags Head . There were 8 deaths and over 100 injuries . Later on September 12 , Donna reemerged into the Atlantic Ocean and continued to move northeastward . The storm struck Long Island , New York late on September 12 and rapidly weakened inland . On the following day , Donna became extratropical over Maine . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 = = = Hurricane Ethel = = = 
 A tropical disturbance in the central Gulf of Mexico developed into Tropical Storm Ethel on September 14 . Ethel rapidly intensified , becoming a hurricane six hours later and a major hurricane by early on September 15 . The storm peaked as a Category 3 hurricane later that day , despite an abnormally high minimum pressure of 974 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Cool and dry air began impacting Ethel , causing it to rapidly weaken back to a Category 1 hurricane while brushing eastern Louisiana . Later on September 15 , Ethel was downgraded to a tropical storm . Early on the following day , Ethel made landfall in Pascagoula , Mississippi with sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . The storm gradually weakened after moving inland , before eventually dissipating over southern Kentucky on September 17 . 
 In Louisiana , the outerbands of the storm produced light rainfall and hurricane @-@ force winds , though no damage was reported in that state . Offshore Mississippi , rough seas inundated Horn Island and split Ship Island . Tropical storm force winds in the southern portion of the state littered broken glass , trees , and signs across streets in Pascagoula , as well as down power lines , which caused some residents to lose power . In Alabama , winds damaged beach cottages along the Gulf Coast , and damaged crops in the southern portion of the state . Although large amounts of rain fell in the extreme western portions of Florida , peaking at 12 @.@ 94 inches ( 329 mm ) in Milton , no flooding occurred in Florida . A lightning strike to a power station near Tallahassee caused a brief city @-@ wide blackout . The storm spawned four tornadoes in Florida , one of which destroyed 25 homes . Outside the Gulf Coast of the United States , rain fell in 8 others states , but no damage is known to have occurred . Overall , Ethel caused 1 fatality and $ 1 @.@ 5 million in losses . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Florence = = = 
 A westward moving tropical wave developed into a tropical depression while located north of Puerto Rico on September 17 . By the following day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Florence . Later on September 18 , Florence peaked as a 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) tropical storm as it approached The Bahamas . However , unfavorable conditions weakened the storm back to a tropical depression on September 19 . Little change in intensity occurred before Florence made landfall in western Cuba on September 21 . The storm executed a small cyclonic loop over Cuba before eventually emerging into the Straits of Florida . Florence then tracked northeastward and made landfall in Monroe County , Florida on September 23 . The storm drifted across the state slowly and reemerged into the Gulf of Mexico after more than 24 hours over Florida . 
 By September 26 , Florence made landfall near the Alabama @-@ Florida border and dissipated over Mississippi on the following day . On Grand Bahama , 5 @.@ 48 inches ( 139 mm ) of rain fell in only 6 hours . No impact was reported in Cuba . The storm dropped rainfall across Florida , though the heavier amounts were mainly on the Atlantic coast . Precipitation peaked at 15 @.@ 79 inches ( 401 mm ) near Fellsmere , while rainfall reached 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in some areas of the Miami metropolitan area . Although Florence was a depression at landfall , sustained winds between 35 and 40 mph ( 56 and 64 km / h ) were recorded in Ocean Ridge , while a gust as high as 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) was reported in Vero Beach . In Jacksonville , a pressure gradient combined with Florida to produce tides of 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) about normal . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1960 . Storms were named Abby and Donna for the first time in 1960 . Following the season , the name Donna was retired , replaced with Dora . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Arthur Irwin = 
 Arthur Albert Irwin ( February 14 , 1858 – July 16 , 1921 ) , nicknamed " Doc " , " Sandy " , " <unk> " or " Foxy " , was a Canadian @-@ American shortstop and manager in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) during the late nineteenth century . He played regularly in the major leagues for eleven years , spending two of those seasons as a player @-@ manager . He played on the 1884 Providence Grays team that won the first interleague series to decide the world champions of baseball . Irwin then served as a major league manager for several years . 
 Irwin occupied numerous baseball roles in the later years of his career . He spent time as a college baseball coach , a major league scout and business manager , a minor league owner and manager , and a National League umpire . For most of Irwin 's career , the collegiate and professional baseball schedules allowed him to hold positions at both levels in the same year . Irwin also produced several innovations that impacted sports . He took the field with the first baseball fielder 's glove , invented a type of football scoreboard , promoted motor @-@ paced cycling tracks and ran a short @-@ lived professional soccer league . 
 Irwin became terminally ill with cancer in the last weeks of his life . Shortly after his death from an apparent suicide , Irwin made headlines when it was discovered that two wives and families survived him in separate cities . He had been married to one woman since the 1880s and to the other since the 1890s . He was posthumously elected to the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame in 1989 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arthur Irwin was born in 1858 in Toronto , Ontario , to an Irish blacksmith and a Canadian mother . As a child , he moved with his family to Boston and attended school there . He played local amateur baseball from 1873 until he was recruited by the Worcester Ruby Legs of the National Association in 1879 . In late 1879 , manager Frank Bancroft took Irwin and most of the other Worcester players on a baseball tour that included visits to New Orleans and Cuba . The team , which traveled under the name of the Hop Bitters , returned to the United States after only a few days due to financial and contractual difficulties . The team may have played as few as two games in Cuba . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Playing days = = = 
 Irwin 's major league career began when the Ruby Legs moved into the National League ( NL ) in 1880 . He led the league in assists in his rookie season , and remained with the team through 1882 , when it folded due to poor attendance . Irwin spent three seasons with the Providence Grays , and was captain and starting shortstop of the 1884 Providence team that became world champions . The 1884 Grays featured star pitchers Charles Radbourn and Charlie Sweeney ; the two <unk> did not get along well , and Sweeney left the team in the middle of the season . The club folded after a fourth @-@ place finish in 1885 . 
 Irwin moved on to the newly formed Philadelphia Quakers in 1886 . Tragedy struck the Philadelphia squad in 1888 when pitcher Charlie Ferguson developed typhoid fever ; he died at Irwin 's home . During the 1889 season , Irwin went to the Washington Nationals for his first opportunity as player @-@ manager , but the team folded at the end of the season . He played for the Boston Reds in the Players ' League in 1890 . That same year , Irwin coached the baseball team at Dartmouth College . While Irwin served as a player @-@ manager for Boston in 1890 , he was able to focus on the managerial role for the team in 1891 . That year the team signed his brother , John Irwin , on May 21 . Newspapers brought accusations of nepotism and criticized John 's mediocre play . John Irwin was released by Boston on July 16 , and his major league playing career was over by the next month . 
 Although Irwin 's regular playing career ended after the 1890 season , he appeared in six games while managing the Boston team after it moved to the American Association in 1891 . He also played in one game while managing the 1894 Philadelphia Phillies . A left @-@ handed hitter , Irwin finished his playing career with 1 @,@ 015 games played and batted .241 in 4 @,@ 190 plate appearances . He tallied 396 runs batted in and 552 runs scored . Stolen bases were not awarded until 1886 , but Irwin tallied 93 stolen bases in his last 532 games . He recorded an <unk> career fielding percentage , committing 647 errors in 5 @,@ 317 fielding chances . Irwin played 947 games at shortstop and 56 games at third base . He also appeared at second base , pitcher and catcher . 
 = = = Early non @-@ playing roles = = = 
 Irwin coached at the University of Pennsylvania between 1893 and 1895 , and he managed the Philadelphia major league club during those last two seasons . In 1894 , he angered Penn supporters when a talented first baseman named <unk> nearly signed with Irwin 's major league team just prior to a series of collegiate championship games . Nonetheless , by 1895 , Irwin 's coaching role at Penn included the selection of players and other duties that traditionally fell to the team captain . Irwin left Philadelphia in 1896 to manage the New York Giants . Relieved of his duties after one season in New York , he was subsequently recruited to manage in Milwaukee . However , he returned to coach the minor league team in his native Toronto instead . 
 Irwin coached Toronto during 1897 and 1898 . He faced arrest on a libel charge in 1898 , which stemmed from comments made by Irwin about the actions of the Philadelphia ownership during his time there . Though Irwin turned himself in , it appears that he was never arrested . In 1898 , Irwin traded some of his best players to the Washington major league team . The moves were seen as particularly suspect when Irwin was named the Washington manager shortly thereafter . After 1899 , Irwin did not return to the major leagues as a coach . He returned for a subsequent term as Penn 's coach in 1900 , but he left in 1902 . In August 1902 , Irwin was signed as an NL umpire for the remainder of that season . Irwin , who had previously only filled in for one three @-@ day umpiring stretch in 1881 , umpired his first NL game on August 7 , 1902 . His last umpiring appearance came with the end of the 1902 season on October 3 . In fifty games as an umpire , Irwin ejected nine players , including future Hall of Fame inductees Roger Bresnahan and Fred Clarke . Irwin , who had retained partial ownership of the Toronto club , then returned to manage that team for a couple of seasons . 
 By 1906 , Irwin was manager of the Altoona Mountaineers in the Tri @-@ State League . In July 1907 , Irwin resigned as manager of the Mountaineers after fans became disgruntled . Even after entering baseball scouting , Irwin briefly managed the 1908 Washington club in the short @-@ lived Union Professional League . The league was plagued by financial problems — including the inability to pay players at times — and it folded less than two months after play began . He was rehired to the Penn coaching staff in 1908 . 
 = = = Scouting = = = 
 In the summer of 1907 , Irwin became a scout for the New York Highlanders . In 1909 , New York manager George Stallings rented an apartment overlooking Hilltop Park and sent Irwin up to steal signs from the opposing team . Using a system of binoculars and mirrors , Irwin read the signs and flashed them back to Stallings so they could be relayed to the batter . By 1912 , almost the entire Highlanders roster had been scouted by Irwin . In a newspaper interview covering his scouting career , Irwin asserted that he preferred signing young prospects over expensive stars . " The chances are better with a young player , for by getting him early you can gradually break him into the style of play the team is using " , he said . 
 In December 1912 , New York president Frank J. Farrell promoted Irwin from scout to business manager . Upon his promotion , a statement from the team said , " He has been of such service to the club in numerous ways that Mr. Farrell has invested him with full power to look after business details in future . " The poor relationship between Irwin and New York manager Frank Chance was a factor in the manager 's 1914 resignation after two years of a three @-@ year contract . The New York Times said that Chance " did not think it was possible to collect so many mediocre players on one major league club . " Irwin remained with the Highlanders until Farrell sold the team to Jacob Ruppert and T.L. Huston . Upon the sale of the team , Irwin and several other Highlanders personnel submitted their resignations . 
 = = = Later coaching career = = = 
 Irwin became part @-@ owner of the Lewiston Cupids in 1915 and managed that club in the final season of the original New England League . The 1915 Cupids featured 16 @-@ year @-@ old Cuban pitcher Oscar <unk> , who won 17 games in his third professional season . The team did not win the pennant that year , but the race came down to the final days of the season . Irwin and Christy Mathewson were considered for a coaching position at Harvard College that year , but former Highlanders catcher and professional scout Fred Mitchell was ultimately selected . In 1916 , Irwin publicly accused Philadelphia 's Connie Mack of underhanded dealings in obtaining third baseman Jim Ritter from Baltimore . He said that Mack convinced the New England League 's Baltimore club to draft Ritter so that Mack could later obtain him cheaply . Mack was outraged at the accusations and immediately severed all connections with the player . Ritter never appeared in a major league game . 
 Irwin managed the Rochester Hustlers between 1918 and 1920 . Rochester was not successful under Irwin ; the 1920 Hustlers finished with 45 wins and 106 losses . Cray L. Remington of the Rochester Evening Journal later wrote , " Local fans used to pan Arthur Irwin in the old days when Arthur was as innocent of wrong as the little sparrows on the limbs . Arthur 's job was to win ball games minus talent . He couldn 't do it . " While managing the Eastern League 's Hartford Senators in 1921 against a New York semi @-@ pro team , Irwin noticed the play of Lou Gehrig and convinced him to sign his first professional contract with Hartford . Gehrig had already committed to play at Columbia University and professional experience would affect his collegiate eligibility , so he began playing for Hartford using assumed names like Lou Lewis . However , Columbia found out about Gehrig 's play and the slugger was forced to sit out of college baseball for a year . 
 = = Sports innovations = = 
 While playing with Providence in 1883 , Irwin broke the third and fourth fingers of his left hand . Not wanting to miss any games , he obtained an oversized buckskin driving glove , padded it and sewed the third and fourth fingers together to allow space for bandages . He used the glove even after his fingers healed . John Montgomery Ward of New York soon took the field with a similar glove . By the following season , almost every professional player was using the " Irwin glove . " Prior to 1884 , use of gloves was limited to first basemen and catchers . In 1882 , Irwin committed a league @-@ high 78 errors in 84 games . He committed 66 errors in 98 games the following year . Over his next two seasons with the glove , Irwin committed 98 errors in 163 games . 
 Irwin was president of the American League of Professional Football ( <unk> ) for its lone season in 1894 . The organization represented the first American professional soccer league . Teams in the league were named after their MLB counterparts in the same cities . Some of the active baseball managers served as coaches for the soccer teams , and fans were sometimes enticed by the rumor of MLB players who might participate in the league . Irwin was also involved in an attempt to popularize roller polo . 
 Irwin developed and patented a football scoreboard , which was in use in the Ivy League by the 1890s . The large scoreboard featured a miniature representation of a football field , and the ball moved along the board to report each play . By 1915 , Irwin 's scoreboards were featured at each end of the field for the Army @-@ Navy game at the Polo Grounds . 
 = = Other influence = = 
 Irwin owned athletic facilities in Atlantic City , New Jersey , and negotiated with baseball officials about bringing organized baseball there in 1900 . Irwin opened a motor @-@ paced bicycle racing track in the city in July 1902 . His focus on the bicycle track enterprise had been a factor in his resignation from the Penn coaching staff in 1902 . He also became involved with the Hartford Avenue Colosseum Company and oversaw its Philadelphia bicycle track . 
 = = Death = = 
 On June 21 , 1921 , Irwin gave up his managerial role with the Hartford club in the Eastern League due to health concerns . He was experiencing abdominal trouble and severe nervous attacks . Irwin was diagnosed with stomach cancer ; he had lost 60 pounds in two weeks . While in the hospital , he was told that he only had a few days to live . While traveling from New York City to Boston on the vessel Calvin Austin , Irwin was lost overboard in an apparent suicide on July 16 . Shortly after his death , a theory emerged that Irwin had been robbed for $ 5 @,@ 000 and then murdered aboard the ship . This theory was discounted when it was learned from family members that Irwin had taken only $ 35 on the trip . When Irwin was last seen aboard the ship around midnight on July 16 , he told a friend that he was " coming home to his brother John 's to die . " 
 During the investigation into Irwin 's disappearance and death , two widows emerged ; one lived in Boston and the other lived in New York . He first married Elizabeth , the woman in Boston , in 1883 . Together they had three children , including a son who was 37 at the time of Irwin 's death , and nine grandchildren . In the 1890s he married again , this time in Philadelphia to May , a woman he met while coaching baseball at the University of Pennsylvania . They settled in New York and had a son who was 24 when Irwin died . 
 In his final days , Irwin sold his rights from his scoreboard business for $ 2000 . Though he sent $ 1500 to May and only $ 500 to Elizabeth , his Boston widow was surprised at the gesture since Irwin rarely visited Boston and provided almost no financial support to their family . In fact , May said that he had not been away from New York for more than a few days at a time in 27 years . She said that his only long trips were baseball @-@ related , when he would scout players in other cities . Before he left New York for the final time , he told May that he was going to say goodbye to friends in Boston and that he would return to New York . Though neither woman knew of the other , Irwin 's New York son Harold learned about an unknown brother while he was visiting his father in the hospital just before Irwin 's death . 
 In 1989 , Irwin was posthumously inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 = The Boat Race 1882 = 
 The 39th Boat Race took place on 1 April 1882 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In the race , umpired by former Cambridge rower Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd , Oxford won by a margin of seven lengths in a time of 20 minutes 12 seconds , taking the overall record to 21 – 17 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual rowing eight competition between the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along The Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by three lengths , and held the overall lead , with 20 victories to Cambridge 's 17 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss ( who rowed for the Dark Blues four times between the 1875 and 1878 race ) and Walter Bradford Woodgate ( who represented Oxford in the 1862 and 1863 races ) . There is no record of Cambridge 's coaches . The Oxford boat was manufactured by <unk> and Winship and was used in preference to one built by Harry Clasper which had been tested extensively in practice . The umpire for the race was Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1856 and 1859 ) and the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 11 @.@ 125 lb ( 74 @.@ 7 kg ) , 0 @.@ 125 pounds ( 0 @.@ 1 kg ) more than their opponents . Cambridge saw five former Blues return , including Llewellyn Rhys Jones whose poor health had prevented him from rowing since the 1878 race . The Light Blue crew also included the only non @-@ British competitor in the race in Australian Steve Fairbairn ( whose brother Charles had competed in the 1879 race ) . Oxford 's crew also contained five individuals with Boat Race experience , including R. S. Kindersley and David Edward Brown , both of whom were rowing in their third race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were firm pre @-@ race favourites , having rowed the course twenty seconds quicker than Cambridge in practice . Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race commenced at 1 : 02 p.m. in conditions described by author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater as " fine and warm " with a " breeze from the north @-@ west " . Cambridge made the better start , taking a lead of a canvas length , but were in front for less than a minute . Oxford took the lead and were clear of the Light Blues by the Mile Post and held a three @-@ length lead at Hammersmith Bridge . Cambridge encountered choppy water and , according to Drinkwater , " fell to pieces " . Oxford drew away to win by seven lengths in a time of 20 minutes 12 seconds . It was Oxford 's third consecutive win and the fastest winning time since the 1873 race . The result took the overall record to 21 – 17 in their favour . 
 = Flash Gordon ( 1954 TV series ) = 
 Flash Gordon is a science fiction television series based on the characters of the Alex Raymond @-@ created comic strip of the same name . Diverging from the storyline of the comics , the series set Flash , Dale Arden and Dr. Zarkov in the year <unk> . As agents of the Galactic Bureau of Investigation , the team travels the galaxy in their ship the Sky Flash , battling cosmic villains under the order of Commander Paul Richards . 
 The series was filmed in West Berlin and Marseille as a West German , French and American co @-@ production by Intercontinental Television Films and <unk> . The series aired in syndication throughout most of the U.S. but also aired on the east coast on the DuMont Television Network . 
 The series proved popular with American audiences and critical response , though sparse , was positive . Flash Gordon has garnered little modern critical attention . What little there is generally dismisses the series , although there has been some critical thought devoted to its presentation of Cold War and capitalist themes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Steve Holland as Flash Gordon 
 Irene Champlin as Dale Arden 
 Joseph Nash as Hans Zarkov 
 Henry Beckman as Commander Richards 
 = = Production = = 
 Universal Studios had held the production rights to Flash Gordon but allowed them to lapse . Former Universal executives Edward Gruskin and Matty Fox struck a deal with Flash Gordon owners King Features Syndicate to produce the first 26 episodes of the series . The series was produced by Gruskin and Wenzel Lüdecke . Writers for Flash Gordon included Gruskin , Bruce Geller and Earl Markham . Episodes were directed by Wallace Worsley , Jr. and Gunther von Fritsch . Composers Kurt <unk> and Roger Roger provided much of the original music . 
 Shooting began in May 1953 , with an abandoned beer hall in Spandau serving as the principal shooting location . Among the cast and crew , only the lead actors and director Worsley spoke English . Worsley would recall the production difficulties this caused : 
 " No matter what galaxy we explored , everyone spoke with a German accent . The use of German actors who could not speak English required us to use a lot of close @-@ ups . I would stand behind the camera , correctly positioned for the actor 's look , and read his or her line ; the actor would then repeat the line , mimicking my pronunciation and emphasis . " 
 The series was budgeted at <unk> per episode on a three @-@ day @-@ per @-@ episode shooting schedule . Citing salary disputes , Worsley withdrew from the project after completing the first 26 episodes . Production was moved to Marseille under the direction of Gunther von Fritsch for the 13 final episodes . 
 = = Preservation status = = 
 Physical copies of two episodes , " Escape Into Time " ( October 8 , 1954 ) and " The Witch of Neptune " ( March 4 , 1955 ) , are held in the J. Fred MacDonald collection at the Library of Congress . A total of fourteen episodes are currently available in the public domain , both on various DVD releases and on websites such as the Internet Archive : Episodes 1 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 10 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 36 , and 39 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Critical response and themes = = 
 Variety noted that the series was from a technical standpoint " up to the demands of the script and the average viewer probably won 't notice the differences in quality between this and home @-@ grown produce " . Flash Gordon was immediately popular in the United States and continued to run in syndication into the early 1960s . 
 Modern critical reaction to the series has been light but largely negative . The production values are frequently derided , with the series described as " bargain @-@ basement " . The televised series suffered in comparison to the earlier film serials with the television incarnation labeled " vastly inferior , " lacking " good concepts and scripts " and " most of all , [ lacking ] Buster Crabbe , who was Flash Gordon " . One positive comment notes Champlin 's portrayal of Dale Arden , who was transformed from the typical damsel in distress of the serials into a trained scientist and a " quick thinker who often saved [ Flash and Zarkov ] from perishing " . 
 Film theorist Wheeler Winston Dixon , far from decrying the series for its production values , finds that " the copious [ use of ] stock footage and the numerous exterior sequences shot in the ruins of the bombed @-@ out metropolis give Flash Gordon a distinctly ravaged look " . He writes that its international origins give the series " an interesting new cultural dimension , even a perceptible air of a split cultural identity " . Dixon quotes German cultural historian Mark Baker , who writes of a particular scene from the episode The Brain Machine as emblematic of this cultural split . The scene uses stock footage of a June 17 , 1953 demonstration by East Berlin workers against the East German government . Soviet tanks opened fire on both demonstrators and bystanders , thus confirming East Germany 's status as a Soviet puppet state in the minds of West Germans . American viewers , Baker speculates , were probably unaware of the iconic power in West Germany of the images of fleeing East <unk> , which were used to illustrate a panic on Neptune . 
 Dixon , noting the similarities between the ideals espoused by " space operas " like Flash Gordon , Captain Video and Rocky Jones , Space Ranger and American Cold War values , argues that such series were designed to instill those values into their young viewers . Flash Gordon , he writes , along with its fellow space operas , " have a common , unifying theme : peace in the universe can be achieved only by dangerous efforts and the unilateral dominance of the Western powers . " This echoes the earlier critique of Soviet writer G. <unk> , who in the Soviet film journal Art of the Cinema had accused Gordon and other space @-@ faring characters of being " the vanguard of a new and greater ' American imperialism ' " . The " ravaged look " of the series , Dixon writes , " underscores the real @-@ world stage on which the action of the space operas played " . 
 = Spock Must Die ! = 
 Spock Must Die ! is a novel based on the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Original Series . It was published in 1970 by Bantam Books , and was the first original novel for adults based on the series . The only previous works had been comic books , short @-@ story adaptations of the television episodes and the children 's book Mission to Horatius . The novel details the creation of a tachyon copy of Spock to investigate the destruction of the Organians ; without the intervention of the Organians , war erupts between the Klingons and the Federation . Confusion about the two Spocks allows the new Spock to defect to the Klingons . With the war going badly for Starfleet , the Enterprise travels to Organia to investigate . 
 The novel was written by James Blish , who had written the adaptations of the television episodes . Blish wanted to kill off the popular Spock character to surprise readers . It was the only original novel for adults based on the franchise until 1976 's Spock , Messiah ! , and was reprinted numerous times with different covers . It was included in 1978 's The Star Trek Reader IV . Critics reviewing the novel shortly after its release praised the book as a good example of character duplication in science fiction , but later reviews were mixed . Criticism was directed at the character viewpoints presented in the novel , and later reviewers were less enthusiastic about the work overall . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Doctor Leonard McCoy and Engineer Montgomery Scott discuss McCoy 's fear of the transporter . McCoy posits that an original person is killed upon dematerialization and a duplicate is created at the destination . Scotty explains that the technology converts matter into energy , transmits it and reassembles it into the same original object , but McCoy is not convinced and he wonders what happens to the soul in a transporter beam . The conversation is interrupted by the news that the Organians appear to have been destroyed by the Klingon Empire . The Organians had been enforcing a peace treaty between the Klingons and the Federation . The Enterprise is currently a long way from Federation space . 
 As they journey towards the Klingon neutral zone , Scotty tinkers with the transporter . He develops a method to make a temporary tachyon copy of a crewman that could be transported a much greater distance than the standard range of a transporter beam , enabling the Enterprise to place an agent on Organia long before the ship could reach the planet . Spock is chosen , but a permanent duplicate is created unexpectedly upon transportation — something at Organia has functioned as a perfect , impenetrable mirror for the <unk> . When the duplicate returns , the crew is confused by the two Spocks . The two Spocks are psychically linked , and the original determines that the copy is acting as an agent for the Klingons . After faking a mental breakdown and barricading himself in sick bay , the copy escapes on a shuttlecraft . ( The copy had needed time and facilities to manufacture chirality @-@ reversed amino acids . He had undergone a total left @-@ to @-@ right inversion , down to the atomic scale ; to survive , he had to include the inverse forms of amino acids in his diet . ) 
 The Enterprise receives communiqués indicating that the war is going badly for the Federation . Arriving at Organia , the crew are affected by a powerful mental disturbance centered on the planet ; the effects are worse for Kirk , Scotty , and Spock when they transport down to the planet surface . Kirk identifies this Spock as the duplicate . Realizing their danger via the psychic link , the real Spock arrives on the planet and saves Kirk and Scotty by killing the duplicate . They discover that the Organians are not dead , but imprisoned ; however , the Organians report that a thought @-@ screen device , deployed there by the Klingons to block the Organians ' powerful mental abilities , would ultimately destroy their race . Scotty disables the Klingon device , freeing the Organians and disabling the thought screen around the planet . In retaliation , the Organians imprison the Klingon race on their homeworld for a thousand years . The Enterprise departs and continues on its five @-@ year mission of exploration . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first works of fiction based in the Star Trek universe were the Star Trek comic books , which began publication in 1967 . These were followed by short story adaptations of the episodes of Star Trek : The Original Series by James Blish during the same year . In 1968 , the children 's book Mission to Horatius was published , which was the first novel based on Star Trek to feature an original story . For the first original novel for adults , Blish wanted to kill off a highly popular character to surprise readers . Unexpectedly , Spock had been the most popular character in the TV series , more popular than Captain Kirk . Blish discussed the plot with his wife , Judy , who also preferred Spock to Kirk . So Blish chose to kill off Spock . 
 The plot , featuring both the Klingons and the Organians , follows up to the episode " Errand of Mercy " , which had previously been adapted into a short story by Blish . The story also features references to other works of fiction . Mervyn Peake 's <unk> series of novels is referenced in the name of an alien species called " <unk> " , and one of the plot points is based around a language featured in James Joyce 's Finnegans Wake . It also uses the word " <unk> " which was later considered to be a deliberate reference to J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings universe . The novel doesn 't reset the universe once more to that seen in the television series , something unusual for the book line . Instead , the Klingon Empire is left unable to make any space flight for a thousand years , and the character of Koloth is stuck forever in an asymptotically slowing distortion of local time . 
 Spock Must Die ! was published in February 1970 , and due to the cancellation of Star Trek a year earlier it included a message from Blish for fans to rally in order to renew the series . Sales of the book were good , and it was intended that Blish would continue to write new original novels set in the Star Trek universe . This plan was cancelled after Blish 's death , and a further novel for adults would not be released until 1976 's Spock , Messiah ! by Theodore R. Cogswell and Charles A. Spano , Jr .. In the meanwhile between those two books , Alan Dean Foster wrote further adaptations of the animated episodes from the series which began to be published in 1974 . It was also included in The Star Trek Reader IV , a 473 @-@ page anthology published in 1978 . Spock Must Die ! has been reprinted multiple times ; by 1984 it had been printed 17 times by Bantam Books . It has had a number of cover redesigns in later editions . By 2006 , an original paperback edition was valued at between $ 5 to $ 15 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Brian M. Stableford 's 1979 work about James Blish 's career , A Clash of Symbols , described the book as a " combination of space opera and whimsy , quite typical of the Star Trek mythos " . He thought that the sequences in the book would have been too expensive for the television series , although it was structured in a similar manner as an episode with " sub @-@ climaxes that one can easily imagine would bracket commercial breaks " . In Strother B. Purdy 's The Hole in the Fabric ( 1979 ) , Spock Must Die ! was referred to as a " rather well @-@ written " example of the duplication of characters in science fiction . It was considered to be a play on elements of Martin Gardner 's The <unk> Universe and Lewis Carroll 's Through the Looking @-@ Glass . It was described as an " intriguing idea " by astrobiologist Daniel Glavin in New Scientist magazine in 2010 . 
 The review by Science Fiction and Fantasy Book Review magazine in 1979 described the novel as " one of the better original novels written from the series " . In Don D <unk> 's Encyclopedia of Science Fiction ( 2005 ) , the book was described as " interesting historically , but it is a mediocre piece of fiction . " British writer George Mann criticised Blish 's Star Trek work , including Spock Must Die ! in the relevant entry in The Mammoth Encyclopedia of Science Fiction ( 2001 ) . He said that they " were obviously written primarily for money and do not display the literary and intellectual skill evident in his earlier work " . Ellen Cheeseman @-@ Meyer read the book for Tor.com in 2012 . She felt that the plotline involving the women on board the Enterprise sexually desiring the new Spock was " unsettling " as she thought it said " that sex with Spock ... is the cure for racism that 23rd century women cannot find anywhere else " and stated that Janice Rand deliberately pursued men so as not to become involved with Captain Kirk . However , Cheeseman @-@ Meyer said that it was " worth reading as a celebration of the world Star Trek envisioned , however strange that could sometimes be . " 
 = Just the Way You Are ( Bruno Mars song ) = 
 " Just the Way You Are " is the debut solo single recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Bruno Mars . It is the lead single from his debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) . The song was written by The Smeezingtons , Khalil Walton and Needlz and produced by The Smeezingtons , and Needlz . It was released in the United States to Contemporary hit radio on August 10 , 2010 . The track was added to BBC Radio 1 A Playlist in the United Kingdom , and was released in the United Kingdom on September 19 , 2010 as " Just the Way You Are ( Amazing ) " . 
 The debut single received positive reviews from critics , who considered it a stand @-@ out track on Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans and praised The <unk> 's production . It won a Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 2011 ceremony . The song peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 and Mainstream Top 40 charts and charted in the top five in other countries . It was certified 9 times Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and 6 times by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . Worldwide , it was the best selling digital single of 2011 with sales of 12 @.@ 2 million copies . So far , it has sold over 13 @.@ 7 million copies worldwide becoming one of the best selling digital singles of all time . In 2012 , Dominican musician Karlos Rosé covered the song in bachata as his debut single which peaked at number @-@ one on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 The music video , directed by Ethan Lader , was released on September 8 , 2010 and features Peruvian born Australian actress Nathalie Kelley . The official remix features rapper Lupe Fiasco and is included on the deluxe edition of Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans . Mars performed " Just The Way You Are " on The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour ( 2010 – 2012 ) and The Moonshine Jungle Tour ( 2013 – 2014 ) , and was also performed at his Super Bowl XLVIII halftime show . The song has been covered by various recording artists . " Just the Way You Are " also inspired Meghan Trainor 's debut single " All About That Bass " . The song is featured in the movie Pitch Perfect . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 The song was written by Mars , along with The Smeezingtons , Khalil Walton , and Needlz . Mars said of the song , " It took me months to come up with ' Just the Way You Are ' ... I wasn 't thinking of anything deep or poetic . I was telling a story . Get ready to fall in love ! " He added , " I 'm a big fan of songs like Joe Cocker 's ' You Are So Beautiful ' and Eric Clapton 's ' Wonderful Tonight ' - songs that go straight to the point . You know , there 's no mind @-@ boggling lyrics or twists in the story - they just come directly from the heart . And to me ' Just The Way You Are ' is one of those songs . There 's nothing mind @-@ blowing about it . I 'm just telling a woman she looks beautiful the way she IS - and , let 's be honest , what woman doesn 't wanna hear those lyrics ? ! " Mars ' A & R who was responsible for finding songs and songwriters to help in the process of composing the song , Aaron Bay @-@ Schuck , told HitQuarters that as soon as " Just the Way You Are " was finished they knew they had the first single , saying : 
 " It had a massive chorus , an instantly memorable melody and lyric , and was a natural transition from the B.o.B and Travie McCoy songs ... [ Also ] it didn ’ t sound like anything else on the radio . It had everything we could want in a first single for Bruno . " 
 Ari Levine explains : “ Needlz had a track with a melody idea by Khalil Walton that was presented to us by one of the A & R guys . Bruno and Phil came up with the chorus , and then Needlz sent us the files and we replaced a bunch of sounds with our sounds and I programmed drums in the MPC , and we wrote the rest of the song . I never met Needlz or Walton " . The song was supposed to be for Lupe Fiasco but at this point Bruno decided to keep it . 
 " Just the Way You Are " was Mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios in Hollywood by Manny Marroquin , while Christian Plata and Erik Madrid served as the assistant mixing . Ari Levine and Bruno Mars played all the instruments on the track and recorded them . Ari was also responsible for engineering the song at Levcon Studios in California . Stephen Marcussen mastered the song at Marcussen Mastering in California . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Just The Way You Are " was released as the lead single from Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans . Elektra Records serviced the song to download in the United States on July 20 , 2010 . On November 2 , seven remixes were released as a purchasable download in US . On September 19 , 2010 , the song was sent to United Kingdom to be released Mainstream Radio . It was released as a CD single in Germany on September 22 . The single contains the album version of the song and the remix by Skrillex <unk> . The single ended up by being released worldwide on November 25 , 2010 . On December 2 , 2010 , The Remixes - 12 " Maxi was released in the UK and Denmark to promote the single and album . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Just The Way You Are " is a pop and R & B song with an instrumentation that features piano , keyboard sounds and breakbeat . The instruments are arranged into what critics described as a " nice smooth ballad with vocals " . Tim Byron of The Vine said " the steeply rising melody at the start of the chorus introduces a little tension before defusing it with the , catchy tag of the chorus , which is simple and effective as a hook " . The Guardian music reviewer , Paul Lester , describes the song as " fairly standard R & B pop , his vocal a breezy falsetto as characterless . " 
 The song is in the key of F Major and has a sequence of F @-@ D @-@ Minor @-@ B @-@ Flat @-@ F. Mars ' vocal range spans from F3 to C5 . Billboard critic Megan Vick called " Just The Way You Are " " a feel @-@ good jam , in which Mars ' is able to take " to the next level " is dreamy soprano with a " breezy piano and vaguely hip @-@ hop breakbeat " " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly labeled the song " sweetly smitten ballad " . Nick Levin from Digital Spy describe it as a " huge @-@ hearted <unk> piano ballad with a similar instant classic feel to " Empire State of Mind " " . From The Guardian , Paul Lester says the lyrics are " about a girl Mars could " kiss all day " " . The song has been compared to a " U2 production " by Jon Caramanica of The New York Times and by Andy Gill adding that he felt a " groove through R & B territory " . Tim Sendra of AllMusic called the debut single " lushly romantic " . Scott Kara for the New Zealand Herald felt the song was a " ballad boogie " . 
 Lyrically , the song is about Mars professing " his love for a beautiful girl who occupies his dreams " . Megan Vick for Billboard carries on with her explanation " Mars professes his love ... " When you smile , the whole world stops and stares for a while / ' Cause girl you 're amazing , just the way you are " . She concludes , " Mars ' lyrics aim to make female listeners feel nothing short of perfect in their own skin " . Tim Byron of The Vine said the song is " effective – the repeated lines at the start of the verses are catchy " . Consequence of Sound 's Kevin Barber described the song " Mars sticks to the song ’ s name and insists that he wouldn ’ t want to change anything about his particular <unk> believe him , too . With an undeniably catchy chorus " . 
 = = Reception and accolades = = 
 The song has received positive reviews by music critics . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine gave the song four out of five stars and described it as a " huge @-@ hearted <unk> piano ballad " and compared it to " Empire State of Mind " by Alicia Keys with a similar sound as the Keys song . In her review for Billboard , Megan Vick wrote : " Over a breezy piano and vaguely hip @-@ hop breakbeat , Mars professes his love for a beautiful girl who occupies his dreams [ ... ] Mars pens lyrics that aim to make female listeners feel nothing short of perfect in their own skin . With its steady , danceable pulse and singalong chorus , Mars has created a feel @-@ good jam that should establish him as a solo contender in his own right . " Nima Baniamer from Contactmusic.com felt that " there is nothing about the single that makes Bruno Mars stand out from all the other RnB artists dominating the charts at the moment " , and said , " The song never builds to any climax and it simply falls a bit flat , coming across quite corny and cheesy . " 
 The song was nominated for the 2010 The Record of the Year ceremony . On February 13 , 2011 , the song won the Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance . The single was nominated for several awards at 2011 Billboard Music Awards , but it ended up by winning only the category Top Radio Song . It was nominated for Choice Music : Love Song at the 2011 Teen Choice Awards . In the same year , the single won Most Performed Song at ASCAP Pop Music Awards . In 2012 , at the same award ceremony , it won , again , Most Performed Song and also Song of the Year . 
 " Just the Way You Are " has sold 13 @.@ 7 million copies worldwide , becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . In 2013 , as a celebration of the chart 's 55th Anniversary , Billboard counted down the 100 biggest Hot 100 hits ever , the song was ranked at 74 . The song is also one of the UK 's biggest selling singles of all @-@ time placed at number 74 with sales around 1 @.@ 17 million . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The song reached the top of the US Billboard Hot 100 on the chart dated October 2 , 2010 , ending the two @-@ week reign of Katy Perry 's " Teenage Dream " . The song spent a total of 48 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 , debuting on August 7 , 2010 and leaving the chart on July 2 , 2011 . By the end of December 2010 , the song had sold over 3 @,@ 280 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US alone ; and as of October 2015 , it has sold 6 @.@ 7 million downloads domestically . The song was certified nine times platinum by the RIAA . It holds the record of the longest @-@ reigning debut format on the Adult Contemporary , having spent 20 weeks atop . The song jumped from 7 to 1 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart dated October 9 , 2010 . 
 On September 26 , 2010 , it became the singer 's second number @-@ one single in the United Kingdom , where it hit the number @-@ one spot again on October 24 , 2010 from sales of 116 @,@ 000 copies becoming the first song ever to have left the top three before rebounding to the top spot . It sold 766 @,@ 000 copies during 2010 , becoming the third biggest seller of the year . On April 9 , 2013 it was revealed that the song is the ninth most downloaded song of all time in the United Kingdom . On 2 August 2011 " Just The Way You Are " became the 108th million @-@ selling single in the UK , it took 43 weeks to reach there . As of November 2012 , the song has sold over 1 @,@ 120 @,@ 000 copies . The Official Charts Company ranked the song as the 70th biggest selling single of all @-@ time in UK . 
 On October 12 , 2010 , Bruno Mars got his third number one single in the Dutch Top 40 , after " Nothin ' On You " and " Billionaire " , having spent 11 weeks at number one in Netherlands . The song also reached number one in Australia and certified six times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . The single debuted at number 31 in New Zealand on August 2 , 2010 . The song was number 1 for two weeks . The single was on the chart for 32 weeks . 
 It debuted at number 8 on the Italian Singles Chart on November 4 , 2010 . The song ended up by peaking at number five , and it stayed on the chart for 1 week . It was less successful on the French Singles Chart , where it peaked at number 33 and stayed on the chart for 28 weeks . " Just The Way You Are " also peaked at number three in Switzerland , at number one in the Republic of Ireland and in the Netherlands , at number four in Belgium ( Flanders ) , and at number 2 in Germany and Sweden . It reached number six at Denmark . " Just the Way You Are " was the best selling single of 2011 , selling more than 12 @.@ 5 million copies globally throughout that year . As of January 2016 , the song has sold 13 @,@ 6 million digital downloads . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and synopsis = = = 
 The corresponding music video was directed by Ethan Lander and was shot in September 2010 in the downtown of Los Angeles . The video features Peruvian @-@ Australian actress Nathalie Kelley . Lander considers Bruno Mars a star . He adds " The charisma that he has , you can ’ t teach . ” Finishing with " singer even manages to be suave in his mugshot , which is no small feat ! " He sees the video as a collaboration , the video director came up with the vision and Mars added his vision and so on . The video is a mixture of live action and stopped animation and through the animation Bruno shows his girlfriend how beautiful she is . He takes a cassette tape and starts creating images out of the tape and they start to get a life of their own . 
 The video begins with Kelley listening to " Just the Way You Are " on her Walkman as Mars walks in . Mars stops the tape player , removes the cassette tape and begins singing his song . As the instrumental portion of the song begins , Mars pulls the media out of the cassette tape and arranges the media into letters forming his name followed by the song title . As the song continues , he forms a picture of a drum , again on the table , using the tape media . Additional images of similar construction follow throughout the video including a portrait of Mars as well as one of Kelley blinking her eyes and smiling as Mars continues singing . Most of the images shown are animated , including a bell which Mars rings with his fingers in synchronization with the chimes near the end of the song . Lastly , Mars finishes the song while singing and playing an upright piano while Kelley watches and smiles . The video was inspired by the artwork of Erika Iris Simmons . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 It has received strong airplay on VH1 Europe , reaching # 1 on the VH1 Pop Chart . At the 2011 MTV Video Music Aid Japan the music video won Best Male Video . In 2011 , the video also received 3 nominations at the MuchMusic Video Awards . It won Favorite International Video at the <unk> Music Awards . During the Channel [ V ] Thailand Music Video Awards received the award for Popular International Music Video . It has also received a " Platinum " award for one of the most played music video on MTV channels around the world at the 2011 MTV Platinum Video Plays Awards ceremony . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bruno Mars performed the song on Saturday Night Live on October 9 , 2010 . The song was performed at The Ellen DeGeneres Show , on October 14 , 2010 . A soulful arrangement of the song was sung for a Billboard Tastemakers video session , on October 22 , 2010 . An acoustic version of the song was performed at Grammy Nominations concert in 2010 for the 53rd Grammy Awards . Mars also performed it at the NBA All @-@ Star Tip Off Pre @-@ Show in February 2011 . The song was also performed on NBC 's Today Show on June 24 , 2011 . A live performance was also done on the French X Factor during the finale of the second season . Carolina Frost for the Huffington Post said that Mars at the 2012 Brit Awards " took his <unk> song Just the Way You Are , and gave it a fresh jazzy arrangement . " While Tweeter David Quantick summed up his opinion , asking if " someone came as a spare Osmond " . Others praised Mars ' <unk> and confidence with his soulful rendition . It was the twelfth song of his debut worldwide tour , The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour and was fourteenth on the set list of his second worldwide tour , The Moonshine Jungle Tour ( 2013 ) . The single was performed as the last song in his set list for his performance at Super Bowl XLVIII halftime show as a Tribute to the United States Armed Forces . 
 = = Cover versions and remixes = = 
 San Diego @-@ based formed band , Pierce the Veil covered the track for the compilation album Punk Goes Pop 4 , which was released on November 21 , 2011 . Daniel Evans , a finalist on The X Factor ( UK ) , included his version of the song on his album Wicked Game , released on December 2 , 2013 . The album contains covers from various artists . 
 " Just the Way You Are " was performed by Cory Monteith for the American TV show Glee on episode " Furt " , which aired on November 22 , 2010 . It was also covered by Nathan Sykes from The Wanted , The Saturdays at BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge on October 29 , 2010 . Matt Cardle , the winner of the seventh series of British TV talent contest The X Factor , performed " Just the Way You Are " in week 2 of the live shows and later recorded his own version of the song as a B @-@ side for his debut single " When We Collide " . 
 In 2012 , Dominican musician Karlos Rosé covered the song in bachata as his debut single which peaked at number 31 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and number one on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart in the United States . The music video for his cover was filmed in New York City and directed by Robert <unk> . 
 Following the release of the original version of the song came the remixes . Big Beat , a sublabel of Atlantic Records released these . Skrillex , Simon <unk> and the Manufactured Superstars were among the names to remix the original version in to electronic dance music versions . These remixes did well in the clubs and on <unk> , a leading legal download portal for EDM . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The song was first made available to purchase online on July 20 , 2010 , in the US . Three months later , a promo CD single containing the album version was available for purchase . In Germany a CD single was available for purchase on September 22 , 2010 , that included the Skrillex <unk> Remix along with the original version of the song . On November 12 , 2010 , a digital version that includes the version of the official remix of " Just The Way You Are " featuring Fiasco and the original version of the single was made available in UK and in Denmark . A deluxe edition which includes the remix and the music video was released on November 25 , 2010 , digitally worldwide . On November 2 , 2011 , an EP that includes several remixes was released worldwide . A 12 @-@ inch Maxi CD that included the original version of the song and seven new remixes was released in UK and Denmark on December 2 , 2010 . In US , a 12 @-@ inch Maxi CD was released including a remix of " Billionaire " and two new tracks " Voices in My Head " and " Dancing in the Mirror " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Mixing and mastering 
 Mixed at Larrabee Sound Studios , Hollywood , California ; mastered at Marcussen Mastering , Hollywood , California ; engineered at Levcon Studios , Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , Elektra Records 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Perfect Dark ( Game Boy Color ) = 
 Perfect Dark is an action video game developed by Rare and published by Nintendo exclusively for the Game Boy Color handheld game console . It was released in August 2000 , shortly after the release of its Nintendo 64 counterpart . The game takes place in the year 2022 , one year prior to the events of the Nintendo 64 game , and follows the exploits of Joanna Dark as she attempts to prove herself as an agent for the Carrington Institute agency . 
 The gameplay revolves around shooting opponents and completing objectives like rescuing hostages or recovering items . It also features a multiplayer mode where two players may compete in different types of deathmatch settings . The game includes a built @-@ in rumble functionality into the game cartridge and supports the Game Boy Printer , Game Link Cable , and Transfer Pak accessories . The Transfer Pak allows certain features within the Nintendo 64 game to alternatively be unlocked . Perfect Dark received generally a mixed reaction from video game critics , who criticized its poor and difficult gameplay but praised its graphics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Perfect Dark is an action game that is presented from an overhead perspective where the player can move and shoot in eight directions , similar to Metal Gear : Ghost Babel . The player assumes the role of Joanna Dark , who must initially complete a training mode where she will be provided a fixed sequence of challenges so that the player learns the game mechanics . These mechanics include the use of stealth , in which players are challenged to kill enemies by sneaking up behind them without making noise ( e.g. running or reloading weapons ) , complete a memory type game that involves pressing various buttons in a specific order to open up doors , and shoot targets from a first @-@ person perspective . 
 The campaign is divided into several missions that the player has to complete while fighting enemies and completing objectives . Objectives range from rescuing hostages to exploring areas and recovering items such as <unk> , explosives or laptop computers , which are useful to hack into electronic devices . The player can pick up new weapons , health and ammunition dropped by enemies if necessary . The game also features several mini @-@ games , including a driving level and a sniper mission , as well as numerous boss battles that the player has to defeat in order to progress through the next level . By beating any of these mini @-@ games , the player can access them in the game 's extras menu . 
 In addition to the single @-@ player campaign , Perfect Dark features a multiplayer mode . With the help of a Game Link Cable , two players can link together and compete in four different types of deathmatch modes , ranging from the standard kill @-@ the @-@ other @-@ person on a pre @-@ set time to the Counter Force mode , where the first player must rescue two hostages while the second player has to guard them . Various multiplayer maps are unlocked as the player progresses through the single player mode . Additionally , with the use of the optional Transfer Pak , players can use the game 's cartridge to alternatively unlock some cheats in its Nintendo 64 counterpart . Players may also use the Game Boy Printer to print out character profiles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Perfect Dark is set in early 2022 , predating the storyline of the Nintendo 64 game by one year . Joanna Dark is a student at the Carrington Institute and she is eager to complete the final stages of her training . After completing her training successfully , Carrington Institute leader Daniel Carrington sends her on a mission to destroy an illegal cyborg manufacturing facility in the South American jungle . The facility is headed by Mink Hunter , a highly dangerous terrorist whose purpose is to produce high @-@ tech weaponry for terrorist operations . Joanna manages to complete her mission by eliminating Hunter and destroying the entire facility . When Carrington contacts Joanna , she reports that , during her landing in the jungle , she witnessed an aircraft being shot down and made a note of the co @-@ ordinates . Carrington soon learns that there is a UFO in the area at the time and that dataDyne , the world 's leading developer of new technology , is getting away with the alien wreckage . 
 Joanna is then ordered to snoop around and investigate the crash site . In the process , she is captured and taken to the Pelagic I ship , along with the alien wreckage . Nevertheless , a mysterious alien rescues her and convinces her to sink the Pelagic I with the wreckage and escape . She succeeds and when she contacts Carrington , she tells him that she discovered that the wreckage belonged to an alien race called Skedar , extraterrestrials encountered in the Nintendo 64 game . The situation changes abruptly when the Carrington Institute is stormed by a dataDyne strike team who hopes to destroy any clues of the conspiracy . Joanna manages to defend the Institute and her work earned her enough recognition to take part in her next mission . The game ends with the Carrington Institute carrying out further investigations of dataDyne , setting the stage for the Nintendo 64 game . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Perfect Dark was developed by Rare and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Color . The game was officially announced on January 13 , 2000 when its Nintendo 64 counterpart was still under development . At the time , Rare had its Game Boy Color development team split into two : one for the Game Boy Color version of Donkey Kong Country and the other for Perfect Dark . Since Perfect Dark is one of Rare 's latest games developed for the Game Boy Color , the developers wanted the game to support every Game Boy Color accessory , including the Game Boy Printer , Transfer Pak , and Game Link Cable . 
 Rare originally planned to include a face @-@ mapping Game Boy Camera feature that would have allowed players to place a photograph of their choice onto the face of a multiplayer character in the Nintendo 64 game with the help of a Transfer Pak . However , the company ultimately removed this feature due to events such as the Columbine High School massacre . The game also features a built @-@ in rumble functionality into the game cartridge , which provides force feedback while playing the game . Perfect Dark was presented at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in 2000 and was initially scheduled for release on June 12 , 2000 . According to Rare , " What could be a better accompaniment to Joanna Dark 's [ Nintendo 64 ] debut than an exclusive Game Boy Color title that delves into her previous exploits ? " However , the game was ultimately released in August 2000 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Perfect Dark received generally mixed reviews from video game critics . At the review aggregate website GameRankings , the game holds an average review score of 65 @.@ 67 % based on 9 reviews . Frank Provo of GameSpot felt that the game " does its Nintendo 64 counterpart justice , albeit haphazardly . " Writing for Gaming Target , Jonathan Nicklas praised the graphics , highlighting the game 's detailed character sprites and " appealing " backgrounds . He also praised the voice acting , commenting : " I was deeply surprised to find speech on an aging handheld that 's actually fairly clear . I mean , speech in an N64 game is a rare find , so speech on a GBC is revolutionary . " Although the game 's sound was highlighted , GameSpot criticized the fact that there is no music during gameplay . 
 Criticism was leveled at the game 's difficult gameplay due to the scarcity of health and ammunition , and distinct lack of strategy overall . IGN reviewer Craig Harris criticized the weak artificial intelligence of enemies , while GameSpot criticized the stealth mechanics , commenting : " in theory you should be sneaking up on enemies , defusing bombs , and saving hostages . In practice , however , enemies turn around and attack even when you 're sneaking up on them and defusing bombs requires no effort , so the suggestion of strategy is moot . " N64 Magazine , in their " Planet Game Boy " section , compared the game favourably to Metal Gear : Ghost Babel , noting that Perfect Dark has less emphasis on stealth and more on killing . Some reviewers found the mini @-@ games interesting , but most agreed that they were clearly imitative of games like Spy Hunter and Operation Wolf . 
 In a very positive review , Planet Game Boy magazine praised the mini @-@ games and highlighted the multiplayer mode due to its selection of competitive games , concluding : " Perfect Dark is one of the biggest handheld games ever made , and for fans of the [ Nintendo 64 ] version it 's a vital purchase . " IGN also praised the multiplayer mode and extras , but remarked that " there 's no real strategy involved in these deathmatch games other than to find the other person and open fire until one dies and respawns elsewhere on the map " . In a retrospective review , Jon Wahlgren of NintendoLife felt that Rare " did a great job on squeezing so many features and technical magic into the little cart , but by focusing so heavily on the tech they seem to have sacrificed a lot of what would make it more fun to play " . In 2012 , GamesRadar ranked it the 47th best game available on the Game Boy and / or Game Boy Color . The staff praised Rare for its adaptation of the Nintendo 64 game . 
 = Marriott School of Management = 
 The Marriott School of Management is a business school located in Provo , Utah at Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , a private university in the United States of America owned by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . Going by several different names since its inception in 1891 , the business school at BYU has been known as the Marriott School of Management since 1988 , when Marriott International founders J. Willard and Alice Marriott made a $ 15 million donation to the school . The Marriott School is housed on @-@ campus in the N. Eldon Tanner Building and offers five undergraduate and six graduate degrees . 
 Ethical decision @-@ making is strongly emphasized at the school : undergraduate students are required to complete 14 hours of religion coursework for graduation , all Marriott School students must take at least one course in management ethics , and both students and faculty must commit to abide by the university 's honor code . The school also exhibits a unique culture because the majority of its student and faculty bodies are members of the LDS Church . 
 Many Marriott School students obtain a level of foreign language proficiency while serving as LDS missionaries . ( Sixty @-@ five percent of the student body is bilingual . ) Consequently , the Marriott School sponsors high @-@ proficiency business language courses in 11 languages . The school claims over 53 @,@ 000 alumni and is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1891 , Brigham Young Academy , the predecessor to BYU , formed the Commercial College , which offered coursework in business education . A decade later ( 1901 ) , the college began offering its first four @-@ year degree program . After Brigham Young Academy was separated into Brigham Young High School and Brigham Young University in 1903 , the college was renamed the College of Commerce and Business Administration as part of the university . The next decade was tough for the college , as " BYU struggled through the World War I , a flu epidemic [ that ] closed the school during the fall term of 1918 , and school indebtedness that resulted in the 1918 LDS purchase of both BYU 's assets and debts . " Starting in 1921 , the college was housed in the Maeser Building , where it would remain for 13 years . 
 The Wall Street Crash of 1929 significantly depleted LDS Church funds , which caused the church to consider closing BYU . However , " the transference of a number of church junior colleges allowed BYU to remain in operation . " By 1935 the church regained its financial footing and provided more aid to BYU , the school growing slowly over the next ten years . The business college subsequently began offering master 's degrees in 1939 ; however , the programs were hit hard beginning in 1941 when its enrollment ( particularly that of men ) dropped due to U.S. involvement in World War II . But later that decade , U.S. military veterans returned to school , and in 1945 enrollment doubled . William F. Edwards oversaw the college 's growth over the next several years until 1957 , when the school was re @-@ branded as the College of Business and Weldon J. Taylor was appointed as its first dean . A year later ( 1958 ) the business school held its first management conference , and in 1960 the school was moved to the newly completed Jesse Knight Building . 
 A Master of Business Administration ( MBA ) program was added in 1961 , and the school formed its National Advisory Council in 1966 . In 1973 , the school bestowed its first International Executive of the Year Award to AT & T President Robert D. Lilley . Bruce B. Orton served as interim dean of the school for a year until 1975 , when Merrill J. Bateman was recruited from a management position at candy @-@ maker Mars , Inc. for the job as dean . That same year , the school was separated into the School of Management for undergraduate studies and the Graduate School of Management , which grouped together the MBA , MPA , MOB , and MAcc programs . A year later ( 1976 ) , the business school created a School of Accountancy within its jurisdiction and printed its first issue of Exchange magazine ( now Marriott Alumni Magazine ) . In 1977 , the BYU Management Society was organized . 
 In 1979 , William G. Dyer became dean of the school . Dyer oversaw the construction of the N. Eldon Tanner Building , which was dedicated in 1982 . In 1983 , an Executive MBA program was added , and in 1984 Paul H. Thompson was appointed dean of the school . Two years later ( 1986 ) , the International Student Sponsor Program was started , which continues to provide financial assistance to married LDS international students to this day . In 1988 , the name of the school was changed to Marriott School of Management in honor of its benefactors — Marriott International founders J. Willard and Alice Marriott — following their $ 15 million donation to the school . That same year , the Army and Air Force ROTC programs became a part of the Marriott School . 
 In 1989 , K. Fred Skousen became dean of the school . In that year , the school 's endowment exceeded $ 10 million , and the school was awarded a Center for International Business Education and Research ( <unk> ) grant by the U.S. Department of Education . In 1993 , the Organizational Leadership and Strategy Department was created , and a year later the school instituted a limited @-@ enrollment policy . Also in 1994 , the school began offering a minor in management . By 1998 , the school 's endowment had reached $ 40 million and the Institute of Public Management was renamed in honor of George W. Romney , who during his lifetime served as chairman of American Motors Corporation , Governor of Michigan , and U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development . That same year , Ned C. Hill was named dean of the Marriott School . 
 The school 's Center for Economic Self @-@ Reliance ( CESR ) was formed in 2003 , and the Information Systems Department was created in 2005 . That same year the CESR also participated in the production of the microcredit documentary Small Fortunes , which aired nationwide on October 27 , 2005 , on PBS . In 2006 the school 's worldwide initiatives were organized under the Kay and Yvonne Whitmore Global Management Center , named for former Kodak CEO Kay Whitmore and his wife . 
 In 2006 , members of the school 's faculty were involved in controversy surrounding the U.S. Republican Party presidential primaries . On October 9 , Dean Hill and Associate Dean W. Steve Albrecht sent an e @-@ mail to 50 BYU Management Society members and 100 members of the school 's National Advisory Council asking them to support Mitt Romney 's bid for the U.S. presidency . Hill and Albrecht signed the message with their official BYU titles , sent the e @-@ mail from a BYU e @-@ mail address , and began the message " Dear Marriott School Friend . " Both the LDS Church and BYU , as tax @-@ exempt , nonprofit organizations , are prohibited by federal law from endorsing a particular candidate or political party . Albrecht said that he should not have sent it in his capacity as a BYU dean : " It wasn 't something BYU did , it wasn 't something I probably should have done , and it was bad judgment . " 
 By 2007 , the school 's endowment reached $ 130 million , and in 2008 , the Tanner Building Addition was dedicated . For 2013 , the endowment reached $ 182 @.@ 1 million . Also during this year , the Finance Department was formed in an effort to strengthen curriculum and placement ; the Center for Entrepreneurship and Technology was created in honor of former Dell CEO Kevin Rollins and his wife Debra ; and administrators announced the addition of a Recreation Management and Youth Leadership ( <unk> ) Department to the school . The latter department was formerly under BYU 's College of Health and Human Performance and comprises the academic disciplines of leisure services management , therapeutic recreation , Scouting administration , non @-@ profit management , and youth leadership . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Marriott School is located on the campus of Brigham Young University , which is situated in the urban , Wasatch Front area of Provo , Utah . The school is principally housed inside the N. Eldon Tanner Building ( <unk> ) . At the building 's construction announcement in 1980 , university President Dallin H. Oaks said that the Board of Trustees named it in honor of N. Eldon Tanner ( a Canadian politician and counselor to four presidents of the LDS Church ) because he was known in Canada as " Mr. Integrity " — a title wished upon every Marriott School graduate . At the groundbreaking for the building on November 8 , 1980 , " explosives that were used to remove the soil showered unsuspecting spectators with dust and pebbles . " The Tanner Building was completed in late 1982 and dedicated on April 5 , 1983 , by Gordon B. Hinckley . Today , the seven @-@ story , 120 @,@ 000 square feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m2 ) granite building houses Marriott School classrooms as well as professor and administration offices . A 76 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 100 m2 ) addition , costing $ 43 million and funded by donations , was dedicated on October 24 , 2008 by alumnus Thomas S. Monson . The addition increased the building 's capacity by 53 percent and provides 10 tiered classrooms , one network teaching room , one large assembly room , and 39 study rooms . 
 The Tanner Building is located directly west of central campus . To its immediate north is the Gordon B. Hinckley Alumni and Visitors Center and on @-@ campus housing Helaman Halls . Its western and southern sides are covered by athletic facilities . Close by is also the newly renovated Jesse Knight Building ( <unk> ) , where some business school classes are held . Additionally , a parking garage is located adjacent to the Tanner Building . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Organization and research = = = 
 As part of the larger institution of BYU , the Marriott School is ultimately administered by BYU 's President and Board of Trustees . Under them , the school is directly managed by a Dean ( currently Lee Perry ) , who is advised by three associate deans and the school 's National Advisory Council . The school has nine academic departments , each overseen by a department chair . The Marriott School student body has its own student council , which serves an umbrella organization for Marriott School clubs . The school houses student chapters for national associations including the Society for Human Resource Management , the Collegiate Entrepreneurs ' Organization , <unk> , and Net Impact . There is also a chapter of the honorary association Beta Alpha Psi . 
 Faculty are grouped in one or more of seven " academic areas " : accounting , business management ( including business law , management communication , and managerial economics ) , finance , information systems , organizational leadership and strategy , public management , and recreation management and youth leadership . The school is also home to four research centers that organize research in different fields of business administration and establish liaisons between the Marriott School and the corporate world . Both undergraduate and graduate students may be invited to work as teaching and research assistants , and some MAcc students teach accounting classes during the spring or summer terms , as well as at the BYU 's Salt Lake Center . However , research productivity is hampered by the fact that the Marriott School has no doctoral programs , and therefore , no doctoral students focused on research . The Marriott School faculty was ranked # 64 nationally and # 71 globally in 2008 for its research productivity in the <unk> Top 100 Business School Research Ranking . 
 The Marriott School oversees two perennial publications : Economic Self @-@ Reliance ( a semi @-@ annual , practitioner @-@ focused publication that highlights research and best practices ) and Marriott Alumni Magazine ( a tri @-@ annual publication that showcases innovative business research and ideas as well as news from the school and alumni ) . Marriott School students and faculty are serviced by the Business and Economics Library within the Harold B. Lee Library , which houses an accounting lab and several Bloomberg Terminals . The MSM is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business . 
 = = = Curriculum and degrees offered = = = 
 The Marriott School offers five Bachelor of Science degree programs : Accounting , Finance , Information Systems , Management , and Recreation Management . Three minors are also offered to all students of BYU : Management , Non @-@ profit Management , and Strategy . Management majors must further choose one of the following areas of emphasis : Entrepreneurship , General Business , Global Supply Chain Management , Marketing , Organizational Behavior and Human Resources , or Strategy . 
 The school offers six graduate degrees : the MAcc , MBA , EMBA , <unk> , MISM , and MPA . MBA students choose a major ( Finance , Marketing , Supply Chain Management , <unk> , or Product Development ) and a minor ( Entrepreneurship , International Business , Strategy ) if desired . MAcc students choose either audit , tax , or PhD Prep . 
 Matriculation into the Marriott School as an undergraduate requires an application independent from normal acceptance to BYU . Once in the program , students go through a one @-@ semester " core " where students in the block are in the same classes together as teams . All undergraduates must also complete a one @-@ semester mentoring program where each student selects a Marriott School alumnus to converse with over the course of the semester . The Marriott School 's class schedules mirror those of the university : two 16 @-@ week semesters ( fall and winter ) and two terms over the summer break ( spring and summer ) . Students must carry 12 credit hours in order to be considered a full @-@ time student , and 18 credit hours is the maximum unless permission is granted to take more . 
 About 70 % of student tuition is funded by LDS Church tithing funds , making tuition less expensive for church members than at similar private universities . Students not members of the church pay double the LDS tuition rate . For the 2014 @-@ 2015 school year , Marriott School tuition for full @-@ time LDS undergraduates is $ 2 @,@ 500 per semester ; for Marriott School graduate students , it is $ 5 @,@ 810 per semester . All Marriott School students may apply for several school @-@ specific and university @-@ wide financial aid opportunities . Some are program @-@ specific , others are need @-@ based . The Hawes Scholars program is the highest scholarship distinction given to MBA students at the school . The program awards $ 10 @,@ 000 to second @-@ year students who are nominated by students or faculty , and who are then selected based on academic performance , leadership maturity , and a commitment to high ethical standards . 
 All Marriott School students may also earn the Global Management Certificate . To earn the certificate , students are required to take a business language course , pertinent international business classes , and participate in an international field study or study abroad program . Undergraduate students may also qualify for graduation honors . University Honors is the highest distinction BYU awards its graduates . Overseen by Honors Program , the distinction requires students to complete an honors curriculum requirement , a Great Works requirement , an Advanced Languages requirement , a service requirement , an honors thesis requirement , a graduation portfolio that summarizes the student 's honors experiences — all while maintaining at least a 3 @.@ 5 GPA . The Marriott School designates a faculty member as its Honors Coordinator , who aids students in finding faculty with whom to begin honors thesis research . The university also awards Latin scholastic distinctions : summa cum laude top 1 percent , magna cum laude top 5 percent , and cum laude top 10 percent . 
 = = = Rankings , awards , and admissions = = = 
 Many of the Marriott School 's degree programs have received high rankings from independent sources . In 2014 , the Marriott School 's undergraduate programs were ranked # 13 by BusinessWeek . The Marriott School 's MBA program received rankings from several sources for 2013 – 2014 : # 27 ranking by BusinessWeek , # 17 by Forbes , and # 27 by U.S. News & World Report . Among regional schools the program was ranked # 1 by The Wall Street Journal 's most recent ranking ( 2007 ) ; and among business schools worldwide the MBA program was ranked # 93 for 2014 by Financial Times . The undergrad program was also ranked # 2 for return on investment ( BusinessWeek , 2013 ) and # 2 for its emphasis on ethics ( The Wall Street Journal , 2007 ) . 
 The Marriott School 's accounting program is the only program in the country to receive the American Accounting Association 's Innovation in Accounting Education Award twice . The first award , received in 1993 , was for the development of an integrated approach to teaching accounting . The second award , received in 2007 , was for the development of a PhD Prep Track to prepare MAcc students to enroll in a PhD program after graduation . For 2013 , the bachelor 's degree in the School of Accountancy received two # 3 rankings , one by Public Accounting Report and the other by U.S. News & World Report . The same two reporting agencies also ranked the school 's MAcc program # 2 and # 7 in the nation , respectively . 
 The Information Systems department was ranked # 26 in the nation in 2003 for research , and its MISM program was ranked " among the top ten " by TechRepublic in 2008 . 
 The Marriott School is one of the few colleges at BYU that requires application from undergraduate students post @-@ matriculation to the university itself . In addition to essays and pre @-@ baccalaureate academics , students are evaluated on performance in 13 credit hours of " pre @-@ management " coursework at BYU . For 2008 , the MSM admitted 69 percent of undergraduate applicants , comprising a class of 1 @,@ 783 students . 
 Applicants to the MBA program are evaluated based on commitment to the mission of BYU and the LDS Church , undergraduate academic performance , Graduate Management Admission Test ( GMAT ) standardized test scores , essays , work experience , recommendations , written applications , and interviews , if applicable . For 2009 , the MBA program admitted 51 percent of applicants or 478 students . The class averaged 672 on the GMAT , 3 @.@ 54 GPA , and 45 months of work experience post @-@ baccalaureate . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Students = = = 
 The Marriott School student body comprises approximately 1 @,@ 900 undergraduate and 1 @,@ 100 graduate students . Nearly 75 percent of the students are bilingual and about 30 percent speak a third language , most having lived abroad while serving a mission for the LDS Church . Approximately 16 percent of students are international students , 66 percent are married , and whites ( non @-@ Hispanic ) comprise 91 percent of the student body as of 2009 . Eighty @-@ seven percent of domestic students hail from the West . The mean and median ages of undergraduate students is 23 , 21 percent of whom are female . Female MBA students only account for 13 percent of the graduating class . 
 The Marriott School embodies a distinct culture due to its affiliation with the LDS Church . " Membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints is not required for admittance into the [ school ] , but an understanding of and a commitment to support the Church 's mission is necessary . " All students must adhere to the university 's honor code , which prescribes standards of morality , dress and grooming , academic honesty , and drug and alcohol non @-@ consumption . Undergraduate students must also take 14 credit hours of religion courses in order to fulfill the university 's religious education requirement for graduation . 
 Students find diversion in clubs sponsored by the MSM and in university @-@ wide intramural sports . Students interested in careers in academia can participate in the Marriott School of Management Pre @-@ doctoral Student Organization . Students also compete in academic competitions at various campuses and venues . A BYU student team placed # 1 at the University of Arizona 's annual ethics competition ( Duel in the Desert ) in 2006 and 2007 , and a team of undergraduate accounting students placed # 1 in the 2007 Deloitte Tax Case Competition — marking BYU 's seventh consecutive first- or second @-@ place finish in this division . The BYU chapter of the Collegiate Entrepreneurs Organization also received three first @-@ place national chapter awards at the organization 's national conference in Chicago , including " Best in Teaching Entrepreneurship " and " Best Chapter Marketing . " Additionally , a BYU student team was # 3 at the 2007 International Venture Capital Investment Competition finals , finishing behind MIT and the University of Virginia . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 The Marriott School has 130 full @-@ time faculty with more than 90 percent holding PhDs . Faculty have included former Academy of Management president David <unk> , <unk> co @-@ founder Alan Ashton , <unk> co @-@ founder Stephen Covey , University of Oxford professor <unk> Felin , and Steve Albrecht , former President of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners and of the American Accounting Association . 
 Several Marriott School faculty have been awarded for their efforts in teaching and research , as well as in the community . Kevin Stocks was awarded the 2007 Joseph A. <unk> Faculty Award of Merit by the Federation of Schools of Accountancy for displaying excellence in accounting education , and Warner Woodworth received the 2007 Faculty Pioneer Award in External Impact from The Aspen Institute 's Center for Business Education in recognition for the integration of social issues in research and teaching . Gary <unk> also received the 2006 Stephen D. Gold Award from the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management , while <unk> Arbon was appointed to the Utah Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 Numbering nearly 44 @,@ 000 , graduates from the Marriott School have been deemed " first among recruiters " by BusinessWeek in 2008 . Top recruiters include Ernst & Young , PricewaterhouseCoopers , Deloitte & Touche , KPMG , HP , Intel , Cisco , and Goldman Sachs . For 2009 , MBA graduates averaged $ 87 @,@ 769 in post @-@ graduation salary , MPA graduates $ 48 @,@ 294 , MAcc graduates $ 51 @,@ 900 , MISM graduates $ 58 @,@ 785 , and management undergraduates $ 48 @,@ 995 . 
 There is also a strong contingency of Marriott School alumni who pursue a career in academia , with BYU being ranked # 8 nationally for the number of students who go on to earn PhDs . This is due in part to the MAcc PhD Prep Track and the BYU Honors Program . 
 Alumni of the Marriott School of Management who are prominent in business include Citigroup CFO Gary Crittenden 1976 , former Dell CEO Kevin Rollins 1984 , former Intermountain Health Care CEO Bill Nelson ' 67 , and <unk> <unk> International President Jeffrey B. Welch 1984 . In education , Alison Davis @-@ Blake 1982 is Dean of the Ross School of Management at the University of Michigan , John Grout 1984 is Dean of the Campbell School of Business at Berry College , and David A. Bednar 1976 served as president of BYU @-@ Idaho . Alumni in other fields include Thomas S. Monson 1974 – President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints and chairman of the board of Trustees of BYU , Bart Oates 1982 – three @-@ time NFL Super Bowl champion , and Dave Crenshaw – Writer and Speaker . 
 Many alumni also choose to participate in the BYU Management Society , which was founded in 1977 by Dean Merrill J. Bateman . The organization is an alumni association " with inclusivity " , inviting non @-@ alumni to join as well . The fourfold mission of the society is networking , career development , supporting BYU and the Marriott School , and community service . The Society membership is now at 6 @,@ 000 members in 40 U.S. cities and 10 countries . 
 = Australian Cattle Dog = 
 The Australian Cattle Dog ( ACD ) , or simply Cattle Dog , is a breed of herding dog originally developed in Australia for droving cattle over long distances across rough terrain . The Australian Cattle Dog is a medium @-@ sized , short @-@ coated dog that occurs in two main colour forms . It has either brown or black hair distributed fairly evenly through a white coat , which gives the appearance of a " red " or " blue " dog . 
 As with dogs from other working breeds , the Australian Cattle Dog is energetic and intelligent with an independent streak . It responds well to structured training , particularly if it is interesting and challenging . It was originally bred to herd by biting , and is known to nip running children . It forms a strong attachment to its owners , and can be protective of them and their possessions . It is easy to groom and maintain , requiring little more than brushing during the shedding period . The most common health problems are deafness and progressive blindness ( both hereditary conditions ) and accidental injury ; otherwise , it is a robust breed with a lifespan of 12 to 14 years . 
 In the 19th century , New South Wales cattle farmer Thomas Hall crossed the dogs used by drovers in his parents ' home county , Northumberland , with dingoes he had tamed . The resulting dogs were known as Halls Heelers . After Hall 's death in 1870 , the dogs became available beyond the Hall family and their associates . They were subsequently developed into two modern breeds : the Australian Cattle Dog and the Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog . Robert Kaleski , who wrote the first standard for the breed , was influential in its development . 
 It has been nicknamed a " Red Heeler " or " Blue Heeler " on the basis of its colouring and practice of moving reluctant cattle by nipping at their heels . Dogs from a line bred in Queensland , Australia , which were successful at shows and at stud in the 1940s , were called " Queensland Heelers " to differentiate them from lines bred in New South Wales ; this nickname is now occasionally applied to any Australian Cattle Dog . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The Australian Cattle Dog is a sturdy , muscular , compact dog that gives the impression of agility and strength . It has a broad skull that flattens to a definite stop between the eyes , with muscular cheeks and a medium @-@ length , deep , powerful muzzle . The ears are pricked , small to medium in size and set wide apart , with a covering of hair on the inside . The eyes are oval and dark , with an alert , keen expression . The neck and shoulders are strong and muscular ; the forelegs are straight and parallel ; and the feet round and arched , with small , sturdy toes and nails . 
 The Cattle Dog breed standard states that it should have well @-@ conditioned muscles , even when bred for companion or show purposes , and that its appearance should be symmetrical and balanced , with no individual part of the dog exaggerated . It should not look either delicate or cumbersome , as either characteristic limits the agility and endurance that is necessary for a working dog . 
 = = = = Size = = = = 
 The female Australian Cattle Dog measures approximately 43 – 48 centimetres ( 17 – 19 in ) at the withers , and the male measures about 46 – 51 centimetres ( 18 – 20 in ) at the withers . The dog should be longer than tall , that is , the length of the body from breast bone to buttocks is greater than the height at the withers , in a ratio of 10 to 9 . An Australian Cattle Dog in good condition weighs around 15 – 22 kilograms ( 33 – 49 lb ) . 
 = = = = Coat and colour = = = = 
 There are two accepted coat colours , red and blue , though chocolate and cream do occur . Blue dogs can be blue , blue mottled , or blue speckled with or without black , tan , or white markings . Red dogs are evenly speckled with solid red markings . Both red dogs and blue dogs are born white ( except for any solid @-@ coloured body or face markings ) and the red or black hairs grow in as they mature . The distinctive adult colouration is the result of black or red hairs closely interspersed through a predominantly white coat . This is not merle colouration ( a speckled effect that has associated health issues ) , but rather the result of the ticking gene . A number of breeds show ticking , which is the presence of colour through white areas , though the overall effect depends on other genes that will modify the size , shape and density of the ticking . 
 In addition to the primary colouration , an Australian Cattle Dog displays some patches of solid or near @-@ solid colour . In both red and blue dogs , the most common are masks over one or both eyes , a white tip to the tail , a solid spot at the base of the tail , and sometimes solid spots on the body , though these are not desirable in dogs bred for conformation shows . Blue dogs can have tan midway up the legs and extending up the front to breast and throat , with tan on jaws , and tan eyebrows . Both colour forms can have a white " star " on the forehead called the " Bentley Mark " , after a legendary dog owned by Tom Bentley . Common <unk> in the Australian Cattle Dog are black hairs in a red @-@ coated dog , including the extreme of a black saddle on a red dog , and extensive tan on the face and body on a blue dog , called " creeping tan " . The Cattle Dog has a double coat — the short , straight outer guard hairs are protective in nature , keeping the elements from the dog 's skin while the undercoat is short , fine and dense . 
 The mask consists of a black patch over one or both eyes ( for the blue coat colour ) or a red patch over one or both eyes ( for the red coat colour ) . Depending on whether one or both eyes have a patch , these are called , respectively , " single " ( or " half " ) mask and " double " ( or " full " ) mask . Dogs without a mask are called plain @-@ faced . Any of these are acceptable according to the breed standard . In conformation shows , even markings are preferred over uneven markings . 
 = = = = Tail = = = = 
 The breed standards of the Australian , American and Canadian kennel clubs specify that the Australian Cattle Dog should have a natural , long , un @-@ docked tail . There will often be a solid colour spot at the base of the tail and a white tip . The tail should be set moderately low , following the slope of the back . It should hang in a slight curve at rest , though an excited dog may carry its tail higher . The tail should feature a reasonable level of brush . 
 In the United States , tails are sometimes docked on working stock . The tail is not docked in Australia , and serves a useful purpose in increasing agility and the ability to turn quickly . The Australian Cattle Dog is a breed distinct from the Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog , a square @-@ bodied dog born with a naturally " bobbed " tail . The Stumpy Tail resembles the Australian Cattle Dog , but has a taller , leaner conformation . It occasionally has a natural long thin tail , but most are born without tails . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 Like many working dogs , the Australian Cattle Dog has high energy levels , an active mind , and a level of independence . The breed ranks 10th in Stanley Coren 's The Intelligence of Dogs , rated as one of the most intelligent dogs ranked by obedience command trainability . The Cattle Dog needs plenty of exercise , companionship and a job to do , so a non @-@ working dog might participate in dog sports , learning tricks , or other activities that engage its body and mind . 
 When on home ground , the Australian Cattle Dog is an affectionate and playful pet . However , it is reserved with people it does not know and naturally cautious in new situations . Its attitude to strangers makes it an excellent guard dog when trained for this task , and it can be socialised to become accustomed to a variety of people from an early age as a family pet . It is good with older , considerate children , but will herd people by nipping at their heels , particularly younger children who run and squeal . By the time puppies are weaned , they should have learned that the company of people is pleasurable , and that responding to cues from a person is rewarding . The bond that this breed can create with its owner is strong and will leave the dog feeling protective towards the owner , typically resulting in the dog 's never being too far from the owner 's side . The Australian Cattle Dog can be the friendliest of companions although it is quick to respond to the emotions of its owners , and may defend them without waiting for a command . The ACD was originally bred to move reluctant cattle by biting , and it will bite if treated harshly . The Australian Cattle Dog 's protective nature and tendency to nip at heels can be dangerous as the dog grows into an adult if unwanted behaviours are left unchecked . 
 While an Australian Cattle Dog generally works silently , it will bark in alarm or to attract attention . It has a distinctive intense , high @-@ pitched bark . Barking can be a sign of boredom or frustration , although research has shown that pet dogs increase their vocalisation when raised in a noisy environment . It responds well to familiar dogs , but when multiple dogs are present , establishing a pecking order can trigger aggression . It is not a breed that lives in a pack with other dogs . 
 Data accumulated from Council reports in New South Wales from April to June 2013 , showed that dogs identified as Australian Cattle Dogs were involved in 66 attacks , where an attack is defined as any incident where a dog rushes at , bites , harasses or chases any person or animal . Staffordshire Bull Terrier ( 155 attacks ) , German Shepherd ( 89 ) and American Staffordshire Terrier ( 88 ) were reported to be involved in more incidents . Expressed as a percentage of registered dogs , 0 @.@ 1 % of Australian Cattle Dogs were involved in attacks . The data gathered in 2011 – 2012 listed the ACD twenty @-@ seventh in involvement in incidents ranked by percentage of dogs registered . A review of incidents in Melbourne where a dog bit , rushed at or chased a person or animal in a public space , found that there were sixty breeds involved and the German Shepherd and German Shepherd crosses , and Australian Cattle Dog and Cattle Dog crosses accounted for 9 % of incidents . Surveys of U.S. breed club members showed that both dog @-@ directed aggression and stranger @-@ directed aggression were higher in the ACD than the average of breeds studied , with dog @-@ directed aggression being the more prevalent of the two aggression types . The American Temperament Test Society reports a test pass rate of 79 @.@ 3 % for Australian Cattle Dogs . The average pass rate for all breeds is 80 @.@ 4 % . 
 = = As pets = = 
 = = = Grooming = = = 
 Known as a " wash and wear " dog , the Australian Cattle Dog requires little grooming , and an occasional brushing is all that is required to keep the coat clean and odour @-@ free . Even for the show ring it needs no more than wiping down with a moist cloth . It is not a year @-@ round <unk> but blows its coat once a year ( twice in the case of intact females ) and frequent brushing and a warm bath during this period will contain the shedding hair . As with all dogs , regular attention to nails , ears and teeth will help avoid health problems . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 In Katherine Buetow 's guide to the Australian Cattle Dog , Ian Dunbar makes the point that while people think of dog training as teaching a dog to sit , speak and roll over , the dog already knows how to do these things . Training , he says , involves teaching the dog that it is a good idea to do these things when a particular word is said or signal is given . He goes on to explain his belief that training is about opening communication channels , so that the dog knows what the handler wants it to do , and knows that it will be worth its while to do it . Consequences for the dog can be rewards for doing what is required , as recommended by Dunbar , or corrections where an unwanted behaviour is performed . Like other working breeds , the Australian Cattle Dog is intelligent and responsive ; both of these traits can be an advantage in training where a structured , varied program is used , but can lead to unwanted outcomes if training is not consistent , or is repetitive and boring for the dog . Stock dog trainer Scott Lithgow recommends making training a game so the Cattle Dog learns that obedience leads to enjoyment . Many of a Cattle Dog 's natural behaviours are undesirable in a pet : barking , chewing , chasing , digging , defending territory , and nipping heels . Training , therefore , involves helping the dog adopt a lifestyle that is probably very different from that of its droving ancestors . The Australian Cattle Dog is <unk> , and responds well to training . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 The Australian Cattle Dog demands a high level of physical activity . Like many other herding dog breeds , the Cattle Dog has an active and fertile mind and if it is not given jobs to do it will find its own activities . It will appreciate a walk around the neighbourhood , but it needs structured activities that engage and challenge it , and regular interaction with its owner . While individual dogs have their own personalities and abilities , as a breed the Australian Cattle Dog is suited to any activity that calls for athleticism , intelligence , and endurance . 
 Kennel club @-@ sponsored herding trials with a range of events suit the driving abilities of the Cattle Dog and other upright breeds , while sheepdog trials are more suited to the " eye " breeds such as the Border Collie and Australian Kelpie . Herding instincts and trainability are measured at non @-@ competitive herding tests , and basic commands are sometimes taught through herding games , where rules such as " stay " , " get it " and " that 'll do " are applied to fetching a ball or chasing a yard broom . 
 The Australian Cattle Dog was developed for its ability to encourage reluctant cattle to travel long distances and may be the best breed in the world for this work . However , some working dog trainers have expressed concern that dogs bred for the show ring are increasingly too short in the legs and too stocky in the body to undertake the work for which they were originally bred . 
 Among the most popular activities for an Australian Cattle Dog is dog agility . It is ideally suited for navigating obstacle courses , since as a herding dog it is reactive to the handler 's body language and willing to work accurately at a distance from the handler . Agility has been used by Cattle Dog owners to instil confidence in their dogs , and enhance their performance in training and competition . 
 The Australian Cattle Dog thrives on change and new experiences , and many handlers find training the breed challenging for this reason . An Australian Cattle Dog can excel in obedience competition . It will enjoy the challenges , such as retrieving a scented article , but the breed 's problem @-@ solving ability may lead it to find solutions to problems that are not necessarily rewarded by the obedience judges . Rally obedience offers more interaction with the owner and less repetition than traditional obedience trials . 
 Australian Cattle Dogs have been successful in a range of dog sports including weight pulling , flyball and <unk> . The breed is particularly suited to activities that a dog can share with its owner such as <unk> , disc dog , and skijoring or <unk> . It is an effective hiking companion because of its natural endurance , its general lack of interest in hunting , and preference for staying by its owner 's side . Most Australian Cattle Dogs love the water and are excellent swimmers . It is not a hyperactive breed , and once one has had its exercise , it is happy to lie at its owner 's feet , or to rest in its bed or crate while keeping an ear and eye open for signs of pending activity . The Australian Cattle Dog is an adaptable dog that can accept city or indoor living conditions , if its considerable exercise and companionship needs are met . 
 The Australian Cattle Dog can be put to work in a number of ways . Cattle Dogs are service dogs for people with a disability or are therapy dogs , some work for customs agencies in drug detection , some as police dogs , others haze pest animals , such as geese , for city or state agencies , and some work as scat @-@ detection dogs , tracking endangered wildlife species . 
 = = Health and lifespan = = 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 In a small sample of 11 deceased dogs , Australian Cattle Dogs had a median longevity of 11 @.@ 7 years ( maximum 15 @.@ 9 yrs ) . A larger survey of 100 deceased dogs yielded a mean longevity of 13 @.@ 41 years with a standard deviation of 2 @.@ 36 years . The median <unk> of breeds of similar size are between 11 and 13 years . There is an anecdotal report of a Cattle Dog named Bluey , born in 1910 and living for 29 @.@ 5 years , but the record is unverified . Even if true , Bluey 's record age would have to be regarded more as an uncharacteristic exception than as an indicator of common exceptional longevity for the entire breed . It remains , however , that Australian Cattle Dogs generally age well and appear to live on average almost a year longer than most dogs of other breeds in the same weight class . Many members of the breed are still well and active at 12 or 14 years of age , and some maintain their sight , hearing and even their teeth until their final days . 
 = = = Common health problems = = = 
 The Australian Cattle Dog carries recessive piebald alleles that produce white in the coat and skin and are linked to congenital hereditary deafness , though it is possible that there is a multi @-@ gene cause for deafness in a dog with the piebald pigment genes . Around 2 @.@ 4 % of Cattle Dogs in one study were found to be deaf in both ears and 14 @.@ 5 % were deaf in at least one ear . 
 The Australian Cattle Dog is one of the dog breeds affected by progressive retinal atrophy . It has the most common form , progressive rod @-@ cone degeneration ( PRCD ) , a condition that causes the rods and cones in the retina of the eye to deteriorate later in life , resulting in blindness . PRCD is an autosomal recessive trait and a dog can be a carrier of the affected gene without developing the condition . 
 Hip dysplasia is not common in the breed , although it occurs sufficiently often for many breeders to have their breeding stock tested . The Cattle Dog has a number of inherited conditions , but most of these are not common . Hereditary <unk> of the Australian Cattle Dog is a very rare condition caused by an inherited biochemical defect . Dogs identified with the condition were completely paralysed within their first year . Based on a sample of 69 still @-@ living dogs , the most common health issues noted by owners were musculoskeletal ( <unk> , elbow dysplasia , and arthritis ) and reproductive ( <unk> , infertility , and false pregnancy ) , and blindness . A study of dogs diagnosed at Veterinary Colleges in the United States and Canada over a thirty @-@ year period described fractures , lameness and cruciate ligament tears as the most common conditions in the Australian Cattle Dogs treated . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = In Australia = = = 
 George Hall and his family arrived in the New South Wales Colony in 1802 . By 1825 , the Halls had established two cattle stations in the Upper Hunter Valley , and had begun a northward expansion into the Liverpool Plains , New England and Queensland . Getting his cattle to the Sydney markets presented a problem in that thousands of head of cattle had to be moved for thousands of kilometres along unfenced stock routes through sometimes rugged bush and mountain ranges . A note , in his own writing , records Thomas Hall 's anger at losing 200 head in scrub . 
 A droving dog was needed , but the colonial working dogs are understood to have been of the Old English Sheepdog type , commonly referred to as <unk> . Descendants of these dogs still exist , but are useful only over short distances and for yard work with domesticated cattle . Thomas Hall addressed the problem by importing several of the dogs used by drovers in Northumberland , his parents ' home county . At that time dogs were generally described by their job , regardless of whether they constituted a breed as it is currently understood . In the manner of the time , the Hall family historian , A. J. Howard , gave these blue mottled dogs a name : Northumberland Blue Merle Drovers Dog . 
 Thomas Hall crossed his Drovers Dogs with dingoes he had tamed , and by 1840 was satisfied with his resulting progeny . During the next thirty years , the Halls Heelers , as they became known , were used only by the Halls . Given that they were dependent on the dogs , which gave them an advantage over other cattle breeders , it is understandable that the dogs were not distributed beyond the Hall 's properties . It was not until after Thomas Hall 's death in 1870 , when the properties went to auction with the stock on them , that Halls Heelers became freely available . 
 By the 1890s , the dogs had attracted the attention of the Cattle Dog Club of Sydney , a group of men with a recreational interest in the new practice of showing dogs competitively . None were stockmen working cattle on a daily basis , and initially they were interested in a range of working dogs , including the Smithfield . They reportedly adopted the term " Australian Cattle Dog " to refer to the dogs being bred from bloodlines originating from Thomas Hall 's " <unk> " , and prominent members of the group concentrated on breeding these lines . Of these breeders , the <unk> family was the most influential . Robert Kaleski , of Moorebank , a young associate of Harry <unk> , wrote " in 1893 when I got rid of my cross @-@ bred cattle dogs and took up the blues , breeders of the latter had started breeding ... to fix the type . I drew up a standard for them on those lines " . This first breed standard for the Cattle Dog breed was published , with photographs , by the New South Wales Department of Agriculture in 1903 . 
 Kaleski 's standard was adopted by breed clubs in Queensland and New South Wales and re @-@ issued as their own , with local changes . His writings from the 1910s give an important insight into the early history of the breed . However , dog breeder and author Noreen Clark has noted that his opinions are sometimes just that , and he introduces some contradictory assertions in his later writings , as well as some assumptions that are illogical in the light of modern science . Some of these have persisted ; for example he saw the red colour form as having more dingo in it than the blue form , and there is a persistent belief that reds are more vicious than blues . The most enduring of Kaleski 's myths relate to Dalmatian and Kelpie infusions into the early Cattle Dog breed . These infusions are not referred to in Kaleski 's writings until the 1920s and it seems likely that Kaleski sought to explain the Cattle Dog 's mottled colouration and tan on legs by similarity to the Dalmatian and Kelpie , respectively . The genetics of coat colour , and the current understanding of hereditary characteristics , make the infusion of Dalmatian to increase the cattle dog 's tolerance of horses an extremely unlikely event . There were relatively few motor vehicles in Australia at the beginning of the 20th century , so most dogs of any breed would have been accustomed to horses . The Kelpie breed was developed after the Cattle Dog type was described , so its infusion is unlikely . It is possible that there was some infusion of Bull Terrier but there is no verifiable record of this , and the Cattle Dog has not had the Bull Terrier 's instinct to bite and hold , which would have been an undesirable trait . Early in the 1900s there was considerable in @-@ fighting amongst members of the Cattle Dog Club , and a series of arguments about the origin of the breed appeared in newspapers and journals of the time . While many of these arguments were misleading , some irrational , and the majority not supported by historical facts , they continue to be circulated , resulting in a number of theories on the origins of the breed . In recent years , information technology enabling the manipulation of large databases combined with advances in the understanding of canine genetics has allowed a clearer understanding of the development of the breed . 
 Through the 1890s , Cattle Dogs of Halls Heeler derivations were seen in the kennels of exhibiting Queensland dog breeders such as William Byrne of <unk> , and these were a different population from those shown in New South Wales . Little Logic was bred in Rockdale , New South Wales , however Sydney exhibitors saw Little Logic for the first time after the dog had been added to the Hillview kennels of Arch Bevis in Brisbane . The show records of Little Logic and his offspring created a demand in New South Wales for Queensland dogs . By the end of the 1950s , there were few Australian Cattle Dogs whelped that were not descendants of Little Logic and his best known son , Logic Return . The success and popularity of these dogs led to the growth of the nickname " Queensland Heeler " . 
 The prominence of Little Logic and Logic Return in the pedigrees of modern Australian Cattle Dogs was perpetuated by Wooleston Kennels . For some twenty years , Wooleston supplied foundation and supplementary breeding stock to breeders in Australia , North America and Continental Europe . As a result , Wooleston Blue Jack is ancestral to most , if not all , Australian Cattle Dogs whelped since 1990 in any country . 
 = = = In the United States = = = 
 In the 1940s Alan McNiven , a Sydney veterinarian , introduced Dingo , Kelpie , German Shepherd , and Kangaroo Hound into his breeding program ; however , the Royal Agricultural Society Kennel Club ( <unk> ) would not register the cross breeds as Australian Cattle Dogs , even though McNiven argued they were true to conformation , colour and temperament . McNiven responded by giving his pups registration papers from dead dogs , and was consequently expelled from the <unk> and all of his dogs removed from the registry . Meanwhile , Greg Lougher , a Napa , California cattle rancher who met Alan McNiven while stationed in Australia during World War II , had imported several adults and several litters from McNiven . After his de @-@ registration McNiven continued to export his " improved " dogs to the United States . Many U.S. soldiers who were stationed in Queensland or NSW during the War discovered the Australian Cattle Dog and took one home when they returned . 
 In the late 1950s a veterinarian in Santa Rosa , California , Jack Woolsey , was introduced to Lougher 's dogs . With his partners , he bought several dogs and started breeding them . The breeders advertised the dogs in Western Horsemen stating they were guaranteed to work and calling them Queensland Heelers . Woolsey imported several purebred Australian Cattle Dogs to add to his breeding program , including <unk> Blue Ace , Glen Iris Boomerang and several Glen Iris bitches . The National Stock Dog Registry of Butler , Indiana , registered the breed , assigning American numbers without reference to Australian registrations . 
 Australian Cattle Dogs had been classified in the " miscellaneous " category at the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) since the 1930s ; to get the breed full recognition , the AKC required that a National Breed Parent Club be organised for promotion and protection of the breed . In 1967 Esther Ekman met Chris Smith @-@ Risk at an AKC show , and the two fell into conversation about their Australian Cattle Dogs and the process of establishing a parent club for the breed . By 1969 the fledgling club had 12 members and formally applied to the AKC for instructions . One of the requirements was that the Club had to start keeping its own registry for the breed and that all dogs on the registry would have to be an extension of the Australian registry , tracing back to registered dogs in Australia . The AKC Parent Club members began researching their dogs , including exchanging correspondence with McNiven , and discovered that few of them had dogs that could be traced back to dogs registered in Australia . The AKC took over the club registry in 1979 and the breed was fully recognised in September 1980 . The Australian Cattle Dog Club of America is still active in the promotion of the breed and the maintenance of breed standards . The National Stock Dog Registry continued to recognise Cattle Dogs without prerequisite links to Australian registered dogs , on the condition that any dog of unknown parentage that was presented for registry would be registered as an " American Cattle Dog " , and all others would still be registered as " Australian Cattle Dogs " . 
 = = = In Canada = = = 
 The breed gained official recognition from the Canadian Kennel Club in January 1980 after five years of collecting pedigrees , gathering support , and lobbying officials by two breeders and enthusiasts . The small number of Australian Cattle Dogs in Canada at the time were primarily working dogs on farms and ranches scattered across large distances . However , the fledgling breed club held conformation shows , obedience and agility competitions , and entered their dogs in sports including flyball and lure coursing . At the end of 1980 , Landmaster Carina was named the first Australian Cattle Dog in Canada to gain both her conformation and obedience titles . 
 = = = In the United Kingdom = = = 
 The first registered Australian Cattle Dogs to arrive in the United Kingdom were two blue puppies , Lenthal <unk> and Lenthal <unk> , followed in 1980 by Landmaster Darling Red in whelp . Landmaster Darling Red was imported by John and Mary Holmes , and proved to be an outstanding brood bitch . Over the next few years additional Cattle Dogs arrived in the UK from the Netherlands , Kenya , Germany and Australia , although prior to relaxation of rules regarding artificial insemination , the UK gene pool was limited . In 1985 an Australian Cattle Dog Society was formed and officially recognised by the Kennel Club ; before this they had to compete in the category " Any Variety Not Separately Classified " . Australian Cattle Dogs were competing successfully in obedience and working trials in the UK during the 1980s . 
 = = Cross breeds = = 
 The Texas Heeler is a cross between the Australian Cattle Dog and the Australian Shepherd that was first registered with the Animal Research Foundation ( ARF ) in 1970 . The ARF has registered Australian Cattle Dogs without papers as " Australian <unk> Queensland Heelers " since 1965 and was the first organisation to recognise the Australian Shepherd . Although originally bred for its ability to work cattle , the Texas Heeler is increasingly used as a pet and a companion in dog sports . As with most cross breeds , the Texas Heeler 's size and appearance is a variable combination of the parent breeds . 
 = Matthew West = 
 Matthew Joseph West ( born April 25 , 1977 ) is an American contemporary Christian musician , singer @-@ songwriter , and actor . He has released five studio albums and is known for his songs , " More " , " You Are Everything " , and " The Motions " . He was nominated for five Dove Awards in 2005 , two of which were for his major label debut album , Happy . West won the 2013 American Music Award for Best Contemporary Inspirational Artist . 
 Starting as an independent musician in the late 1990s , he released three independent albums before signing with Universal South Records . With the release of his Dove Award @-@ winning debut album , Happy , released in 2003 , his first radio single , " More " , stayed at No. 1 on Christian Adult Contemporary charts for nine weeks and received two Dove Award nominations . His second album , History , was followed by a 2006 re @-@ release of the originally independent album , Sellout . In 2007 , he faced vocal issues that threatened his career with two months of prescribed vocal rest . His third studio album , Something to Say , also enjoyed chart success with No. 1 hits , " You Are Everything " and " The Motions " . 
 In addition to his main solo career , West has worked as a songwriter for many Christian musicians and groups such as Point of Grace , Mandisa , Natalie Grant , and Casting Crowns , as well as mainstream country acts , Rascal Flatts , Billy Ray Cyrus , and Vince Gill . In 2013 , his second single , " Hello , My Name Is " , from the album , Into the Light , was released and reached at No. 1 for a record @-@ breaking 17 consecutive weeks on the Billboard Christian Songs chart . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Matthew West was born on April 25 , 1977 in Downers Grove , Illinois . As a child he was a fan of his hometown baseball team , the Chicago Cubs , and wanted to eventually have a career in baseball . He played baseball throughout high school at Downers Grove North High School , becoming team captain as a senior . He was hoping for a college baseball scholarship but instead ended up receiving a four @-@ year music scholarship at Millikin University in Decatur , Illinois . He graduated from Millikin in 1999 . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 West wrote most of his first songs in the sanctuary of his father 's church while he was at home during college breaks . According to a statement by West at the 2013 Winter Jam ( March 23 , 2013 ) : at a 1997 Steven Curtis Chapman concert at the Assembly Hall in Champaign , Urbana , West has said that he was crying profusely , making his friends ask him what was wrong . He said that he was being led by Jesus to pursue a career in singing and songwriting . He was a songwriter and independent musician from 1997 to 2002 , releasing three albums : September Sun ( 1997 ) , Every Step of the Way ( 1998 ) , and Sellout ( 2002 ) . In October 1997 , he went on a three @-@ city tour to support of the release of September Sun . 
 Just before graduating from Millikin University in 1999 , someone from the college recommended that West attend the GMA Music in the Rockies event for aspiring musicians . Although West was not interested at first , he attended after learning that other people signed him up and paid his entrance fee . He met a representative from Word Publishing at the event who took interest in him and kept in contact until he graduated . West landed in the finals of a songwriting competition and was offered a songwriting deal in July 1999 , five weeks after graduating . After penning songs for well @-@ known musicians like Billy Ray Cyrus and Rachael Lampa , he began touring the United States as an independent artist in 2000 and 2001 . 
 On July 26 , 2002 , only a week or two before signing a record contract with Universal South Records , West had an injury to his left arm which threatened his musical career and guitar playing . He says , " I locked myself out of my house . But I 'd done that before , and I had a way of breaking in through a window . But this time , I had a really hard time getting the window open . I started pushing up on the window really hard and my hand broke through the glass . Blood starting spewing out of my left arm everywhere and I ran down my street screaming for help . After seeing so much blood , I went into shock and just blacked out in the middle of the street . The next thing I can remember is some construction workers praying over me in Spanish and then being taken to the hospital . " West was told that the chances were low of regaining the full use of his left arm , having come very close to severing a major artery . He recovered after the accident , however , and was able to continue playing guitar and record for his first studio album . 
 = = = Happy ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = 
 After signing with Universal South Records on August 23 , 2002 , West released his first non @-@ independent studio album , Happy on December 26 , 2003 . The album 's producers Kenny Greenberg and Jason Houser co @-@ wrote the song " More " with West . The track was his first and most successful radio single to date , staying at No. 1 on R & R 's Christian Adult Contemporary chart for a record @-@ breaking nine weeks . It was the most played Christian AC song of 2004 and went on to be labelled as the Christian Song of the Year by ASCAP . Two additional songs , " The End " and " You Know Where to Find Me " , were also released as singles off the album . Beginning in late September 2004 , West joined Avalon and Mark Schultz on a 40 @-@ city fall tour , which concluded at the end of November . In 2005 , he was nominated for five Dove Awards , including " New Artist of the Year " and " Song of the Year " . He won the " Recorded Music Packaging of the Year " Dove Award for his debut album Happy . 
 In early 2005 , he was on the <unk> 2005 tour , hosted by <unk> , with tobyMac , Building 429 , Tait , and Rachael Lampa . 
 = = = History and vocal problems ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = 
 With Kenny Greenberg and Jason Houser once again as producers , Matthew West began recording for his second studio album in early 2005 . History , co @-@ produced by West , was released on June 21 , 2005 on Universal South Records . The first single off the album , " Next Thing You Know " , was released June 20 , a day before the album 's release . The theme of the title track " History " was inspired by a R & R music news headline " Matthew West Makes History " , in reference to his first album , Happy . " It 's not every day you read a headline like that with your name in it that calls you a history maker , " he said . Beginning on September 14 , 2005 , he kicked off the 30 @-@ city History 101 tour , his first headlining tour , which included guest musicians Shawn McDonald and Paul Wright . He then joined tobyMac 's Winter Wonder Slam tour , beginning on December 1 , 2005 , along with John Reuben , <unk> , <unk> , and DJ Maj. Two additional songs were released off History as singles : " Only Grace " and the title track " History " . 
 His independent album Sellout was re @-@ released in 2006 on Universal South Records . 
 West said that he began to experience " some vocal fatigue " in April 2007 . He said " I had lost some of my vocal range , staying on higher notes and lower notes . I even began having a hard time speaking . " At a vocal check @-@ up in response to the issue , West 's doctors at the Nashville Vanderbilt Voice Center discovered " hemorrhaging caused by some polyps " . He was told by his doctors that vocal surgery was the only option , since a few weeks had passed . The surgery took place on May 17 , 2007 , a process that he said was " career threatening . " Afterward , he was prescribed a two @-@ month period of silence for vocal rest . 
 A video documentary titled Nothing to Say , directed and produced by Benjamin Eisner , was released in early 2008 , highlighting Matthew West 's time of silence and vocal recovery in 2007 . In February 2008 , the documentary was available exclusively in Family Christian Stores as a CD / DVD combo pack with West 's album Something to Say . 
 = = = Something to Say ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = 
 His next single " You Are Everything " was released in late 2007 . The song was available as a free download from West 's website . He also recorded a duet ( " Christmas Makes Me Cry " ) with American Idol finalist Mandisa which was released as a Christmas radio single in November 2007 , from Mandisa 's Christmas Joy EP . 
 Matthew West 's album , Something to Say , was released on January 15 , 2008 . It reached No. 8 on Billboard 's Top Christian albums chart , and peaked at No. 159 on the Billboard 200 chart , making it his first Billboard 200 album . It was produced by Brown Bannister , Ed Cash , and Christopher Stevens . West said in an interview that all of the album 's songs had already been written and the title " Something to Say " had already been decided " months before I found out that I was going to have nothing to say . " The first radio single released from the album was " You Are Everything " . In March 2008 , the song reached No. 1 on R & R 's Christian AC chart . " Something to Say " , the album 's title track , was also released to radio , receiving airplay in June 2008 . 
 Matthew West guested on tobyMac 's 26 @-@ city " Boomin ' Beyond Measure " tour along with Jeremy Camp . The tour ran from February 6 through March 21 , 2008 . 
 He was featured on the Billy Graham television special America 's Dream : Chasing Happiness , which aired in the U.S. on March 1 – 9 , 2008 . The appearance included a world premiere of his music video for " Nothing Else " , a song from History . On June 29 , West hosted GMA 's 2008 Gospel Dream , a televised Christian music talent competition . " The Motions " was released as his next single , placing at No. 1 on R & R 's Christian AC chart in April 2009 . 
 He has a song on the upcoming album of country artist Jo Dee Messina , and another under consideration by “ American Idol ” finalist Danny <unk> . In December 2009 , " The Motions " was Grammy @-@ nominated for Best Gospel Song , his first Grammy nomination . 
 = = = The Story of Your Life , Into the Light and Live Forever ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 The first single from Matthew West 's new album , " My Own Little World " was released on August 23 , 2010 . The album , The Story of Your Life , was released October 5 , 2010 , and according to West , is a response to thousands of life stories his fans shared with him . " The first day , I got 1 @,@ 000 stories . All of a sudden , I was like , ' holy cow , something special is about to take place ' . I rented a cabin in Tennessee , about 25 minutes from my house that felt like it was out in the middle of nowhere . And I spent two months in that cabin reading 10 @,@ 000 stories , " the singer / songwriter reported in an interview with <unk> Matthew is also starring in The Heart of Christmas . 
 In 2011 , West released a Christmas song featuring Country Music Hall of Fame member Vince Gill entitled " Leaving Heaven " . 
 Into the Light was released in September 2012 . He will be going on an Into the Light Tour in September , October , and November 2013 . West released his sixth studio album , Live Forever , on April 28 , 2015 . He will be part of the Winter Jam Tour 2016 in the central and eastern parts of the United States . 
 = = Other songwriting = = 
 In addition to his main solo career , Matthew West has also written songs for other bands and musicians , including Mark Schultz , Mandisa , <unk> , Sara Groves , Joy Williams , Casting Crowns , Salvador , Natalie Grant , <unk> , and Point of Grace , as well as mainstream country act , Billy Ray Cyrus . Rascal Flatts recorded West 's song , " The Day Before You " , on their album , Feels Like Today . He co @-@ wrote " Voice of a Savior " by Mandisa and " Thank You " by <unk> , both of which were released as singles in early 2008 . 
 = = Acting = = 
 West also pursues his acting skills occasionally appearing in some Christian television shows starting in 2009 . In 2011 , he made his film debut via appearing on Gary Wheeler 's Christian film The Heart of Christmas co @-@ starring Candace Cameron Bure . It received mostly positive review after premiering in a limited theaters in the U.S. 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Matthew West currently lives in Nashville , Tennessee with his wife Emily . He married Emily on May 10 , 2003 after proposing to her in September 2002 . They have a daughter Luella Jane ( " Lulu " ) and a daughter Delaney Ruth . The Wests own a pug named Earl " The Girl " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = GMA Dove Awards = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Hugh Bardulf = 
 Hugh Bardulf or Hugh <unk> ( died c . 1203 ) was a medieval English administrator and royal justice . Known for his legal expertise , he also served as a financial administrator . He served three kings of England before his death . 
 Bardulf began his royal service under King Henry II of England , where he was a steward to the royal household . He also served as a royal justice and a sheriff during Henry 's reign , and continued as sheriff under Henry 's son and successor , Richard I. Because Bardulf was a vassal of Richard 's younger brother John , who rebelled against his older brother , Bardulf was denounced briefly as a traitor to Richard . He was quickly restored to royal service , however , and continued in service throughout the rest of Richard 's reign and into the reign of John . Bardulf died sometime before 1203 , and his heir was his brother , Robert Bardulf . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Historians are divided on Hugh Bardulf 's ancestry . Katharine Keats @-@ Rohan says that he was the son of Hamelin Bardulf , a tenant of Hugh Bigod , who held land in Suffolk . Ralph V. Turner , revising John Horace Round 's entry in the Dictionary of National Biography for the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography says that Hugh was the son of a Hugh Bardulf that died around 1176 . According to Turner and Round , the younger Hugh 's mother was Isabel , who may have been a member of the Twist family from Lincolnshire . The younger Hugh acquired land at Waddington , Lincolnshire as a tenant of Ranulf de Gernon , 4th Earl of Chester , sometime in the middle 1140s . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 In 1181 Bardulf was at the court of King Henry II of England , where he was steward , or dapifer , an office he held throughout Henry 's reign and which he may have held throughout the next reign also . He held that office until Henry 's death in 1189 . From about 1185 until 1203 , Bardulf was a royal justice almost annually , usually as a justice of eyre rather than sitting at Westminster . He performed the duties of sheriff for the following counties : Cornwall from 1184 – 1187 , Wiltshire from 1187 to 1189 , Somerset during 1188 and 1189 along with Dorset during the same period , the counties of Staffordshire , Warwickshire and Leicestershire during 1190 and 1191 , Yorkshire from 1191 to 1194 , Westmorland from 1191 to 1199 , Northumberland from 1194 to 1198 , Cumberland during 1198 and 1199 , Cornwall again from 1199 to 1200 along with Devonshire , and Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire from 1200 to 1203 . In 1194 Bardulf was mentioned on the escheat roll as responsible for the farm of lands held by Osbert de Bayeux , an archdeacon of York . 
 = = Under Richard and John = = 
 In 1189 , Hugh was one of only five sitting sheriffs who retained their office when Richard took the throne ; the others included Geoffrey fitzPeter , William Briwerre , and Ranulf de Glanvill . However , in 1189 , Bardulf did lose custody of Salisbury Castle , which he had held under Henry . Henry had given Bardulf the manor and barony of Brampton in Devonshire , but when Richard took the throne , the king took back Brampton , and gave Bardulf the manor of Hoo in Kent instead . 
 Although Bardulf set out with the new King , Richard I on the Third Crusade , he turned back after a period in Messina , and returned to England . There , he was part of the administration during the <unk> of Hugh de Puiset , the Bishop of Durham , and William Longchamp , the Bishop of Ely . Longchamp gave him custody of Kenilworth Castle . Bardulf then was involved in the attempts of Walter de Coutances to remove Longchamp from office , which led to Longchamp excommunicating Bardulf . In 1193 , Bardulf helped with the defences of Doncaster against the forces of Prince John , Richard 's brother , who was rebelling against Richard while the king was on crusade . However , Bardulf refused to besiege Tickhill near Doncaster , because he was a vassal of John 's , which led to him being denounced as a traitor . Although he was required to surrender his shrievalty of Yorkshire , he was immediately appointed to other sheriff offices . On 31 March 1194 , Hugh was named an escheator for estates confiscated by Richard in the northern part of England in relation to John 's rebellion . While Richard was in captivity in Germany in 1193 , Bardulf , along with William Marshall , Geoffrey fitzPeter and William Briwerre , was a recipient of letters from the captive king , urging the election of Hubert Walter as Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 Bardulf was also a financial administrator . He served as a Baron of the Exchequer during the reigns of Henry , Richard and John . In 1196 , he was the collector of taxation in seven shires , along with Philip of Poitou , the bishop @-@ elect of Durham . Around 1197 , Hugh was named as responsible for the " bail and custody " of the Jewish population in England , along with William of Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Eglise , the Bishop of London , who was his fellow escheator in the north . The office in charge of the bail and custody of the Jews was probably a forerunner of the office of Keeper of the Jews . 
 Bardulf continued to serve Richard until the king 's death , and then served John , who became king , until sometime before Michaelmas 1203 , when records show that Bardulf was known to be deceased . 
 = = Legacy and personal life = = 
 Bardulf was known for his legal expertise , which led to him being one of the few justices mentioned by name in Glanvill , an early medieval English legal text , although whether by the original author or by a <unk> , is unclear . His long career as a justice helped create a sense of continuity in judicial matters through the reigns of the Angevin kings . He remained on such good terms with Hubert Walter , that when Walter was appointed chancellor at the beginning of John 's reign , Bardulf made a comment to the new chancellor that included a pointed barb about the last Archbishop of Canterbury to also be chancellor , Thomas Becket . Bardulf was on good enough terms that he was able to tease Walter that " We have never heard nor seen an archbishop become a chancellor , but we have seen a chancellor become an archbishop . " 
 The justice married Mabel de Limesy , daughter of Gerard de Limesy , and coheir with her sisters of their brother John de Limesy , with the marriage taking place in 1200 . When he died , his heir was Robert Bardulf , his brother . Hugh Bardulf gave land capable of pasturing 500 sheep to Barlings Abbey . Robert , his heir , offered a £ 1 @,@ 000 fine to receive the inheritance , and William de Briouze made an identical offer for the right to marry his son to Mabel , Hugh 's widow . 
 After Bardulf 's death , a legal case was brought against Bardulf 's chaplain and constable , alleging that Bardulf had allowed his two servants to hear a case that should have been heard by the justice . The litigants charged that the two servants had wrongly decided the case , and after hearing the allegations , the royal justices at Westminster agreed and restored the disputed property to the litigants . 
 = Leslie Hunter = 
 George Leslie Hunter ( 7 August 1877 – 7 December 1931 ) , was christened simply George Hunter , but he adopted the name Leslie in San Francisco , and Leslie Hunter , became his professional name . Showing an aptitude for drawing at an early age , he was largely self @-@ taught , receiving only elementary painting lessons from a family acquaintance . A Scottish painter , he also spent fifteen formative years from the age of fifteen in the USA , mainly in California . He was later regarded as one of the four artists of the Scottish Colourists group of painters . Following his youth in California , he returned to Scotland , painting and drawing there and in Paris . Subsequently , he traveled widely in Europe , especially in the South of France , but also in the Netherlands , the Pas de Calais and Italy . Hunter painted a variety of still @-@ lifes , landscapes and portraits , and his paintings are critically acclaimed for their treatment of light and the effects of light . They became popular with more progressive critics and collectors during his lifetime and have grown to command high prices since his death , becoming among the most popular in Scotland . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hunter was born in Rothesay , at 7 Tower Street , on the Isle of Bute . The date was 7 August 1877 . He was the youngest child of five , born to William and Jeanie ( née Stewart ) Hunter . George , as he was then known , showed an aptitude for drawing when very young and when he was about thirteen , his mother arranged for him to have painting lessons with a lady acquaintance . In February 1892 , Hunter 's elder sister Catherine died . Shortly after , in March , another elder sibling , James , also died . Both were in their early twenties . It is thought they may have been victims of an influenza pandemic . William , the father , and Jeanie , seem already to have contemplated emigrating , because a home had been sold . Evidently , the tragic deaths sealed the matter , and the remaining family departed for California via New York on 1 September 1892 , aboard the SS Ethiopia . 
 = = = Emigration to California and move to San Francisco , leaving parents = = = 
 Thus Hunter was fifteen when he emigrated with his parents and two surviving siblings to California . Initially , he lived with his family on an orange grove , 50 miles east of Los Angeles . He continued sketching and loved the climate , but showed little interest in farm management . Hunter began making a living in 1896 , primarily as a newspaper and journal illustrator . He mixed with significant literary figures such as Bret Harte and Jack London , who were associated with the San Francisco Bohemian Club . Hunter provided illustrations for Overland Monthly . In 1899 , a full @-@ page black and white drawing for Overland Monthly is signed G. Leslie Hunter , the first recorded occasion of his use of " Leslie . " In 1902 , Hunter became part of a group of artists that included Maynard Dixon and Arthur Putnam . They desired independence from the hierarchies of the establishment art world and , together , they formed the California Society of Arts as an alternative to the conservative San Francisco Art Association . Clearly , Hunter had a completely different artistic exposure compared with others of the Scottish Colourists group , such as John Duncan Fergusson or Samuel John Peploe . Hunter was at this stage quite a successful American graphic artist , considering his young age . " Sunset , The Pacific Monthly " , was another journal commissioning his work and altogether , Smith & Marriner catalogue over two hundred publication and book illustrations commissioned from Hunter . 
 = = = Beginnings in fine art = = = 
 In 1904 , Hunter made a visit to Paris , funded by his earnings as an illustrator . He was inspired by the numerous artistic experiences there , and became fully resolved to take up oil painting . When he returned to San Francisco in 1905 , he began preparing for his first solo exhibition , which was to be held the following year . However , Hunter 's early work was destroyed in the fire that followed the 1906 San Francisco earthquake , and he returned to Scotland shortly afterwards , settling in Glasgow . Initially he continued to make his living there primarily as an illustrator . His oil painting began with still lifes on black backgrounds , influenced by the Dutch style . 
 In 1907 , whilst back in Paris , Hunter met Alice Toklas , whom he had known previously in San Francisco . She took him to see the collection at 27 rue de Fleurus , that was being started by Gertrude Stein and her brother Leo Stein . Toklas wrote of this re @-@ meeting that Hunter was at first shocked by the style of artists such as Matisse , but obviously strongly impressed . 
 Hunter began to achieve limited success after a trip to the Etaples art colony in northern France in 1914 . Here , inspired by French art and the local landscape , he began to develop the style and ability that would later identify him as a colourist . However , the onset of the First World War forced him to return to Scotland , where his work became noticed by Alexander Reid of Reid & Lefevre . In 1915 , Hunter held his first one @-@ man exhibition with Reid in Glasgow . Hunter 's work at this stage of his career focused primarily on still lifes , inspired by Chardin , Kalf and Manet . During the 1920s , Hunter began to be associated with a group of three other artists : John Duncan Fergusson , F. C. B. Cadell , and Samuel Peploe . The four of them became known as the Scottish Colourists , although the term was not used until 1948 , by which time only Fergusson was still alive . 
 = = = European travel and return to Fife = = = 
 In 1922 , Hunter began to make a series of trips to mainland Europe , where he visited Paris , Venice , Florence and the Riviera . Fergusson accompanied him on a number of these visits . Hunter 's visits abroad produced a large number of paintings and his style changed noticeably in this period of European travel as he began using dabs of colour placed instinctively to portray underlying form . 
 When Hunter returned from his first series of trips abroad , in 1922 , he settled in Fife , on the east coast of Scotland and , between 1924 and 1927 , he remained in Scotland , dividing his time between Fife and Glasgow . His paintings from this period include a number inspired by views of Loch Lomond , and these landscapes increasingly took inspiration from the work of Cézanne to create colourful and atmospheric compositions . In 1925 , Hunter 's work was displayed at an exhibition in Leicester Square in London , along with works by Peploe , Cadell and Fergusson . Walter Sickert , in his introduction to the exhibition , wrote that " Hunter uses the refractory ... to inspired ends on normal and traditional lines " . 
 Hunter traveled again to the South of France on a number of occasions between 1927 and 1929 , and based himself at Saint @-@ Paul @-@ de @-@ Vence . He sent paintings back to Reid to be exhibited in Glasgow and London , but he spent a great deal of time sketching and his output of finished oil paintings was low . One exhibition in London had to be postponed due to a lack of paintings . The France trips culminated in 1929 with a critically acclaimed exhibition at the <unk> Galleries in New York . 
 = = = London , ill @-@ health and death = = = 
 However , shortly after returning to the French Riviera in 1929 , Hunter suffered a severe breakdown , forcing his sister to bring him home to Scotland in September . He recovered , and began to paint a number of portraits of his friends , including one of Dr Tom Honeyman , the Director of the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum from 1939 until 1954 . Honeyman , at the time an art dealer , had assisted Hunter in developing his career , and painting the portrait may have been a gesture of thanks . 
 In 1930 he embarked upon a series of drawings and watercolours of Hyde Park , which were due to be exhibited in London . Hunter hoped to move to the city permanently , as he found it livelier than Glasgow and the art market was more secure . However , his health deteriorated and he began to suffer badly from stomach pains . He died in Glasgow in the Claremont Nursing Home on the 7 December 1931 , aged 54 . The cause of death was cardiac failure due to blood poisoning , following an unsuccessful gall bladder operation . A member of Glasgow Art Club , work by Hunter was included in the club 's Memorial Exhibition of 1935 , in memory of those of its members who had died since the First World War . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 Hunter 's paintings were popular with critics during his lifetime , and he had successful exhibitions in Glasgow , London and New York . Shortly before his death , the Glasgow Herald commented that while Hunter was already " well known as a painter of landscape and still @-@ life , " his move to portrait painting would " cause a good deal of interest and discussion . " 
 Many years after his death , solo exhibitions of Hunter 's paintings were still held and , in 1953 , the display of a selection of watercolours and paintings in Glasgow attracted numerous visitors . The art critic of the Glasgow Herald described the " varied and uneven genius " of the painter , and praised one painting as having been executed with " such a freedom and economy of touch one cannot well see how any amount of extra thought or technical application could have bettered it . " 
 Paintings by Hunter have gone on to sell for large sums in the early 21st century , with one painting described as the " star lot " in a Bonhams auction in June 2010 selling for £ 144 @,@ 000 . Another painting was sold in June 2010 for £ 78 @,@ 000 . Nick Curnow , head of pictures at Lyon & Turnbull , said of it " This is a very special painting , so typical of Hunter . " 
 = = Style = = 
 Hunter focused for much of his life on landscapes and on still lifes , working in both pen and ink and oil on canvas . His still lifes of fruit are particularly distinctive , but he also painted a variety of landscapes , especially of Scotland and France . In his earlier paintings , Hunter was influenced by Cézanne to produce domestic landscapes . Later , however , in common with the other members of the Scottish <unk> movement , he was heavily influenced by contemporary French artists like Monet and Matisse , and his paintings began to make bolder and more energetic use of colour . 
 Hunter particularly strove to capture in his paintings the effects of light , and would repeatedly paint the same objects or locations under a range of lighting conditions . His brush style was influenced by the French avant garde and , especially in his later work , is described by art critics as ' " open and free " and " energetic " . 
 = The Simpsons Game = 
 The Simpsons Game is an action platformer video game based on the animated television series The Simpsons and loosely on the film , made for the Nintendo DS , Wii , Xbox 360 , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable . The game was developed , published , and distributed by Electronic Arts . It was released in North America in October 2007 and worldwide in November 2007 . It features an original storyline written by The Simpsons writers Tim Long , Matt Selman , and Matt Warburton . In the self @-@ referential plot , the family discovers that they are forced to participate in another The Simpsons video game . Similar to the show , the game pokes fun at popular culture , other video games , and Electronic Arts , its publisher . 
 The game follows the five Simpson family members — Homer , Marge ( with Maggie ) , Bart , and Lisa — who learn they are part of a video game and are given superpowers to resolve several situations . Eventually , they must save their 8 @-@ bit predecessors from Will Wright , and the creator of their video game character selves , Matt Groening . The Simpson family travels to four scenarios in parodies of other games to collect key cards used to infiltrate their creator 's mansion and ultimately to save their predecessors from destruction . 
 The game was met with mixed reception from video game critics . They praised its visuals and writing , which included many parodies of other video games , while they criticized its short length and poor camera system , which did not always function properly . The Simpsons Game received the Best Game Based on a Movie or TV Show award at the 2007 Spike Video Game Awards and was nominated for Best Video Game Writing at the 2007 Writers Guild of America Awards . As of January 31 , 2008 , four million copies of the game have been sold worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players of The Simpsons Game are able to control four of the five members of the Simpson family , each with their own unique abilities . Two different family members are playable in each level , aside from the " Land of Chocolate " tutorial level , in which only Homer is playable . The game contains sixteen levels , called episodes , and each requires specific powers to complete . For example , in the fourth episode , " Lisa the Tree Hugger " , the player is required to use Lisa 's " Hand of Buddha " power to move large objects , and Bart 's slingshot to shut down machines . Enemies unique to each episode are featured , with the exception of the final level , in which enemies that have already been defeated are " recycled " with different colors . 
 Several challenges are made available after all episodes are completed . These include finding all the collectibles for each character , finding all the video game clichés , and in the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Nintendo DS versions , completing a certain task related to each episode 's plot in a time trial . 
 The Simpsons Game 's head @-@ up display features health meters for both characters in each level , and an attack meter and special power meter for the character currently controlled by the player . The game features a two player co @-@ op mode , which has a split screen and allows each player to control one of the two characters featured on that level . 
 The DS version of the game was developed separately from its console counterparts and is a side scrolling adventure . It also offers several features that are not available in the other versions . Several minigames are available to unlock and play , most which are updated versions of arcade games such as Frogger and Space Invaders , the latter which references the aliens Kang and Kodos from the The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror episodes . A virtual pet is also accessible , called " Pet Homer " , which allows players to feed , entertain , and save Homer from threats such as choking and heart attacks . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Homer is the first playable character available to the player in " The Land of Chocolate " level . His abilities involve turning into the " Homer ball " by eating food power @-@ ups to let him roll and slam objects ; turn into a Gummi Homer by eating small gummi Venus de Milos to shoot gummi grenades ; eat hot chili peppers to become Insanity Pepper Homer to use lava and fire bombs ; and inhale helium to become a balloon to float in the air . Homer 's special power is a giant burp , which can stun enemies . Bart first appears in the second level of the game " Bartman Begins " . He can turn into Bartman , allowing him to use zip @-@ lines , climb certain walls , glide over long distances , and do other acrobatic feats . Bart 's special power is releasing a flood of bats towards enemies . He can use his slingshot to defeat enemies and hit targets from afar . 
 Lisa is introduced in the fourth level " Lisa the Tree Hugger " . Her main attack style is kicking , and her power is the " Hand of Buddha " . She can use it to flick , smash , freeze , or send lightning bolts to enemies , as well as lift certain items . Lisa 's special power is playing her saxophone to attack and stun enemies . As the levels progress , Lisa can use her saxophone to turn enemies against each other . Marge is the least @-@ playable character . Introduced in the fifth level , " Mob Rules " , Marge learns her power is to make large crowds obey her . She can use her mob to break down obstacles , build objects , attack enemies , and repair objects . Maggie is , in effect , an extension of Marge , briefly playable in air ducts and other small spaces . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins with Homer having a candy @-@ induced fantasy about a world of chocolate where he tries to catch and eat a white chocolate rabbit ; upon waking up he is upset to find that it was all a dream . 
 Bart goes to the video game store and coerces the clerk to let him buy the new and violent Grand Theft Scratchy game , only to have it confiscated by Marge . While Bart mopes , a video game manual crashes down from the sky in front of him . Reading through the manual , Bart discovers that he and the rest of his family have special powers . Later , Bart uses his Bartman powers to stop Jimbo , Kearney , and Dolph from stealing from the Natural History Museum , Homer uses his ability to become a huge ball and win an eating contest , Lisa uses her powers of meditation to stop a deforestation project , and Marge uses her powers to influence crowds to stop the release of Grand Theft Scratchy in Springfield , although Lisa points out it is ironic she used violence to stop a violent game . 
 During dinner , the family is euphoric with their new powers . However , it leads to an argument about what they should be doing with them . Aliens Kang and Kodos see this as an opportunity to strike Earth , and an alien invasion unfolds . Realizing none of their powers are strong enough to defeat the aliens , Bart and Lisa visit Professor Frink . They visit his house to find him not there , but they stumble upon a portal that sends them to a place called the Game Engine where all video games are made . After saving him from a giant gorilla , Frink gives them The Simpsons Game 's player 's guide to teach them how to better use their powers as well as gain new ones , and the Simpson family soon sets out to try and stop the alien invasion . First , Bart and Lisa aid Captain McCallister in beating back mind @-@ controlled dolphins that are attacking the city aquarium . Then , Bart and Homer defeat the Lard Lad statue which has come to life . Finally , they rescue Cletus from the aliens . 
 In order to find out the truth , the family turns to the Internet to discover more about the powers they have in the game , but are accidentally sent to the game engine when Homer spills beer over the keyboard . There , they discover Will Wright , who is destroying copies of an old 8 @-@ bit The Simpsons game and its characters . The family manages to save their 8 @-@ bit predecessors before they are destroyed by Wright , and discover that they will also become obsolete when the next The Simpsons game is released . The only way to prevent this is to talk to the creator of the games and convince him not to destroy them . In order to access his mansion , the family needs to acquire four key cards from four upcoming Simpsons games . First , Homer and Marge defeat a two @-@ headed dragon whose heads are those of Patty and Selma in the <unk> game . Marge and Lisa then travel to Grand Theft Scratchy , eliminating all offensive material and replacing it with more family @-@ friendly material . Next , Homer and Bart travel to France during World War II to thwart Mr. Burns ' plan to steal priceless French paintings , in the " Medal of Homer " game . Lisa and Homer then travel to ancient Japan to defeat the evil Mr. Dirt and his " <unk> " in the Big Super Happy Fun Fun Game . 
 Once they have all four key cards , Bart and Homer infiltrate the creator 's mansion . They are greeted by Matt Groening , who sends Futurama characters Bender and Dr. <unk> after them . The family manages to defeat them , however , and Groening admits that he is only creating new games for the money , and destroys the game engine . The Simpsons , along with several other characters from the games escape to Springfield , where the aliens are still attacking . Lisa uses her power to create a stairway to heaven , and the family asks God for advice . After he is defeated in a game of Dance Dance Revolution , God reveals that the video game that they 're in is a mini @-@ game in another video game about Earth . He dropped the video game manual by accident , thus endowing the family with superpowers . Realizing his misdemeanor , he promises to restore Springfield , let them keep their powers , and to improve the working conditions of all video game characters . He also gives Homer three wishes . As the game ends , it turns out that Ralph Wiggum is playing the entire game before he looks at the screen , wondering who was looking at him . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game 's storyline was written by Tim Long , Matt Selman , and Matt Warburton , who are all regular writers on The Simpsons . They wanted to create something that appealed to the fans of the show , and was , in its own right , " a great new game " . Matt Groening and the writers had continuous feedback on the game 's content , from its " look and feel " to its puzzles and gameplay . The game 's executive producer , Scot Amos , said it was an amazing partnership between the writers and the developers . Selman , the head writer , says the reason they decided to call it The Simpsons Game and not add a subtitle was because they felt it was a restart of " the ' Simpsons ' gaming franchise [ ... ] a big , new , fresh game that takes on video games and hilarious things of all time " . 
 The Simpsons Game was published by Electronic Arts and developed by its subsidiary , EA Redwood Shores ; the company had signed a contract for the video game rights to The Simpsons in 2005 . The game 's lead designer , Greg <unk> , said that when he asked his bosses if they could parody some Electronic Arts games including Medal of Honor , they were enthusiastic about it . The Simpsons Game , which parodies video games from 30 years ago to the present , was forced to have some of its content removed after several video game companies complained about it . <unk> , however , was still pleased with the amount of parody in the game and considered The Simpsons the " perfect vehicle to poke fun at the games industry " . At the 2007 Games Convention in Leipzig , Germany , a poster for " Grand Theft Scratchy " , one of the levels in The Simpsons Game and a parody of Grand Theft Auto , was asked to be taken down by an employee of Rockstar Games , the company that develops the Grand Theft Auto series of video games . Several companies , however , embraced the game 's parody of their video games , including developers from Harmonix , who were pleased with the game 's " Sitar Hero " , a parody of Harmonix 's Guitar Hero video game . In addition to game parodies , The Simpsons Game also features several cameos with satirical spins , including Matt Groening as himself and Will Wright as an antagonist . 
 The graphics for the game 's characters are cel @-@ shaded , and an implemented technique helps flatten the character models from any angle that the camera views them from , in order to recreate the 2D , hand @-@ drawn look seen in the show . The development team found it particularly difficult to render Lisa 's spiky hair as 2D in the game 's 3D environment . The Wii version has lower @-@ quality graphics than the Xbox 360 and PS3 versions due to the console 's inferior hardware . There is a different cover for the game on each console . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received a mostly mixed reaction , receiving an aggregated score of 71 % on Metacritic for the Xbox 360 and PS3 version of the game . Praise focused on the game 's visuals and writing , which lampooned the gaming industry and the show itself . The Simpsons Game won the award for Best Game Based on a Movie or TV Show at the Spike Video Game Awards 2007 , and was nominated for the first @-@ ever award for Best Video Game Writing at the Writers Guild of America Awards 2007 . As of January 31 , 2008 , four million copies of the game have been sold . Peter Nowak of CBC News named it the third @-@ best game of 2007 and described it as " easily the best game starring the wacky residents of Springfield " . 
 The game 's use of The Simpsons @-@ style humor received a mixed reception . Both GameSpot and GameTrailers said that the game delivered more than enough laughs to make it worth playing through at least once . It was considered enjoyable for both hardcore and casual The Simpsons fans by IGN and GameDaily , who also called it a particularly appealing game for diehard fans . Despite the few problems that the game had , GameSpy said that it was worth it to see the humorous parodies . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell , however , believed that the game 's humor could only carry it so far , and suggested that those interested in The Simpsons humor should purchase a box set of one of the television series ' seasons instead . Joe Juba of Game Informer called the game an average experience . He elaborated that the game would appeal primarily to fans of the television series , but would not be worth playing for people unfamiliar with it . 
 Eurogamer praised the involvement of people from The Simpsons television series with the game 's development and GameZone enjoyed the two @-@ character mechanics of the game and had fun collecting unlockable items . GameTrailers thought the graphics and animations looked great and appreciated the hand @-@ drawn appearances , even though they found it obvious that the characters were " never really meant to jump into the third dimension " because of their second @-@ dimension roots . 
 Criticism of the game focused on its short , uninspiring gameplay and troublesome camera system . GameSpot considered the gameplay " nothing special " while GameZone called it a " pretty shallow " game that depended too much on repetitive jumping puzzles and a weak combat system . The game disappointed IGN because it did not include an online feature and it was deemed too short . The camera system was found to be problematic by both GameZone and GameSpy , who called it " a pain " and a " busted " feature ; GameDaily also found it bothersome because it often got stuck . 
 The DS version of the game , which was significantly different from the other versions , received praise for its unique gameplay , but criticism for its short length . IGN lauded the DS version 's unique gameplay experience and GameSpot proclaimed that it was satisfying from start to finish . GameSpot and GameZone , however , were both disappointed that the game was extremely brief . 1UP found that even though The Simpsons Game parodied numerous 2D platform game conventions , it used them anyway , making it a pointless endeavor . 
 EA planned to produce a sequel to the game , but it was cancelled in 2011 . 
 = Kicks ( song ) = 
 " Kicks " is a song by American rock band Paul Revere & the Raiders . Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil wrote the song for The Animals , but the band 's lead singer Eric Burdon turned it down . Instead , Paul Revere & The Raiders recorded and released it as a single in 1966 . The single was a number one hit in Canada , and reached number four in the United States . " Kicks " was included on the band 's fifth album , Midnight Ride , released in May 1966 . A live version of the song was recorded on the band 's 1996 Greatest Hits Live compilation album . 
 Considered one of the earliest anti @-@ drug songs , " Kicks " was composed and released during an era in which pro @-@ hippie , pro @-@ experimentation , and other counterculture themes were gaining popularity on U.S. FM radio stations . The song 's message was consequently perceived as outdated by the emerging youth counterculture , as popular artists ranging from The Beatles to Jefferson Airplane had written songs whose themes sharply contrasted that of " Kicks . " However , the song has received generally positive reviews by music critics in the decades since its release . In 2004 , " Kicks " was ranked number 400 on Rolling Stone 's list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 After the Animals had chart success with the 1965 single " We Gotta Get Out of This Place , " producer Terry Melcher asked the song 's writers , Mann and Weil , to compose a similar song for Paul Revere & the Raiders . The result was " Kicks , " a song originally offered to the Animals , but turned down by lead singer Eric Burdon . Mann and Weil wrote the song as a warning to a friend about the dangers of drug use . The lyrics consist of a narrator telling a girl that drug use causes addiction and that soft drugs can lead to the use of hard drugs . Musically , the song 's lead guitar lines recall the Beatles , while its bass figures are similar to those popularized by The Byrds . The song contains closer harmonies and a more euphonious melodic arrangement than the band 's previous single , " Just Like Me " . Lead singer Mark Lindsay 's R & B vocal style , combined with the song 's guitar and organ instrumentation , is reminiscent of British bands such as The Kinks and The Yardbirds . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In March 1966 , " Kicks " entered the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 62 . The song peaked at number four in May , and spent 14 weeks on the chart . Within two months of its release , the single had sold 500 @,@ 000 copies . It was the highest @-@ charting U.S. hit to that date for Paul Revere & the Raiders , later eclipsed only by 1971 's " Indian Reservation ( The Lament of the Cherokee Reservation Indian ) , " which peaked at number one . " Kicks " became the band 's first Canadian number one single when it topped the Canadian Singles Chart in May 1966 . 
 The song is considered the first with an anti @-@ drug message to become a U.S. hit single . With the passage of the Communications Act of 1934 , the Federal Communications Commission was chartered to monitor the radio and TV industries , meaning broadcasts were subject to censorship . Some censors , based on the song title alone , mistakenly believed " Kicks " to glorify drug use . Despite the song 's commercial success , its lyrics were soon perceived as outdated by young people , as they increasingly experimented with marijuana and LSD . Meanwhile , songs emerged from popular artists who praised , sometimes cryptically and sometimes overtly , the use of psychedelic drugs . These acts included the Beatles , The Rolling Stones , the Grateful Dead , Jefferson Airplane and the Byrds . The messages contained within hit songs such as " White Rabbit , " " Along Comes Mary " and " Eight Miles High " were antithetical to that of " Kicks , " which contributed to a perception by members of the burgeoning youth counterculture that Paul Revere & the Raiders were part of the Establishment . Singer – songwriter David Crosby , then a member of the Byrds , was upset with the success of the song , particularly as it came just after his group 's " Eight Miles High " had been boycotted by many U.S. radio stations . Crosby described " Kicks " as " a dumb anti @-@ drug song " that took " a falsely adopted stance . With ' Eight Miles High , ' we were talking about something very near and dear to our hearts . " 
 On the other hand , Beach Boys founder Brian Wilson singled out " Kicks " as one his favorites of Terry Melcher 's works . Music critic Chris Brown of Crawdaddy ! praised the song 's vocal , saying " the use of harmony is well @-@ timed and wonderfully executed ; and the power in the vocal as the last word of each verse stretches into the chorus is undoubtedly what sells the song . " Bruce Eder of AllMusic called it " a great song that managed to be cool and anti @-@ drug . " In his 2009 book , Everybody Must Get Stoned , author R. U. Sirius named " Kicks " the number one rock song against drugs . Sirius said , " With clear and concise lyrics by the famous Mann @-@ Weil songwriting team , there 's no cheese on rock 's first anti @-@ drug platter . " The song was ranked number 400 on Rolling Stone 's 2004 list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . The song placed 36th on Paste Magazine 's 2014 list of the " 50 Best Garage Rock Songs of All Time " . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 Paul Revere & the Raiders performed a live version of " Kicks " on the band 's 1996 Greatest Hits Live compilation . Lindsay , with the Mark Lewis Trio , re @-@ recorded the song on the 1990 album Looking for Shelter . A live version appears on his 1999 album Legends Live : Mark Lindsay & Friends . Former bass guitarist Phil Volk , with his band Fang & the Gang , performed the song on the 2005 tribute album Fang <unk> the Raiders . Mann and Weil revisited the song in their 2004 Off Broadway revue They Wrote That ? The Songs of Barry Mann & Cynthia Weil . 
 Singer @-@ songwriter Del Shannon recorded a cover of " Kicks " on his 1966 album This Is My Bag . Surf rock group The Challengers covered the song on their album California Kicks , also released in 1966 . The <unk> Minds , a studio band featuring J. J. Cale on guitar and production , performed the song on their 1968 album A Trip Down the Sunset Strip . Psychedelic rock band Nazz covered the song on their final album Nazz III . In 1974 , John Mellencamp was signed to MCA Records after Mellencamp recorded a demo on which he performed the song . Rock band Earth Quake recorded a version of the song on their 1977 album <unk> . Leif Garrett covered " Kicks " on his 1979 album Same Goes for You . Naz Nomad and the Nightmares , a side project featuring members of punk band The Damned , covered the song on their 1984 album Give Daddy the Knife Cindy . The Monkees included their version of the song on their 1986 greatest hits compilation Then & Now ... The Best of The Monkees . Rock band The Flamin ' Groovies released " Kicks " as a single from their 1986 album One Night Stand . In 1999 , jazz guitarist Mimi Fox released the album Kicks , on which her rendition of the song appears . Garage rock band The Gants added a version of the song on their 2000 greatest hits album I Wonder . Everclear covered the song on their 2008 album The Vegas Years . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " Vinyl 
 " Kicks " ( Mann , Weil ) – 2 : 26 
 " Shake It Up " ( Lindsay , Revere ) – 3 : 59 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Drake Levin - lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Mark Lindsay - lead vocals 
 Terry Melcher - producer 
 Paul Revere - organ , backing vocals 
 Hal Blaine - drums 
 Phil Volk - bass guitar , backing vocals 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Columbus Globe for State and Industry Leaders = 
 The Columbus Globe for State and Industry Leaders ( also known as Hitler 's Globe or the Führer Globe ) was a globe designed specifically for Adolf Hitler and his Nazi Party . 
 Made in Berlin in the 1930s , the Columbus Globe for State and Industry Leaders was located in Hitler 's office throughout most of its existence . It became a widely known in the United States after comedian Charlie Chaplin parodied it in his 1940 film The Great Dictator . Comedy group The Three Stooges also made fun of it in two of their acts . One of the two limited editions was collected by John Barsamia , a private in the U.S. Army , at Hitler 's summer retreat shortly after the war and sold 60 years later at an auction in San Francisco for $ 100 @,@ 000 . The globe in Hitler 's office replaced Ethiopia with Italian East Africa and was known for its size as well as manufacturing cost . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Two limited editions of the globe were made in Berlin in the mid 1930s , one for the Nazi Party and another for German dictator Adolf Hitler himself . The one made for the Führer was nearly the size of a Volkswagen car and manufactured at a great expense . It changed Abyssinia ( today 's Ethiopia ) to Italian East Africa . The other was made of standard wood with no special features . The actual number of globes produced cannot be verified as the factory that produced the globe , along with its archives , was destroyed in air raids in 1943 . 
 Wolfram <unk> , Polish historian and globe enthusiast , believes that even though it was located in his office , Hitler was probably not particularly fond of the globe , declaring : 
 In 1938 , Hitler decided that the old Reich Chancellery was not big enough to house the ministries of the Third Reich . He assigned his favorite architect Albert Speer to build the new Chancellery . After the massive renovations were completed in early 1939 per Hitler 's insistence , the globe was moved to the Führer 's new office located at the heart of the new Chancellery , where it remained until the Soviets occupied the building in April 1945 . 
 = = Whereabouts = = 
 Numerous globes purported to have been owned by Hitler exist throughout the world , although the authenticity of many of them is doubtful . There are a total of three in Berlin , one at a geographical institute , another at the Marcher Museum , and the third at the German Historical Museum . Another two reside in public collections in Munich . Many of the globes show Germany with a bullet hole or simply wiped out , an act committed out of contempt by either Soviet or American soldiers . 
 Based on photographic evidence , none of these globes are the iconic one from Hitler 's office in the Chancellery . 
 In May 1945 , one globe allegedly owned by Hitler was found by American soldier John Barsamia among the ruins of the <unk> ( " Eagle 's Nest " ) , a personal retreat near the Bavarian Alps used by Hitler on several occasions before the war . The complex had been nearly completely looted by the time Barsamia arrived . He took the globe home and kept it for 60 years before selling it at an auction in San Francisco in 2007 . Bob <unk> , an entrepreneur from San Francisco , bought the globe for $ 100 @,@ 000 , five times the original estimated price of $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The globe is regarded as an iconic representation of Adolf Hitler 's megalomaniacal desire for world conquest . Chronologically , in The Three Stooges ' January 1940 @-@ released short subject You <unk> Spy ! — the first @-@ ever Hollywood parody of Hitler and the Nazis — followed by the October 1940 release of British comedian Charlie Chaplin 's parody film The Great Dictator , both the Stooges and Chaplin parodied the globe separately in their works . In the Stooges ' July 1941 @-@ released sequel to their 1940 short subject , named I 'll Never Heil Again , the globe is once again the focus of parody . In Chaplin 's 1940 film , the globe is portrayed as a beach ball that bursts in front of the face of dictator " <unk> <unk> " . Similarly , in I 'll Never Heil Again , the " Axel " partners of <unk> dictator " Moe Hailstone " play a game of " keep @-@ away " with the globe . Hailstone 's military commander , " Field Marshal Herring " , eventually smashes the globe over Hailstone 's head . 
 = Kelsey Wakefield = 
 Kelsey Wakefield ( born 1 June 1991 ) is an Australian water polo player . Before choosing water polo , she competed in the high jump at a state and national level . Wakefield has been a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team at the junior starting in 2006 and senior level starting in 2009 . She earned a silver medal at the 2010 FINA World League , a gold medal at the 2011 Canada Cup and a bronze medal at the 2011 FINA Junior World Championships . Wakefield won a championship as a member of the 2011 Brisbane Barracudas squad in the National Water Polo League and has been selected for the preliminary Australian water polo team for the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Wakefield was born on 1 June 1991 in Gold Coast , Queensland . She is 178 cm ( 5 ft 10 in ) tall and weighs 64 kilograms ( 141 lb ) . She has a wingspan of 183 cm ( 6 ft 0 in ) , and is left @-@ handed . 
 While she was growing up , Wakefield 's house had a backyard pool , where she used to train with her sister , Brittany . As a five @-@ year @-@ old , she watched the Olympics on television and dreamed of competing at the Games . 
 Wakefield attended Trinity Lutheran College , and was a straight @-@ A student . Beyond water polo , while in school , she also competed in the high jump . In 2006 , after winning the Queensland state championships , and setting a Queensland age group record and personal best of 166 cm ( 5 ft 5 in ) , she competed in the U16 national athletics competition . In 2007 , she finished fourth in her age group in high jump at the national championships . In 2008 , she competed at the Queensland U20 state athletics championships in the event , finishing second with a 165 cm ( 5 ft 5 in ) . She eventually chose water polo over the high jump because she preferred to play a team sport . Her departure from the sport was also a result of conflicting training times between it and water polo . 
 As of 2011 , the Brisbane @-@ based Wakefield is a student at Griffith University , studying biomedical science studies . She took a semester off from school in order to concentrate full @-@ time on playing water polo with the hope of making the Olympics . One of the reasons she is pursuing a career in medicine is because her father is a doctor . She is thinking of specialising in pediatrics or anesthetics . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 Wakefield is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . She is a goalkeeper . She wears several different numbers including 1 , 13 and 18 . She took up the sport when she was twelve years old at school . In 2006 , at the Australian Country Championships , she competed for the Queensland open women 's team . In 2007 , she competed at the U16 Australian Water Polo Championships and was named the goalkeeper of the tournament . She competed at the 2009 Australian National U20 Water Polo Championships for Queensland , where her team finished second to New South Wales . She competed at the Australian National U20 competition in 2011 , where her team took home gold . She trains at the Queensland Academy of Sport , and during the regular season , she may drive as many as 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) a week driving between home , university , the Queensland Academy of Sport , to training facilities and competition pools . The City South News in Brisbane describes her as an " Australian water polo prodigy " . Between appearances on the junior national team and the senior national team , she has already played more than 50 games for Australia . She currently holds a water polo scholarship at the Australian Institute of Sport . 
 = = = Club water polo = = = 
 Wakefield plays club water polo for the Brisbane Barracudas who compete in the National Water Polo League . She was with the team in 2008 . She was a member of the team in 2011 when they won the league championship for the third year in a row . She was in goal for the championship match with the score 4 – 4 at the end of regular time , 1 – 1 at the end of over time and finally going to a shootout . Wakefield was named to the league 's 2011 All Star team . 
 = = = Juniors = = = 
 Wakefield represented Australia in 2006 at the U16 national team that competed at the New Zealand hosted Pan Pacific Championships . In 2007 , she was a member of the U16 national team . In 2008 , she was a member of the U16 and U17 national teams , and the first ranked goal keeper on the U16 squad . She was a member of the Australian side that finished third at the 2011 FINA Junior World Championships . She was the captain of the Australian side . The team finished third after losing to eventual gold medalist , Spain , during the semifinals . 
 = = = Seniors = = = 
 Wakefield made her first appearance for the senior side at the 2009 Canada Cup . She was a member of the 2010 team that finished second at the FINA World League Super Finals held in La Jolla , California . She competed at the 2010 Canada Cup . In a preliminary round match against Canada that Australia won 11 – 5 , she made 10 saves in goal . Her team played Italy in the semi @-@ finals of the 2010 Cup . She represented Australia at the 2011 Canada Cup , and participated in the gold medal final match against China that Australia won . She was named the Goalkeeper of the Tournament . She competed in a warm up match for the 2011 FINA Water Polo World League against Italy in Ostia , Italy in July that Australia won 12 – 11 . 
 In October 2011 , as a representative of the senior squad , she attended a training camp at the Australian Institute of Sport . The camp had four goal Australian goalkeepers at it , of which only two would be named to the squad to compete at the Olympics . She competed in the Pan Pacific Championships in January 2012 for the Australian Stingers . In February 2012 , she was named to the final training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics . She attended a training camp at the Australian Institute of Sport in February 2012 . The team of seventeen players will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement being made on 13 June . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . She did not compete in the first match . She competed in the remaining four matches in the series . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 2008 , Wakefield was nominated for Gold Coast Sportsperson of the Year . In 2010 , she was nominated for the Queensland Junior Sportswoman of the Year . 
 = Sonic & Knuckles = 
 Sonic & Knuckles ( Japanese : ソニック & <unk> , Hepburn : Sonikku to <unk> ) is a platform video game developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega for the Sega Genesis . Released on October 18 , 1994 , it is the fourth installment in the main Sonic the Hedgehog series and a direct sequel to Sonic the Hedgehog 3 . It follows Sonic the Hedgehog and Knuckles the Echidna in their respective quests to save Angel Island ; Sonic tries to prevent Dr. Robotnik from relaunching his orbital weapon , the Death Egg , while Knuckles scuffles with Robotnik 's minion , EggRobo . 
 Sonic 3 and Sonic & Knuckles were originally intended to be a single game . However , due to time constraints and the cost of a large @-@ memory @-@ capacity cartridge , Sega split the game in two . The Sonic & Knuckles cartridge uses " lock @-@ on technology " that allows the game to connect to Sonic the Hedgehog 2 and Sonic the Hedgehog 3 , so that elements of both Sonic & Knuckles and the locked @-@ on game are combined . 
 Critics were impressed with the lock @-@ on technology and hailed Sonic & Knuckles as " an exceptional game " despite its similarity to its predecessor . It has since been rereleased in various compilations and on online platforms such as Xbox Live Arcade , the Wii Virtual Console and Steam . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game follows Sonic the Hedgehog and Knuckles the Echidna in their respective quests to save Angel Island . Sonic 's side of the story picks up immediately after the events of Sonic the Hedgehog 3 , where Dr. Robotnik 's orbital weapon , the Death Egg , is damaged in a battle with Sonic and crash @-@ lands back onto Angel Island , landing in a volcanic crater . Sonic travels through each zone looking to retrieve the Chaos Emeralds to defeat Robotnik , and once again comes into conflict with Knuckles , who believes Sonic is trying to steal the Emeralds for himself . 
 In Hidden Palace Zone , Sonic fights and defeats Knuckles . The two hear a disturbance outside of the chamber , and go out to find Dr. Robotnik stealing the Master Emerald , the secret to the island 's levitation powers . Knuckles attempts to attack Robotnik , but is electrically shocked in the process , and is trapped with Sonic in an underground passage . Knuckles , realizing Sonic is on his side , shows him a portal that leads them to Sky Sanctuary , where the Death Egg is relaunching . 
 At Sky Sanctuary , Sonic battles against Robotnik 's robotic EggRobo minions and Mecha Sonic . Mecha Sonic is left behind in a damaged state as Sonic boards the relaunching Death Egg . Robotnik uses the power of the Master Emerald to fuel a giant mech , but Sonic uses the power of the Chaos Emeralds to transform into Super Sonic . Super Sonic stops Robotnik , destroys the Death Egg , and returns the Master Emerald to its rightful place . If the player collects all the Chaos Emeralds , an ending is shown where a lone EggRobo rises from the wreckage of Robotnik 's mech . This leads into Knuckles ' story . 
 Knuckles ' story begins in Mushroom Hill , where he is relaxing with his animal friends but is interrupted by a bomb dropped by EggRobo . This prompts Knuckles to chase after him , leading him through most of the same zones Sonic went through . The chase ends at Sky Sanctuary , where Mecha Sonic attacks Knuckles but accidentally destroys EggRobo instead . After a short fight , Mecha Sonic uses the power of the Master Emerald to achieve a Super form similar to Sonic 's . Knuckles manages to defeat Super Mecha Sonic , who blows up . Sonic flies in piloting the biplane Tornado and Knuckles hitches a ride to return the Master Emerald to Angel Island . If all the Chaos Emeralds are collected , Angel Island rises upwards , into the sky . However , if the player has not collected all the Chaos Emeralds , Knuckles cannot redeem the Master Emerald , and Angel Island plummets into the ocean . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Since Sonic & Knuckles and Sonic the Hedgehog 3 were developed initially as a single title , their gameplay is similar : both are 2D , side @-@ scrolling platformers with similar level design , graphics , and game mechanics . However , in Sonic & Knuckles , unlike in Sonic 3 , the player chooses either Sonic or Knuckles at the title screen . The game differs from Sonic 3 in that Miles " Tails " Prower is not available to select , and the player cannot control two characters together or use any multiplayer modes . There is also no save feature . 
 The player character moves through eight levels , each divided into two acts . The first act of each level is punctuated by a miniboss fight with one of Dr. Robotnik 's robots , while the second ends with a regular boss fight with Robotnik , and there is a final boss fight with Robotnik at the game 's end . The two characters traverse levels differently : Sonic can jump slightly higher , is faster and can use the Insta @-@ shield ability returning from Sonic 3 which makes him invincible for a split @-@ second , but Knuckles can glide — by letting the wind run under his dreadlocks , break fragile walls and climb most walls . The levels also include a few cutscenes that differ based on the character selected , as Sonic and Knuckles are rivals for most of the game . 
 The game contains two types of " Bonus Stages " , both accessed by passing a checkpoint with at least 20 rings . The first type has the character orbit around floating , glowing spheres , jetting off each one when a button is pressed , while a fence of light approaches from the bottom and will remove the player from the stage if touched . Collecting 50 rings in this stage earns the player a continue . The second type involves bouncing around a room with a slot machine in its center with the intention of winning extra lives and power @-@ ups from it . The amount of rings held by the player determines which bonus stage is accessed . This is made visible by the colour of the stars floating around the checkpoint , red denoting the glowing spheres stage and yellow denoting the slot machine stage . 
 Special Stages are entered by finding giant rings hidden in secret passageways : the player is placed in a 3D environment and tasked to turn all of a number of blue spheres red by running through them , but must avoid all red spheres , including formerly blue ones . Completing this task earns the player a Chaos Emerald , and collecting all seven Emeralds allows the player to turn into Super Sonic or Super Knuckles , more powerful versions of the characters . These special stages feature yellow spheres that bounce the player long distances . 
 = = = Lock @-@ on technology = = = 
 Sonic & Knuckles features " lock @-@ on technology " that lets the game access data from Sonic the Hedgehog 2 and Sonic the Hedgehog 3 so that elements of both Sonic & Knuckles and the locked @-@ on game are combined . To play these combined games , the hatch on top of the Sonic & Knuckles cartridge can be flipped open and the second game placed inside . 
 When Sonic 3 is used in this manner , it enables the player to play through both games as one , titled in @-@ game as Sonic 3 & Knuckles . This features several additions to the games not otherwise available , such as slight changes to the level design , being able to play through Sonic 3 levels as Knuckles or Sonic & Knuckles levels as Tails , and the ability to save progress in all of the game 's levels . Additionally , locking @-@ on is the only way to collect " Super Emeralds " , which are earned by accessing Special Stages in the Sonic & Knuckles levels after collecting all seven Chaos Emeralds from Sonic 3 . When all Super Emeralds have been collected , Sonic , Knuckles , and Tails can transform into Hyper Sonic , Hyper Knuckles , and Super Tails respectively , each with unique abilities . Inserting Sonic 2 unlocks Knuckles the Echidna in Sonic the Hedgehog 2 , wherein the player can complete Sonic 2 using Knuckles ' abilities . 
 If the player attaches the original Sonic the Hedgehog or Sonic Compilation , a screen with Sonic , Tails , Knuckles , and Robotnik stating " No Way " repeatedly is displayed . The player can also access a minigame based on Sonic 3 's and Sonic & Knuckles 's Chaos Emerald Special Stages by pressing the Genesis ' A , B , and C buttons together . Here , the player can enter a twelve @-@ digit code , with every number combination generating a different variation of a Special Stage . This game is named Blue Sphere in Sonic Mega Collection . If any other game is inserted , the " No Way " screen is displayed with faded colors . However , by pressing the A , B , and C buttons together , the player can access a randomly generated Blue Sphere stage . 
 = = Development = = 
 Sonic & Knuckles was developed at the Sega Technical Institute by members of Sonic Team in the United States . It and Sonic 3 were originally planned to compose a single story within the same cartridge . However , due to time constraints and the fact that the manufacturing costs of a cartridge with more memory would have been prohibitively expensive for Sega , the decision was made to split the planned game in half , with Sonic & Knuckles as the second part of the Sonic 3 story @-@ arc . 
 According to Roger Hector , vice @-@ president and general manager of Sega Technical Institute , the idea of the lock @-@ on technology was first conceived two and a half years before the release of Sonic & Knuckles , between the releases of Sonic the Hedgehog and Sonic the Hedgehog 2 . Early development screenshots suggest Knuckles was planned to be playable in the first Sonic the Hedgehog via Sonic & Knuckles ' lock @-@ on technology , but this feature was removed prior to release . 
 Prior to the release of Sonic & Knuckles in North America , Blockbuster Video and MTV co @-@ sponsored a tournament contest where children were allowed to play a pre @-@ release of the game , leading up to a final tournament held at Alcatraz Island in San Francisco , California , with a winning prize of $ 25 @,@ 000 and the title " The World 's Most Hardcore Gamer " . The two finalists were additionally awarded a copy of every Sega product released for the next year . MTV broadcast the finale of this tournament along with other footage of the game ; titled " MTV 's Rock the Rock " , this video was aired shortly before the game 's release . The game was released worldwide on October 18 , 1994 . 
 = = Alternate versions and ports = = 
 = = = Compilation releases = = = 
 Sonic & Knuckles has been released as part of numerous compilations of Sega games including Sonic Jam ( 1997 ) for the Sega Saturn ; Sonic & Knuckles Collection ( 1997 ) and Sonic & Garfield Pack ( 1999 ) for the PC , Sonic Mega Collection ( 2002 ) for the Nintendo GameCube ; Sonic Mega Collection Plus ( 2004 ) for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , and PC ; Sonic 's Ultimate Genesis Collection ( 2009 ) for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 ; and Sonic Classic Collection ( 2010 ) for the Nintendo DS . 
 Sonic Jam , in addition to featuring the original release , included some new " remix " options to modify the game : " Normal " mode alters the layout of rings and hazards and " Easy " mode removes certain acts entirely from the game . The version in Sonic 's Ultimate Genesis Collection does not retain the lock @-@ on feature included in other versions of the game , because of " tight development times " . 
 = = = Digital releases = = = 
 The game has been re @-@ released through the Wii 's Virtual Console and Xbox 360 's Xbox Live Arcade . Both releases are programmed such that , if any of the " Lock @-@ on " games are also downloaded on the same account , the " connected " versions of the game are also available . For example , if one downloads Sonic & Knuckles and Sonic 2 , they have the option to play the corresponding Knuckles in Sonic 2 game . When the PC version was released via the Steam software , the games were released together as Sonic 3 & Knuckles as originally intended , with the player ( even if playing as Tails ) simply continuing at the beginning of Sonic & Knuckles after finishing Sonic 3 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics praised Sonic & Knuckles , despite its similarity to its predecessor . The four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly named it their " Game of the Month " . They lauded the lock @-@ on technology and remarked that despite that being " more of the same , it still is an exceptional game . " A reviewer of GamePro , who gave it a perfect score , commented that the ability to play as Knuckles makes it essentially two games on a single cartridge , the game is more challenging than Sonic 3 , and the ability to hook the cartridge up to Sonic 2 and 3 makes those games " worth playing again . " 
 Critics praised the lock @-@ on technology the game offered . Lucas Thomas of IGN said it was " a great game on its own " , but the lock @-@ on feature completely revamped the overall experience . Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer preferred Sonic & Knuckles to Sonic 3 , stating that he could not fully appreciate its predecessor without its " companion piece " . Sega Power 's review praised the game 's harder difficulty in comparison to its predecessor and the new expansion of levels , admitting that the expansion would not have been possible had Sonic 3 been a single game . Sega Magazine 's review similarly praised the lock @-@ on technology and the new innovation the unique cartridge offered , adding that Sonic & Knuckles ' hidden stages and bosses would strongly add to the replay value of the combined title . 
 Reviewing the Virtual Console release , Nintendo Life writer James Newton praised its support for the old lock @-@ on feature of the original release , claiming that the game does not truly shine without having purchased Sonic the Hedgehog 2 and 3 to activate this feature . Thomas praised the game for " impressive visuals that pushed the Genesis to its limits " and for the value added in the content unlocked with the lock @-@ on technology . 
 The Genesis version sold 1 @.@ 24 million copies in the United States . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For the series ' twentieth anniversary in 2011 , Sega released Sonic Generations , a game that remade aspects of various past games from the franchise . A remake of the Sky Sanctuary stage was made for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and PC versions of the game , while the Mushroom Hill level was remade for the Nintendo 3DS version of the game . Sonic & Sega All @-@ Stars Racing features a track inspired by the Death Egg as downloadable content along with the Metal Sonic character . Sonic & All @-@ Stars Racing Transformed also features Sky Sanctuary as a racetrack , with the Death Egg track returning for this game . 
 = Silvertip shark = 
 The silvertip shark ( Carcharhinus albimarginatus ) is a large species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , with a fragmented distribution throughout the tropical Indian and Pacific Oceans . This species is often encountered around offshore islands and coral reefs , and has been known to dive to a depth of 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) . The silvertip shark resembles a larger , bulkier grey reef shark ( C. amblyrhynchos ) , and can be easily identified by the prominent white margins on its fins . It attains a maximum length of 3 m ( 10 ft ) . 
 An aggressive , powerful apex predator , the silvertip shark feeds on a wide variety of bony fishes , as well as eagle rays , smaller sharks , and cephalopods . This species dominates other requiem sharks of equal size when competing for food , and larger individuals are often heavily scarred from conflicts with others of its species . As with other members of its family , the silvertip shark is viviparous , with females giving birth to one to 11 pups in the summer . Silvertip sharks are regarded as potentially dangerous to humans , as they often approach divers quite closely . This slow @-@ reproducing species is taken by commercial fisheries for its meat , fins , skin , cartilage , and jaws and teeth , which has apparently led to local population declines or extirpations . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed it as Near Threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The silvertip shark was originally described as Carcharias albimarginatus by German naturalist Eduard Rüppell , in the 1837 Fische des Rothen Meeres ( Fishes of the Red Sea ) . The name was later changed to the currently valid Carcharhinus albimarginatus . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin <unk> meaning " white " , and marginatus meaning " to enclose with a border " , in reference to the distinct white fin margins . In 1960 , a 103 cm ( 3 @.@ 38 ft ) -long immature male caught off Ras Muhammad in the Red Sea was designated as the type specimen . Based on similarities in morphology , tooth shape , and vertebral characters , Garrick ( 1982 ) proposed the grey reef shark as the closest relative of the silvertip shark . This interpretation was corroborated by Lavery ( 1992 ) , based on allozyme data . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The silvertip shark is widely but not continuously distributed in the tropical Indian and Pacific Oceans . In the western Indian Ocean , this species occurs from the Red Sea to South Africa , including Madagascar , the Seychelles , the Aldabra Group , Mauritius , and the Chagos Archipelago . In the western Pacific , it is known from off southern Japan to northern Australia , including Taiwan , the Philippines , Indonesia , Papua New Guinea , New Caledonia , Guam , Palau , the Solomon Islands , the Marshall Islands , the Phoenix Islands , and Tahiti . In the eastern Pacific , it occurs from southern Baja California to Colombia , including the Cocos , Galapagos , and Revillagigedo Islands . Its presence in the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea is unconfirmed . 
 Silvertip sharks are found over continental and insular shelves at a depth of 30 – 800 m ( 98 – 2 @,@ 625 ft ) , occupying all levels of the water column . They are most common around isolated islands , coral banks , and reef drop @-@ offs . Juveniles frequent coastal shallows or lagoons , while adults occur in deeper water , with little overlap between the two age groups . 
 = = Description = = 
 The silvertip shark is a robust and streamlined species with a moderately long , broad snout and large , round eyes . The five pairs of gill slits are short . There are 12 – 14 tooth rows on each side of both jaws , with one or two small teeth at the symphysis ( middle of the jaws ) . The upper teeth are broad with oblique triangular cusps and coarse serrations near the base ; the lower teeth have erect cusps with fine serrations . The first dorsal fin is large and triangular , originating above or slightly forward of the free pectoral fin tips . There is a ridge between the first and second dorsal fins . The pectoral fins are proportionately longer than in most requiem sharks and falcate ( sickle @-@ like ) in shape , with pointed tips . 
 The coloration is blue @-@ gray above with a bronze sheen , and white below . There is a subtle white band along the sides and distinctive white tips and borders on all fins . Silvertip sharks can grow up to 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) long , but typically measure 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in length . The maximum reported weight is 162 @.@ 2 kg ( 358 lb ) . Females are larger than males . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Though silvertip sharks are quite mobile , they exhibit fidelity to certain areas and there are reports of territorial behavior . They are usually encountered alone or in pairs . Small groups of adult females have been seen in deep water . Individual silvertip sharks behave very aggressively towards one another , and many are heavily scarred . They are also reported to dominate Galapagos sharks ( C. galapagensis ) and blacktip sharks ( C. limbatus ) of equal size when competing for food . This shark sometimes forms mixed @-@ species aggregations with grey reef sharks . Rainbow runners ( <unk> <unk> ) have been observed rubbing against silvertip sharks , using the sharks ' rough skin to scrape off parasites . They sometimes follow marine mammals such as bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops sp . ) in open water , and are themselves followed by pilot fish ( Naucrates ductor ) . 
 Like the grey reef shark , silvertip sharks sometimes perform a stereotypical threat display if pursued by divers , warning that it is prepared to attack . The display begins with the shark accelerating away to a distance of 15 m ( 49 ft ) , before turning and charging towards the perceived threat . At a distance of two body lengths , the shark brakes , turns broadside , drops its pectoral fins , gapes its jaws , lowers the posterior two @-@ thirds of its body , and " shivers " . The last two elements of this display are unique to this species ; the " shivering " may serve to emphasize its white fin markings . If the diver persists , the shark may rapidly close in and slash with its upper teeth . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The diet of the silvertip shark consists primarily of bony fishes , such as grouper , mackerel , tuna , escolars , lanternfish , flyingfish , wrasses , and soles . Eagle rays , smaller sharks , and octopus are occasionally taken . Larger sharks tend to be more sluggish and take more benthic prey . The differently shaped dentition in their upper and lower jaws allows them to tackle large prey , gripping and sawing off chunks of flesh with violent twists and turns . Silvertip sharks have been observed swimming around the periphery of groups of feeding sharks of other species , occasionally dashing in to steal food . This species often approaches ships , as they are attracted to certain artificial , low @-@ frequency sounds . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like other requiem sharks , the silvertip shark is viviparous ; once the embryos exhaust their supply of yolk , the depleted yolk sac develops into a placental connection through which the mother delivers nourishment . In the Southern Hemisphere , mating and parturition both occur in summer . Courtship involves the male biting the female to hold her for copulation ; one female observed had the tip of her first dorsal fin bitten off from such activity . Females bear litters of one to 11 ( usually five or six ) young after a gestation period of about one year , on a biennial cycle . The newborns have been reported to measure 63 – 68 cm ( 25 – 27 in ) and 73 – 81 cm ( 29 – 32 in ) long by different authors , and are found in shallower water than adults . The growth rate is highly variable in the wild : Kato and Hernandez ( 1967 ) reported juvenile silvertip sharks grow an average of 3 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) , or 5 @.@ 3 % of their body length , per year , with some individuals growing as much as 20 @.@ 8 cm ( 8 @.@ 2 in ) , 30 @.@ 1 % of their body length ) per year and others showing negative " growth " . Males have been reported to be sexually mature at 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 2 – 5 @.@ 9 ft ) or 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 0 m ( 6 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long , and females at 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 0 m ( 5 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Inquisitive and bold , especially in the presence of food , the silvertip shark is regarded as potentially dangerous to humans . Often , several Silvertip sharks will rush up from deep water to inspect divers when they first enter the water , which can be a very intimidating experience , as the sharks may approach quite close . This species has also been known to circle or pursue divers . In one experiment involving bait , a large silvertip shark tore the leg off a dummy dressed in SCUBA gear , demonstrating that this species is capable of inflicting lethal injuries . As of 2008 , the International Shark Attack File listed four provoked attacks attributable to this species , none of them fatal . 
 The silvertip shark is caught by commercial and artisan fisheries across its range using longlines , gillnets , and trawls , both intentionally and as bycatch . The fins are highly valued for shark fin soup and are sold on the export market , along with the skin and cartilage . The meat is marketed locally , fresh or dried and salted , as are the jaws and teeth . Silvertip sharks are known to be taken by fisheries in Indonesia , Myanmar , and the Philippines , as well as by various Indian Ocean nations with coral reef fisheries ; it is also an increasingly important catch of pelagic fisheries , where it is often finned at sea . This species is susceptible to overfishing , due to its slow reproductive rate and tendency to stay in a certain area . It is believed to have been extirpated by Indonesian artisan fishers at Scott Reef off northern Australia , and is likely becoming rare in many other parts of its range . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed the silvertip shark as Near Threatened , and noted it may be approaching the criteria for Vulnerable . 
 = Pioneer Zephyr = 
 The Pioneer Zephyr is a diesel @-@ powered railroad train formed of railroad cars permanently articulated together with Jacobs bogies , built by the Budd Company in 1934 for the Chicago , Burlington and Quincy Railroad ( CB & Q ) , commonly known as the Burlington . The train featured extensive use of stainless steel , was originally named the Zephyr , and was meant as a promotional tool to advertise passenger rail service in the United States . The construction included innovations such as <unk> ( a specialized type of spot welding ) to join the stainless steel , and articulation to reduce its weight . 
 On May 26 , 1934 , it set a speed record for travel between Denver , Colorado , and Chicago , Illinois , when it made a 1 @,@ 015 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 633 km ) non @-@ stop " Dawn @-@ to @-@ Dusk " dash in 13 hours 5 minutes at an average speed of 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) . For one section of the run it reached a speed of 112 @.@ 5 mph ( 181 km / h ) , just short of the then US land speed record of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . The historic dash inspired a 1934 film and the train 's nickname , " The Silver Streak " . 
 The train entered the regular revenue service on November 11 , 1934 , between Kansas City , Missouri ; Omaha , Nebraska ; and Lincoln , Nebraska . It operated this and other routes until its retirement in 1960 , when it was donated to Chicago 's Museum of Science and Industry , where it remains on public display . The train is generally regarded as the first successful streamliner on American railroads . 
 = = Concept and construction = = 
 In the early 1930s , the US was in the depths of the Great Depression . Without the money to purchase new goods , freight trains were not hauling as much as they had in the previous decade . People who could not buy goods also could not afford to travel to the extent that they had before , so passenger revenues were also down . Automobile travel travel had increasingly cut into rail ridership since the mid @-@ 1920s , making faster , more efficient service imperative for railroads to compete . Railroads needed a way to re @-@ energize the traveling public and offer a bit of hope for the days to come . 
 One of the railroad presidents who faced this challenge was Ralph Budd , formerly of the Great Northern Railway and now president of the Chicago , Burlington and Quincy Railroad ( Burlington ) , who sought to develop a more efficient high speed train to replace conventional steam @-@ powered heavyweight equipment to lower operating costs , attract more customers , and restore profitability to passenger service . The project hinged on two major elements : developing lighter railcars and developing an internal combustion driven power system adequate for high speed service . 
 In 1932 Ralph Budd met Edward G. Budd ( no relation ) , an automotive steel pioneer who was founder and president of the Budd Company . Edward Budd was demonstrating his new Budd @-@ Michelin rail motorcar built of stainless steel . Pneumatic @-@ wheeled railcars never found popularity for actual service in the US - they tended to derail - but they demonstrated the successful construction of lightweight stainless steel unibody railcars . 
 Stainless steel provided many benefits over traditional wood and hardened steel for railroad carbodies ; it was a lighter and stronger material , and its natural silver appearance and resistance to corrosion meant that it would not have to be painted to protect it from the weather . Since the carbody was much lighter than similar cars , it would be able to carry a higher revenue load for the same cost . 
 In developing the Budd @-@ Michelin railcar , the Budd Company used the formed steel technology in which they were industry pioneers and solved the most difficult problem in using stainless steel for railcar construction : developing a welding technique that would not compromise the strength and corrosion resistance of the stainless steel . On August 20 , 1932 , Earl J. Ragsdale , an engineer at the Budd Company , filed a patent application for a " Method and product of electric welding " ; on January 16 , 1934 , the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) granted US patent 1 @,@ 944 @,@ 106 to the Budd Company . <unk> , as Ragsdale termed his method , involved automatic control of the timing of individual spot welds . In spot welding , the two pieces of metal that are to be joined are pressed together with an electrode on each side of the joint . A very high electric current is passed through the joint and fuses the two pieces of metal together . If a spot weld is heated too long , heat will spread from the weld at a middling temperature that weakens the stainless steel and compromises its corrosion @-@ resistant properties unacceptably ; Ragsdale 's precisely @-@ timed welds solved the problem . With their patented welding process at the core of stainless steel railcar construction , the cars produced by Budd were a truly unique product . 
 The other major problem Ralph Budd faced in developing a practical high speed lightweight train was to find a powerplant adequate to drive a trainset at a speed competitive with the faster steam trains . The existing powerplants for motorized railcars were completely inadequate . Contemporary four @-@ stroke Diesel motors had unacceptably low power @-@ to @-@ weight ratios and were only efficient under an unacceptably narrow range of operating conditions . Spark @-@ ignited petroleum distillate motors also suffered from low power @-@ to @-@ weight ratios along with being maintenance @-@ intensive and smokey , and gasoline motors showed limited potential for higher power hauling applications . The solution to Budd 's problem presented itself in the new two @-@ stroke Diesel motors developed by the partnership of the Winton Engine Company and General Motors , which represented a factor @-@ of @-@ four improvement in power @-@ to @-@ weight ratio over the previous generation of Diesel motors . Their efficient operating range was also improved , owing largely to improvements in fuel injection developed by GM and Winton . A Diesel @-@ electric system driven by the new motor was used to power General Motors ' automotive assembly exhibit at the 1933 Century of Progress Chicago World 's Fair . Budd saw the compact , efficient system in action , saw a major piece of his lightweight train puzzle fall into place , then approached GM about developing it into a system for rail propulsion . The result was a Diesel @-@ electric drive system powered by an eight @-@ cylinder , 600 hp Winton 201A Diesel motor installed in a new three car stainless steel streamliner within a year . In 1933 a Century of Progress exhibit inspired the Zephyr streamliner ; the following year the new Zephyr streamliner inspired the Century of Progress fair and the rest of the country . 
 Another factor in making the Zephyr lighter than conventional trains was that the individual carbodies in the train share their trucks with adjacent cars . In this design by Budd engineer Walter B. Dean , the train was three articulated compartments . On conventional passenger cars , each carbody rode upon a pair of trucks ( pivot @-@ mounted wheel @-@ axle assembly ) , with one truck at each end . The articulation not only reduced the number of trucks under the train , but it also dispensed with the need for couplers between each of the carbodies , further reducing the train 's weight . It did , however , mean that train lengths could not be easily changed by switching out cars . 
 The exterior design of the train was left to aeronautical engineer Albert Gardner Dean ( Walter Dean 's younger brother ) who designed the sloping nose shape , with architects Paul Philippe Cret and John Harbeson , devising a way to strengthen and beautify the sides with the train 's horizontal fluting . On April 15 , 1936 , Colonel Ragsdale , Walter Dean and Albert Dean , filed patent applications for a " Rail Car Front End Construction " . On September 23 , 1941 the USPTO granted US patents 2 @,@ 256 @,@ 493 and 2 @,@ 256 @,@ 494 to the Budd Company . The streamlining extended to the undercarriage as well to reduce drag . 
 Naming the train was a task that was very seriously taken by Budd . He wanted a name that started with the letter Z because this train was intended to be the " last word " in passenger service ; Budd and his coworkers looked up the last words in their dictionaries , but neither <unk> nor <unk> conveyed the meanings that Budd was looking for . The name of the new train came from The Canterbury Tales , which Budd had been reading . The story begins with pilgrims setting out on a journey , inspired by the budding springtime and by Zephyrus , the gentle and nurturing west wind . Budd thought that would be an excellent name for a sleek new traveling machine — Zephyr . 
 The first Zephyr ( 9900 ) was completed by the Budd Company on April 9 , 1934 , powered by an eight @-@ cylinder , 600 @-@ horsepower ( 447 kW ) , 8 @-@ 201 @-@ A model Winton engine . Like the diesel @-@ electric locomotives that soon displaced the steam locomotive on American railroads , this engine powered an electrical generator ; the electricity it generated was then fed to electric traction motors connected to the axles in the train 's front truck . 
 The train 's engineer sat in a small compartment in the nose of the train , directly in front of the prime mover . Behind the engine in the first carbody was a 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) long railway post office section . The second carbody consisted of a small baggage section and a short buffet and 20 @-@ passenger coach section . The third and final carbody in the train , as originally built , was configured as half coach ( 40 @-@ passenger seats ) and half observation car ( 12 passenger seats ) . As built , the train had 72 seats and could carry 50 @,@ 000 pounds ( 22 @.@ 7 tonnes ) of baggage and express freight . This train 's official christening occurred on April 18 , 1934 , at the Pennsylvania Railroad 's Broad Street Station in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 Following the Zephyr Budd built an identical trainset , the Flying Yankee , for the Boston and Maine railroad , and went on to build a series of larger and more powerful Zephyr trainsets for Burlington . 
 = = Promotion : " Dawn @-@ to @-@ Dusk " dash = = 
 To catch the public 's attention , this train was not simply rolled out of the factory ; it made a dash from one end of the CB & Q , in Denver , to the other , in Chicago on May 26 , 1934 . The railroad spared no expense in planning the operations . All other trains along the Zephyr 's route were diverted to sidings and the turnouts were spiked into the proper alignment for the Zephyr 's run . Track and maintenance of way workers checked every spike and bolt along the train 's route to ensure that there would not be any problems , and temporary speed signs were installed along the route to warn the Zephyr 's crew of curves that would be dangerous at high speeds . On the day of the dash , every road grade crossing was manned by a flagman to stop automobile traffic ahead of the train and to ensure that the crossing was clear . Stations along the route were protected by local police officers and members of the American Legion and the Boy Scouts of America . 
 The train left Denver at 07 : 04 Central Daylight Time and arrived in Chicago at 20 : 09 , 13 hours 5 minutes later , at an average speed of 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) . For one section of the run , the train reached a speed of 112 @.@ 5 mph ( 181 km / h ) , close to the world land speed record of 130 @.@ 6 mph ( 210 @.@ 2 km / h ) of 1903 , which had been achieved in repeated runs on dedicated test track . The non @-@ stop 1 @,@ 015 mile ( 1 @,@ 633 km ) trip exceeded the railroad 's expectations in being 1 hour 55 minutes faster than was scheduled . Reporters along the route told of the " silver streak " that ran by faster than any other train that normally rode American rails at the time . The Burlington 's contemporary passenger trains plied the same distance in around 25 hours . 
 Riding the train were Ralph Budd , Edward G. Budd , H. L. Hamilton , president of the Winton Motor Company ( at that time a part of the new General Motors Electro @-@ Motive Division ) , a number of reporters , some Burlington employees , members of the public , and Zeph , a burro that was contributed by a Colorado newspaper , the Rocky Mountain News , as a mascot for the train . The newspaper had described Zeph to the railroad as a " Rocky Mountain canary " so the train 's crew had originally planned only enough space for a birdcage ; when they found out it was not a bird , the railroad hastily built a pen in the baggage section and bought some hay for it . When asked about the burro , Ralph Budd replied " why not ? One more jackass on this trip won 't make a difference . " 
 After the train arrived in Chicago , it traveled a little farther to the 1934 Century of Progress fair ( noted in some press articles about the dash as the " Chicago World 's Fair " ) where it was put on public display on opening day . After its display on the Wings of a Century stage , the train was taken on a 31 @-@ state , 222 @-@ city publicity tour . More than 2 million people saw the train before it entered revenue service . 
 Part of the tour included a test run between Chicago and Minneapolis – St. Paul a full five hours faster than the Burlington 's fastest steam @-@ powered train . Due to the Zephyr 's success on this test run , the Burlington immediately ordered two more Zephyr trainsets that were dubbed , the " Twin Zephyrs " , starting the spread of the Zephyr brand . 
 = = The early Zephyr series trains = = 
 Following the Pioneer Zephyr 9900 , two identical trainsets , 9901 and 9902 , were built and put into service as the Twin Cities Zephyr between Chicago and Minneapolis - St. Paul in April 1935 . The four car set 9903 entered service as the Mark Twain Zephyr between St. Louis and Burlington , Iowa in October 1935 . The six car sets 9904 and <unk> began service as the Denver Zephyr in May 1936 then replaced 9901 and 9902 on the Twin Cities run in December 1936 ; the smaller trains were assigned to new Zephyr routes . Two new ten car trains , 9906 and 9907 , replaced 9904 and <unk> as the Denver Zephyr in November 1936 . The last of the classic Zephyrs , 9908 , entered service as the General Pershing Zephyr between Kansas City and St. Louis in 1939 . 
 While 9900 @-@ 9903 were power cars , only one more , the unique 9908 , was built . 9904 @-@ 9907 were locomotives with the twin 900 hp 12 @-@ cylinder engine layout that the early E @-@ units would use . 9906 and 9907 , built for the ten car Denver Zephyr sets in 1936 , included booster units . 9908 used the new 1000 hp EMD 567 motor in a single motor configuration . After 9908 , all Burlington passenger engines were standard production locomotives , except for the cosmetic stainless steel bodywork of the <unk> . 
 9900 , and sisters , 9901 @-@ 9903 , were successful as streamliners , but had the drawbacks of articulated trainsets and early two @-@ stroke Diesel motors . However , despite their shortcomings , 9900 and 9902 @-@ 9908 were all in service until at least 1954 . 9900 remained in service until 1960 . The 9908 power car remained in service until 1966 . As of 2016 9908 is undergoing restoration to operational condition . 
 Winton Diesel engines were used in early EMC designs , and 9900 had an eight @-@ cylinder 201A model developing 600 hp at 750 rpm . Two @-@ stroke Diesel motors , while a breakthrough in locomotive power , were an immature technology . Some of their early reliability problems were mitigated with changes to individual parts such as pistons ; other solutions had to wait for a differently designed motor . For example , the first generation of pistons in the Winton motor only had about 50 @,@ 000 miles of useful life , later extended to about 100 @,@ 000 miles . EMC 's next generation Diesel motor had pistons with a useful life of over 500 @,@ 000 miles . The problems were most acute under the operating conditions of locomotive , rather than stationary or marine , use . Even with the problems of the 201A , their maintenance regime was significantly lower than for steam locomotives . 
 9900 and 9901 @-@ 9903 were articulated trainsets , with common trucks ( Jacobs bogies ) between each car . This caused operating problems , as train lengths could not be changed for demand and any single failure affected the entire train . All following power units were separate from their train , although four more articulated and semi @-@ articulated <unk> were built . 
 = = Regular revenue service = = 
 The Zephyr 's power ( leading ) car was numbered 9900 , the baggage @-@ coach combine car 505 , and the coach @-@ observation 570 . The train was placed in regular service between Kansas City , Missouri , Omaha and Lincoln , Nebraska , on November 11 , 1934 , replacing a pair of steam locomotives and six heavyweight passenger cars , weighing up to eight times as much as the Zephyr . By June 1935 , it proved popular enough to add a fourth car , providing additional coach seating . The fourth car was originally a 40 @-@ seat coach number 525 , but the following June it was switched to Twin Cities service , then back to the Pioneer Zephyr in December . Car 525 remained on the train until June 1938 . Just over five years after it was introduced , the Pioneer Zephyr crossed the one million mile mark in regular service on December 29 , 1939 , near Council Bluffs , Iowa . 
 Ralph Budd and the Burlington capitalized on the Zephyr 's success . However , most passenger trains needed larger capacity . Thus , as the Burlington made a transition to larger diesel @-@ electric locomotives pulling individual passenger cars , new streamlined cars of standard size were ordered , which quickly became the standard of many railroads . However , Burlington was determined to be the leader , and ordered its large " E " series passenger diesels to also be equipped with matching stainless @-@ steel fluting . Many of the Burlington 's long distance named passenger trains began operating under the Zephyr banner , including the Nebraska Zephyr , Twin Cities Zephyr , and perhaps the most famous of the namesake , the California Zephyr . 
 On the second anniversary of the train 's famous dash , the original Zephyr was rechristened the Pioneer Zephyr to distinguish it as the first of the Burlington 's growing Zephyr fleet . In 1938 , car 525 was replaced by car number 500 , a 40 @-@ seat buffet / lounge car , to provide light meals . Car number 505 , the baggage @-@ coach combine , was rebuilt at this time into a full baggage car , but it kept its original windows . 
 In regular service , the Pioneer Zephyr had its share of accidents . In 1939 it was involved in a head @-@ on collision with a freight train that completely destroyed the cab . The train was rebuilt and re @-@ entered revenue service soon afterward , but the accident strengthened the desire of locomotive designers to move the cab back from the front of the locomotive to above a large nose , as on EMD F @-@ unit and EMD E @-@ unit locomotives . 
 Since the Pioneer Zephyr was built of stainless steel , which is not as recyclable as aluminum , the train was spared from the metal recycling drives of World War II . By contrast , Union Pacific 's M @-@ 10000 , built of aluminum , was scrapped in 1942 for the war effort , among other reasons . 
 In 1948 and 1949 , the Pioneer Zephyr was temporarily removed from service to participate in the Chicago Railroad Fair 's " Wheels A @-@ Rolling " pageant . The fair 's purpose was to celebrate 100 years of railroad history west of Chicago , and the Pioneer Zephyr 's role in the pageant was to highlight the latest strides in railroad technology . It resumed regular passenger operations when the fair ended on October 2 , 1949 . By 1955 the Pioneer Zephyr 's route had been updated to run between Galesburg , Illinois , and Saint Joseph , Missouri ; the trainset had been in continual service since 1934 , operating over nearly 3 million miles ( 4 @.@ 8 million kilometres ) . The Pioneer Zephyr 's last revenue run was a trip from Lincoln , Nebraska , to Kansas City , Missouri , ( along the train 's regular revenue route ) that then continued to Chicago on March 20 , 1960 . When Amtrak took over passenger rail services in 1971 , the legendary Zephyr name was preserved , and the California Zephyr is an Amtrak route in the 21st century . 
 = = Use in film = = 
 Press publicity had apparently first coined the term " Silver Streak " . The Pioneer Zephyr 's famous Denver @-@ Chicago dash served as the inspiration for the 1934 film The Silver Streak starring Charles Starrett . In that story , the crew was racing to the Boulder Dam construction site with an iron lung , with only moments to spare . The original Zephyr trainset was used for the exterior shots in the film , while interior scenes were filmed on a soundstage in Hollywood . For the film , the " Burlington Route " nameplate on the train 's nose was replaced with one that read " Silver Streak " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence on trains = = = 
 The sensation caused by the new Zephyr trainsets sparked intense competition centered on speed and styling in the region served by the CB & Q. In May 1935 the Milwaukee Road introduced the Class A steam @-@ powered high speed streamliner locomotive on its Chicago @-@ Twin Cities Hiawatha run . The styling of the Class A was directly evocative of the Zephyr , with a " shovel @-@ nose " front end featuring a high @-@ mounted headlamp ensconced in <unk> . Another early adopter of streamline styling was the New York Central railway with its Commodore Vanderbilt steam locomotive , showing styling elements borrowed from the Zephyr , unveiled in December 1934 . A Zephyr @-@ type trainset , the Flying Yankee , started service between Boston and Portland , Maine in April 1935 , signaling new competition for steam @-@ powered passenger service on the east coast . The Gulf , Mobile , and Northern Rebel featured styling similar to that of the Zephyr , entering service on July 10 , 1935 between New Orleans and Jackson , Tennessee . The race was on nationally to develop faster and more stylish locomotives for passenger service , boosting the streamliner trend . 
 Style and structural elements of the Zephyr were incorporated into the EMC " E " series diesel locomotives introduced in 1937 , featuring " shovel @-@ nose " front ends beneath their elevated cabs . The E5 units produced for CB & Q paid homage to the original Zephyr trainsets with a stainless steel body , fluted lower bodywork , horizontal black stripes across the front , and faux <unk> flanking the upper headlamp . The lightweight construction introduced to mainline service by the Zephyr trainsets became the standard for new railcars used with the new EMC @-@ powered Diesel streamliners such as the AT & SF Super Chief . 
 = = = Zephyr @-@ mania = = = 
 With Zephyr @-@ mania sweeping the country , tributes turned up in the names of everything from sports teams to commercial products . In 1934 , Father Becker , principal of the newly built St. Mary High School in <unk> , Wisconsin , was so inspired by the dawn @-@ to @-@ dusk run that he chose " Zephyrs " as the mascot for the new school . In Galesburg , Illinois , which is 162 rail miles from Chicago , the local high school named all its athletic teams the " Galesburg Silver Streaks " in honor of the train . In 1935 , the H. N. White Company changed the name of its top @-@ line saxophones to " King Zephyr . " Ford Motor Company introduced the " Mercury Zephyr " with the 1936 model year . If advertisers could find a way to cash in on Zephyr @-@ mania , they did . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 On May 26 , 1960 , the 26th anniversary of the " Dawn @-@ to @-@ Dusk " dash , the original Pioneer Zephyr train ( car numbers 9900 , 505 and 570 ) was donated to Chicago 's Museum of Science and Industry ( MSI ) . Car number 500 , which operated with the train from 1938 , went along with Mark Twain Zephyr trainset 9903 to a party in Mount Pleasant , Iowa , for static display in a town park , but plans for the train 's display did not work out ; car 500 and the Mark Twain Zephyr are currently stored in Granite City , Illinois and plans are currently underway to display it in Fairfield , Iowa . 
 MSI displayed the Pioneer Zephyr outdoors , with no protection from the weather , until 1994 . At that time , the steam locomotive that shared the display space with the Zephyr , Santa Fe # 2903 , was donated to the Illinois Railway Museum ( IRM ) at Union , west of Chicago , while MSI prepared a new display location for the Zephyr . 
 MSI dug a pit in front of the building and built a new display area for the Zephyr , where it could be displayed year @-@ round . In 1998 , after the train received a cosmetic restoration by Northern Rail Car in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , the pit was finally ready to receive the train . Rohn Metal <unk> , known for its expertise in stainless steel fabrication , played a part in the interior restoration of the Zephyr . The Pioneer Zephyr train is still on display at MSI just outside the main entrance from the museum 's underground parking area , where it is one of the more popular exhibits . Thomas Rohn , owner of Rohn Metal , was " happy to lend his company 's expertise " in the train 's restoration . 
 In addition to the Pioneer Zephyr , two other legacies remain . An operable Nebraska Zephyr train was donated to IRM . There , powered by one of the large " E " series passenger diesels ( an EMC E5 ) with the distinctive and durable stainless @-@ steel fluting , it is still operated on short runs on the museum 's substantial trackage , providing train enthusiasts and tourists with an experience reminiscent of the heyday of the Burlington 's Zephyr service . The Silver Charger , power car of the General Pershing Zephyr , is on display at the Museum of Transportation in St. Louis , and the same train 's " diner @-@ parlour and observation car " is now the Silver Star Cafe in Port Hedland , Australia . 
 Also utilizing the name , the Minnesota Zephyr was a dinner train located in the historic city of Stillwater , Minnesota , although it was not directly associated with the historic Burlington Zephyr fleet . 
 Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom in Allentown , Pennsylvania has a miniature replica train ride called Zephyr which was built in 1935 and helped the park survive the Great Depression . 
 = = Models = = 
 Due to the Zephyr 's place in American railroad history , many model <unk> have built their own versions of the Pioneer Zephyr in miniature . Several model manufacturers are now producing commercial ready @-@ to @-@ run models or kits of the train for modelers to build . This list is ordered by the manufacturer 's release date : 
 American Flyer introduced one of the earliest versions of the Zephyr in 1934 . Originally sold as a three @-@ car set , the body shells were produced in sand @-@ cast aluminum and hand @-@ polished to represent the stainless steel @-@ skinned prototype . Additional cars became available and the locomotive or " power unit " underwent some refinements during production ; and a less expensive stamped lithographed steel version was also produced . The Zephyr set appeared in the 1934 @-@ 1938 American Flyer catalogs . With the purchase of the American Flyer line in 1937 by the A. C. Gilbert Company , a new line of O scale ( 1 : 48 ) trains moved into production phasing out the Zephyrs and previous O @-@ scale products collectively known as " Chicago Flyer " . 
 Challenger Imports imported limited production ready @-@ to @-@ run brass models in HO scale ( 1 : 87 ) of the four @-@ car Pioneer Zephyr , Mark Twain Zephyr and the Boston and Maine Railroad 's Maine Cheshire and Maine Minuteman in 1993 . 
 Fine N @-@ Scale Products released a kit in 1996 in N scale ( 1 : 160 ) that includes an option for car number 500 . 
 Con @-@ Cor made limited @-@ run models available in both HO scale and N scale that were released in 2005 , and then again in 2012 . 
