 NBA commissioner David Stern reacted with strict penalties for the players involved , stating , " It is our obligation to take the strongest possible steps to avoid such failures in the future . " Seven players were suspended for a total of 47 games , and the players lost in excess of $ 1 @.@ 2 million in salary . Each team was also fined $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 Because Anthony 's suspension was longer than 12 games , he was eligible to appeal to an arbitrator ; however , Anthony eventually announced he would not attempt one , saying he did not " want to be a further distraction " . 
 = = = Public reaction = = = 
 Several sportswriters said the brawl was not as violent as the Pacers – Pistons brawl two years before , and 81 % of respondents in a SportsNation poll said the biggest difference between the two brawls was that it " didn 't involve players going into the stands and fighting fans " . However , Michael Ventre said that the Knicks and Nuggets brawl was worse because " it was touched off by the actions of players , and it escalated because of them . " Several writers said that the penalties were more severe because of the Pacers – Pistons brawl , because the league was on a " very serious image @-@ cleanup campaign . " 
 Steve Francis claimed that the media reaction to the fight and the suspensions itself were " racially motivated . " He argued that Major League Baseball and the National Hockey League had " incidents that are way worse than basketball , " but did not face the scrutiny that the NBA received " because there are more black players in the NBA . " This was echoed by several writers , and sportswriter @-@ television personality Michael Wilbon said that " NBA players have endured more scrutiny , pertaining to image , than any other professional athletes in America . " Martin Luther King III called for a meeting to end the violence in the NBA , stating , " Individuals who play a game should be able to conduct themselves appropriately . " However , the NBA said through a spokesman that they " don 't think that meeting is necessary . " 
 = = = Coaches ' role in the brawl = = = 
 Minutes before the brawl started , Knicks coach Isiah Thomas asked Carmelo Anthony not to go into the painted area around the basket , despite the fact that they were not members of the same team . Thomas later said that because Denver head coach George Karl kept his team 's starting players on the court for the closing minutes of the game , which Thomas thought showed a lack of sportsmanship , his orders to Anthony were to " show some class . " However , Karl responded by saying the brawl " was directed by Isiah " . 
 Thomas was not penalized after the brawl , as an NBA investigation ruled that they did not have " adequate evidence upon which to make a determination , " but several writers criticized the NBA for not including Thomas in the suspensions . ESPN analyst Marc Stein called Thomas ' explanations of his comments " laughable , " and commentator Greg Anthony , a former Knicks player , said he " never had a coach say that to an opponent . " It was also suggested that Thomas was attempting to resurrect the physical tactics of his former team , the " Bad Boy " Pistons . 
 In response to Thomas saying that keeping the Nuggets starters on the floor in the final minutes of the game was unsportsmanlike , Karl said that he " never thought about running up the score , " and only wanted to " get a big win on the road . " However , several sportswriters criticized his decision , and some said that he should also have been penalized . It was also suggested that Karl was trying to humiliate Thomas due to the perception that Thomas had mistreated Larry Brown , a friend of Karl 's . Karl was also blamed for putting his players in a position to start a fight . 
 = = = Carmelo Anthony = = = 
 The day following the brawl , Anthony issued a statement and apology to his family , the league , and fans . He also specifically apologized to Mardy Collins , whom he directly struck during the incident . At the time of the brawl , Anthony was the league 's leading scorer ; his suspension was also the longest of the players suspended , and the sixth @-@ longest in NBA history . According to former NBA player Steve Kerr , Anthony had " tarnished " his image , and Ric Bucher said that Anthony had " torched his own career " . Sports Illustrated writer Marty Burns said that Anthony faced becoming known by sports fans across America as the player who punched Collins in the face and then ran away . An example of the backlash was Northwest Airlines pulling Anthony from its in @-@ flight magazine cover , as it said it did not want " to condone the behavior of Anthony " . 
 = = Events after the brawl = = 
 A day after Anthony was suspended , Denver acquired Allen Iverson , who was then second in the league in scoring behind Anthony . After Anthony and Smith returned from their suspensions , the trio led the Nuggets to 45 wins and the sixth seed in the Western Conference for the playoffs . However , they were eliminated in the first round by the San Antonio Spurs . The Knicks finished 33 – 49 , 12th in the Eastern Conference , and did not make the playoffs . 
 The two teams faced each other for the first time since the altercation on November 17 , 2007 , which the Nuggets won 115 – 83 . Opposing players Renaldo Balkman and <unk> Kleiza began arguing with each other after Balkman was called for a hard foul on Kleiza , but the incident was defused after Balkman was given a technical foul . Iverson , Anthony , and Marcus Camby were all removed early in the fourth quarter . Balkman and Kleiza later became teammates after Balkman was traded to the Nuggets in the 2008 off @-@ season . 
 As of the 2010 – 11 season , of the seven suspended players , three were still with their respective teams . Mardy Collins was traded to the Los Angeles Clippers in 2008 . Jerome James was traded to the Chicago Bulls a year later , but never played for the Bulls as he suffered a torn Achilles tendon . Jeffries and Robinson were traded at the 2010 trade deadline to the Houston Rockets and Boston Celtics , respectively . Robinson then signed a multi @-@ year deal with the Denver Nuggets on July 26 , 2013 . Carmelo Anthony was traded to the Knicks before the 2011 trade deadline . Meanwhile , Jeffries ' contract was bought out by the Rockets and he rejoined the Knicks . In addition , J.R. Smith was signed by the Knicks in February of the 2012 season , which will make him the second former Nugget involved in the brawl to join the Knicks . Though not directly involved in the brawl , 2006 Nuggets C / PF Marcus Camby also joined the Knicks during the 2012 off @-@ season , making him the third 2006 Nugget to join the Knicks for the 2012 @-@ 2013 season . Also not directly involved in the brawl , PF Kenyon Martin joined the Knicks on February 21 , 2013 ( initially on a 10 @-@ day contract ) , making him the 4th member of the 2012 @-@ 2013 Knicks to have been on the ' 06 Nuggets team . 
 = Tropical Storm Linda ( 1997 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Linda , known in the Philippines as Tropical Depression Openg , was the worst typhoon in southern Vietnam in at least 100 years , killing thousands of people and leaving extensive damage . It formed on October 31 , 1997 in the South China Sea , between Indochina and the Philippines . Strengthening as it moved westward , Linda struck extreme southern Vietnam on November 2 with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , dropping heavy rainfall . Once in the Gulf of Thailand it strengthened further to minimal typhoon status , but weakened to tropical storm strength before crossing the Malay Peninsula into the Bay of Bengal , the first storm to do so in five years . It restrengthened in the Indian Ocean to typhoon status , but increasing wind shear and weakened steering currents caused Linda to dissipate on November 9 . 
 The worst of Linda 's impact was in Vietnam , where 3 @,@ 111 people were killed , and damage totaled $ 385 million ( USD ) . Heavy rainfall caused flooding , which damaged or destroyed about 200 @,@ 000 houses and left about 383 @,@ 000 people homeless . Widespread crop and transportation damage also occurred , the latter which impeded relief efforts . Several countries around the world sent relief aid , including medical teams , food , and clothing . However , the food supply and health status of the storm victims proved not as bad as originally feared . Linda later struck Thailand , causing flash flooding and at least 164 deaths . The storm also affected Burma ( Myanmar ) , Indonesia , Malaysia , and Cambodia to a lesser degree . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Linda were from an area of convection that were first noted east of the Philippines on October 26 . A subtropical ridge persisted to the north , which caused the disturbance to move generally westward . On October 29 , the system crossed the Philippines and entered the South China Sea . It subsequently began to organize , and late on October 31 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 30W . At that time , the system was located off the northwest coast of Borneo . The PAGASA organization named it " Openg " . 
 Shortly after developing , the depression intensified into a tropical storm , and was named " Linda " by the JTWC . It continued to intensify , reaching winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) as it approached southern Vietnam . At 0900 UTC on November 2 , Linda made landfall in the Vietnamese province of Cà Mau . It maintained its strength over land , and the storm quickly reached typhoon status after entering the Gulf of Thailand ; a typhoon is a tropical cyclone with winds of at least 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , although Linda did not intensify beyond minimal typhoon status . Turning northwestward , Linda deteriorated to tropical storm strength , and struck Thailand late on November 3 with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . 
 Linda weakened further over the mountainous terrain of the Malay Peninsula , and the storm emerged into the Andaman Sea with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . This made Linda the first tropical cyclone since Tropical Storm Forrest in 1992 to cross from the western Pacific Ocean into the Indian Ocean . Additionally , upon reaching the Indian Ocean , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) classified the storm as Cyclonic Storm BOB 08 , with winds of 40 mph ( 70 km / h ) . With warm waters , Tropical Storm Linda gradually re @-@ intensified as it slowed down , due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge . On November 6 , it again attained typhoon status while located off the southwest coast of Burma ( Myanmar ) . Initially , it was expected to cross the Bay of Bengal and make landfall near the India / Bangladesh border . The cyclone only maintained peak strength for 18 hours , due to an increase in wind shear from a mid @-@ latitude trough . Linda 's motion became nearly stationary , and it gradually weakened for several days . On November 9 , Linda dissipated about 375 miles ( 600 km ) southwest of Yangon , Burma . That day , the IMD also terminated advisories . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Prior to the arrival of the storm , officials in Vietnam issued warnings to the residents , although its approach was faster than expected , and the region rarely experiences tropical cyclones . Tropical Storm Linda dropped heavy rainfall across southern Vietnam , peaking at 9 @.@ 17 inches ( 23 @.@ 3 cm ) in Cần Thơ . The storm caused heavy damage in the country , particularly in the southernmost province of Cà Mau where it struck , but also in <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Kiên Giang . The most severely affected regions were poor fishing communities . Overall , the storm damaged 139 @,@ 445 houses and wrecked 76 @,@ 609 more , which left 383 @,@ 045 people homeless . Thousands of schools were damaged , and 130 @,@ 815 dykes were breached . Additionally , the storm destroyed at least 3 @,@ 122 boats . The rainfall also flooded 1 @,@ 750 square miles ( 4 @,@ 500 km2 ) of rice paddy crop , about half of which in Cà Mau . A preliminary damage total was estimated at 7 @.@ 18 trillion <unk> ( $ 385 million USD ) . 
 Typhoon Linda caused considerable deaths in Vietnam . Many fishermen and sailors were caught at sea in the path of the storm , unable to escape its path . Within three days , the death toll in Vietnam was set at over 150 , with thousands missing , many of them fishermen . By the fourth day after the storm , the toll reached 390 , and on November 14 , eight days after the storm , the death toll reached 464 . Ultimately , the death toll was set at 3 @,@ 111 . Eight days after Linda 's passage , a United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs ( DHA ) report indicated 857 people were injured by the storm . The government quickly established search and rescue teams , particularly for missing fishermen , and a total of 3 @,@ 513 people were rescued after the storm . In the weeks after the storm , hundreds of dead bodies washed ashore in Vietnam and Thailand . 
 The Vietnamese government identified basic supplies that it needed in response to the storm ; those included various foods , clothing , medicine , shelter supplies , and sanitation equipment . The country made a formal request for international assistance , noting that the storm was the worst in 100 years , and officials had limited resources due to the unexpected destruction . Prior to the request , the government of Switzerland sent about 500 @,@ 000 Swiss francs ( $ 360 @,@ 000 USD ) for immediate relief assistance . Subsequently , ten other countries sent cash or relief supplies worth $ 2 @.@ 6 million , including medical shelters from the United States , clothing from the United Kingdom , tents from Russia , and transport goods from Japan . Red Cross workers had to travel by riverboat to bring aid to the most affected communities , due to the poor state of the roads . After two months , the Red Cross distributed 65 @,@ 401 roofing sheets , 390 metric tons of rice , 11 @,@ 990 mosquito nets , 6 @,@ 871 blankets , 3 @,@ 664 medical kits , and abundant clothing supplies to about 150 @,@ 000 affected people ; the supplies were purchased in Ho Chi Minh City . Eventually , the food supply and health status of the storm victims proved not as bad as originally feared . After the assistance was distributed , the Red Cross shifted focus toward reconstruction . Reconstruction was slow , partly due to a slowdown in economic activity from the Vietnamese New Year . Additionally , the two primary factories responsible for making iron and construction frames were only intermittently open , due to machines failing . 
 Elsewhere , moderate damage was also reported in Thailand , where at least 12 casualties were reported on land , and at least 152 fishermen were killed at sea . Flash flooding occurred in six districts , which damaged about 88 square miles ( 230 km2 ) of croplands and destroyed 12 houses . Land transportation was affected , with 184 roads and 14 bridges damaged . The government of Thailand sent 20 medical teams to the most affected areas . Following the storm , about 10 @,@ 600 people became sick from flood related diseases . Heavy rains fell in <unk> Division in southeastern Burma ( Myanmar ) , although because the winds were not strong , there was little damage . The typhoon increased smog and haze in Indonesia and Malaysia , which had been occurring for weeks . In Indonesia , the typhoon also removed atmospheric moisture , which lowered the chance for rain in areas affected by wildfires . Cambodia was also affected by the outskirts of the storm . 
 = Cape Moreton Light = 
 Cape Moreton Light , also listed as North Point Range Rear Light , is an heritage @-@ listed active lighthouse located on Cape Moreton , a rocky headland located at the north eastern tip of Moreton Island , a large sand island on the eastern side of Moreton Bay , on the coast of South East Queensland , Australia . It marks the northern entrance to Moreton Bay and Brisbane and also serves as the rear light for the North Point Range . With its two distinctive red bands , it also serves as a daymark . It is the oldest lighthouse in Queensland , and the only one to be built by the New South Wales Government before the separation of Queensland , which took place in 1859 . It is also the only lighthouse in Queensland to be built of stone . 
 The lighthouse was established following an increase in traffic through the northern entrance to Moreton Bay in the 1840s . It was designed by Edmund Blacket in 1854 and established in 1857 . Over the years the light source went through several changes , from oil wick , to kerosene , to acetylene gas , to electricity , and finally to solar power . The structures also went through various modifications , the major one being an increase in the lighthouse height and rebuilding of several structures , in 1928 – 1930 . 
 The station includes the lighthouse , three lighthouse keeper residences , and various buildings . The lighthouse is made of sandstone and topped by a concrete gallery and a cast iron lantern . The residences and most other structures are timber framed and fibro clad . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 In 1825 , Brisbane was established as a penal settlement . In spite of the hazards , the preferred access to Moreton Bay and Brisbane was through the southern entrance , between Moreton Island and North Stradbroke Island , mainly due to shorter shipping route and better shipping conditions . The southern entrance was therefore marked in 1825 and a pilot station was established at Amity Point on North Stradbroke Island in 1827 . Although the northern entrance was considered in the 1830s , it was only with the increased shipping activity due to proclamation of Moreton Bay as a free settlement in 1842 that vessels began to use the northern entrance . Buoys marking the entrance were laid in 1846 – 1847 , and in 1848 the Pilot Station was moved to Bulwer on Moreton island . By then the northern entry was regarded as the main entry . 
 In 1850 , Brisbane residents petitioned the New South Wales Government , which controlled the Queensland area until Queensland 's separation in 1859 , to establish a lighthouse on Cape Moreton . The government also wanted to encourage ships to use the broader and safer northern passage . Planning for the structure therefore commenced in 1852 . The site was selected and surveyed in 1853 , and the lighthouse was designed in 1854 by Edmund Blacket the New South Wales Colonial Architect of the time . However , Blacket resigned on 10 June 1854 , for the private market , and left the office on 25 August . The office remained vacant until 1 October 1854 , when Blacket was succeeded by William Weaver . Drawings for the tower which were completed in September 1854 were signed by Alexander <unk> , Foreman of Works in the Colonial Architect 's office . The tower was finally built during the office of Alexander Dawson who succeeded Weaver in 1856 , and signed further drawings made in April 1856 . 
 The tower was constructed by a contractor , Mark Farrell , for the cost of £ 15 @,@ 232 , using prison labor , and supervised by <unk> . Both the lighthouse and three sandstone lighthouse keeper cottages were constructed from locally quarried sandstone . The lighthouse was first displayed in February 1857 , though tenders for painting the tower were called for only in December 1858 . 
 The original optical apparatus was a <unk> system consisting of 21 oil wick lamps with parabolic reflectors . The lighthouse was 67 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 20 m ) , visible for 26 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 49 @.@ 1 km ; 30 @.@ 5 mi ) . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1859 , control of the <unk> passed to the Government of Queensland , but it continued to be managed by the New South Wales Marine Board until the formation of the Queensland Department of Ports and Harbours in 1862 . In 1864 a telegraph office was opened at the Cape . In 1873 , the oil wick lamps were replaced with kerosene . During the 1860s and 1870s some further structures were constructed in the station including a schoolhouse ( opened in 1879 ) , a stable , and other storage buildings . A telegraph line was constructed during the 1890s , and a Morse lamp visible for 20 miles ( 32 km ) was installed in the 1910s . In 1913 the timber parts of the structures , which were damaged by ants , were replaced . A 1911 – 1913 survey found the light in good shape , though the apparatus was found out of date and needing replacement . This replacement was to be delayed for a long time due to the transfer of all coastal lights to the Commonwealth , occurring officially October 1913 , though practically in July 1915 . A post office was operated by the light keepers between 1915 and the early 1920s . 
 In 1928 , the tower was extended and the lighthouse reached its current height of 75 feet ( 23 m ) to increase its range . In 1928 – 1930 , the keepers ' cottages were replaced with timber framed fibro clad structures . In 1930 , the lantern underwent major modification . The lantern house was replaced with 7 feet 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 16 m ) diameter Chance Brothers lantern room . The optical apparatus was replaced with either a third order Chance Bros dioptric lens or a four panel 375 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 8 in ) AGA <unk> lens on an AGA pedestal . The light source was replaced by an AGA incandescent gas mantle operated by acetylene gas , and a sun valve was also installed . 
 = = = Electricity = = = 
 In 1937 , the light was converted to 110 V DC electricity . The two distinctive red bands were painted in 1942 . In 1967 the power source was replaced with 240 V AC power , being supplied by two diesel alternators , and a new lens , pedestal , bearing and optic drive may have been installed . The range of the 1967 light was 27 nautical miles ( 50 km ; 31 mi ) . The light was modernised in July 1988 , with the installation of a 120 V 1 Kw tungsten halogen lamp . In 1990 , the handrails and stanchions of the balcony and external staircase were replaced and an access ladder to the dome was installed . On 8 December 1993 , the light was converted to solar powered operation and a VRB @-@ 25 apparatus was installed . 
 = = Current display = = 
 The light characteristic shown is four white flashes , separated by 3 @.@ 3 seconds , every 20 seconds ( Fl . ( 4 ) W. 20s ) , visible for 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) . The light source is a 12 V 35 W Halogen lamp producing an intensity of 14 @,@ 000 cd . The light revolves three times per minute . 
 = = = Front light = = = 
 Cape Moreton Light is located 0 @.@ 86 nautical miles ( 1 @.@ 59 km ; 0 @.@ 99 mi ) at 132 ° 30 ′ from North Point Range Front Light . The front light is a square 22 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) concrete house with a white lantern . It displays a quickly flashing white or red light , depending on the direction ( <unk> ) . The white light , shown at 04 ° <unk> ° and 244 ° <unk> ° , is visible for 9 nautical miles ( 17 km ; 10 mi ) . The red light , shown at 192 ° <unk> ° and 258 ° <unk> ° , is visible for 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ; 9 @.@ 2 mi ) . 
 = = Structures = = 
 The structures of the station are built in three levels . On the highest level is the lighthouse , surrounded by the workshop , former powerhouse and fuel store , the head keeper cottage to the north and an office further north . On the second level is the first assistant keeper residence and two sheds , a garage and a powerhouse . On the bottom level is the second assistant keeper residence , some distance to the south , and a fuel store to the north . 
 = = = Lighthouse = = = 
 The circular tower , 18 @.@ 5 metres ( 61 ft ) high from the ground to the lantern , is made of sandstone blocks laid in regular courses . The ground level has thicker walls , topped by a timber floor . The tower shaft tapers slightly toward the top , where the cast iron lantern sits . Entrance to the tower is either through a timber door on the ground level , or through a timber door on the top of the original 1857 external masonry staircase ( with a modern 1990 handrail ) that circles the first floor , leading to the first floor . Two horizontal bands are painted close to the top , and the tower is otherwise unpainted , showing the sandstone color . Both the ground floor and the lantern floor are made of concrete . Access from the ground floor to the lantern is first via a ladder leading to a trapdoor in the first floor , then via the original internal cast iron spiral stair , ending in a landing below the lantern , and finally another short ladder leading to a trapdoor in the lantern floor . The internal is painted , and lit by small square glass panels in timber frames . 
 The tower is topped by the 1930 7 feet 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 16 m ) diameter Chance Brothers lantern , painted white . The lantern cylindrical wall is made of six bolted cast iron panels . These support a continuous band of curved glass with cast iron glazing bars , and a small catwalk between the wall and the glazing . The cupola on top of the lantern is made of sheet copper , painted red , and it is topped by ball vent and a wind vane . An access ladder and safety rails , installed in 1990 , provide access to the cupola . In the center of the lantern is the VRB @-@ 25 apparatus , mounted on steel box . 
 Surrounding the lantern is a concrete gallery , accessible through a door in the lantern wall , with a white painted balustrade , and a 1990 railing . The solar panels are mounted on the gallery . 
 = = = Other structures = = = 
 The three keepers ' cottages were constructed in 1928 – 1930 . The head keeper 's house is located close to the lighthouse , and on the tallest ground , and also includes a small fenced garden . The assistant keeper residence is located right to the west , but geographically lower . The second assistant residence is located at some distance from the main cluster of buildings , to the south , and even lower . The residences are square one storey structures , timber framed and fibro clad , with central rooms , no corridors , enclosed verandahs and hipped roofs . The head keeper 's house and the second assistant 's house have corrugated fibrous cement rood while the first assistant house has a newer corrugated zinc / aluminium alloy ( <unk> ) metal roof . A museum was set in the second assistant 's quarters in 1988 . Two spherical steel rainwater tanks are set next to each of the houses . 
 The three sheds surrounding the lighthouse are the workshop to the south , the former powerhouse to the west and the fuel store to the north . They are all rectangular structures , timber framed and fibro clad with corrugated fibrous cement gable roofs . The workshop appears to be built on the remains of one of the early stone buildings , lying on a plinth with sandstone steps . It consists of two rooms with pivoting sash windows and timber framed doors and no internal lining . The former powerhouse and the fuel store have reinforced concrete floors , fibro lining , double @-@ hung sash windows and double timber framed doors . 
 The office to the north of the head keeper house is a small square room raised on short concrete pillars , constructed of timber framed fibro clad walls and corrugated fibrous cement roof . It has a continuous band of windows . The last three buildings , the garage , powerhouse and fuel store , are small brick buildings with metal roofs and reinforced concrete floors . 
 = = Site operation and visiting = = 
 The site and the light are operated by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority . The island can be reached by ferry service from Scarborough , though visiting requires a permit and a four @-@ wheel drive is mandatory . The station is accessible , but the lighthouse is closed to the public . 
 = = Heritage listing = = 
 The lighthouse was added to the Queensland Heritage Register in 2004 . 
 = History of American football = 
 The history of American football can be traced to early versions of rugby football and association football . Both games have their origin in varieties of football played in Britain in the mid @-@ 19th century , in which a football is kicked at a goal or kicked over a line , which in turn were based on the varieties of English public school football games . 
 American football resulted from several major divergences from association football and rugby football , most notably the rule changes instituted by Walter Camp , a Yale University and Hopkins School graduate considered to be the " Father of American Football " . Among these important changes were the introduction of the line of scrimmage , of down @-@ and @-@ distance rules and of the legalization of interference . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , gameplay developments by college coaches such as Eddie <unk> , Amos Alonzo Stagg , Parke H. Davis , Knute Rockne , and Glenn " Pop " Warner helped take advantage of the newly introduced forward pass . The popularity of college football grew as it became the dominant version of the sport in the United States for the first half of the 20th century . Bowl games , a college football tradition , attracted a national audience for college teams . Boosted by fierce rivalries and colorful traditions , college football still holds widespread appeal in the United States . 
 The origin of professional football can be traced back to 1892 , with William " Pudge " Heffelfinger 's $ 500 contract to play in a game for the Allegheny Athletic Association against the Pittsburgh Athletic Club . In 1920 the American Professional Football Association was formed . This league changed its name to the National Football League ( NFL ) two years later , and eventually became the major league of American football . Primarily a sport of Midwestern industrial towns in the United States , professional football eventually became a national phenomenon . 
 The modern era of American football can be considered to have begun after the 1932 NFL Playoff game , which was the first American football game to feature hash marks , the legalization of the forward pass anywhere behind the line of scrimmage , the first indoor game since 1902 , and the movement of the goal posts back to goal line . Other innovations to occur immediately after 1932 , were the introduction of the AP Poll in 1934 , the tapering of the ends of the football in 1934 , the awarding of the first Heisman Trophy in 1935 , the first NFL draft in 1936 and the first televised game in 1939 . Another important event was the American football game at the 1932 Summer Olympics , which combined with a similar demonstration game at 1933 World 's Fair , led to the first College All @-@ Star Game in 1934 , which in turn was an important factor in the growth of professional football in the United States . American football 's explosion in popularity during the second half of the 20th century can be traced to the 1958 NFL Championship Game , a contest that has been dubbed the " Greatest Game Ever Played " . A rival league to the NFL , the American Football League ( AFL ) , began play in 1960 ; the pressure it put on the senior league led to a merger between the two leagues and the creation of the Super Bowl , which has become the most watched television event in the United States on an annual basis . 
 = = History of American football before 1869 = = 
 = = = Prehistory of American football = = = 
 Forms of traditional football have been played throughout Europe and beyond since antiquity . Many of these involved handling of the ball , and <unk> @-@ like formations . Several of the oldest examples of football @-@ like games include the Greek game of <unk> and the Roman game of <unk> . Over time many countries across the world have also developed their own national football @-@ like games . For example , New Zealand had Ki @-@ o @-@ <unk> , Australia <unk> <unk> , Japan <unk> , China cuju , Georgia <unk> <unk> , the Scottish Borders <unk> Ba ' and Cornwall Cornish hurling , Central Italy Calcio Fiorentino , South Wales <unk> , East Anglia <unk> and Ireland had <unk> , which was an ancestor of Gaelic football . 
 These archaic forms of football , typically classified as mob football , would be played between neighboring towns and villages , involving an unlimited number of players on opposing teams , who would clash in a heaving mass of people struggling to drag an inflated pig 's bladder by any means possible to markers at each end of a town . By some accounts , in some such events any means could be used to move the ball towards the goal , as long as it did not lead to manslaughter or murder . Sometimes instead of markers , the teams would attempt to kick the bladder into the balcony of the opponents ' church . A legend that these games in England evolved from a more ancient and bloody ritual of kicking the " Dane 's head " is unlikely to be true . 
 These antiquated games went into sharp decline in the 19th century when the Highway Act 1835 was passed banning the playing of football on public highways . 
 = = = Football in America = = = 
 Although there are some mentions of Native Americans playing football @-@ like games , modern American football has its origins in the traditional football games played in the cities , villages and schools of Europe for many centuries before America was settled by Europeans . Early games appear to have had much in common with the traditional " mob football " played in England . The games remained largely unorganized until the 19th century , when intramural games of football began to be played on college campuses . Each school played its own variety of football . Princeton University students played a game called " <unk> " as early as 1820 . A Harvard tradition known as " Bloody Monday " began in 1827 , which consisted of a mass ballgame between the freshman and sophomore classes . In 1860 , both the town police and the college authorities agreed the Bloody Monday had to go . The Harvard students responded by going into mourning for a mock figure called " Football <unk> " , for whom they conducted funeral rites . The authorities held firm and it was a dozen years before football was once again played at Harvard . Dartmouth played its own version called " Old division football " , the rules of which were first published in 1871 , though the game dates to at least the 1830s . All of these games , and others , shared certain commonalities . They remained largely " mob " style games , with huge numbers of players attempting to advance the ball into a goal area , often by any means necessary . Rules were simple , violence and injury were common . The violence of these mob @-@ style games led to widespread protests and a decision to abandon them . Yale , under pressure from the city of New Haven , banned the play of all forms of football in 1860 . 
 The game began to return to college campuses by the late 1860s . Yale , Princeton , Rutgers University , and Brown University began playing the popular " kicking " game during this time . In 1867 , Princeton used rules based on those of the London Football Association . A " running game " , resembling rugby football , was taken up by the Montreal Football Club in Canada in 1868 . 
 = = Intercollegiate football ( 1869 – present ) = = 
 = = = Pioneer period ( 1869 – 1875 ) = = = 
 On November 6 , 1869 , Rutgers University faced Princeton University ( then known as the College of New Jersey ) in a game that was played with a round ball and , used a set of rules suggested by Rutgers captain William J. Leggett , based on the Football Association 's first set of rules , which were an early attempt by the former pupils of England 's public schools , to unify the rules of their public schools games and create a universal and standardized set of rules for the game of football and bore little resemblance to the American game which would be developed in the following decades . It is still usually regarded as the first game of intercollegiate American football . The game was played at a Rutgers field . Two teams of 25 players attempted to score by kicking the ball into the opposing team 's goal . Throwing or carrying the ball was not allowed , but there was plenty of physical contact between players . The first team to reach six goals was declared the winner . Rutgers won by a score of six to four . A rematch was played at Princeton a week later under Princeton 's own set of rules ( one notable difference was the awarding of a " free kick " to any player that caught the ball on the fly , which was a feature adopted from the Football Association 's rules ; the fair catch kick rule has survived through to modern American game ) . Princeton won that game by a score of 8 – 0 . Columbia joined the series in 1870 , and by 1872 several schools were fielding intercollegiate teams , including Yale and Stevens Institute of Technology . 
 Rutgers was first to extend the reach of the game . An intercollegiate game was first played in the state of New York when Rutgers played Columbia on November 2 , 1872 . It was also the first scoreless tie in the history of the fledgling sport . Yale football starts the same year and has its first match against Columbia , the nearest college to play football . It took place at Hamilton Park in New Haven and was the first game in New England . The game used a set of rules based on association football with 20 @-@ man sides , played on a field 400 by 250 feet . Yale wins 3 @-@ 0 , Tommy Sherman scoring the first goal and Lew Irwin the other two . 
 By 1873 , the college students playing football had made significant efforts to standardize their fledgling game . Teams had been scaled down from 25 players to 20 . The only way to score was still to bat or kick the ball through the opposing team 's goal , and the game was played in two 45 minute halves on fields 140 yards long and 70 yards wide . On October 20 , 1873 , representatives from Yale , Columbia , Princeton , and Rutgers met at the Fifth Avenue Hotel in New York City to codify the first set of intercollegiate football rules . Before this meeting , each school had its own set of rules and games were usually played using the home team 's own particular code . At this meeting , a list of rules , based more on the Football Association 's rules than the rules of the recently founded Rugby Football Union , was drawn up for intercollegiate football games . 
 Harvard refused to attend the rules conference organized by the other schools and continued to play under its own code . While Harvard 's voluntary absence from the meeting made it hard for them to schedule games against other American universities , it agreed to a challenge to play McGill University , from Montreal , in a two @-@ game series . Inasmuch as Rugby football had been transplanted to Canada from England , the McGill team played under a set of rules which allowed a player to pick up the ball and run with it whenever he wished . Another rule , unique to McGill , was to count tries ( the act of grounding the football past the opposing team 's goal line ; it is important to note that there was no end zone during this time ) , as well as goals , in the scoring . In the Rugby rules of the time , a touchdown only provided the chance to kick a free goal from the field . If the kick was missed , the touchdown did not count . 
 Harvard quickly took a liking to the rugby game , and its use of the try which , until that time , was not used in American football . The try would later evolve into the score known as the touchdown . On June 4 , 1875 , Harvard faced Tufts University in the first game between two American colleges played under rules similar to the McGill / Harvard contest , which was won by Tufts . The rules included each side fielding 11 men at any given time , the ball was advanced by kicking or carrying it , and tackles of the ball carrier stopped play . Further elated by the excitement of McGill 's version of football , Harvard challenged its closest rival , Yale , to which the Bulldogs accepted . The two teams agreed to play under a set of rules called the " Concessionary Rules " , which involved Harvard conceding something to Yale 's soccer and Yale conceding a great deal to Harvard 's rugby . They decided to play with 15 players on each team . On November 13 , 1875 , Yale and Harvard played each other for the first time ever , where Harvard won 4 @-@ 0 . At the first The Game — the annual contest between Harvard and Yale , among the 2000 spectators attending the game that day , was the future " father of American football " Walter Camp . Walter , who would enroll at Yale the next year , was torn between an admiration for Harvard 's style of play and the misery of the Yale defeat , and became determined to avenge Yale 's defeat . Spectators from Princeton , also carried the game back home , where it quickly became the most popular version of football . 
 = = = = Walter Camp : Father of American football = = = = 
 Walter Camp is widely considered to be the most important figure in the development of American football . As a youth , he excelled in sports like track , baseball , and association football , and after enrolling at Yale in 1876 , he earned varsity honors in every sport the school offered . 
 Following the introduction of rugby @-@ <unk> rules to American football , Camp became a fixture at the Massasoit House conventions where rules were debated and changed . Dissatisfied with what seemed to him to be a disorganized mob , he proposed his first rule change at the first meeting he attended in 1878 : a reduction from fifteen players to eleven . The motion was rejected at that time but passed in 1880 . The effect was to open up the game and emphasize speed over strength . Camp 's most famous change , the establishment of the line of scrimmage and the snap from center to quarterback , was also passed in 1880 . Originally , the snap was executed with the foot of the center . Later changes made it possible to snap the ball with the hands , either through the air or by a direct hand @-@ to @-@ hand pass . Rugby league followed Camp 's example , and in 1906 introduced the play @-@ the @-@ ball rule , which greatly resembled Camp 's early scrimmage and center @-@ snap rules . In 1966 , Rugby league introduced a four @-@ tackle rule based on Camp 's early down @-@ and @-@ distance rules . 
 Camp 's new scrimmage rules revolutionized the game , though not always as intended . Princeton , in particular , used scrimmage play to slow the game , making incremental progress towards the end zone during each down . Rather than increase scoring , which had been Camp 's original intent , the rule was exploited to maintain control of the ball for the entire game , resulting in slow , unexciting contests . At the 1882 rules meeting , Camp proposed that a team be required to advance the ball a minimum of five yards within three downs . These down @-@ and @-@ distance rules , combined with the establishment of the line of scrimmage , transformed the game from a variation of rugby football into the distinct sport of American football . 
 Camp was central to several more significant rule changes that came to define American football . In 1881 , the field was reduced in size to its modern dimensions of 120 by 531 ⁄ 3 yards ( 109 @.@ 7 by 48 @.@ 8 meters ) . Several times in 1883 , Camp tinkered with the scoring rules , finally arriving at four points for a touchdown , two points for kicks after touchdowns , two points for safeties , and five for field goals . Camp 's innovations in the area of point scoring influenced rugby union 's move to point scoring in 1890 . In 1887 , game time was set at two halves of 45 minutes each . Also in 1887 , two paid officials — a referee and an umpire — were mandated for each game . A year later , the rules were changed to allow tackling below the waist , and in 1889 , the officials were given whistles and stopwatches . 
 The last , and arguably most important innovation , which would at last make American football uniquely " American " , was the legalization of interference , or blocking , a tactic which was highly illegal under the rugby @-@ style rules . Interference remains strictly illegal in both rugby codes to this day . The prohibition of interference in the rugby game stems from the game 's strict enforcement of its offsides rule , which prohibited any player on the team with possession of the ball to loiter between the ball and the goal . At first , American players would find creative ways of aiding the runner by pretending to accidentally knock into defenders trying to tackle the runner . When Walter Camp witnessed this tactic being employed against his Yale team , he was at first appalled , but the next year had adopted the blocking tactics for his own team . During the 1880s and 1890s , teams developed <unk> complex blocking tactics including the interlocking interference technique known as the Flying wedge or " V @-@ trick formation " , which was developed by Lorin F. <unk> and first introduced by Harvard in a collegiate game against Yale in 1892 . Despite its effectiveness , it was outlawed two seasons later in 1894 through the efforts of the rule committee lead by Parke H. Davis , because of its contribution to serious injury . Non @-@ interlocking interference remains a basic element of modern American football , with many complex schemes being developed and implemented over the years , including zone blocking and pass blocking . 
 After his playing career at Yale ended in 1882 , Camp was employed by the New Haven Clock Company until his death in 1925 . Though no longer a player , he remained a fixture at annual rules meetings for most of his life , and he personally selected an annual All @-@ American team every year from 1889 through 1924 . The Walter Camp Football Foundation continues to select All @-@ American teams in his honor . 
 = = = = Scoring table = = = = 
 = = = Period of the American Intercollegiate Football Association ( 1876 – 1893 ) = = = 
 On November 23 , 1876 , representatives from Harvard , Yale , Princeton , and Columbia met at the Massasoit House in Springfield , Massachusetts to standardize a new code of rules based on the rugby game first introduced to Harvard by McGill University in 1874 . The rules were based largely on the Rugby Football Union 's code from England , though one important difference was the replacement of a kicked goal with a touchdown as the primary means of scoring ( a change that would later occur in rugby itself , favoring the try as the main scoring event ) . Three of the schools — Harvard , Columbia , and Princeton — formed the Intercollegiate Football Association , as a result of the meeting . Yale did not join the group until 1879 , because of an early disagreement about the number of players per team . 
 The first game where one team scored over 100 points happened on October 25 , 1884 when Yale routed Dartmouth 113 – 0 . It was also the first time one team scored over 100 points and the opposing team was shut out . The next week , Princeton outscored Lafayette by 140 to 0 . 
 In 1879 , the University of Michigan became the first school west of Pennsylvania to establish a college football team . On May 30 , 1879 Michigan beat Racine College 1 – 0 in a game played in Chicago . The Chicago Daily Tribune called it " the first rugby @-@ football game to be played west of the Alleghenies . " Other Midwestern schools soon followed suit , including the University of Chicago , Northwestern University , and the University of Minnesota . The first western team to travel east was the 1881 Michigan team , which played at Harvard , Yale and Princeton . The nation 's first college football league , the Intercollegiate Conference of Faculty Representatives ( also known as the Western Conference ) , a precursor to the Big Ten Conference , was founded in 1895 . 
 Organized intercollegiate football was first played in the state of Virginia and the south on November 2 , 1873 in Lexington between Washington and Lee and VMI . Washington and Lee won 4 – 2 . Some industrious students of the two schools organized a game for October 23 , 1869 – but it was rained out . Students of the University of Virginia were playing pickup games of the kicking @-@ style of football as early as 1870 , and some accounts even claim it organized a game against Washington and Lee College in 1871 ; but no record has been found of the score of this contest . Due to <unk> of records of the prior matches some will claim Virginia v. Pantops Academy November 13 , 1887 as the first game in Virginia . 
 On April 9 , 1880 at Stoll Field , Transylvania University ( then called Kentucky University ) beat Centre College by the score of 13 ¾ – 0 in what is often considered the first recorded game played in the South . The first game of " scientific football " in the South was the first instance of the Victory Bell rivalry between North Carolina and Duke ( then known as Trinity College ) held on Thanksgiving Day , 1888 , at the North Carolina State Fairgrounds in Raleigh , North Carolina . 
 On November 13 , 1887 the Virginia Cavaliers and Pantops Academy fought to a scoreless tie in the first organized football game in the state of Virginia . Students at UVA were playing pickup games of the kicking @-@ style of football as early as 1870 , and some accounts even claim that some industrious ones organized a game against Washington and Lee College in 1871 , just two years after Rutgers and Princeton 's historic first game in 1869 . But no record has been found of the score of this contest . Washington and Lee also claims a 4 to 2 win over VMI in 1873 . 
 College football expanded greatly during the last two decades of the 19th century . Several major rivalries date from this time period . 
 November 1890 was an active time in the sport . In Baldwin City , Kansas , on November 22 , 1890 , college football was first played in the state of Kansas . Baker beat Kansas 22 – 9 . On the 27th , Vanderbilt played Nashville ( Peabody ) at Athletic Park and won 40 – 0 . It was the first time organized football played in the state of Tennessee . The 29th also saw the first instance of the Army – Navy Game . Navy won 24 – 0 . 
 The first nighttime football game was played in Mansfield , Pennsylvania on September 28 , 1892 between Mansfield State Normal and Wyoming Seminary and ended at halftime in a 0 – 0 tie . The Army @-@ Navy game of 1893 saw the first documented use of a football helmet by a player in a game . Joseph M. Reeves had a crude leather helmet made by a shoemaker in Annapolis and wore it in the game after being warned by his doctor that he risked death if he continued to play football after suffering an earlier kick to the head . 
 = = = Period of Rules Committees and Conference ( 1894 – 1932 ) = = = 
 The beginnings of the contemporary Southeastern Conference and Atlantic Coast Conference start in 1894 . The Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) was founded on December 21 , 1894 , by Dr. William Dudley , a chemistry professor at Vanderbilt . The original members were Alabama , Auburn , Georgia , Georgia Tech , North Carolina , Sewanee , and Vanderbilt . Clemson , Cumberland , Kentucky , LSU , Mercer , Mississippi , Mississippi A & M ( Mississippi State ) , Southwestern Presbyterian University , Tennessee , Texas , Tulane , and the University of Nashville joined the following year in 1895 as invited charter members . The conference was originally formed for " the development and purification of college athletics throughout the South " . 
 It is thought that the first forward pass in football occurred on October 26 , 1895 in a game between Georgia and North Carolina when , out of desperation , the ball was thrown by the North Carolina back Joel Whitaker instead of punted and George Stephens caught the ball . On November 9 , 1895 John Heisman executed a hidden ball trick utilizing quarterback Reynolds Tichenor to get Auburn 's only touchdown in a 6 to 9 loss to Vanderbilt . It was the first game in the south decided by a field goal . Heisman later used the trick against Pop Warner 's Georgia team . Warner picked up the trick and later used it at Cornell against Penn State in 1897 . He then used it in 1903 at Carlisle against Harvard and garnered national attention . 
 The 1899 Sewanee Tigers are one of the all @-@ time great teams of the early sport . The team went 12 – 0 , outscoring opponents 322 to 10 . Known as the " Iron Men " , with just 13 men they had a six @-@ day road trip with five shutout wins over Texas A & M ; Texas ; Tulane ; LSU ; and Ole Miss . It is recalled memorably with the phrase " ... and on the seventh day they rested . " Grantland Rice called them " the most durable football team I ever saw . " 
 The first college football game in Oklahoma Territory occurred on November 7 , 1895 when the ' Oklahoma City Terrors ' defeated the Oklahoma Sooners 34 to 0 . The Terrors were a mix of Methodist college students and high schoolers . The Sooners did not manage a single first down . By next season , Oklahoma coach John A. Harts had left to prospect for gold in the Arctic . Organized football was first played in the territory on November 29 , 1894 between the Oklahoma City Terrors and Oklahoma City High School . The high school won 24 to 0 . 
 In 1891 , the first Stanford football team was hastily organized and played a four @-@ game season beginning in January 1892 with no official head coach . Following the season , Stanford captain John Whittemore wrote to Yale coach Walter Camp asking him to recommend a coach for Stanford . To Whittemore 's surprise , Camp agreed to coach the team himself , on the condition that he finish the season at Yale first . As a result of Camp 's late arrival , Stanford played just three official games , against San Francisco 's Olympic Club and rival California . The team also played exhibition games against two Los Angeles area teams that Stanford does not include in official results . Camp returned to the East Coast following the season , then returned to coach Stanford in 1894 and 1895 . 
 USC first fielded an American football team in 1888 . Playing its first game on November 14 of that year against the Alliance Athletic Club , in which USC gained a 16 – 0 victory . Frank <unk> and Henry H. Goddard were playing coaches for the first team which was put together by quarterback Arthur Carroll ; who in turn volunteered to make the pants for the team and later became a tailor . USC faced its first collegiate opponent the following year in fall 1889 , playing St. Vincent 's College to a 40 – 0 victory . In 1893 , USC joined the Intercollegiate Football Association of Southern California ( the forerunner of the <unk> ) , which was composed of USC , Occidental College , Throop Polytechnic Institute ( Cal Tech ) , and Chaffey College . Pomona College was invited to enter , but declined to do so . An invitation was also extended to Los Angeles High School . 
 The Big Game between Stanford and California is the oldest college football rivalry in the West . The first game was played on San Francisco 's Haight Street Grounds on March 19 , 1892 with Stanford winning 14 – 10 . The term " Big Game " was first used in 1900 , when it was played on Thanksgiving Day in San Francisco . During that game , a large group of men and boys , who were observing from the roof of the nearby S.F. and Pacific Glass Works , fell into the fiery interior of the building when the roof collapsed , resulting in 13 dead and 78 injured . On December 4 , 1900 , the last victim of the disaster ( Fred Lilly ) died , bringing the death toll to 22 ; and , to this day , the " Thanksgiving Day Disaster " remains the deadliest accident to kill spectators at a U.S. sporting event . 
 In May 1900 , Yost was hired as the football coach at Stanford University , and , after traveling home to West Virginia , he arrived in Palo Alto , California , on August 21 , 1900 . Yost led the 1900 Stanford team to a 7 – 2 – 1 , outscoring opponents 154 to 20 . The next year in 1901 , Yost was hired by Charles A. Baird as the head football coach for the Michigan Wolverines football team . On 1 January 1902 , Yost 's dominating 1901 Michigan Wolverines football team agreed to play a 3 – 1 – 2 team from Stanford University in the inaugural " Tournament East @-@ West football game what is now known as the Rose Bowl Game by a score of 49 – 0 after Stanford captain Ralph Fisher requested to quit with eight minutes remaining . 
 Led by coach Fielding H. Yost , Michigan became the first " western " national power . From 1901 to 1905 , Michigan had a 56 @-@ game undefeated streak that included a 1902 trip to play in the first college football bowl game , which later became the Rose Bowl Game . During this streak , Michigan scored 2 @,@ 831 points while allowing only 40 . 
 In 1906 , citing concerns about the violence in American Football , universities on the West Coast , led by California and Stanford , replaced the sport with rugby union . At the time , the future of American football was very much in doubt and these schools believed that rugby union would eventually be adopted nationwide . Other schools <unk> suit and also made the switch included Nevada , St. Mary 's , Santa Clara , and USC ( in 1911 ) . However , due to the perception that West Coast football was inferior to the game played on the East Coast anyway , East Coast and Midwest teams shrugged off the loss of the teams and continued playing American football . With no nationwide movement , the available pool of rugby teams to play remained small . The schools scheduled games against local club teams and reached out to rugby union powers in Australia , New Zealand , and especially , due to its proximity , Canada . The annual Big Game between Stanford and California continued as rugby , with the winner invited by the British Columbia Rugby Union to a tournament in Vancouver over the Christmas holidays , with the winner of that tournament receiving the Cooper Keith Trophy . 
 The University of Colorado Boulder began playing American football in 1890 . Colorado found much success in its early years , winning eight Colorado Football Association Championships ( 1894 – 97 , 1901 – 08 ) . 
 = = = = Violence and controversy ( 1905 ) = = = = 
 From its earliest days as a mob game , football was a violent sport . The 1894 Harvard @-@ Yale game , known as the " Hampden Park Blood Bath " , resulted in crippling injuries for four players ; the contest was suspended until 1897 . The annual Army @-@ Navy game was suspended from 1894 to 1898 for similar reasons . One of the major problems was the popularity of mass @-@ formations like the flying wedge , in which a large number of offensive players charged as a unit against a similarly arranged defense . The resultant collisions often led to serious injuries and sometimes even death . Georgia fullback Richard Von <unk> Gammon notably died on the field from concussions received against Virginia in 1897 , causing Georgia , Georgia Tech , and Mercer to temporarily stop its football programs . 
 The situation came to a head in 1905 when there were 19 fatalities nationwide . President Theodore Roosevelt reportedly threatened to shut down the game if drastic changes were not made . However , the threat by Roosevelt to eliminate football is disputed by sports historians . What is absolutely certain is that on October 9 , 1905 , Roosevelt held a meeting of football representatives from Harvard , Yale , and Princeton . Though he lectured on eliminating and reducing injuries , he never threatened to ban football . He also lacked the authority to abolish football and was , in fact , actually a fan of the sport and wanted to preserve it . The President 's sons were also playing football at the college and secondary levels at the time . 
 Meanwhile , John H. Outland held an experimental game in Wichita , Kansas that reduced the number of scrimmage plays to earn a first down from four to three in an attempt to reduce injuries . The Los Angeles Times reported an increase in punts and considered the game much safer than regular play but that the new rule was not " conducive to the sport . " Finally , on December 28 , 1905 , 62 schools met in New York City to discuss rule changes to make the game safer . As a result of this meeting , the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States , later named the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) , was formed . One rule change introduced in 1906 , devised to open up the game and reduce injury , was the introduction of the legal forward pass . Though it was underutilized for years , this proved to be one of the most important rule changes in the establishment of the modern game . 
 As a result of the 1905 – 1906 reforms , mass formation plays became illegal and forward passes legal . Bradbury Robinson , playing for visionary coach Eddie <unk> at St. Louis University , threw the first legal pass in a September 5 , 1906 , game against Carroll College at Waukesha . Other important changes , formally adopted in 1910 , were the requirements that at least seven offensive players be on the line of scrimmage at the time of the snap , that there be no pushing or pulling , and that interlocking interference ( arms linked or hands on belts and uniforms ) was not allowed . These changes greatly reduced the potential for collision injuries . Several coaches emerged who took advantage of these sweeping changes . Amos Alonzo Stagg introduced such innovations as the huddle , the tackling dummy , and the pre @-@ snap shift . Other coaches , such as Pop Warner and Knute Rockne , introduced new strategies that still remain part of the game . 
 Besides these coaching innovations , several rules changes during the first third of the 20th century had a profound impact on the game , mostly in opening up the passing game . In 1914 , the first roughing @-@ the @-@ passer penalty was implemented . In 1918 , the rules on eligible receivers were loosened to allow eligible players to catch the ball anywhere on the field — previously strict rules were in place only allowing passes to certain areas of the field . Scoring rules also changed during this time : field goals were lowered to three points in 1909 and touchdowns raised to six points in 1912 . 
 Star players that emerged in the early 20th century include Jim Thorpe , Red Grange , and Bronko Nagurski ; these three made the transition to the fledgling NFL and helped turn it into a successful league . Sportswriter Grantland Rice helped popularize the sport with his poetic descriptions of games and colorful nicknames for the game 's biggest players , including Notre Dame 's " Four Horsemen " backfield and Fordham University 's linemen , known as the " Seven Blocks of Granite " . 
 In 1907 at Champaign , Illinois Chicago and Illinois played in the first game to have a halftime show featuring a marching band . Chicago won 42 – 6 . On November 25 , 1911 Kansas and Missouri played the first homecoming football game . The game was " broadcast " play @-@ by @-@ play over telegraph to at least 1 @,@ 000 fans in Lawrence , Kansas . It ended in a 3 – 3 tie . The game between West Virginia and Pittsburgh on October 8 , 1921 , saw the first live radio broadcast of a college football game when Harold W. Arlin announced that year 's Backyard Brawl played at Forbes Field on KDKA . Pitt won 21 – 13 . On October 28 , 1922 , Princeton and Chicago played the first game to be nationally broadcast on radio . Princeton won 21 – 18 in a hotly contested game which had Princeton dubbed the " Team of Destiny . " 
 = = = = Notable intersectional games = = = = 
 In 1906 Vanderbilt defeated Carlisle 4 to 0 , the result of a Bob Blake field goal . In 1907 Vanderbilt fought Navy to a 6 to 6 tie . In 1910 Vanderbilt held defending national champion Yale to a scoreless tie . 
 Helping Georgia Tech 's claim to a title in 1917 , the Auburn Tigers held undefeated , Chic Harley led Big Ten champion Ohio State to a scoreless tie the week before Georgia Tech beat the Tigers 68 to 7 . The next season , with many players gone due to World War I , a game was finally scheduled at Forbes Field with Pittsburgh . The Panthers , led by freshman Tom Davies , defeated Georgia Tech 32 to 0 . Tech center Bum Day was the first player on a Southern team ever selected first @-@ team All @-@ American by Walter Camp . 
 1917 saw the rise of another Southern team in Centre of Danville , Kentucky . In 1921 Bo McMillin led Centre upset defending national champion Harvard 6 to 0 in what is widely considered one of the greatest upsets in college football history . The next year Vanderbilt fought Michigan to a scoreless tie at the inaugural game on Dudley Field , the first stadium in the South made exclusively for college football . Michigan coach Fielding Yost and Vanderbilt coach Dan McGugin were brothers @-@ in @-@ law , and the latter the protege of the former . The game featured the season 's two best defenses and included a goal line stand by Vanderbilt to preserve the tie . Its result was " a great surprise to the sporting world . " Commodore fans celebrated by throwing some 3 @,@ 000 seat cushions onto the field . The game features prominently in Vanderbilt 's history . That same year , Alabama upset Penn 9 to 7 . 
 Vanderbilt 's line coach then was Wallace Wade , who in 1925 coached Alabama to the south 's first Rose Bowl victory . This game is commonly referred to as " the game that changed the south . " Wade followed up the next season with an undefeated record and Rose Bowl tie . Georgia 's 1927 " dream and wonder team " defeated Yale for the first time . Georgia Tech , led by Heisman protege William Alexander , gave the dream and wonder team its only loss , and the next year were national and Rose Bowl champions . The Rose Bowl included Roy Riegels ' wrong @-@ way run . On October 12 , 1929 , Yale lost to Georgia in Sanford Stadium in its first trip to the south . Wade 's Alabama again won a national championship and Rose Bowl in 1930 . 
 = = = Modernization of intercollegiate American football ( 1933 – 1969 ) = = = 
 In the early 1930s , the college game continued to grow , particularly in the South , bolstered by fierce rivalries such as the " South 's Oldest Rivalry " , between Virginia and North Carolina and the " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " , between Georgia and Auburn . Although before the mid @-@ 1920s most national powers came from the Northeast or the Midwest , the trend changed when several teams from the South and the West Coast achieved national success . Wallace William Wade 's 1925 Alabama team won the 1926 Rose Bowl after receiving its first national title and William Alexander 's 1928 Georgia Tech team defeated California in the 1929 Rose Bowl . College football quickly became the most popular spectator sport in the South . 
 Several major modern college football conferences rose to prominence during this time period . The Southwest Athletic Conference had been founded in 1915 . Consisting mostly of schools from Texas , the conference saw back @-@ to @-@ back national champions with Texas Christian University ( TCU ) in 1938 and Texas A & M in 1939 . The Pacific Coast Conference ( PCC ) , a precursor to the Pac @-@ 12 Conference ( Pac @-@ 12 ) , had its own back @-@ to @-@ back champion in the University of Southern California which was awarded the title in 1931 and 1932 . The Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) formed in 1932 and consisted mostly of schools in the Deep South . As in previous decades , the Big Ten continued to dominate in the 1930s and 1940s , with Minnesota winning 5 titles between 1934 and 1941 , and Michigan ( 1933 , 1947 , and 1948 ) and Ohio State ( 1942 ) also winning titles . 
 As it grew beyond its regional affiliations in the 1930s , college football garnered increased national attention . Four new bowl games were created : the Orange Bowl , Sugar Bowl , the Sun Bowl in 1935 , and the Cotton Bowl in 1937 . In lieu of an actual national championship , these bowl games , along with the earlier Rose Bowl , provided a way to match up teams from distant regions of the country that did not otherwise play . In 1936 , the Associated Press began its weekly poll of prominent sports writers , ranking all of the nation 's college football teams . Since there was no national championship game , the final version of the AP poll was used to determine who was crowned the National Champion of college football . 
 The 1930s saw growth in the passing game . Though some coaches , such as General Robert Neyland at Tennessee , continued to eschew its use , several rules changes to the game had a profound effect on teams ' ability to throw the ball . In 1934 , the rules committee removed two major penalties — a loss of five yards for a second incomplete pass in any series of downs and a loss of possession for an incomplete pass in the end zone — and shrunk the circumference of the ball , making it easier to grip and throw . Players who became famous for taking advantage of the easier passing game included Alabama end Don Hutson and TCU passer " <unk> " Sammy Baugh . 
 In 1935 , New York City 's Downtown Athletic Club awarded the first Heisman Trophy to University of Chicago halfback Jay Berwanger , who was also the first ever NFL Draft pick in 1936 . The trophy was designed by sculptor Frank Eliscu and modeled after New York University player Ed Smith . The trophy recognizes the nation 's " most outstanding " college football player and has become one of the most coveted awards in all of American sports . 
 During World War II , college football players enlisted in the armed forces , some playing in Europe during the war . As most of these players had eligibility left on their college careers , some of them returned to college at West Point , bringing Army back @-@ to @-@ back national titles in 1944 and 1945 under coach Red Blaik . Doc Blanchard ( known as " Mr. Inside " ) and Glenn Davis ( known as " Mr. Outside " ) both won the Heisman Trophy , in 1945 and 1946 respectively . On the coaching staff of those 1944 – 1946 Army teams was future Pro Football Hall of Fame coach Vince Lombardi . 
 The 1950s saw the rise of yet more dynasties and power programs . Oklahoma , under coach Bud Wilkinson , won three national titles ( 1950 , 1955 , 1956 ) and all ten Big Eight Conference championships in the decade while building a record 47 @-@ game winning streak . Woody Hayes led Ohio State to two national titles , in 1954 and 1957 , and dominated the Big Ten conference , winning three Big Ten titles — more than any other school . Wilkinson and Hayes , along with Robert Neyland of Tennessee , oversaw a revival of the running game in the 1950s . Passing numbers dropped from an average of 18 @.@ 9 attempts in 1951 to 13 @.@ 6 attempts in 1955 , while teams averaged just shy of 50 running plays per game . Nine out of ten Heisman trophy winners in the 1950s were runners . Notre Dame , one of the biggest passing teams of the decade , saw a substantial decline in success ; the 1950s were the only decade between 1920 and 1990 when the team did not win at least a share of the national title . Paul Hornung , Notre Dame quarterback , did , however , win the Heisman in 1956 , becoming the only player from a losing team ever to do so . 
 = = = Modern intercollegiate football ( 1970 – present ) = = = 
 Following the enormous success of the National Football League 's 1958 championship game , college football no longer enjoyed the same popularity as the NFL , at least on a national level . While both games benefited from the advent of television , since the late 1950s , the NFL has become a nationally popular sport while college football has maintained strong regional ties . 
 As professional football became a national television phenomenon , college football did as well . In the 1950s , Notre Dame , which had a large national following , formed its own network to broadcast its games , but by and large the sport still retained a mostly regional following . In 1952 , the NCAA claimed all television broadcasting rights for the games of its member institutions , and it alone negotiated television rights . This situation continued until 1984 , when several schools brought a suit under the Sherman Antitrust Act ; the Supreme Court ruled against the NCAA and schools are now free to negotiate their own television deals . ABC Sports began broadcasting a national Game of the Week in 1966 , bringing key matchups and rivalries to a national audience for the first time . 
 New formations and play sets continued to be developed . Emory Bellard , an assistant coach under Darrell Royal at the University of Texas , developed a three @-@ back option style offense known as the wishbone . The wishbone is a run @-@ heavy offense that depends on the quarterback making last second decisions on when and to whom to hand or pitch the ball to . Royal went on to teach the offense to other coaches , including Bear Bryant at Alabama , Chuck Fairbanks at Oklahoma and Pepper Rodgers at UCLA ; who all adapted and developed it to their own tastes . The strategic opposite of the wishbone is the spread offense , developed by professional and college coaches throughout the 1960s and 1970s . Though some schools play a run @-@ based version of the spread , its most common use is as a passing offense designed to " spread " the field both horizontally and vertically . Some teams have managed to adapt with the times to keep winning consistently . In the rankings of the most victorious programs , Michigan , Texas , and Notre Dame are ranked first , second , and third in total wins . 
 = = = = Growth of bowl games = = = = 
 In 1940 , for the highest level of college football , there were only five bowl games ( Rose , Orange , Sugar , Sun , and Cotton ) . By 1950 , three more had joined that number and in 1970 , there were still only eight major college bowl games . The number grew to eleven in 1976 . At the birth of cable television and cable sports networks like ESPN , there were fifteen bowls in 1980 . With more national venues and increased available revenue , the bowls saw an explosive growth throughout the 1980s and 1990s . In the thirty years from 1950 to 1980 , seven bowl games were added to the schedule . From 1980 to 2008 , an additional 20 bowl games were added to the schedule . Some have criticized this growth , claiming that the increased number of games has diluted the significance of playing in a bowl game . Yet others have countered that the increased number of games has increased exposure and revenue for a greater number of schools , and see it as a positive development . 
 With the growth of bowl games , it became difficult to determine a national champion in a fair and equitable manner . As conferences became contractually bound to certain bowl games ( a situation known as a tie @-@ in ) , match @-@ ups that guaranteed a consensus national champion became increasingly rare . In 1992 , seven conferences and independent Notre Dame formed the Bowl Coalition , which attempted to arrange an annual No.1 versus No.2 matchup based on the final AP poll standings . The Coalition lasted for three years ; however , several scheduling issues prevented much success ; tie @-@ ins still took precedence in several cases . For example , the Big Eight and SEC champions could never meet , since they were contractually bound to different bowl games . The coalition also excluded the Rose Bowl , arguably the most prestigious game in the nation , and two major conferences — the Pac @-@ 10 and Big Ten — meaning that it had limited success . In 1995 , the Coalition was replaced by the Bowl Alliance , which reduced the number of bowl games to host a national championship game to three — the Fiesta , Sugar , and Orange Bowls — and the participating conferences to five — the ACC , SEC , Southwest , Big Eight , and Big East . It was agreed that the No.1 and No.2 ranked teams gave up their prior bowl tie @-@ ins and were guaranteed to meet in the national championship game , which rotated between the three participating bowls . The system still did not include the Big Ten , Pac @-@ 10 , or the Rose Bowl , and thus still lacked the legitimacy of a true national championship . 
 = = = = Bowl Championship Series = = = = 
 In 1998 , a new system was put into place called the Bowl Championship Series . For the first time , it included all major conferences ( ACC , Big East , Big 12 , Big Ten , Pac @-@ 10 , and SEC ) and all four major bowl games ( Rose , Orange , Sugar and Fiesta ) . The champions of these six conferences , along with two " at @-@ large " selections , were invited to play in the four bowl games . Each year , one of the four bowl games served as a national championship game . Also , a complex system of human polls , computer rankings , and strength of schedule calculations was instituted to rank schools . Based on this ranking system , the No.1 and No.2 teams met each year in the national championship game . Traditional tie @-@ ins were maintained for schools and bowls not part of the national championship . For example , in years when not a part of the national championship , the Rose Bowl still hosted the Big Ten and Pac @-@ 10 champions . 
 The system continued to change , as the formula for ranking teams was tweaked from year to year . At @-@ large teams could be chosen from any of the Division I conferences , though only one selection — Utah in 2005 — came from a non @-@ BCS affiliated conference . Starting with the 2006 season , a fifth game — simply called the BCS National Championship Game — was added to the schedule , to be played at the site of one of the four BCS bowl games on a rotating basis , one week after the regular bowl game . This opened up the BCS to two additional at @-@ large teams . Also , rules were changed to add the champions of five additional conferences ( Conference USA , the Mid @-@ American Conference , the Mountain West Conference , the Sun Belt Conference and the Western Athletic Conference ) , provided that said champion ranked in the top twelve in the final BCS rankings , or was within the top 16 of the BCS rankings and ranked higher than the champion of at least one of the " BCS conferences " ( also known as " AQ " conferences , for Automatic Qualifying ) . Several times since this rule change was implemented , schools from non @-@ AQ conferences have played in BCS bowl games . In 2009 , Boise State played TCU in the Fiesta Bowl , the first time two schools from non @-@ BCS conferences played each other in a BCS bowl game . The most recent team from the non @-@ AQ ranks to reach a BCS bowl game was Northern Illinois in 2012 , which played in ( and lost ) the 2013 Orange Bowl . 
 = = = = College Football Playoff = = = = 
 Due to the <unk> of the College football playoff debate after nearly a decade of the sometimes disputable results of the BCS , the conference commissioners and Notre Dame 's president voted to implement a Plus @-@ One system which was to be called the ' College Football Playoff ' . The College Football Playoff is the annual postseason tournament for the NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) and just as its predecessors , has failed to receive sanctioning from the NCAA . The playoff began with the 2014 NCAA Division I FBS football season . Four teams play in two semifinal games , and the winners advance to the College Football Playoff National Championship game . The first season of the new system was not without controversy , however , after TCU and Baylor ( both with only one loss ) both failed to receive the support of the College Football Playoff selection committee . 
 = = Professional football ( 1892 – present ) = = 
 = = = Early players , teams , and leagues ( 1892 – 1919 ) = = = 
 In the early 20th century , football began to catch on in the general population of the United States and was the subject of intense competition and rivalry , albeit of a localized nature . Although payments to players were considered unsporting and dishonorable at the time , a Pittsburgh area club , the Allegheny Athletic Association , of the unofficial western Pennsylvania football circuit , surreptitiously hired former Yale All @-@ American guard William " Pudge " Heffelfinger . On November 12 , 1892 , Heffelfinger became the first known professional football player . He was paid $ 500 to play in a game against the Pittsburgh Athletic Club . Heffelfinger picked up a Pittsburgh fumble and ran 35 yards for a touchdown , winning the game 4 – 0 for Allegheny . Although observers held suspicions , the payment remained a secret for years . 
 On September 3 , 1895 the first wholly professional game was played , in Latrobe , Pennsylvania , between the Latrobe Athletic Association and the Jeannette Athletic Club . Latrobe won the contest 12 – 0 . During this game , Latrobe 's quarterback , John Brallier became the first player to openly admit to being paid to play football . He was paid $ 10 plus expenses to play . In 1897 , the Latrobe Athletic Association paid all of its players for the whole season , becoming the first fully professional football team . In 1898 , William Chase Temple took over the team payments for the Duquesne Country and Athletic Club , a professional football team based in Pittsburgh from 1895 until 1900 , becoming the first known individual football club owner . Later that year , the Morgan Athletic Club , on the South Side of Chicago , was founded . This team later became the Chicago Cardinals , then the St. Louis Cardinals and now is known as the Arizona Cardinals , making them the oldest continuously operating professional football team . 
 The first known professional football league , known as the National Football League ( not the same as the modern league ) began play in 1902 when several baseball clubs formed football teams to play in the league , including the Philadelphia Athletics , Pittsburgh Pirates and the Philadelphia Phillies . The Pirates ' team the Pittsburgh Stars were awarded the league championship . However , the Philadelphia Football Athletics and Philadelphia Football Phillies also claimed the title . A five @-@ team tournament , known as the World Series of Football was organized by Tom O 'Rouke , the manager of Madison Square Garden . The event featured the first @-@ ever indoor pro football games . The first professional indoor game came on December 29 , 1902 , when the Syracuse Athletic Club defeated the " New York team " 5 – 0 . Syracuse would go on to win the 1902 Series , while the Franklin Athletic Club won the Series in 1903 . The World Series only lasted two seasons . 
 Charles Follis is believed to be the first black professional football player , having played for the Shelby Steamfitters from 1902 to 1906 . Follis , a two sport athlete , was paid for his work beginning in 1904 . 
 The game moved west into Ohio , which became the center of professional football during the early decades of the 20th century . Small towns such as Massillon , Akron , Portsmouth , and Canton all supported professional teams in a loose coalition known as the " Ohio League " , the direct predecessor to today 's National Football League . In 1906 the Canton Bulldogs – Massillon Tigers betting scandal became the first major scandal in professional football in the United States . It was the first known case of professional gamblers attempting to fix a professional sport . Although the Massillon Tigers could not prove that the Canton Bulldogs had thrown the second game , the scandal tarnished the Bulldogs ' name and helped ruin professional football in Ohio until the mid @-@ 1910s . 
 In 1915 , the reformed Canton Bulldogs signed former Olympian and Carlisle Indian School standout Jim Thorpe to a contract . Thorpe became the face of professional football for the next several years and was present at the founding of the National Football League five years later . A disruption in play in 1918 ( due to World War I and flu pandemic ) allowed the New York Pro Football League to pick up some of the Ohio League 's talent ; the NYPFL had coalesced around 1916 , but efforts to challenge the Ohio teams were largely unsuccessful until after the suspension . By 1919 , the Ohio League and the New York league were on relatively equal footing with both each other and with teams clustered around major cities such as Philadelphia , Chicago and Detroit . 
 = = = Early years of the NFL ( 1920 – 1932 ) = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 The 1919 expansion of top @-@ level professional football threatened to drastically increase the cost of the game by sparking bidding wars . The various regional circuits determined that forming a league , with enforceable rules , would mitigate these problems . 
 In 1920 , the American Professional Football Association , was founded , in a meeting at a Hupmobile car dealership in Canton , Ohio . Jim Thorpe was elected the league 's first president . After several more meetings , the league 's membership was formalized . The original teams were : 
 In its early years the league was little more than a formal agreement between teams to play each other and to declare a champion at season 's end . Teams were still permitted to play non @-@ league members . The 1920 season saw several teams drop out and fail to play through their schedule . Only four teams : Akron , Buffalo , Canton , and Decatur , finished the schedule . Akron claimed the first league champion , with the only undefeated record among the remaining teams . 
 From its inception in 1920 as a loose coalition of various regional teams , the American Professional Football Association had comparatively few African @-@ American players ; a total of nine black people suited up for NFL teams between 1920 and 1926 , including future attorney , black activist , and internationally acclaimed artist Paul Robeson . Fritz Pollard and Bobby Marshall were the first black players in what is now the NFL in 1920 . Pollard became the first black coach in 1921 . 
 = = = = Expansion = = = = 
 In 1921 , several more teams joined the league , increasing the membership to 22 teams . Among the new additions were the Green Bay Packers , which now has the record for longest use of an unchanged team name . Also in 1921 , A. E. Staley , the owner of the Decatur Staleys , sold the team to player @-@ coach George Halas , who went on to become one of the most important figures in the first half century of the NFL . In 1921 , Halas moved the team to Chicago , but retained the Staleys nickname . In 1922 the team was renamed the Chicago Bears . The Staleys won the 1921 AFPA Championship , over the Buffalo All @-@ Americans in an event later referred to as the " Staley Swindle " . 
 By the mid @-@ 1920s , NFL membership had grown to 25 teams , and a rival league known as the American Football League was formed . The rival AFL folded after a single season , but it symbolized a growing interest in the professional game . Several college stars joined the NFL , most notably Red Grange from the University of Illinois , who was taken on a famous barnstorming tour in 1925 by the Chicago Bears . Another scandal that season centered on a 1925 game between the Chicago Cardinals and the Milwaukee Badgers . The scandal involved a Chicago player , Art <unk> , hiring a group of high school football players to play for the Milwaukee Badgers , against the Cardinals . This would ensure an inferior opponent for Chicago . The game was used to help prop up their win @-@ loss percentage and as a chance of wrestling away the 1925 Championship away from the first place Pottsville Maroons . All parties were severely punished initially ; however , a few months later the punishments were rescinded . Also that year a controversial dispute stripped the NFL title from the Maroons and awarded it to the Cardinals . 
 = = = = 1932 NFL playoff game = = = = 
 At the end of the 1932 season , the Chicago Bears and the Portsmouth Spartans were tied with the best regular @-@ season records . To determine the champion , the league voted to hold its first playoff game . Because of cold weather , the game was held indoors at Chicago Stadium , which forced some temporary rule changes . Chicago won , 9 – 0 . The playoff proved so popular that the league reorganized into two divisions for the 1933 season , with the winners advancing to a scheduled championship game . A number of new rule changes were also instituted : the goal posts were moved forward to the goal line , every play started from between the hash marks , and forward passes could originate from anywhere behind the line of scrimmage ( instead of the previous five yards behind ) . In 1936 , the NFL instituted the first draft of college players . With the first ever draft selection , the Philadelphia Eagles picked Heisman Trophy winner Jay Berwanger , but he declined to play professionally . Also in that year , another AFL formed , but it also lasted only two seasons . 
 = = = Stability and growth of the NFL ( 1933 – 1969 ) = = = 
 The 1930s represented an important time of transition for the NFL . League membership was fluid prior to the mid @-@ 1930s . 1936 was the first year where there were no franchise moves , prior to that year 51 teams had gone defunct . In 1941 , the NFL named its first Commissioner , Elmer Layden . The new office replaced that of President . Layden held the job for five years , before being replaced by Pittsburgh Steelers co @-@ owner Bert Bell in 1946 . 
 During World War II , a player shortage led to a shrinking of the league as several teams folded and others merged . Among the short @-@ lived merged teams were the <unk> ( Pittsburgh and Philadelphia ) in 1943 , the Card @-@ Pitts ( Chicago Cardinals and Pittsburgh ) in 1944 , and a team formed from the merger of the Brooklyn Dodgers and the Boston Yanks in 1945 . 
 1946 was an important year in the history of professional football , as that was the year when the league reintegrated . The Los Angeles Rams signed two African American players , Kenny Washington and Woody Strode . Also that year , a competing league , the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , began operation . 
 During the 1950s , additional teams entered the league . In 1950 , the AAFC folded , and three teams from that league were absorbed into the NFL : the Cleveland Browns ( who had won the AAFC Championship every year of the league 's existence ) , the San Francisco 49ers , and the Baltimore Colts ( not the same as the modern franchise , this version folded after one year ) . The remaining players were chosen by the now 13 NFL teams in a dispersal draft . Also in 1950 , the Los Angeles Rams became the first team to televise its entire schedule , marking the beginning of an important relationship between television and professional football . In 1952 , the Dallas Texans went defunct , becoming the last NFL franchise to do so . The following year a new Baltimore Colts franchise formed to take over the assets of the Texans . The players ' union , known as the NFL Players Association , formed in 1956 . 
 = = = = The Greatest Game Ever Played = = = = 
 At the conclusion of the 1958 NFL season , the Baltimore Colts and the New York Giants met at Yankee Stadium to determine the league champion . Tied after 60 minutes of play , it became the first NFL game to go into sudden death overtime . The final score was Baltimore Colts 23 , New York Giants 17 . The game has since become widely known as " the Greatest Game Ever Played " . It was carried live on the NBC television network , and the national exposure it provided the league has been cited as a watershed moment in professional football history , helping propel the NFL to become one of the most popular sports leagues in the United States . Journalist Tex Maule said of the contest , " This , for the first time , was a truly epic game which inflamed the imagination of a national audience . " 
 = = = = American Football League and merger = = = = 
 In 1959 , longtime NFL commissioner Bert Bell died of a heart attack while attending an Eagles / Steelers game at Franklin Field . That same year , Dallas , Texas businessman Lamar Hunt led the formation of the rival American Football League , the fourth such league to bear that name , with war hero and former South Dakota Governor Joe Foss as its Commissioner . Unlike the earlier rival leagues , and bolstered by television exposure , the AFL posed a significant threat to NFL dominance of the professional football world . With the exception of Los Angeles and New York , the AFL avoided placing teams in markets where they directly competed with established NFL franchises . In 1960 , the AFL began play with eight teams and a double round @-@ robin schedule of fourteen games . New NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle took office the same year . 
 The AFL became a viable alternative to the NFL as it made a concerted effort to attract established talent away from the NFL , signing half of the NFL 's first @-@ round draft choices in 1960 . The AFL worked hard to secure top college players , many from sources virtually untapped by the established league : small colleges and predominantly black colleges . Two of the eight coaches of the Original Eight AFL franchises , Hank Stram ( Texans / Chiefs ) and Sid Gillman ( Chargers ) eventually were inducted to the Hall of Fame . Led by Oakland Raiders owner and AFL commissioner Al Davis , the AFL established a " war chest " to entice top talent with higher pay than they got from the NFL . Former Green Bay Packers quarterback Babe Parilli became a star for the Boston Patriots during the early years of the AFL , and University of Alabama passer Joe Namath rejected the NFL to play for the New York Jets . Namath became the face of the league as it reached its height of popularity in the mid @-@ 1960s . Davis 's methods worked , and in 1966 , the junior league forced a partial merger with the NFL . The two leagues agreed to have a common draft and play in a common season @-@ ending championship game , known as the AFL @-@ NFL World Championship . Two years later , the game 's name was changed to the Super Bowl . AFL teams won the next two Super Bowls , and in 1970 , the two leagues merged to form a new 26 @-@ team league . The resulting newly expanded NFL eventually incorporated some of the innovations that led to the AFL 's success , such as including names on player 's jerseys , official scoreboard clocks , national television contracts ( the addition of Monday Night Football gave the NFL broadcast rights on all of the Big Three television networks ) , and sharing of gate and broadcasting revenues between home and visiting teams . 
 = = = Post @-@ merger NFL ( 1970 – present ) = = = 
 The NFL continued to grow , eventually adopting some innovations of the AFL , including the two @-@ point conversion . It has expanded several times to its current 32 @-@ team membership , and the Super Bowl has become a cultural phenomena across the United States . One of the most popular televised events annually in the United States , it has become a major source of advertising revenue for the television networks that have carried it and it serves as a means for advertisers to debut elaborate and expensive commercials for their products . The NFL has grown to become the most popular spectator sports league in the United States . 
 One of the things that have marked the modern NFL as different from other major professional sports leagues is the apparent parity between its 32 teams . While from time to time , dominant teams have arisen , the league has been cited as one of the few where every team has a realistic chance of winning the championship from year to year . The league 's complex labor agreement with its players ' union , which mandates a hard salary cap and revenue sharing between its clubs , prevents the richest teams from stockpiling the best players and gives even teams in smaller cities such as Green Bay and New Orleans the opportunity to compete for the Super Bowl . One of the chief architects of this labor agreement was former NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue , who presided over the league from 1989 to 2006 . In addition to providing parity between the clubs , the current labor contract , established in 1993 and renewed in 1998 and 2006 , has kept player salaries low — the lowest among the four major league sports in the United States — and has helped make the NFL the only major American professional sports league since 1993 not to suffer any player strike or work stoppage . 
 Since taking over as commissioner before the 2006 season , Roger Goodell has made player conduct a priority of his office . Since taking office , several high @-@ profile players have experienced trouble with the law , from Adam " Pacman " Jones to Michael Vick . In these and other cases , Commissioner Goodell has mandated lengthy suspensions for players who fall outside of acceptable conduct limits . Goodell , however , has remained a largely unpopular figure to many of the league 's fans , who perceive him attempting to change the NFL 's identity and haphazardly damage the sport . 
 = = = = Other professional leagues = = = = 
 Minor professional leagues such as the original United Football League , Atlantic Coast Football League , Seaboard Football League and Continental Football League existed in abundance in the 1960s and early 1970s , to varying degrees of success . 
 Several other professional football leagues have been formed since the AFL @-@ NFL merger , though none have had the success of the AFL . In 1974 , the World Football League formed and was able to attract such stars as Larry Csonka away from the NFL with lucrative contracts . However , most of the WFL franchises were insolvent and the league folded in 1975 ; the Memphis Southmen , the team that had signed Csonka and the most financially stable of the teams , unsuccessfully sued to join the NFL . 
 In 1970 , Patricia <unk> <unk> became the first woman to ever play on a men 's semipro football team when she joined the Orlando Panthers of the Atlantic Coast league . In 1974 , the National Women 's Football League was founded , starting play with 7 teams . 
 In 1982 , the United States Football League formed as a spring league , and enjoyed moderate success during its first two seasons behind such stars as Jim Kelly and Herschel Walker . After its spring 1985 season , the league , which lost a considerable amount of money due to overspending on players , opted to gamble on moving its schedule to fall in 1986 and filing a billion @-@ dollar antitrust lawsuit against the NFL and its television partners in an effort to stay afloat . When the lawsuit only drew a three @-@ dollar judgment days before the fall 1986 season was to begin , the USFL folded . 
 The NFL founded a developmental league known as the World League of American Football with teams based in the United States , Canada , and Europe . The WLAF ran for two years , from 1991 to 1992 . Its successor , the all @-@ European NFL Europe League , ran from 1995 to 2007 . 
 In 2001 , the XFL was formed as a joint venture between the World Wrestling Federation and the NBC television network . It folded after one season in the face of rapidly declining fan interest and a poor reputation . However , XFL stars such as Tommy Maddox and Rod " He Hate Me " Smart later saw success in the NFL . 
 The United Football League was a four @-@ team fully professional league which played its first season in October – November 2009 . The UFL was beset with numerous financial problems , some of which stemmed from the inability to sell television rights , insufficient ticket revenue and insurmountable expenses . Midway through its fourth season , the league abruptly shut down , after which several dozen former players and coaches sued to recover unpaid salaries ; all remaining teams had folded and shut down their offices by March , 2013 . The Fall Experimental Football League , which played two abbreviated seasons as an explicitly minor professional league in 2014 and 2015 . 
 = = Youth and high school football ( 1863 – present ) = = 
 Football is a popular participatory sport among youth . One of the earliest youth football organizations was founded in Philadelphia , in 1929 , as the Junior Football Conference . Organizer Joe Tomlin started the league to provide activities and guidance for teenage boys who were vandalizing the factory he owned . The original four @-@ team league expanded to sixteen teams in 1933 when Pop Warner , who had just been hired as the new coach of the Temple University football team , agreed to give a lecture to the boys in the league . In his honor , the league was renamed the Pop Warner Conference . 
 Today , Pop Warner Little Scholars — as the program is now known — enrolls over 300 @,@ 000 young boys and girls ages 5 – 16 in over 5000 football and cheerleading squads , and has affiliate programs in Mexico and Japan . Other organizations , such as the Police Athletic League , Upward , and the National Football League 's NFL Youth Football Program also manage various youth football leagues . 
 Football is a popular sport for high schools in the United States . The National Federation of State High School Associations ( NFHS ) was founded in 1920 as an umbrella organization for state @-@ level organizations that manage high school sports , including high school football . The NFHS publishes the rules followed by most local high school football associations . More than 13 @,@ 000 high schools participate in football , and in some places high school teams play in stadiums that rival college @-@ level facilities . In Denton , Texas , for example , a 12 @,@ 000 seat , $ 21 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 stadium hosts two local high school football teams . The growth of high school football and its impact on small town communities has been documented by landmark non @-@ fiction works such as the 1990 book Friday Night Lights and the subsequent fictionalized film and television series . 
 = = American football outside the United States ( 1874 – present ) = = 
 American football has been played outside the US since the 1920s and accelerated in popularity after World War II , especially in countries with large numbers of U.S. military personnel , who often formed a substantial proportion of the players and spectators . 
 In 1998 , the International Federation of American Football , was formed to coordinate international amateur competition . At present , 45 associations from the Americas , Europe , Asia and Oceania are organized within the IFAF , which claims to represent 23 million amateur athletes . The IFAF , which is based in Paris , France , organizes the quadrennial American Football World Cup . 
 A long @-@ term goal of the IFAF is for American football to be accepted by the International Olympic Committee as an Olympic sport . The only time that the sport was played was at the 1932 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , but as a demonstration sport . Among the various problems the IFAF has to solve in order to be accepted by the IOC are building a competitive women 's division , expanding the sport into Africa , and overcoming the current worldwide competitive imbalance that is in favor of American teams . 
 = = Similar codes of football = = 
 Other codes of football share a common history with American football . Canadian football is a form of the game that evolved parallel to American football . While both games share a common history , there are some important differences between the two . A more modern sport that derives from American football is Arena football , designed to be played indoors inside of hockey or basketball arenas . The game was invented in 1981 by Jim Foster and the Arena Football League was founded in 1987 as the first major professional league to play the sport . Several other indoor football leagues have since been founded and continue to play today . 
 American football 's parent sport of rugby continued to evolve . Today , two distinct codes known as rugby union and rugby league are played throughout the world . Since the two codes split following a schism on how the sport should be managed in 1895 , the history of rugby league and the history of rugby union have evolved separately . Both codes have adopted innovations parallel to the American game ; the rugby union scoring system is almost identical to the American game , while rugby league uses a gridiron @-@ style field and a six @-@ tackle rule similar to the system of downs in American Football . 
 = Thomas de Buittle = 
 Thomas de Buittle [ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ] ( died c . 1420 – 1422 ) was a Scottish prelate , clerk and papal auditor active in the late 14th and early 15th centuries . Probably originating in Galloway , Scotland , Thomas took a university career in canon law in England and France , before taking up service at the court of Avignon Pope Benedict XIII . He obtained a number of benefices in the meantime , including the position of Archdeacon of Galloway , and is the earliest known and probably first provost of the collegiate church of Maybole . The height of his career came however when the Pope provided him to the bishopric of Galloway , a position he held from 1415 until his death sometime between 1420 and 1422 . 
 = = Background and education = = 
 Thomas ' name suggests a strong likelihood that he came from Buittle in Kirkcudbrightshire , Galloway , lands in the control of the Douglas family . In 1388 , it was claimed that he had been a scholar of Decrees ( i.e. Canon law ) at the University of Oxford for five years , a claim to some extent confirmed by the grant of safe @-@ conduct from the English crown on 18 February 1380 , to travel and study at Oxford for a year . 
 By 18 April 1390 , he had obtained a Bachelor 's degree ( in Decrees ) from the University of Avignon ; he appears in the Avignon university student rolls on 9 August 1393 and again on 21 October 1394 . Thomas had obtained a doctorate ( in Decrees ) sometime between 15 July 1401 and 9 June 1410 . He witnessed Bishop Henry de Wardlaw 's foundation charter of the University of St Andrews on 28 February 1412 and was named in the grant of privileges made to the new university by Pope Benedict XIII on 28 August 1413 . 
 = = First provost of Maybole = = 
 On 1 February 1388 , a letter from Avignon Pope Clement VII to the official of the diocese of Glasgow says that Thomas " holds the <unk> of the chapel of St Mary de <unk> , Glasgow diocese , which is a simple benefice without cure " . The collegiate church of Maybole was founded under the patronage of John Kennedy , Lord of Dunure , a short time before 2 February 1382 , when a mandate was issued by the papacy confirming its erection . A year previously the Lord of Dunure had founded a chapel to St Mary beside the parish church of Maybole , and the erection established a provost , two chaplains and a clerk . Thomas de Buittle held the vicarage there . It is possible that Thomas was the senior priest there when it was erected into a collegiate church ; Thomas is certainly the earliest known provost , and neither the appointment nor the death of any predecessor are noted anywhere . 
 He held the vicarage of Lochrutton in Kirkcudbrightshire in 1388 , when a papal letter indicated that he was expected to resign Lochrutton after obtaining the benefice of Maybole in the gift of the Prioress of the nunnery of North Berwick . He still held Lochrutton on 18 April 1390 , when the letter was repeated . Thomas remained provost of Maybole until at least 1401 , and perhaps until his consecration as Bishop of Galloway in 1415 . No @-@ one else is known to have held the position of provost there until 1439 , although this proves nothing as the evidence for such things in the south @-@ west of Scotland in this period is always scarce . 
 = = Archdeacon of Galloway = = 
 On 2 March 1391 , Thomas was provided by the papacy to be Archdeacon of Galloway . On 23 May a mandate was sent to the senior clergy of the bishopric of Glasgow authorising them to collate Thomas to the archdeaconry of Galloway , at that point occupied " unlawfully " by Patrick <unk> ; the mandate gave dispensation for Thomas to retain control of both the <unk> of Maybole and the vicarage of Lochrutton . He was still litigating with <unk> on 9 August 1393 , by which point in time he had resigned Lochrutton ; he was in firm possession of the archdeaconry by 21 October 1394 . During his time as Archdeacon of Galloway , the church of <unk> was annexed as a prebend of the office . 
 = = Papal career and other benefices = = 
 He resigned the vicarage of Maybole through a proxy ( Patrick de Houston ) at the papal court on 16 February 1398 , in exchange with Gilbert <unk> for the church of <unk> in Wigtownshire . Sweetheart Abbey , overlords of <unk> parish , dispossessed him briefly of this benefice , but Thomas obtained papal restitution in a papal mandate dated 13 October 1410 . He got papal provision on 5 December 1412 , to the politically important vicarage of Dundonald in Kyle , but this was unfruitful as the previous vicar turned out still to be alive . Presumably in its place he obtained the vicarage of <unk> in the diocese of Dunkeld on 30 January 1413 , but despite promising annates , failed to obtain possession . 
 He did however successfully obtain provision to the church of Kinkell in the diocese of Aberdeen , and the prebend of <unk> in the diocese of Moray with its associated canonry in Elgin Cathedral . As Thomas seems to have spent most of the early 15th century outside Scotland in the employment of the papacy , these positions were probably given to supplement Thomas ' income . When he was in Scotland in February 1412 witnessing the foundation charter of St Andrews University , he was said to hold to elevated post of " auditor of the sacred apostolic palace " . He had returned to Pope Benedict 's court in Spain later in the same year , and can be found conducting various business there over the next few years , both for the papacy and as a proctor for people in Scotland . 
 = = Bishop of Galloway = = 
 As a reward for his service to the " Avignon Pope " , now only recognised in Scotland , Sicily , Aragon and Castile , Thomas was provided to the bishopric of Galloway following the death of <unk> <unk> , the previous bishop . This occurred on 14 June 1415 . Although the local chapter had elected one Gilbert Cavan , a clerk of the Earl of Douglas , to fill this position , Benedict overturned this election and put Thomas there instead . This probably occurred against the will of the Douglas family , to whom Cavan was a senior clerk . Thomas resigned the archdeaconry of Galloway , with Gilbert Cavan succeeding him there . Presumably in compensation , Gilbert also received Thomas ' previous holdings in the dioceses of Moray and Aberdeen . It had been supposed by some authorities that Thomas supported the capitulation of Narbonne , renounced his allegiance to Pope Benedict and supported the adherence to the Council of Constance in December 1415 , but this is based on a misreading of the evidence . 
 It is not clear that , with possible Douglas opposition , Thomas obtained possession of the bishopric smoothly . There is a mandate , dated 5 September 1415 , to the subdean of Glasgow Cathedral , ordering the latter to protect " Thomas and his successors in possession of the lands and <unk> of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> in Candida Casa [ i.e. Whithorn ] diocese ... which are being molested " . No more of such problems are heard . Thomas is next found testifying to an <unk> at Perth on 17 March 1416 . This was made by Bishop Henry de Wardlaw of St Andrews on the request of the Council of Constance , a sign of the waning loyalty in Scotland and perhaps in Thomas to the Avignon papacy . Bishop Thomas appears to have been suffering ailing health by 1420 . In this year he failed to attend a provincial council of the Scottish church at Perth , although he did sent a proctor . He died at some point between 16 July 1420 ( date of the council ) and 4 December 1422 , when Alexander <unk> , Bishop of Caithness , was translated to be Thomas ' successor as Bishop of Galloway . Professor Donald Watt believes that his death probably occurred sometime in 1422 . 
 = Anna Maria Rückerschöld = 
 Anna Maria Rückerschöld ( 5 February 1725 – 25 May 1805 ) , born Rücker , was a Swedish author who wrote several popular books on housekeeping and cooking in the late 18th and early 19th century . She was an advocate of women 's right to a good education in household matters and propagated this view in public debate through an anonymous letter in 1770 . Along with Cajsa Warg and other female cookbook authors , she was an influential figure in culinary matters in early modern Sweden . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Rückerschöld was born in 1725 . She was the daughter of Emerentia <unk> and Reinhold Rücker , a judge of the local hundred who was employed at the high court in Stockholm . She grew up in <unk> and <unk> , being one of ten children in the family , seven girls and three boys . The family was not part of the nobility , but belonged to the upper echelons of society and the father was eventually knighted in 1751 , the same year as he died . Reinhold Rücker spent much time away from the home while working in Stockholm , leaving his wife to run the household . Rückerschöld was the granddaughter of inventor and industrialist Christopher <unk> and spent part of her childhood with her grandfather at his estate at <unk> . When Rückerschöld was twelve , her three brothers were sent to be educated at the prestigious Uppsala University . The seven sisters remained in <unk> without receiving any formal education , which was the customary upbringing of girls at the time . 
 In 1750 Rückerschöld married Jonas Jakobsson Dahl , an accountant employed by the high court in Stockholm . Dahl was educated at Uppsala University and was the son of a factory owner . Rückerschöld kept her maiden name throughout her life , changing it only after her father was knighted in 1751 and <unk> ( " shield " ) was added to his last name . Rückerschöld was 25 years old when she married and Dahl 33 , eight years her senior . The couple had their first child , Emerentia , in 1751 , and moved to <unk> <unk> in modern @-@ day <unk> <unk> , north of Stockholm in 1760 . Rückerschöld gave birth to three more children between 1759 and 1765 , Maria , Fredrica and Christopher . A fourth child , <unk> , died only seven hours after her birth . The other three children reached adulthood . Emerentia married a <unk> in Småland while her sister Maria Fredrica remained a spinster . Christopher went to sea , but was never heard from after that . The family moved from <unk> <unk> to Stockholm . The earliest record of their residence in Stockholm is from 1775 , and the couple remained there the rest of their lives . Both parents survived their children ; Dahl died in 1796 and Rückerschöld nine years later , in 1805 , at the age of 80 . 
 = = Public debate = = 
 Rückerschöld is best known for her books on cooking and household work , but it has also been established that she wrote an article advocating household education for women . In February 1770 a letter with the title " Det <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> till <unk> " ( " The unhappy Swedish woman 's entreaty to the general public " ) appeared in the periodical <unk> Magazinet written by Fru D * * , " Mrs D * * " ( likely " Mrs Dahl " ) . The letter has been attributed to <unk> since it is known that she wrote a letter to Carl Christopher <unk> , publisher of <unk> Magazinet and other papers , only a few weeks later . In the letter she is grateful to <unk> for having one of her writings published , and expresses her wish that she would " live to see even the smallest amendment to the suggestions that I have ventured to <unk> for the benefit of my sex " . 
 The article was published during a period of intense public debate . Freedom of press had been established in 1766 and encouraged people to give their suggestions on how to improve Swedish society . Economy , emigration , agriculture and education were hotly debated issues , as well as the problematic situation for unmarried middle class women . Without a spouse a woman in 18th century Sweden could have great difficulty supporting herself , especially as lower ranking servants were often promoted to maids and thereby lowering the number of employment opportunities for unmarried women . 
 Rückerschöld defended the " natural " division between male and female spheres of work , but also advocated schools for women where they could be taught household duties , such as cooking , sowing and basic household economics . She believed the need for practical household knowledge should have priority over social skills intended to please , such as knowledge of music , embroidery and art . Through allegories , the letter expressed Rückerschöld 's view on the relationship between the sexes , and her passionate concern for the well @-@ being of her fellow women . She attempted to illustrate the gravity of the situation by comparing the plight of women with that of Philomela , a character in Greek mythology who was raped by her sister 's husband and then had her tongue cut out to prevent her from speaking about the deed . She eventually managed to expose the husband by painstakingly explaining her story through embroidery . 
 Her passionate advocacy for the right of contemporary middle @-@ class women to a solid education in housekeeping has led journalist and writer Ingrid <unk> to describe Rückerschöld as a " cautious feminist " . In the letter in Allmänna Magazinet , she also shows signs of being well @-@ read and familiar with contemporary literature on pedagogy with quotes from François Fénelon 's Traité de l <unk> des filles ( " Treatise on the Education of Girls " ) , which had been published in Swedish translation 1762 . Like Rückerschöld , Fénelon strongly advocated household education to for young women . 
 = = Housekeeping and cooking = = 
 In 1785 , fifteen years after she wrote her plea for female household education , Rückerschöld published En Liten Hushålls @-@ Bok ( " A Small Household Book " ) . It was published in her own name , and contains various practical advice on efficient household management ; cooking , cleaning , washing , brewing , butchering , etc . Rückerschöld was influenced by the <unk> economic ideas of her time , and advised readers to take better advantage of local produce , such as berries and mushrooms and using locally available products in favor of imports , such as substitution of wine with juice or vinegar made from homegrown fruit . There are few actual recipes for cooking , and all of them describe more everyday dishes such as simpler porridge and soup . For more refined cooking , Rückerschöld recommended other contemporary cookbooks , of which Cajsa Warg 's is described as the foremost . 
 The book proved to be popular enough to be printed in two more editions and in 1796 Rückerschöld 's first genuine cookbook was published , Den Nya och <unk> Kok @-@ <unk> ( " The New and Complete Cookbook " ) . It was far larger than her previous work , over 300 pages , and included recipes for more refined dishes . Nevertheless , Rückerschöld tried to hold fast to her frugal ideals . In the foreword to the book , she described Cajsa Wargs cookbook as being too extravagant , though this is partially excused because it was written in a time of more abundance and by an author used to the lavish resources of a wealthy kitchen . In the book Rückerschöld continued to promote her goal that all women should be skilled homemakers and cooks ; without such knowledge , they would not be able to fulfill their duties as women . Other than recommendations in the foreword , the book also contained a short chapter with descriptions of fictitious housewives that served as warning examples about neglecting housework in favor of beautification , reading , religion , or doing the chores of the servants . The ideal housewife is embodied only by the final example , <unk> . By being humble , studious and knowledgeable , and being first to rise and last to go to bed , she becomes " the pride of her husband , pinnacle of the household , joy of servants , delight of friends , <unk> of the poor , solace of the inconsolable , haven of the oppressed , and , finally , the envy of mean @-@ spirited neighbors " . 
 Before her death , Rückerschöld would write two more books on the topic of housekeeping and cooking : <unk> Mans <unk> och Kök , ( " Poor Man 's <unk> and Kitchen " ) and En Liten Hushålls @-@ <unk> ( " A Small Household Catechism " ) . The first book was published in 1796 , and aimed for a broader readership than the previous books . This included not just modest urban households , but also peasant wives who made up the majority of the population in Sweden at the time . Again Rückerschöld stressed the importance that women know proper housekeeping skills , and urged them to take good care of the household economy to keep incompetent husbands from wrecking the family budget . Other than directions for simple dishes , there was money @-@ saving strategies like baking one 's own bread or cooperating with neighbors to buy larger quantities of food at lower prices . In the book Rückerschöld portrays herself as going on inspection in a peasant household , being shown the barn , larder , vegetable garden , etc . , and having suggestions for improvements everywhere . <unk> Mans <unk> och Kök was awarded a silver medal by <unk> <unk> ( " The Patriotic Society " ) for being the first cookbook written for poorer households . Twenty years earlier , the society had issued a challenge with this aim , but no one before Rückerschöld had managed to write such a book . In 1797 , one year after the book was first published , a second edition came out . 
 En Liten Hushålls @-@ <unk> came out in 1800 and was only 43 pages long . In her last book Rückerschöld repeated her previous stances about the importance of knowing household skills , and that girls should be allowed to partake in household work from an early age rather than being pampered and taught impractical skills . While stressing that a woman 's God @-@ given station was in the home and that she should be accustomed to humility and obedience , she also encouraged women to take matters in their own hands ; the lack of household education could only be alleviated by sharing information and passing on knowledge from one generation to the other . 
 = Imagination ( magazine ) = 
 Imagination was an American fantasy and science fiction magazine first published in October 1950 by Raymond Palmer 's Clark Publishing Company . The magazine was sold almost immediately to Greenleaf Publishing Company , owned by William Hamling , who published and edited it from the third issue , February 1951 , for the rest of the magazine 's life . Hamling launched a sister magazine , Imaginative Tales , in 1954 ; both ceased publication at the end of 1958 in the aftermath of major changes in US magazine distribution due to the liquidation of American News Company . 
 The magazine was more successful than most of the numerous science fiction titles launched in the late 1940s and early 1950s , lasting a total of 63 issues . Despite this success , the magazine had a reputation for low @-@ quality space opera and adventure fiction , and modern literary historians refer to it in dismissive terms . Hamling consciously adopted an editorial policy oriented toward entertainment , asserting in an early issue that " science fiction was never meant to be an educational tour de force " . Few of the stories from Imagination have received recognition , but it did publish Robert Sheckley 's first professional sale , " Final Examination " , in the May 1952 issue , and also printed fiction by Philip K. Dick , Robert A. Heinlein and John Wyndham . 
 = = History = = 
 American science fiction magazines first appeared in the 1920s with the appearance of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . The beginnings of science fiction as a separately marketed genre can be traced to this time , and by the end of the 1930s the field was undergoing its first boom , but World War II and its attendant paper shortages led to the demise of several titles . By the late 1940s the market began to recover again . From a low of eight active magazines in 1946 , the field expanded to 20 in 1950 , and a further 22 had commenced publication by 1954 . Imagination was launched in the middle of this publishing boom . 
 The groundwork was laid in 1947 , when Clark Publishing , the company that would publish the first issue of Imagination , was incorporated in Evanston , Illinois , by Raymond Palmer . He worked for Ziff @-@ Davis as the editor of Amazing Stories and did not leave until the end of 1949 , but he launched two magazines under the Clark name before that date : Fate , in the spring of 1948 , and Other Worlds , the first issue of which was dated November 1949 . Both of these magazines listed their editor as " Robert N. Webster " , a pseudonym Palmer adopted while he was still at Ziff @-@ Davis because of the conflict of interest . The second issue of Other Worlds reported that Webster and Palmer were going to edit together ; by the third issue , dated March 1950 , the pretense had been dropped and although there was no masthead listing the editor , the editorial was simply signed " Rap " ( for " Raymond A. Palmer " ) . At the 1949 World Science Fiction Convention in Cincinnati , held over the weekend of 3 – 5 September , Palmer announced that he had left Ziff @-@ Davis and described his plans for Clark Publishing . He also met and hired Bea Mahaffey , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old science fiction fan attending her first convention , as his assistant editor . 
 With Fate and Other Worlds launched , Palmer began to plan for a new magazine , to be called Imagination . Material for the first two issues had been assembled by mid @-@ 1950 , but in the early summer Palmer fell down his basement stairs and was left paralyzed from the waist down . While he was hospitalized , much of the work of editing both Other Worlds and Imagination was done by Mahaffey , who coped well , despite her inexperience . An assistant , Marge Budwig Saunder , was hired to read the slush pile and help out . The magazine 's first issue , dated October 1950 on a planned bi @-@ monthly schedule , appeared on news stands 1 August 1950 . However , in September that year , Ziff @-@ Davis made the decision to move to New York from Chicago ; Palmer promptly contacted William Hamling , who did not want to relocate and suggested that Hamling take over Imagination . Like Palmer , Hamling had made preparations to leave Ziff @-@ Davis by establishing a separate publishing company , Greenleaf Publishing , and in November 1950 Hamling left Ziff @-@ Davis and became Imagination 's editor and publisher . 
 In 1954 Hamling started a companion magazine , Imaginative Tales ; in addition , his company Greenleaf Publishing was the publisher of Rogue , a men 's magazine modelled after Playboy . In 1957 the liquidation of American News Company , a major distributor , meant that many magazines had to scramble to find new distributors . Independent distributors often required that the magazines be monthly , and that they be in a larger format than the digest @-@ size common in science fiction magazines . The larger format required higher revenue to be profitable , but in many cases it proved impossible to attract the additional advertising income that would have kept the magazines afloat . By the end of 1958 , many titles had disappeared as a result , with Imagination one of the victims ; Hamling closed down both Imagination and its sister magazine to invest the money in Rogue instead . The last issue of Imagination was October 1958 , the 63rd issue , while Imaginative Tales , retitled Space Travel , ceased with the November 1958 issue . There was no indication in either magazine that the end had come , though the last issue of Imagination omitted its letter , book review and pen @-@ pal columns , all of which had appeared regularly in prior issues . 
 Circulation figures were not required to be published annually until the 1960s , so the actual circulation figures are not known . For comparison , the more successful Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , which had been launched the previous year , is known to have had a circulation of just under 60 @,@ 000 copies for its first issue , dated Fall 1949 . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 The cover story for the first issue was " The Soul Stealers " by Chester S. Geier , a regular in the Ziff @-@ Davis magazines Amazing Stories and Fantastic Adventures . The story was a science fantasy tale of Leeta , a beautiful woman from another dimension stealing the souls of men to try to save her father . The cover illustration , by Hannes Bok , showed Leeta on her flying steed . Other contributors included Rog Phillips , another prolific magazine author , and Kris Neville , whose first story had been published only the year before . Neville 's work appeared regularly in the first few years of the magazine ; other prolific contributors included Dwight V. Swain , Daniel F. <unk> and Milton Lesser . Edmond Hamilton 's work also appeared frequently towards the end of the magazine 's life . The magazine often contained a long novel as the lead attraction . 
 In addition to less well @-@ known regulars , some more prominent writers occasionally appeared . Ray Bradbury 's " The Fire Balloons " was published in the April 1951 issue , under the title " ' … In This Sign ' " ; the story was later incorporated into Bradbury 's <unk> , The Martian Chronicles and The Illustrated Man . Robert Sheckley 's first story , " Final Examination " , appeared in the May 1952 issue . Other well @-@ known authors who were published in Imagination include Poul Anderson , John Wyndham ( as " John Beynon " ) , James Blish , Philip K. Dick , Harlan Ellison , Robert A. Heinlein , Frederik Pohl and Robert Silverberg . 
 Imagination is generally thought of by historians of science fiction as one of the weaker magazines of the 1950s , despite its relative longevity . Donald Tuck , in his Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy , dismissed the novels it published , saying , " not many were noteworthy , most being in the interplanetary / space opera / adventure field " , and Brian Stableford , a science fiction writer and critic , described it as dealing " primarily in routine space opera . " James Blish , writing under the pseudonym " William Atheling , Jr . " , which he used for some of his critical writing , remarked that it was a " widely unread " magazine . Hamling 's editorial policy was consciously slanted against intellectualism . In the November 1951 issue he commented that " science fiction was never meant to be an educational tour de force . The so @-@ called adult story is nothing more than an attempt to show the reader how dumb he is and how smart the editor is . " Imagination 's approach , he said , was to publish entertainment : " What we need is a little relaxation . And entertaining reading is one way to get it . " Some readers agreed with Hamling ; a 1952 issue of <unk> Digest , a fanzine , contains approving commentary on Hamling 's editorial by Gregg Calkins , a fan of the period . 
 Starting with the April 1951 issue , a regular column on science fiction fandom began , titled " <unk> 's Box " . It was written by Mari Wolf , an active fan , for five years , and was taken over by Robert Bloch from June 1956 through the end . The column had an excellent reputation , and was one of the few such columns in the professional magazines . Every issue carried an editorial , and a letter column appeared in every issue but the very last . A book review column began in June 1953 , and appeared in every issue except the last one . It was initially by Mark <unk> , and was taken over by Henry Bott in May 1954 after two months in which both reviewers contributed to the column . A " Cosmic Pen Club " column , where fans could post requests for pen @-@ pals , began in February 1957 ; as with the book reviews it appeared regularly , excepting only the last issue . Beginning in September 1951 , the inside front cover was often used for an " Introducing the Author " feature , with short pieces by and about a writer or artist who appeared in the issue . These included photographs of the authors in question , a feature not typically found in other magazines . Among the better @-@ known authors featured were Heinlein , Evan Hunter and Philip K. Dick . " Introducing the Author " skipped four issues from October 1954 to January 1955 , and ceased altogether with the April 1956 issue . One issue , May 1953 , included pictures from that year 's World Science Fiction in Chicago , rather than a feature about an author . The most frequently appearing cover artists were Harold W. McCauley , Lloyd Rognan , Malcolm Smith and William Terry . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Imagination was digest size ( 7 @.@ 5 × 5 @.@ 5 inches or 19 @.@ 1 × 14 @.@ 0 cm ) for its first 17 issues , and then shrank slightly to a short digest size ( 7 @.@ 25 × 5 @.@ 5 inches or 18 @.@ 4 × 14 @.@ 0 cm ) for the rest of its run , a further 46 issues . The volume number rose by one at the start of each calendar year , regardless of the number of issues . Volume 1 , 1950 , contained only two issues ; subsequent volumes contained five to twelve issues , depending on frequency of publication . The overall issue number was printed on the spine ( an unusual practice ) along with the volume number . The first issue had a publication date of October 1950 , and the schedule was bimonthly through the September 1952 issue except that June 1951 was followed by September 1951 . The next four issues were dated October 1952 , December 1952 , January 1953 and February 1953 , and then a monthly run began with April 1953 that lasted without a break until the July 1955 issue . The next issue was October 1955 , which inaugurated another bimonthly period that ran with perfect regularity until the last issue , October 1958 . The price remained at 35 cents throughout . 
 The title of the magazine was initially " Imagination : Stories of Science and Fantasy " ; it changed with the October 1955 issue to " Imagination : Science Fiction " , though this change was only on the cover and spine and was never reflected on the masthead . 
 The first 28 issues were 166 pages long . The page count dropped to 134 with the April 1954 issue and stayed at that length for the remainder of the run . The cover layout initially strongly resembled that of Other Worlds but was changed with the fifth issue , June 1951 , to have a white background banner for the title . This format was retained for the rest of the magazine 's life , with occasional slight variations such as using a different color for the banner background . The spine also changed from a colored spine with pale lettering , which was similar to the spine style used by Other Worlds , to a white spine with red or blue lettering . 
 The publisher was Clark Publishing Company for the first two issues . The editor for those issues was Raymond Palmer , but as he was hospitalized much of the work was done by Bea Mahaffey . As a result , these two issues are sometimes indexed with Mahaffey as editor . With the third issue , Greenleaf Publishing Company became the publisher and William Hamling took over as editor , a position he retained throughout the magazine 's life . 
 = Adventure ( Atari 2600 ) = 
 Adventure is a video game for the Atari 2600 video game console , released in ca. late 1979 – 1980 . In the game , the player controls a square avatar whose quest is to explore an open world environment to find a magical chalice and return it to the golden castle . The game world is populated by roaming enemies : three dragons that can eat the avatar and a bat that randomly steals and hides items around the game world . Adventure introduced a number of innovative game elements to console games , including a playing area that spanned several different screens and enemies that continued to move even when not displayed on the screen . 
 Adventure was conceived as a graphical version of the 1977 text adventure Colossal Cave Adventure . It took developer Warren Robinett approximately one year to design and code the game , during which time he had to overcome a variety of technical limitations in the Atari 2600 console hardware , as well as difficulties with management within Atari . In this game , he introduced the first widely known video game Easter egg , a secret room containing text crediting himself for the game 's creation . Robinett 's Easter egg became a tradition for future Atari 2600 titles . 
 Adventure received mostly positive reviews at the time of its release and has continued to be viewed positively in the decades since , often named as one of the industry 's influential titles . It is considered the first action @-@ adventure and console fantasy game , and inspired other titles in the genres . More than one million cartridges of Adventure were sold , and the game has been included in numerous Atari 2600 game collections for modern computer hardware . The game 's prototype code was used as the basis for the 1979 Superman game , and a planned sequel eventually formed the basis for the <unk> games . The Easter egg concept pioneered by the game has transcended video games and entered popular culture . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Adventure , the player 's goal is to recover the Enchanted Chalice that an evil magician has stolen and hidden in the kingdom and return it to the Golden Castle . The kingdom includes two other castles ( White and Black ) and various obstacles and mazes within them . Further , the kingdom is guarded by three dragons : <unk> ( yellow dragon ) , <unk> ( green dragon ) , and <unk> ( red dragon who moves much faster than the other two ) , that protect various items in the game and will try to chase and eat the player 's avatar . There is also a bat that can roam across the kingdom freely , carrying a single item ( which can include the player 's avatar or a dragon ) around ; the bat was to be named <unk> but the name did not make it into the manual . The bat has two states , agitated and non @-@ agitated ; when in the agitated state , the bat will either pick up or swap what it currently carries with an object in the present room , eventually returning to the non @-@ agitated state where it will not pick up an object . The bat continues to fly around even if not present on the player 's current screen and may continue moving or swapping around objects . 
 The player 's avatar is represented by a simple square shape that can move within and between rooms , each represented by a single screen . While Robinett originally intended for all rooms to be <unk> connected , a few such connections ( including one inside the White Castle ) were unidirectional , which he considered to be bugs . Such problems were explained away as " bad magic " in the game 's manual . The player 's goal is to find objects to help defeat the dragons and recover the Chalice . These include various keys that open the castles , a magnet that pulls items towards the player , a magic bridge that the player can use to cross certain obstacles , and a sword which can be used to defeat the dragons . Only one object can be carried at a time . The player can be eaten by a dragon if it is caught in its " bite " cycle , at which point the avatar is stuck in the dragon 's stomach . At this point , the player can opt to restore their avatar 's life instead of completely restarting the game , reappearing at the Golden Castle while leaving all objects where they were last left , but this will also regenerate any dragon previously killed as well . The ability to reset the player 's avatar without resetting the entire game is considered the first known " continue game " option in video games . 
 The game offers three different skill levels . Level 1 is the easiest , as it uses a simplified room layout missing one of the castles and one of the mazes , and doesn 't include the bat and one of the dragons . Level 2 is the full version of the game , with the various objects appearing in set positions at the start of the game . Level 3 is similar to Level 2 , but the location of the objects is randomized to provide a more challenging game . In addition , the player can use the difficulty switches on the Atari 2600 to further control the game 's difficulty by affecting the behavior of the dragons : one switch controls the dragons ' bite speed , and one causes them to flee when the player is wielding the sword . 
 = = Development = = 
 Adventure was published by the developer of the 2600 console , Atari , Inc , and programmed by Atari employee Warren Robinett . At the time , Atari programmers were generally given full control on the creative direction and development cycle for their games , but this required them to plan for their next game as they neared completion of their current one to stay productive . Robinett was finishing his work on Slot Racers when he was given an opportunity to visit the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory by Julius Smith , one of several friends he was sharing a house with . There , he was introduced to the 1977 version of the computer text game Colossal Cave Adventure , created by Will Crowther and modified by Don Woods . After playing the game for several hours , he was inspired to create a graphical version of the game . Adventure was named after Colossal Cave Adventure . 
 Robinett began designing the graphics @-@ based game , loosely based on the text game , on a Hewlett @-@ Packard <unk> microprocessor computer around May to June 1978 . Robinett was aware early on that memory use was going to be critical : Atari 2600 cartridges had room for only 4096 bytes ( 4 KB ) on the cartridge ROM , and 128 bytes for program variables in the 2600 's RAM ; in contrast , Colossal Cave Adventure took over hundreds of kilobytes of memory . The final game used nearly all of the available memory ( including 5 % of the cartridge storage for Robinett 's Easter egg ) , with 15 unused bytes from the ROM capacity . Robinett credits Ken Thompson , his professor at University of California Berkeley , with teaching him the skills needed to use the limited memory efficiently . Thompson had required his students to learn the C programming language ; Robinett carried techniques from that language into his programming of Adventure . 
 Robinett first identified ways to translate the elements of Colossal Cave Adventure into simple , easy @-@ to @-@ recognize graphics that the player could interact with directly , replacing text @-@ based commands with joystick controls . Due to the limitations of the system 's graphical hardware , Robinett noted the dragons ended up looking more like ducks . Robinett developed workarounds for various technical limitations of the Atari 2600 . The system has only one playfield and five memory @-@ mapped registers available to represent moving objects . Only two of these registers are capable of representing more complex sprites . Robinett used those for objects and creatures within the game . He used the register originally designated for the ball in games such as Pong to represent the player 's avatar . Finally , he used the registers assigned for missiles , such as the bullets in Combat , for additional walls in the playing field to be able to represent different rooms within the game with the same playfield . Another hardware limitation forces the left and right sides of nearly every screen to be mirror images of each other ; this fostered the creation of the game 's confusing mazes . The notable exceptions are two screens in the black castle catacombs and two in the main hallway beneath the Yellow Castle . These two hallway screens are mirrored , but contain a vertical " wall " object in the room in order to achieve a non @-@ symmetrical shape , as well as act as a secret door for an Easter egg . 
 Despite the limitations , Robinett was able to introduce concepts that at the time were unfamiliar to players . He had been able to construct different rooms in the games ( thirty in the final version ) , in days where most games took place only on a single screen . Further , off @-@ screen objects such as the bat would continue to move according to their programming behavior . 
 In additional to the technical limitations , Robinett had struggled with Atari 's management over the game . Around the time of Adventure 's development , Atari , now owned by Warner Communications , had hired Ray Kassar as general manager of their Consumer Division , and he was later promoted to president and CEO of Atari in December 1978 . Kassar interacted with the programmers rarely and generally treated their contributions with indifference . Robinett was initially discouraged from working on Adventure by his supervisor , George Simcock , who said the ambitious game could not be done based on knowing how much memory Colossal Cave Adventure used . When Robinett developed a working prototype within a month , the management at Atari were impressed , encouraging him to continue the game despite his supervisor 's initial response . The management later tried to convince Robinett to make it a tie @-@ in work for the upcoming Superman movie , which was owned by Warner Communication . Robinett remained committed to his initial idea . Instead , Atari had developer John Dunn offered to take Robinett 's prototype source code to make the 1979 Superman game . 
 A second prototype , completed near the end of 1978 , had only about eight rooms , a single dragon , and two objects , and Robinett recognized that the game , though demonstrating what he had set out to do , was boring . He put the game aside for a few months and came back with additional ideas to improve the game , finishing it by June 1979 . Two changes that Robinett added were the possibility of being eaten by the dragon , as well as the means to reset the avatar if this should happen , and the addition of the sword object , which could kill the dragon . Robinett found the various possibilities that arose from this combination of elements improved the excitement of the game , and subsequently made three dragons , reusing the same code for the behavior of all three . The magnet was created to work around a potential situation where the player could drop an object into a wall space and make it irretrievable . 
 Robinett worked with Steve Harding , the author for nearly all Atari 2600 game manuals at that point in time , to develop the plot for the game . Harding developed most of the plot after playing the game himself , with Robinett revising elements where he saw fit . Robinett states that he had come up with the names for the three dragons as well as offering a friend 's suggestion for " <unk> " for the bat . 
 Robinett submitted the source code for Adventure to Atari management in June 1979 ; he left Atari soon afterward . The game was released by Atari some time later , though the exact date is unclear . In a 2003 interview , Robinett recalled the release date as being Christmas 1979 though noted he had left the company by this point and was traveling in Europe at that time , but knew the game had been released worldwide by early 1980 . A 1979 date is also listed in various other sources . Atari began advertising the game as " coming soon " in its 1980 catalog , and several sources indicate the game was released that year , after the Atari 2600 version of Space Invaders was released in early 1980 . 
 = = = Easter egg = = = 
 Generally defined as a " message , trick , or unusual behavior hidden inside a computer program by its creator " , the Easter egg concept was popularized by Adventure , influenced by the corporate culture at Atari . Atari removed the names of game developers from their products , seeing it as a means to prevent competitors from identifying and luring away Atari 's programmers . Atari 's decisions led to several programmers leaving the company ; notably , David Crane , Larry Kaplan , Alan Miller , and Bob Whitehead all left Atari due to lack of recognition and royalties from the company , and formed Activision . 
 Robinett , as a means to maintain his name on his game , included a hidden message in Adventure identifying himself as the creator , inspired by the supposedly hidden messages left on various songs recorded by The Beatles . In discussing the game in 2015 , Robinett considered the message as a means of self @-@ promotion , noting that he had only been paid around $ 22 @,@ 000 a year from Atari without any royalties , while Atari would sell a million units of a game at $ 25 a piece . This secret is one of the earliest known Easter eggs in a video game . 
 Within Adventure , the Easter egg is located inside the black castle catacombs ( on difficulty level 2 or 3 ) , embedded in the south wall of a sealed chamber ( accessible only with the bridge ) , where there is an invisible 1 @-@ pixel object referred to as the Gray Dot . The player must bounce the avatar along the bottom wall to pick up the dot . The dot is not actually invisible , but is simply the same color as the wall and is easily seen when placed in a catacombs passage or over a normal wall . The dot is not attracted to the magnet , unlike most other objects in Adventure . Bringing this dot to the east end of the corridor below the Yellow Castle while other differently colored objects are present causes the wall object to similarly become effectively invisible , allowing the player to pass into a room displaying the words " Created by Warren Robinett " . 
 Robinett kept the Gray Dot a secret for over a year , and did not mention it to anyone at Atari prior to his departure . He was unsure of whether or not it would be discovered by other Atari personnel prior to publishing ; the dot was not mentioned in the game 's manual , as the manual 's author was unaware of the dot 's existence . After the game was released , Adam <unk> , a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old from Salt Lake City , discovered the Dot and sent a letter to Atari explaining how to retrieve it . Robinett had already quit the company by this point , so Atari tasked designers with finding the responsible code . The one who found it said that if he were to fix it , he would change the message in the game to say " Fixed by Brad Stewart " . Further , the cost of creating a new read @-@ only memory ( ROM ) mask , or memory chip , was around $ 10 @,@ 000 US at the time of the game 's release , making this change a costly endeavor . Steve Wright , the director of software development of the Atari Consumer Division , argued for retaining the message , believing it gave players additional incentive to find it and play their games more , and suggested these were like Easter eggs for players to find . Atari eventually decided to leave the Dot in @-@ game , and dubbed such hidden features Easter eggs , saying they would be adding more such secrets to later games . Wright made it an official policy at Atari that all future games should include Easter eggs , often limited to being the initials of the game developer . 
 The Easter egg text with Warren Robinett 's name was removed from the version on the Atari Classics 10 @-@ in @-@ 1 TV Games standalone gaming unit , replaced with " TEXT ? " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Adventure received mostly positive reviews in the years immediately after its release and has generally been viewed positively in subsequent decades . 
 Bill Kunkel and Frank Laney in the January 1981 issue of Video magazine called Adventure a " major design breakthrough " and said that it " shatters several video @-@ game conventions " such as scoring and time limits . They added that it was " much more ambitious " than average home video games , but noted that the graphics were underwhelming , such as the hero being a simple square . The 1982 book How to Win at Home Video Games called it too unpredictable with an " illogical mission " , concluding that " even devoted strategists may soon tire of Adventure 's excessive trial and error . " Electronic Games in 1983 stated that the game 's " graphics are tame stuff " , but it " still has the power to fascinate " and that " the action adventure concepts introduced in Adventure are still viable today " . 
 Atari Headquarters scored the game 8 of 10 , and noted its historical importance while panning the graphics and sound , concluding that Adventure was " very enjoyable " regardless of its technological shortcomings . 
 Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com wrote in 2010 that Adventure is " a work of interpretive brilliance " that " cleverly extracted the basic elements of exploration , combat and treasure hunting from the text games and converted them into icons " , but also conceded that it " seems almost <unk> basic these days " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Atari 's Adventure yielded sales of one million copies . As the first action @-@ adventure video game and first console fantasy game , Adventure established its namesake genres on video game consoles . In addition to being the first graphical adventure game on the Atari 2600 console , it is the first video game to contain a widely known Easter egg , and the first to allow a player to use multiple , portable , on @-@ screen items . The game is also the first to use a fog of war effect in its catacombs , which obscures most of the playing area except for the player 's immediate surroundings . The game has been voted the best Atari 2600 cartridge in numerous polls , and has been noted as a significant step in the advancement of home video games . GamePro ranked it as the 28th most important video game of all time in 2007 . In 2010 , 1UP.com listed it as one of the most important games ever made in its " The Essential 50 " feature . Entertainment Weekly named Adventure as one of the top 10 games for the Atari 2600 . 
 A sequel to Adventure was first announced in early 1982 . The planned sequel eventually evolved into the <unk> series of games . In 2005 , a sequel written by Curt Vendel was released by Atari on the Atari Flashback 2 system . In 2007 , <unk> released a self @-@ published sequel called Adventure II for the Atari 5200 , which is heavily inspired by the original ; its name is used with permission from Atari Interactive . Robinett himself took the idea of using items from Adventure into his next game , Rocky 's Boots , but added the ability to combine them to form new items . 
 The Adventure Easter egg became a cornerstone of the hunt for the Easter egg hidden in the fictional virtual reality game OASIS in the novel Ready Player One . 
 = = = Ports and re @-@ releases = = = 
 Adventure has been ported to or re @-@ released on several platforms : 
 Atari Classics 10 @-@ in @-@ 1 TV Games ( Standalone hardware unit , 2003 ) 
 Atari : 80 Classic Games in One ( PC , 2003 ) 
 Atari Flashback ( Standalone hardware unit , 2004 ) 
 Atari Anthology ( PlayStation 2 , Xbox , 2004 ) 
 Atari Flashback 2 ( Standalone hardware unit , 2005 ) 
 Game Room ( Xbox 360 , PC , 2010 ) 
 Atari Greatest Hits ( Nintendo DS , iOS , 2010 ) 
 Atari Flashback 3 ( Standalone hardware unit , 2011 ) 
 Atari Flashback 4 ( Standalone hardware unit , 2012 ) 
 Atari Vault ( PC , 2016 ) 
 = Joshua Prawer = 
 Joshua Prawer ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ; November 22 , 1917 – April 30 , 1990 ) was a notable Israeli historian and a scholar of the Crusades and Kingdom of Jerusalem . 
 His work often attempted to portray Crusader society as a forerunner to later European colonialist expansion . He was also an important figure in Israeli higher education , was one of the founders of the University of Haifa and Ben @-@ Gurion University , and was a major reformer of the Israeli education system . 
 = = Life = = 
 Prawer was born on November 10 , 1917 to a prosperous Jewish merchant family in Będzin , a small city in the Polish part of Silesia . He grew up speaking Polish and German , learned Hebrew , French , and Latin at school , and after joining a Zionist group , learned Yiddish as well . He immigrated to Palestine in 1936 , where he learned English , and became a student of mathematics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem . An invitation to study at the university was one of the few legal ways for Jews to enter the British Mandate of Palestine at the time . His mother died at the outbreak of World War II , and most of his family died in the Holocaust . 
 Prawer found that he was unhappy with mathematics , and his father suggested he study history instead since he had always enjoyed history in high school . His professor , Richard Koebner , an Anglophile historian of imperialism , set him on the course of studying the crusader colonies in the Holy Land . The close ties to Koebner were likely to have instilled in Prawer his interest in the history of settlements and colonialization . Prawer began his teaching career at the Hebrew University in 1947 and ( after fighting in the 1948 siege of Jerusalem ) soon rose through the faculty ranks . He became deputy dean of the Faculty of Humanities from 1953 – 55 , was made professor and chair of medieval history in 1958 , was dean of the Faculty of Humanities from 1962 – 66 , and served as <unk> at the university in the years 1975 @-@ 78 . In the process , he succeeded in making the university into a " global center " for Crusade Studies , and trained many future Israeli historians in that specialty . Prawer has been described as an outstanding teacher and lecturer who combined thorough preparation with a charismatic style . He was often invited to lecture abroad . 
 = = = Other roles = = = 
 In addition to his work at the Hebrew University , Joshua Prawer was involved in the creation of other Israeli institutions of higher learning , namely Ben Gurion University of the Negev and especially the University of Haifa , where he was the first dean and academic chairman in the years 1966 @-@ 8 . 
 Prawer was a key contributor to Israeli government policy as well . Between 1957 and 1959 , at the request of David Ben @-@ Gurion , he chaired the <unk> Secretariat of the Education Ministry which was responsible for setting up new norms for Israeli secondary education . He fought against graded fees and for wider free compulsory education , and gave high priority to social integration and the rights of Sephardi students . During that time and as advisor to education minister Zalman <unk> afterwards , he helped draft the principles for teaching " Jewish awareness " that were incorporated into the primary and secondary school curricula . In 1963 @-@ 65 , he chaired a committee of experts bearing his name that recommended a radical reform of the entire Israeli education system . Its suggestions included making preschool enrollment universal for disadvantaged children , shortening elementary school to grades 1 @-@ 6 ; admitting all pupils without tests into integrated junior high schools ( grades 7 @-@ 9 ) , raising the age of free compulsory education to fifteen ( later raised to eighteen ) , establishing two @-@ year and three @-@ year comprehensive schools that provided a choice of tracks towards either a vocational diploma or a matriculation certificate , further integrating students of different skills and social classes , and establishing a new curriculum division in the Ministry of Education and Culture . The plan was approved by the Knesset and government , which allocated substantial resources to it , and the program began to be implemented in the summer of 1968 . 
 Together with Professor H. <unk> , Prawer initiated the <unk> university preparatory programs in 1963 , which were originally intended to provide an additional year of study for Sephardic students after discharge from the defense forces , but were later expanded to include foreign educated students and immigrants . 
 Prawer served as chief editor of the Encyclopaedia <unk> from 1967 onwards , with volume 21 the first to be published under his tenure . He advised and helped shape the Tower of David Museum of the History of Jerusalem , and was asked to advise the government on cultural agreements with other countries . 
 = = = Honors and later life = = = 
 In 1967 , Prawer served as chairman of the Humanities Section of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities , and was elected as Corresponding Fellow of the Medieval Academy of America . 
 In 1969 , he received the Israel Prize in the humanities . 
 In 1969 , he also received an honorary doctorate from the University of Montpellier . 
 In 1974 , Prawer was honored as Visiting Fellow of All Souls College , Oxford , 
 In 1974 , he was also awarded the Rothschild Prize and the Order of the Chevalier de L 'Ordre Nationale du Mérite . 
 In 1982 , he was presented with a festschrift containing papers by twenty @-@ two historians during a special conference in Jerusalem . 
 In 1987 , Prawer and his colleagues hosted the Second International Conference of the Society for the Study of the Crusades and the Latin East . 
 In 1989 , he was honored as a Yakir Yerushalayim ( Distinguished Citizen of Jerusalem ) . 
 In an interview a year before his death , Joshua Prawer said his message for the Jerusalem of today is " that it is a universal city , belonging to all cultures and conquering time . " Prawer died in Jerusalem on April 30 , 1990 . 
 = = Research = = 
 Prawer was part of a cadre of historians , including Claude <unk> and Jean Richard , who freed crusader studies from the old conception of crusader society as an exemplar of pure , unchanging feudalism that spontaneously emerged from the conquest . This view , which originated with feudal jurists in the thirteenth century , was held to by modern historians since the early thirties . Through the work of Prawer , particularly his two papers from the fifties , and his colleagues , crusader society began to be seen as dynamic , with the nobility gradually putting checks on the monarchy . The combined efforts of these historians led to a surge of new research into crusader society . Prawer 's research extended to a wide variety of other aspects of the crusader states . Among the topics he addressed were land development projects and urban settlement , agriculture , the Italian quarters of port cities , the types of landed property , and legal issues in the <unk> des Bourgeois . 
 One of Prawer 's best known works is the Histoire du Royaume Latin de Jérusalem , which won him the Prix Gustave Schlumberger of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles @-@ Lettres . The two @-@ volume work presents the crusader states as a working immigrant society , and shows the importance of immigration and labor shortages . Another book by Prawer , The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem : European Colonialism in the Middle Ages , which was intended for a larger audience , was more controversial . In it , he portrays the crusaders as a society of Frankish immigrants living in complete political and social segregation from the local Muslim and Syro @-@ Christian population , and terms this phenomenon " Apartheid " . To Prawer , it is the settlers ' refusal to assimilate and their reconstruction of a European @-@ type society on foreign soil , as well as the persistence of indigenous institutions without any interference , that mark the Crusader settlement as colonialist . His thesis is that the economy , society , and institutions of the Latin states are best understood in the light of their colonial status . The 1980 book Crusader Institutions collected a number of his earlier publications and expanded upon them with revisions and new chapters . The book continues his treatment of the Kingdom of Jerusalem as a European colonial product but focuses attention on five topical areas , while throughout employing the tools of textual criticism and commentary on sources . Especially prominent is his coverage of the status and administrative role of burgesses , which had not received such attention before . In his last years , he published a book on a topic of especial interest to him , The History of the Jews in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem , which examined the tightly @-@ knit isolated Jewish communities of the Levant , the Jewish philosophical feuds they engaged in , and their dreams of restoring Israel . 
 = = Comparison of Zionism to the Crusades = = 
 An analogy has frequently been drawn between the European Crusades of the Middle Ages and the modern day Zionist movement . This view , which has been espoused by Arab media and political leaders , has also been discussed in Israeli academia . Prawer was often asked to comment on this analogy , and claimed that a major difference was that the Jews settled the land and worked it , whereas the Crusaders lorded over a conquered land worked by the natives . Ronnie <unk> , a lecturer at Hebrew University , identifies a subliminal objective in Prawer 's work to draw a distinction between the two : " He 's always writing about the Crusaders ' manpower shortage and about their not settling the land ... He claims that their presence here was principally urban , consisting of nobility and merchants . This is why they lost in the end . The implications are obvious : If we bring enough immigrants , and if we settle the land , we are bound to succeed . " ( <unk> himself has shown that Crusader settlement in the Holy Land was much more widespread than previously thought and has found evidence of hundreds of Crusader farms . ) But he also notes that " if Joshua Prawer were alive today he would no doubt deny any linkage between his Zionist political beliefs and the model of segregation that he developed . " 
 Ziad J. Asali , who considers Zionism " the heir — albeit illegitimate — of the Crusader movement , " goes further and writes that Prawer " recognized the extent of the similarity in the individual and social experience of Crusaders and Zionists . Rather than studying the comparison and denying its validity , he chose to study the Crusader 's experience as if it were a historical model which could be completely analyzed and dissected in order to benefit from its experience and avoid its mistakes . " To Zionist author Yoram <unk> , however , it is exactly because of Prawer 's readiness to draw the analogy that he considers him a <unk> of Zionism and a progenitor of post @-@ Zionist thought . David <unk> , a professor of history at Ben Gurion University who rejects the Zionist @-@ Crusader analogy , writes that the subject has now become a litmus test for clarifying one 's views on Zionism , with post @-@ Zionists freely making the analogy and sympathizers with the Zionist viewpoint rejecting it . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 ( 1969 – 70 ) . Histoire du <unk> Latin de Jérusalem . Le Monde <unk> . Paris : Éditions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique . 
 ( 1972 ) . The Latin kingdom of Jerusalem : European colonialism in the Middle Ages . London : Weidenfeld and Nicolson . 
 ( 1972 ) . The world of the Crusaders . London : Weidenfeld and Nicolson . 
 ( 1980 ) . Crusader institutions . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 
 ( 1988 ) . The History of the Jews in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 
 = Malpuech facial clefting syndrome = 
 Malpuech facial clefting syndrome , also called Malpuech syndrome or Gypsy type facial clefting syndrome , is a rare congenital syndrome . It is characterized by facial clefting ( any type of cleft in the bones and tissues of the face , including a cleft lip and palate ) , a caudal appendage ( a " human tail " ) , growth deficiency , intellectual and developmental disability , and abnormalities of the renal system ( kidneys ) and the male genitalia . Abnormalities of the heart , and other skeletal malformations may also be present . The syndrome was initially described by <unk> Malpuech and associates in 1983 . It is thought to be genetically related to <unk> @-@ Hayward syndrome . Malpuech syndrome has also been considered as part of a spectrum of congenital genetic disorders associated with similar facial , urogenital and skeletal anomalies . Termed " 3MC syndrome " , this proposed spectrum includes Malpuech , Michels and Mingarelli @-@ Carnevale ( OSA ) syndromes . Mutations in the COLLEC11 and MASP1 genes are believed to be a cause of these syndromes . The incidence of Malpuech syndrome is unknown . The pattern of inheritance is autosomal recessive , which means a defective ( mutated ) gene associated with the syndrome is located on an autosome , and the syndrome occurs when two copies of this defective gene are inherited . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Malpuech syndrome is congenital , being apparent at birth . It is characterized by a feature known as facial clefting . Observed and noted in the initial description of the syndrome as a cleft lip and palate , facial clefting is identified by clefts in the bones , muscles and tissues of the face , including the lips and palate . The forms of cleft lip and palate typically seen with Malpuech syndrome are midline ( down the middle of the lip and palate ) or bilateral ( affecting both sides of the mouth and palate ) . Facial clefting generally encompasses a wide range of severity , ranging from minor anomalies such as a bifid ( split ) uvula , to a cleft lip and palate , to major developmental and structural defects of the facial bones and soft tissues . <unk> of the lip and palate occurs during embryogenesis . Additional facial and ortho @-@ dental anomalies that have been described with the syndrome include : hypertelorism ( unusually wide @-@ set eyes , sometimes reported as <unk> ) , narrow palpebral fissures ( the separation between the upper and lower eyelids ) and ptosis ( drooping ) of the eyelids , frontal bossing ( prominent eyebrow ridge ) with <unk> , highly arched eyebrows , wide nasal root and a flattened nasal tip , malar hypoplasia ( underdeveloped upper cheek bone ) , micrognathia ( an undersized lower jaw ) , and prominent incisors . Auditory anomalies include an enlarged ear ridge , and hearing impairment associated with congenital otitis media ( or " glue ear " , inflammation of the middle ear ) and sensorineural hearing loss . 
 Another feature identified with Malpuech syndrome is a caudal appendage . A caudal appendage is a congenital outgrowth stemming from the coccyx ( tailbone ) . Present in many non @-@ human animal species as a typical tail , this feature when seen in an infant has been described as a " human tail " . This was observed by Guion @-@ Almeida ( 1995 ) in three individuals from Brazil . The appendage on X @-@ rays variously appeared as a prominent protrusion of the coccyx . On a physical examination , the appendage resembles a nodule @-@ like stub of an animal tail . 
 Deficiencies such as mental retardation , learning disability , growth retardation and developmental delay are common . Psychiatric manifestations that have been reported with the syndrome include psychotic behavior , obsessive – compulsive disorder , loss of inhibition , hyperactivity , aggression , fear of physical contact , and compulsive actions like echolalia ( repeating the words spoken by another person ) . Neuromuscular tics have also been noted . 
 <unk> abnormalities , or those affecting the urinary and reproductive systems , are common with the syndrome . Malpuech et al . ( 1983 ) and <unk> @-@ <unk> et al . ( 2005 ) reported variously in affected males a <unk> , hypospadias ( a congenital <unk> of the urinary meatus ) , cryptorchidism ( ectopic or undescended testes ) , bifid ( split ) and underdeveloped scrotum , and an obstructive urethral valve . An affected boy was also reported by Reardon et al . ( 2001 ) with left renal agenesis , an enlarged and <unk> displaced right kidney , cryptorchidism and a shawl scrotum . Other malformations that have been noted with the syndrome are <unk> and an umbilical hernia . 
 Congenital abnormalities of the heart have also been observed with Malpuech syndrome . From a healthy Japanese couple , Chinen and <unk> ( 1995 ) described the sixth child who had features consistent with the disorder . This two @-@ month @-@ old male infant was also affected by cardiac anomalies including patent ductus arteriosus ( PDA ) and ventricular septal defect . The opening in the ductus arteriosus associated with PDA had been surgically repaired in the infant at 38 days of age . A number of minor skeletal aberrations were also reported in the infant , including <unk> bones at the lambdoid sutures . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Malpuech syndrome has been shown to have physical , or phenotypical similarities with several other genetic disorders . A report by Reardon et al . ( 2001 ) of a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy exhibiting facial , caudal and urogenital anomalies consistent with Malpuech syndrome , who also had skeletal <unk> indicative of <unk> @-@ Hayward syndrome , suggests that the two disorders may be allelic ( caused by different mutations of the same gene ) . 
 Along with several other disorders that have similar , or overlapping features and autosomal recessive inheritance , Malpuech syndrome has been considered to belong under the designation " 3MC syndrome " . <unk> et al . ( 2005 ) described a three @-@ year @-@ old female known to have Michels syndrome . In their review of the physical similarities between Michels , Malpuech and Mingarelli @-@ Carnevale syndromes — particularly the facial appearance including instances of cleft lip and palate , and ptosis , and a similarity of congenital abdominal and urogenital anomalies — they believed the syndromes may represent a spectrum of genetic disorders rather than three individual disorders . They initially suggested this spectrum could be named 3MC ( Michels @-@ Malpuech @-@ Mingarelli @-@ Carnevale ) syndrome . This conclusion and the name 3MC syndrome was supported by Leal et al . ( 2008 ) , who reported a brother and sister with an array of symptoms that overlapped the various syndromes . Further assertion of 3MC syndrome was by <unk> et al . ( 2011 ) in an elaboration of its cause . 
 = = Cause and genetics = = 
 Malpuech syndrome , as with the other disorders within the 3MC syndrome consideration , is caused by mutations in the COLLEC11 and MASP1 genes . In an investigation by <unk> et al . ( 2011 ) , eleven families affected by 3MC syndrome were studied , which resulted in the identification of these two mutations . Both genes encode proteins of the lectin complement pathway , which plays a role in the complement system of innate , or non @-@ specific immunity in humans and other species . 
 The COLLEC11 , or CL @-@ K1 gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 2 ( <unk> ) in humans . The CL @-@ K1 protein is a C @-@ type lectin , and belongs to the <unk> family of these proteins . Other than its role in innate immunity , the protein is thought to be involved in the development of tissues including craniofacial cartilage , the heart and kidney during embryogenesis . This function in facial development was corroborated through study of the zebrafish , where mutations in its version of CL @-@ K1 contributed to craniofacial abnormalities possibly associated with errors in neural crest cell migration . 
 The MASP1 , or Mannan @-@ binding Serine Protease I gene is located on the long arm of human chromosome 3 at <unk> @-@ q28 . The protein is a type of <unk> called a mannan @-@ binding lectin , which plays a role in innate immunity by binding to pathogens such as viruses including HIV . 
 As described by <unk> et al . ( 2010 ) , three Turkish individuals from two consanguineous families ( the children of relatives such as cousins are said to be in a consanguineous family ) with various characteristics of 3MC syndrome , including facial <unk> and a caudal appendage , were evaluated . Investigation of homologous chromosomes through gene mapping revealed an <unk> region ( a location on a chromosome where both alleles of a gene originate from a common ancestor ) at chromosome <unk> in both families . In one family , a missense mutation in MASP1 at this location resulted in the replacement of the amino acid glycine by arginine at position 687 in the gene sequence . The mutation <unk> with the observed phenotype . In individuals from the second family , DNA sequencing of MASP1 showed a nonsense mutation that resulted in a deactivation of tryptophan at position 290 in the gene , that also <unk> with the phenotype . Both mutations occur in a form of MASP1 known to process <unk> ; loss of this function associated with mutation of MASP1 causes disruptions in the availability of insulin @-@ like growth factor during craniofacial and musculoskeletal development during the embryonic period . These results indicate that mutations in MASP1 are responsible for an array of features found with malformation disorders including Malpuech syndrome . 
 The syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner . This means the defective gene ( s ) responsible for the disorder ( COLLEC11 , MASP1 ) is located on an autosome ( chromosomes 2 and 3 are autosomes ) , and two copies of the defective gene ( one inherited from each parent ) are required in order to be born with the disorder . The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive disorder both carry one copy of the defective gene , but usually do not experience any signs or symptoms of the disorder . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 It is suggested that the diagnostic criteria for Malpuech syndrome should include cleft lip and / or palate , typical associated facial features , and at least two of the following : urogenital anomalies , caudal appendage , and growth or developmental delay . Due to the relatively high rate of hearing impairment found with the disorder , it too may be considered in the diagnosis . Another congenital disorder , Wolf @-@ Hirschhorn ( Pitt @-@ Rogers @-@ Danks ) syndrome , shares Malpuech features in its diagnostic criteria . Because of this lacking differentiation , karyotyping ( microscopic analysis of the chromosomes of an individual ) can be employed to distinguish the two . Whereas deletions in the short arm of chromosome 4 would be revealed with Wolf @-@ Hirschhorn , a karyotype without this aberration present would favor a Malpuech syndrome diagnosis . Also , the karyotype of an individual with Malpuech syndrome alone will be normal . 
 = = Management = = 
 Many of the congenital malformations found with Malpuech syndrome can be corrected surgically . These include cleft lip and palate , <unk> , urogenital and craniofacial abnormalities , skeletal deformities such as a caudal appendage or scoliosis , and hernias of the <unk> . The primary area of concern for these procedures applied to a neonate with congenital disorders including Malpuech syndrome regards the logistics of anesthesia . Methods like tracheal intubation for management of the airway during general anesthesia can be hampered by the even smaller , or <unk> mouth of the infant . For regional anesthesia , methods like spinal blocking are more difficult where scoliosis is present . In a 2010 report by Kiernan et al . , a four @-@ year @-@ old girl with Malpuech syndrome was being prepared for an unrelated tonsillectomy and <unk> . While undergoing intubation , insertion of a laryngoscope , needed to identify the airway for the placement of the endotracheal tube , was made troublesome by the presence of micrognathia attributed to the syndrome . After replacement with a laryngoscope of adjusted size , intubation proceeded normally . Successful general anesthesia followed . 
 A rare follow @-@ up of a male with Malpuech syndrome was presented by <unk> et al . ( 2007 ) . Born at term from an uneventful pregnancy and delivery , the infant underwent a surgical repair of a cleft lip and palate . No problems were reported with the procedure . A heart abnormality , atrial septal defect , was also apparent but required no intervention . At age three years , mental retardation , hyperactivity and obsessive compulsive disorder were diagnosed ; hearing impairment was diagnosed at age six , managed with the use of hearing aids . Over the course of the decade that followed , a number of psychiatric evaluations were performed . At age 14 , he exhibited a fear of physical contact ; at age 15 , he experienced a severe psychotic episode , characterized by agitation and a loss of <unk> inhibition . This array of symptoms were treated <unk> ( with prescription medications ) . He maintained a low level of mental deficiency by age 17 , with moments of compulsive echolalia . 
 = = Epidemiology and history = = 
 The incidence of Malpuech syndrome has not been determined . A 1999 report by <unk> et al. suggested that only about 12 individuals worldwide were affected by the disorder at that time . The syndrome was first reported by <unk> Malpuech and colleagues in 1983 , observed in four children of unspecified gender in what was described as a gypsy family . The children included three siblings and their first cousin ; the family was known to be highly consanguineous . 
 = Battle of Ceresole = 
 The Battle of Ceresole ( or <unk> ) was an encounter between a French army and the combined forces of the Holy Roman Empire and Spain during the Italian War of 1542 – 46 . The lengthy engagement took place on 11 April 1544 , outside the village of Ceresole d <unk> in the Piedmont region of Italy ; the French , under François de Bourbon , Count of Enghien , defeated the Imperial @-@ Spanish army of Alfonso d 'Avalos d <unk> , Marquis del Vasto . Despite having inflicted substantial casualties on the Imperial troops , the French subsequently failed to exploit their victory by taking Milan . 
 Enghien and d 'Avalos had arranged their armies along two parallel ridges ; because of the topography of the battlefield , many of the individual actions of the battle were uncoordinated with one another . The battle opened with several hours of skirmishing between opposing bands of arquebusiers and an ineffectual artillery exchange , after which d 'Avalos ordered a general advance . In the center , Imperial landsknechts clashed with French and Swiss infantry , with both sides suffering terrific casualties . In the southern part of the battlefield , Italian infantry in Imperial service were harried by French cavalry attacks and withdrew after learning that the Imperial troops of the center had been defeated . In the north , meanwhile , the French infantry line crumbled , and Enghien led a series of ineffectual and costly cavalry charges against Spanish and German infantry before the latter were forced to surrender by the arrival of the victorious Swiss and French infantry from the center . 
 Ceresole was one of the few pitched battles during the latter half of the Italian Wars . Known among military historians chiefly for the " great slaughter " that occurred when columns of intermingled arquebusiers and pikemen met in the center , it also demonstrates the continuing role of traditional heavy cavalry on a battlefield largely dominated by the emerging pike and shot infantry . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The opening of the war in northern Italy had been marked by the fall of Nice to a combined Franco @-@ Ottoman army in August 1543 ; meanwhile , Imperial @-@ Spanish forces had advanced from Lombardy towards Turin , which had been left in French hands at the end of the previous war in 1538 . By the winter of 1543 – 44 , a stalemate had developed in the Piedmont between the French , under the Sieur de Boutières , and the Imperial army , under d 'Avalos . The French position , centered on Turin , reached outward to a series of fortified towns : <unk> , Carmagnola , <unk> , Susa , Moncalieri , Villanova , <unk> , and a number of others ; d 'Avalos , meanwhile , controlled a group of fortresses on the periphery of the French territory : Mondovì , Asti , Casale Monferrato , Vercelli , and Ivrea . The two armies occupied themselves primarily with attacking each other 's outlying strongholds . Boutières seized San Germano <unk> , near Vercelli , and laid siege to Ivrea ; d 'Avalos , meanwhile , captured Carignano , only fifteen miles south of Turin , and proceeded to garrison and fortify it . 
 As the two armies returned to winter quarters , Francis I of France replaced Boutières with François de Vendôme , Count of Enghien , a prince with no experience commanding an army . Francis also sent additional troops to the Piedmont , including several hundred heavy cavalry , some companies of French infantry from Dauphiné and Languedoc , and a force of quasi @-@ Swiss from Gruyères . In January 1544 , Enghien laid siege to Carignano , which was defended by Imperial troops under the command of Pirro Colonna . The French were of the opinion that d 'Avalos would be forced to attempt a relief of the besieged city , at which point he could be forced into a battle ; but as such pitched battles were viewed as very risky undertakings , Enghien sent Blaise de <unk> @-@ <unk> , seigneur de Montluc , to Paris to ask Francis for permission to fight one . Montluc apparently convinced Francis to give his assent — contingent on the agreement of Enghien 's captains — over the objections of the Comte de St. Pol , who complained that a defeat would leave France exposed to an invasion by d 'Avalos 's troops at a time when Charles V and Henry VIII of England were expected to attack Picardy . Montluc , returning to Italy , brought with him nearly a hundred volunteers from among the young noblemen of the court , including the young Gaspard de Coligny . 
 D 'Avalos , having waited for the arrival a large body of landsknechts dispatched by Holy Roman Emperor Charles V , set off from Asti towards Carignano . His total force included 12 @,@ 500 – 18 @,@ 000 infantry , of which perhaps 4 @,@ 000 were arquebusiers or musketeers ; he was only able to gather about 800 – 1 @,@ 000 cavalry , of which less than 200 were gendarmes . D 'Avalos recognized the relative weakness of his cavalry , but considered it to be compensated by the experience of his infantry and the large number of arquebusiers in its ranks . 
 Enghien , having learned of the Imperial advance , left a blocking force at Carignano and assembled the remainder of his army at Carmagnola , blocking d 'Avalos 's route to the besieged city . The French cavalry , shadowing d 'Avalos 's movements , discovered that the Imperial forces were headed directly for the French position ; on 10 April , d 'Avalos occupied the village of Ceresole d <unk> , about five miles ( 8 km ) southeast of the French . Enghien 's officers urged him to attack immediately , but he was determined to fight on ground of his own choosing ; on the morning of 11 April 1544 , the French marched from Carmagnola to a position some three miles ( 5 km ) to the southeast and awaited d 'Avalos 's arrival . Enghien and Montluc felt that the open ground would give the French cavalry a significant tactical advantage . By this point , the French army consisted of around 11 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 infantry , 600 light cavalry , and 900 – 1 @,@ 250 heavy cavalry ; Enghien and d 'Avalos each had about twenty pieces of artillery . The battle came at a fortunate time for Enghien , as his Swiss troops were — as they had before the Battle of Bicocca — threatening to march home if they were not paid ; the news of the impending battle restored some calm to their ranks . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Dispositions = = = 
 Enghien 's troops were positioned along the crest of a ridge that was higher in the center than on either side , preventing the wings of the French army from seeing each other . The French army was divided into the traditional " battle " , " <unk> " , and " rearward " corps , corresponding to the center and right and left wings of the French line . On the far right of the French position was a body of light cavalry , consisting of three companies under Des Thermes , <unk> , and <unk> , with a total strength of around 450 – 500 men . To their left was the French infantry under De Tais , numbering around 4 @,@ 000 , and , farther to the left , a squadron of 80 gendarmes under Boutières , who was nominally the commander of the entire French right wing . The center of the French line was formed by thirteen companies of veteran Swiss , numbering about 4 @,@ 000 , under the joint command of William <unk> of <unk> and a captain named St. Julian . To their left was Enghien himself with three companies of heavy cavalry , a company of light horse , and the volunteers from Paris — in total , around 450 troopers . The left wing was composed of two columns of infantry , consisting of 3 @,@ 000 of the recruits from Gruyères and 2 @,@ 000 Italians , all under the command of Sieur <unk> . On the extreme left of the line were about 400 mounted archers deployed as light cavalry ; they were commanded by Dampierre , who was also given command of the entire French left wing . 
 The Imperial line formed up on a similar ridge facing the French position . On the far left , facing Des Thermes , were 300 Florentine light cavalry under Rodolfo Baglioni ; flanking them to the right were 6 @,@ 000 Italian infantry under Ferrante Sanseverino , Prince of Salerno . In the center were the 7 @,@ 000 landsknechts under the command of <unk> Madruzzo . To their right was d 'Avalos himself , together with the small force of about 200 heavy cavalry under Carlo Gonzaga . The Imperial right wing was composed of around 5 @,@ 000 German and Spanish infantry under Ramón de Cardona ; they were flanked , on the far right , by 300 Italian light cavalry under Philip de Lannoy , Prince of Sulmona . 
 = = = Initial moves = = = 
 As d 'Avalos 's troops , marching from Ceresole , began to arrive on the battlefield , both armies attempted to conceal their numbers and position from the other ; Enghien had ordered the Swiss to lie on the ground behind the crest of the ridge , while only the left wing of the Imperial army was initially visible to the French . D 'Avalos sent out parties of arquebusiers in an attempt to locate the French flanks ; Enghien , in turn , detached about 800 arquebusiers under Montluc to delay the Imperial advance . The skirmishing between the arquebusiers continued for almost four hours ; Martin Du Bellay , observing the engagement , described it as " a pretty sight for anyone who was in a safe place and unemployed , for they played off on each other all the ruses and stratagems of petty war . " As the extent of each army 's position was revealed , Enghien and d 'Avalos both brought up their artillery . The ensuing cannonade continued for several hours , but had little effect because of the distance and the considerable cover available to the troops on both sides . 
 The skirmishing finally came to an end when it seemed that Imperial cavalry would attack the French arquebusiers in the flank ; Montluc then requested assistance from Des Thermes , who advanced with his entire force of light cavalry . D 'Avalos , observing the French movement , ordered a general advance along the entire Imperial line . At the southern end of the battlefield , the French light cavalry drove Baglioni 's Florentines back into Sanseverino 's advancing infantry , and then proceeded to charge directly into the infantry column . The Italian formation held , and Des Thermes himself was wounded and captured ; but by the time Sanseverino had dealt with the resulting disorder and was ready to advance again , the fight in the center had already been decided . 
 = = = " A wholesale slaughter " = = = 
 The French infantry — mostly Gascons — had meanwhile started down the slope towards Sanseverino . Montluc , noting that the disorder of the Italians had forced them to a standstill , suggested that De Tais attack Madruzzo 's advancing column of landsknechts instead ; this advice was accepted , and the French formation turned left in an attempt to strike the landsknechts in the flank . Madruzzo responded by splitting his column into two separate portions , one of which moved to intercept the French while the other continued up the slope towards the Swiss waiting at the crest . 
 The pike and shot infantry had by this time adopted a system in which arquebusiers and pikemen were intermingled in combined units ; both the French and the Imperial infantry contained men with firearms interspersed in the larger columns of pikemen . This combination of pikes and small arms made close @-@ quarters fighting extremely bloody . The mixed infantry was normally placed in separate clusters , with the arquebusiers on the flanks of a central column of pikemen ; at Ceresole , however , the French infantry had been arranged with the first rank of pikemen followed immediately by a rank of arquebusiers , who were ordered to hold their fire until the two columns met . Montluc , who claimed to have devised the scheme , wrote that : 
 In this way we should kill all their captains in the front rank . But we found that they were as ingenious as ourselves , for behind their first line of pikes they had put <unk> . Neither side fired till we were touching — and then there was a wholesale slaughter : every shot told : the whole front rank on each side went down . 
 The Swiss , seeing the French engage one of the two columns of landsknechts , finally descended to meet the other , which had been slowly moving up the hillside . Both masses of infantry remained locked in a push of pike until the squadron of heavy cavalry under Boutières charged into the landsknechts ' flank , shattering their formation and driving them down the slope . The Imperial heavy cavalry , which had been on the landsknechts ' right , and which had been ordered by d 'Avalos to attack the Swiss , recoiled from the pikes and fled to the rear , leaving Carlo Gonzaga to be taken prisoner . 
 The Swiss and Gascon infantry proceeded to slaughter the remaining landsknechts — whose tight order precluded a rapid retreat — as they attempted to withdraw from the battlefield . The road to Ceresole was littered with corpses ; the Swiss , in particular , showed no mercy , as they wished to avenge the mistreatment of the Swiss garrison of Mondovì the previous November . Most of the landsknechts ' officers were killed ; and while contemporary accounts probably exaggerate the numbers of the dead , it is clear that the German infantry had ceased to exist as a fighting force . Seeing this , Sanseverino decided that the battle was lost and marched away to Asti with the bulk of the Italian infantry and the remnants of Baglioni 's Florentine cavalry ; the French light cavalry , meanwhile , joined in the pursuit of the landsknechts . 
 = = = Engagements in the north = = = 
 On the northern end of the battlefield , events had unfolded quite differently . Dampierre 's cavalry routed Lannoy 's company of light horse ; the Italians and the contingent from Gruyères , meanwhile , broke and fled — leaving their officers to be killed — without offering any real resistance to the advancing Imperial infantry . As Cardona 's infantry moved past the original French line , Enghien descended on it with the entire body of heavy cavalry under his command ; the subsequent engagement took place on the reverse slope of the ridge , out of sight of the rest of the battlefield . 
 On the first charge , Enghien 's cavalry penetrated a corner of the Imperial formation , pushing through to the rear and losing some of the volunteers from Paris . As Cardona 's ranks closed again , the French cavalry turned and made a second charge under heavy arquebus fire ; this was far more costly , and again failed to break the Imperial column . Enghien , now joined by Dampierre 's light cavalry , made a third charge , which again failed to achieve a decisive result ; fewer than a hundred of the French gendarmes remained afterwards . Enghien believed the battle to be lost — according to Montluc , he intended to stab himself , " which ancient Romans might do , but not good Christians " — when St. Julian , the Swiss commander , arrived from the center of the battlefield and reported that the Imperial forces there had been routed . 
 The news of the landsknechts ' defeat reached Cardona 's troops at about the same time that it had reached Enghien ; the Imperial column turned and retreated back towards its original position . Enghien followed closely with the remainder of his cavalry ; he was soon reinforced by a company of Italian mounted arquebusiers , which had been stationed at <unk> and had started towards the battlefield after hearing the initial artillery exchange . These arquebusiers , dismounting to fire and then remounting , were able to harass the Imperial column sufficiently to slow its retreat . Meanwhile , the French and Swiss infantry of the center , having reached Ceresole , had turned about and returned to the battlefield ; Montluc , who was with them , writes : 
 When we heard at Ceresole that M. d 'Enghien wanted us , both the Swiss and we Gascons turned toward him — I never saw two battalions form up so quick — we got into rank again actually as we ran along , side by side . The enemy was going off at quick march , firing salvos of arquebuses , and keeping off our horse , when we saw them . And when they descried us only 400 paces away , and our cavalry making ready to charge , they threw down their pikes and surrendered to the horsemen . You might see fifteen or twenty of them round a man @-@ at @-@ arms , pressing about him and asking for quarter , for fear of us of the infantry , who were wanting to cut all their throats . 
 Perhaps as many as half of the Imperial infantry were killed as they were attempting to surrender ; the remainder , about 3 @,@ 150 men , were taken prisoner . A few , including the Baron of <unk> , who had commanded the German infantry contingents , managed to escape . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The casualties of the battle were unusually high , even by the standards of the time , and are estimated at 28 percent of the total number of troops engaged . The smallest numbers given for the Imperial dead in contemporary accounts are between 5 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 , although some French sources give figures as high as 12 @,@ 000 . A large number of officers were killed , particularly among the landsknechts ; many of those who survived were taken prisoner , including Ramón de Cardona , Carlo Gonzaga , and <unk> Madruzzo . The French casualties were smaller , but numbered at least 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 killed . These included many of the officers of the Gascon and Gruyères infantry contingents , as well as a large portion of the gendarmerie that had followed Enghien . The only French prisoner of note was Des Thermes , who had been carried along with Sanseverino 's retreating Italians . 
 Despite the collapse of the Imperial army , the battle proved to be of little strategic significance . At the insistence of Francis I , the French army resumed the siege of Carignano , where Colonna held out for several weeks . Soon after the city 's surrender , Enghien was forced to send twenty @-@ three companies of Italian and Gascon infantry — and nearly half his heavy cavalry — to Picardy , which had been invaded by Charles V. Left without a real army , Enghien was unable to capture Milan . D 'Avalos , meanwhile , routed a fresh force of Italian infantry under Pietro Strozzi and the Count of Pitigliano at the Battle of Serravalle . The end of the war saw a return to the status quo in northern Italy . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 A number of detailed contemporary accounts of the battle have survived . Among the French chronicles are the narratives of Martin Du Bellay and Blaise de Montluc , both of whom were present at the scene . The Sieur de <unk> , who accompanied Enghien , also makes some mention of the events in his memoirs . The most extensive account from the Imperial side is that of Paolo Giovio . Despite a number of inconsistencies with other accounts , it provides , according to historian Charles Oman , " valuable notes on points neglected by all the French narrators " . 
 The interest of modern military historians in the battle has centered primarily on the role of small arms and the resulting carnage among the infantry in the center . The arrangement of pikemen and arquebusiers used was regarded as too costly , and was not tried again ; in subsequent battles , arquebuses were used primarily for skirmishing and from the flanks of larger formations of pikemen . Ceresole is also of interest as a demonstration of the continuing role of traditional heavy cavalry on the battlefield . Despite the failure of Enghien 's charges — the French , according to Bert Hall , held to their belief in " the effectiveness of unaided heavy cavalry to break disciplined formations " — a small body of gendarmes had been sufficient , in the center , to rout infantry columns that were already engaged with other infantry . Beyond this tactical utility , another reason for cavalry 's continued importance is evident from the final episode of the battle : the French gendarmes were the only troops who could reasonably be expected to accept an opponent 's surrender , as the Swiss and French infantry had no inclination towards taking prisoners . The cavalry was , according to Hall , " almost intuitively expected to heed these entreaties without question " . 
 = Surface weather observation = 
 Surface weather observations are the fundamental data used for safety as well as climatological reasons to forecast weather and issue warnings worldwide . They can be taken manually , by a weather observer , by computer through the use of automated weather stations , or in a hybrid scheme using weather observers to augment the otherwise automated weather station . The ICAO defines the International Standard Atmosphere ( ISA ) , which is the model of the standard variation of pressure , temperature , density , and viscosity with altitude in the Earth 's atmosphere , and is used to reduce a station pressure to sea level pressure . Airport observations can be transmitted worldwide through the use of the METAR observing code . Personal weather stations taking automated observations can transmit their data to the United States <unk> through the Citizen Weather Observer Program ( <unk> ) , the UK Met Office through their Weather Observations Website ( WOW ) , or internationally through the Weather Underground Internet site . A thirty @-@ year average of a location 's weather observations is traditionally used to determine the station 's climate . 
 = = Airports = = 
 Surface weather observations have traditionally been taken at airports due to safety concerns during takeoffs and landings . The ICAO defines the International Standard Atmosphere ( also known as ICAO Standard Atmosphere ) , which is the model of the standard variation of pressure , temperature , density , and viscosity with elevation / altitude in the Earth 's atmosphere . This is useful in calibrating instruments and designing aircraft , and is used to reduce a station 's pressure to sea level pressure ( SLP ) where it can then be used on weather maps . 
 In the United States , the FAA mandates the taking of weather observations at larger airports for safety reasons . To help facilitate the purchase of an automated airport weather station , such as ASOS , the FAA allows federal dollars to be used for the installation of certified weather stations at airports . The airport observations are then transmitted worldwide using the METAR observing code . METAR reports typically come from airports or permanent weather observation stations . Reports are generated once an hour ; however , if conditions change significantly , they may be updated in special reports called <unk> . 
 = = Data Reported = = 
 Surface weather observations can include the following elements : 
 The Station Identifier , or Location identifier , consists of four characters for METAR observations , with the first representing the region of the world the station lies within . For example , the first letter for areas in and around the Pacific ocean is P , and for Europe is E. The second character may represent the country / state the location lies within . For Hawaii , the first two letters are " PH " while for Great Britain , the first two letters of the station identifier are " EG " . Canada and the contiguous United States are an exception , with the first letters C and K representing the regions , respectively . The final two or three letters normally represent the name of the location or airport . 
 Visibility , measured in meters for most sites worldwide , except in the United States where statute miles are reported . 
 Runway visibility , measured in meters in many locations worldwide , or feet within the United States . 
 Temperature is a measure of the kinetic energy of a sample of matter . Temperature is the unique physical property that determines the direction of heat flow between two objects placed in thermal contact . If no heat flow occurs , the two objects have the same temperature ; otherwise heat flows from the hotter object to the colder object . Temperature , within meteorology , is measured with thermometers exposed to the air but sheltered from direct solar exposure . In most of the world , the degree Celsius scale is used for most temperature measuring purposes . However , the United States is the last major country in which the degree Fahrenheit temperature scale is used by most lay people , industry , popular meteorology , and government . Despite this , METAR reports from the United States also report the temperature ( and dewpoint , see below ) in degrees Celsius . 
 Dew point is the temperature to which a given parcel of air must be cooled , at constant atmospheric pressure , for water vapor to condense into water . The condensed water is called dew . The dew point is a saturation point . When the dew point temperature falls below freezing it is called the frost point , as the water vapor no longer creates dew but instead creates frost or <unk> by deposition . The dew point is associated with relative humidity . A high relative humidity indicates that the dew point is closer to the current air temperature . If the relative humidity is 100 % , the dew point is equal to the current temperature . Given a constant dew point , an increase in temperature will lead to a decrease in relative humidity . At a given barometric pressure , independent of temperature , the dew point determines the specific humidity of the air . The dew point is an important statistic for general aviation pilots , as it is used to calculate the likelihood of carburetor icing and fog . When used with the air temperature , a formula can be used to estimate the height of cumuliform , or convective , clouds . 
 Wind is determined using anemometers and wind vanes , or <unk> , located a standard 10 metres ( 33 ft ) above ground level ( AGL ) . Average wind speed is measured using a two @-@ minute average in the United States , and a 10 @-@ minute average elsewhere . Wind direction is measured using degrees , with north representing 0 or 360 degrees , with values increasing from 0 clockwise from north . Wind gusts are reported when there is variation of the wind speed of more than 10 knots ( 5 @.@ 1 m / s ) between peaks and lulls during the sampling period . 
 Sea level pressure ( SLP ) is the pressure at sea level or ( when measured at a given elevation on land ) the station pressure reduced to sea level assuming an isothermal layer at the station temperature . This is the pressure normally given in weather reports on radio , television , and newspapers or on the Internet . When barometers in the home are set to match the local weather reports , they measure pressure reduced to sea level , not the actual local atmospheric pressure . The reduction to sea level means that the normal range of fluctuations in pressure is the same for everyone . The pressures which are considered high pressure or low pressure do not depend on geographical location . This makes isobars on a weather map meaningful and useful tools . 
 Altimeter setting is a term and quantity used in aviation . The regional or local air pressure at mean sea level is called the altimeter setting , and the pressure which will calibrate the altimeter to show the height above ground at a given QNH airfield . 
 Present weather , which present restrictions to visibility or presence of thunder or squalls , are reported in observations to indicate to aviation any possible threats during landings and takeoffs from airports . Types included in surface weather observations include precipitation , obscurations , other weather phenomena such as , well @-@ developed dust / sand whirls , squalls , tornadic activity , sandstorms , volcanic ash , and dust storms . 
 Intensity of precipitation is primarily measured for meteorological concerns . However , it can be of concern to aviation as heavy precipitation can limit visibility . Also , intensity of freezing rain can determine how hazardous it is for pilots to fly nearby certain locations since it can be an in @-@ flight hazard by depositing ice on the wings of aircraft , which can be detrimental to flight . 
 Precipitation amount over the past 1 , 3 , 6 or 24 hours is of particular interest to meteorologists in verifying forecast amounts of precipitation and determining station <unk> . 
 Snowfall amount during the past 6 hours is taken for meteorological and climatological concerns . However , it may also be reported hourly using " <unk> " remarks to provide air field technicians information on how frequently snow must be plowed from runways and taxiways . 
 Snow depth is measured for meteorological and climatological concerns once a day . However , during periods of snowfall , it is measured each six hours to determine amount of recent snowfall . 
 = = = Example of a METAR surface weather observation = = = 
 METAR <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 1400 <unk> / <unk> <unk> / <unk> + SN <unk> <unk> <unk> / <unk> <unk> <unk> 9949 / / 91 = 
 Personal weather stations , maintained by citizens rather than government officials , do not use METAR code . Software allows information to be transmitted to various sites , such as the Weather Underground globally , or the <unk> within the United States , which can then be used by the appropriate meteorological organizations either to diagnose real @-@ time conditions , or be used within weather forecast models . 
 = = Use of weather maps = = 
 Data collected by land locations coding in METAR are conveyed worldwide via phone lines or wireless technology . Within many nations ' meteorological organizations , this data is then plotted onto a weather map using the station model . A station model is a symbolic illustration showing the weather occurring at a given reporting station . Meteorologists created the station model to plot a number of weather elements in a small space on weather maps . Maps filled with dense station @-@ model plots can be difficult to read , but they allow meteorologists , pilots , and mariners to see important weather patterns . 
 Weather maps are used to display information quickly showing the analysis of various meteorological quantities at various levels of the atmosphere , in this case the surface layer . Maps containing station models aid in the drawing of isotherms , which more readily identifies temperature gradients , and can help in the location of weather fronts . Two @-@ dimensional streamlines based on wind speeds show areas of convergence and divergence in the wind field , which are helpful in determining the location of features within the wind pattern . A popular type of surface weather map is the surface weather analysis , which plots isobars to depict areas of high pressure and low pressure . 
 = = Ship and buoy reports = = 
 For over a century , reports from the world 's oceans have been received real @-@ time for safety reasons and to help with general weather forecasting . The reports are coded using the synoptic code , and relayed via radio or satellite to weather organizations worldwide . Buoy reports are automated , and maintained by the country that moored the buoy in that location . Larger moored buoys are used near shore , while smaller drifting buoys are used farther out at sea . 
 Due to the importance of reports from the surface of the ocean , the voluntary observing ship program , known as VOS , was set up to train crews how to take weather observations while at sea and also to calibrate weather sensors used aboard ships when they arrive in port , such as barometers and thermometers . The Beaufort scale is still generally used to determine wind speed from manual observers out at sea . Ships with anemometers have issues with determining wind speeds at higher wind speeds due to blockage of the instruments by increasing high seas . 
 = = Use in establishing climate of a location = = 
 Climate , ( from Ancient Greek <unk> ) is commonly defined as the weather averaged over a long period of time . The standard averaging period is 30 years for an individual location , but other periods may be used . Climate includes statistics other than the average , such as the magnitudes of day @-@ to @-@ day or year @-@ to @-@ year variations . The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) glossary definition is : 
 Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the “ average weather ” , or more rigorously , as the statistical description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions of years . The classical period is 30 years , as defined by the World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) . These quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature , precipitation , and wind . Climate in a wider sense is the state , including a statistical description , of the climate system . 
 The main difference between climate and everyday weather is best summarized by the popular phrase " Climate is what you expect , weather is what you get . " Over historic time spans there are a number of static variables that determine climate , including : latitude , altitude , proportion of land to water , and proximity to oceans and mountains . Degree of vegetation coverage affects solar heat absorption , water retention , and rainfall on a regional level . 
 = Steve Irwin = 
 Stephen Robert " Steve " Irwin ( 22 February 1962 – 4 September 2006 ) , nicknamed " The Crocodile Hunter " , was an Australian wildlife expert , television personality , and conservationist . Irwin achieved worldwide fame from the television series The Crocodile Hunter , an internationally broadcast wildlife documentary series which he co @-@ hosted with his wife Terri . Together , the couple also owned and operated Australia Zoo , founded by Irwin 's parents in <unk> , about 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) north of the Queensland state capital city of Brisbane . 
 Irwin died on 4 September 2006 after being pierced in the chest by a stingray barb while filming an underwater documentary film titled Ocean 's Deadliest . The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society ship MY Steve Irwin was named in his honour . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Irwin was born on his mother 's birthday to Lyn and Bob Irwin in Essendon , a suburb of Melbourne , Victoria . He is of Irish descent on his father 's side . He moved with his parents as a child to Queensland in 1970 , where he attended Landsborough State School and Caloundra State High School . Irwin described his father as a wildlife expert interested in herpetology , while his mother Lyn was a wildlife <unk> . After moving to Queensland , Bob and Lyn Irwin started the small Queensland Reptile and Fauna Park , where Steve grew up around crocodiles and other reptiles . 
 Irwin became involved with the park in a number of ways , including taking part in daily animal feeding , as well as care and maintenance activities . On his sixth birthday , he was given a 12 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) scrub python . He began handling crocodiles at the age of nine after his father had educated him on reptiles from an early age . Also at age nine , he wrestled his first crocodile , again under his father 's supervision . He worked as a volunteer for Queensland 's East Coast Crocodile Management program and captured over 100 crocodiles , some of which were relocated , while others were housed at the family park . Irwin took over the management of the park in 1991 and renamed it Australia Zoo in 1992 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In 1991 , Irwin met Terri Raines , an American naturalist from Eugene , Oregon , who was visiting wildlife rehabilitation facilities in Australia and had decided to visit the zoo . According to the couple , it was love at first sight . Terri said at the time , " I thought there was no one like this anywhere in the world . He sounded like an environmental Tarzan , a larger @-@ than @-@ life superhero guy . " They were engaged four months later and were married in Eugene on 4 June 1992 . Together they had two children : a daughter , Bindi Sue Irwin ( born 24 July 1998 ) , and a son , Robert Clarence " Bob " ( named after Irwin 's father ) Irwin ( born 1 December 2003 ) . Bindi Sue is jointly named after two of Steve Irwin 's favourite animals : Bindi , a saltwater crocodile , and Sui , a Staffordshire Bull Terrier who died on 23 June 2004 . Irwin was as enthusiastic about his family as he was about his work . He once described his daughter Bindi as " the reason [ he ] was put on the Earth . " His wife once said , " The only thing that could ever keep him away from the animals he loves are the people he loves even more . " Although the <unk> were happily married , they did not wear wedding rings ; they believed that in their line of work , wearing jewellery could pose a hazard to them and / or the animals . 
 = = = The Crocodile Hunter and related work = = = 
 Steve and Terri spent their honeymoon trapping crocodiles together . Film footage of their honeymoon , taken by John Stainton , became the first episode of The Crocodile Hunter . The series debuted on Australian TV screens in 1996 , and made its way onto North American television the following year . The Crocodile Hunter became successful in the United States , the UK , and over 130 other countries , reaching 500 million people . Irwin 's exuberant and enthusiastic presenting style , broad Australian accent , signature khaki shorts , and catchphrase " Crikey ! " became known worldwide . Sir David Attenborough praised Irwin for introducing many to the natural world , saying " He taught them how wonderful and exciting it was , he was a born communicator . " 
 American satellite and cable television channel Animal Planet ended The Crocodile Hunter with a series finale titled " Steve 's Last Adventure . " The last Crocodile Hunter documentary spanned three hours with footage of Irwin 's across @-@ the @-@ world adventure in locations including the Himalayas , the Yangtze River , Borneo , and the Kruger National Park . Irwin went on to star in other Animal Planet documentaries , including Croc Files , The Crocodile Hunter Diaries , and New Breed Vets . During a January 2006 interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , Irwin announced that Discovery Kids would be developing a show for his daughter , Bindi Sue Irwin – a plan realised after his death as the series Bindi the Jungle Girl . 
 = = = Other television and film work = = = 
 In 1998 , Irwin continued , working with director Mark Strickson , to present The Ten Deadliest Snakes in the World . He appeared on several episodes of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . A 2000 FedEx commercial with Irwin lightheartedly dealt with the possibility of occupational death from snakebite and the fanciful notion that FedEx would have saved him , if only FedEx were used . 
 Under Irwin 's leadership , the operations grew to include the zoo , the television series , the Steve Irwin Conservation Foundation ( later renamed Wildlife Warriors ) , and the International Crocodile Rescue . Improvements to the Australia Zoo include the Animal Planet Crocoseum , the rainforest aviary and Tiger Temple . Irwin mentioned that he was considering opening an Australia Zoo in Las Vegas , Nevada , and possibly at other sites around the world . 
 In 2001 , Irwin appeared in a cameo role in the Eddie Murphy film Dr. Dolittle 2 , in which an alligator warns Dolittle that he knows Irwin is going to grab him and is prepared to attack when he does , but Dolittle fails to warn Irwin in time . Irwin 's only starring feature film role was in 2002 's The Crocodile Hunter : Collision Course , which was released to mixed reviews . In the film Irwin ( who portrayed himself and performed numerous stunts ) mistakes some CIA agents for poachers . He sets out to stop them from capturing a crocodile , which , unknown to him , has actually swallowed a tracking transmitter . The film won the Best Family Feature Film award for a comedy film at the Young Artist Awards . The film was produced on a budget of about US $ 12 million , and has grossed $ 33 million . To promote the film , Irwin was featured in an animated short produced by Animax Entertainment for <unk> . 
 In 2002 , Irwin and his family appeared in the Wiggles video / DVD release Wiggly Safari , which was set in Australia Zoo and featured singing and dancing inspired by Australian wildlife . 
 In 2003 , Irwin fronted an advertising campaign for The Ghan , a passenger train operating between Adelaide , Alice Springs , and Darwin . A Pacific National NR class locomotive was named Steve Irwin as part of the campaign . 
 In 2005 , Irwin provided his voice for the 2006 animated film Happy Feet , as an elephant seal named Trev . The film was dedicated to Irwin , as he died during post @-@ production . Another , previously incomplete scene , featuring Irwin providing the voice of an albatross and essentially playing himself , was restored to the DVD release . 
 = = = Media campaigns = = = 
 Irwin was also involved in several media campaigns . He enthusiastically joined with the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service to promote Australia 's strict quarantine / customs requirements , with advertisements and posters featuring slogans such as , " Quarantine Matters ! Don 't muck with it " . His payments for these advertising campaigns were directed into his wildlife fund . 
 In 2004 , Irwin was appointed ambassador for The Ghan , the passenger train running from Adelaide to Alice Springs in the central Australian outback , when the line was extended all the way to Darwin on the northern coast that year . For some time he was sponsored by Toyota . 
 Irwin was a keen promoter for Australian tourism in general and Queensland tourism in particular . In 2002 , the Australia Zoo was voted Queensland 's top tourist attraction . His immense popularity in the United States meant he often promoted Australia as a tourist destination there . As a part of the United States ' " Australia Week " celebrations in January 2006 , Irwin appeared at UCLA 's Pauley Pavilion in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = = Search and rescue in Mexico = = = 
 In November 2003 , Irwin was filming a documentary on sea lions off the coast of Baja California Peninsula in Mexico when he heard via his boat 's radio that two scuba divers were reported missing in the area . Irwin and his entire crew suspended operations to aid in the search . His team 's divers searched with the rescue divers , and Irwin used his vessel to patrol the waters around the island where the incident occurred , as well as using his satellite communications system to call in a rescue plane . On the second day of the search , kayakers found one of the divers , Scott Jones , perched on a narrow rock ledge jutting out from the side of a cliff . Irwin and a crew member escorted him to Irwin 's boat . Jones did not recognise Irwin . The other lost diver , Katie <unk> , was found dead by a search plane later the same day not far from Jones ' location . 
 = = Honours = = 
 In 1997 , while on a fishing trip on the coast of Queensland with his father , Irwin discovered a new species of turtle . Later given the honour of naming the newly discovered species , he named it Irwin 's turtle ( <unk> <unk> ) after his family . Another newly discovered Australian animal – a species of air @-@ breathing land snail , Crikey <unk> , was named after Irwin in 2009 . 
 In 2001 , Irwin was awarded the Centenary Medal by the Australian government for his " service to global conservation and to Australian tourism " . In 2004 , he was recognised as Tourism Export of the Year . He was also nominated in 2004 for Australian of the Year – an honour which was won that year by Australian cricket captain Steve Waugh . Shortly before his death , Irwin was to be named an adjunct professor at the University of Queensland 's School of Integrative Biology . On 14 November 2007 , Irwin was awarded the adjunct professorship posthumously . 
 In May 2007 , the government of Rwanda announced that it would name a baby gorilla after Irwin as a tribute to his work in wildlife conservation . Also in 2007 , the state government of Kerala , India named the Crocodile Rehabilitation and Research Centre at <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary in his honour ; however , Terri objected that this action had been taken without her permission and asked the Kerala government in 2009 to stop using Irwin 's name and images – a request which the state government complied with in mid @-@ 2009 . 
 = = Environmentalism = = 
 Irwin was a passionate conservationist and believed in promoting environmentalism by sharing his excitement about the natural world rather than preaching to people . He was concerned with conservation of endangered animals and land clearing leading to loss of habitat . He considered conservation to be the most important part of his work : " I consider myself a wildlife warrior . My mission is to save the world 's endangered species . " Irwin bought " large tracts of land " in Australia , Vanuatu , Fiji and the United States , which he described as " like national parks " and stressed the importance of people realising that they could each make a difference . 
 Irwin founded the Steve Irwin Conservation Foundation , which became an independent charity and was later renamed " Wildlife Warriors Worldwide " . He also helped found International Crocodile Rescue , the Lyn Irwin Memorial Fund ( named in memory of his mother , who died in an automobile crash in 2000 ) , and the Iron Bark Station Wildlife Rehabilitation Facility . 
 Irwin urged people to take part in considerate tourism and not support illegal poaching through the purchase of items such as turtle shells or shark @-@ fin soup . 
 Sir David Attenborough was an inspiration to Irwin , according to his widow . When presenting a Lifetime Achievement Award to Attenborough after Irwin 's death at the British National Television Awards on 31 October 2006 , Terri Irwin said , " If there 's one person who directly inspired my husband it 's the person being honoured tonight .... [ Steve 's ] real , true love was conservation – and the influence of tonight 's recipient in preserving the natural world has been immense . " Attenborough reciprocated by praising Irwin for introducing many to the natural world , saying , " He taught them how wonderful and exciting it was , he was a born communicator . " 
 Irwin , after his death , was described by Mark Townend , CEO of RSPCA Queensland , as a " modern @-@ day Noah . " British naturalist David Bellamy lauded his skills as a natural historian and media performer . Canadian environmentalist David Suzuki paid tribute to Irwin , noting that " [ h ] <unk> will not protect that which we fear or do not understand . Steve Irwin helped us understand those things that many people thought were a nuisance at best , a horror at worst . That made him a great educator and conservationist . " 
 After his death , the vessel MV Robert Hunter owned by the environmental action group Sea Shepherd Conservation Society was renamed MY Steve Irwin . Shortly before his death , Irwin had been investigating joining Sea Shepherd 's 2007 – 2008 voyage to Antarctica to disrupt Japanese whaling activity . Following his death , the organisation suggested renaming their vessel , and this idea was endorsed by Terri Irwin . Regarding the ship and its new name , Terri said , " If Steve were alive , he 'd be aboard with them ! " 
 = = Sporting activities = = 
 Irwin loved mixed martial arts competitions and trained with Greg Jackson in the fighting / grappling system of <unk> . 
 Like many Australians , he was an avid cricket fan . This was seen during his visit to Sri Lanka where he played cricket with some local children and said " I love cricket " and " It 's a shame we have to go catch some snakes now " . This was seen during the Crocodile Hunter episode " Island of the Snakes " . 
 Having grown up in Essendon , Irwin was a fan of the Essendon Bombers , an Australian rules football club in the Australian Football League . Irwin took part in an Australian Rules football promotion in Los Angeles as part of " Australia Week " in early 2006 . After his death , a picture of Irwin wearing a Bombers Guernsey was shown by ESPN.com in their Bottom 10 ranking of the worst Division I FBS college football teams after Week 1 of the season in tribute to him . 
 Having lived in Queensland most of his life , Irwin was also a fan of rugby league . As a teenager , he played for the Caloundra Sharks as a second @-@ rower , and as an adult he was known to be a passionate Brisbane Broncos fan and was involved with the club on several occasions . On one occasion after turning up to training he asked if he could tackle the largest player , Shane Webcke . Despite being thrown to the ground and looking like he 'd been crushed he was jovial about the experience . Irwin laughingly shared the experience with the Queensland State of Origin squad before the 2006 series . Irwin also supported rugby union , being a fan of the national team , the Wallabies . He once wore a Wallaby jersey during a demonstration at the zoo . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes episode of The Crocodile Hunter showed Irwin and the crew finding a petrol station in a remote part of Namibia to watch the Wallabies defeat France in the 1999 Rugby World Cup Final . Irwin was also a talented surfer . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 A controversial incident occurred during a public show on 2 January 2004 , when Irwin carried his one @-@ month @-@ old son , Bob , in his arm while hand @-@ feeding a chicken carcass to Murray , a 3 @.@ 8 @-@ metre ( 12 ft 6 in ) saltwater crocodile . The infant was close to the crocodile , and comparisons were made in the press to Michael Jackson 's dangling his son outside a German hotel window . In addition , some child welfare groups , animal rights groups , and some of Irwin 's television viewers criticised his actions as irresponsible and tantamount to child abuse . Irwin apologised on the US NBC show Today . Both he and his wife publicly stated that Irwin was in complete control of the situation , as he had dealt with crocodiles since he was a small child , and based on his lifetime of experience neither he nor his son was in any danger . He also showed footage of the event shot from a different angle , demonstrating that they were much farther from the crocodile than they had appeared in the publicised clip . Terri Irwin said their child was in no more danger than one being taught to swim . No charges were filed ; according to one journalist , Irwin told officials he would not repeat the action . The incident prompted the Queensland government to change its crocodile @-@ handling laws , banning children and untrained adults from entering crocodile enclosures . 
 In June 2004 , allegations were made that he disturbed wildlife ( namely whales , seals and penguins ) while filming a documentary , Ice Breaker , in Antarctica . The matter was subsequently closed without charges being laid . 
 After questions arose in 2003 about Irwin being paid $ 175 @,@ 000 worth of taxpayers ' money to appear in a television advertisement and his possible political ties , Irwin told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation ( ABC ) that he was a conservationist and did not choose sides in politics . His comments describing Australian Prime Minister John Howard as the " greatest leader in the world " earned him scorn in the media . 
 Irwin was criticised for having an unsophisticated view of conservation in Australia that seemed more linked to tourism than to the problems Australia faces as a continent . In response to questions of Australia 's problems with overgrazing , salinity , and erosion , Irwin responded , " Cows have been on our land for so long that Australia has evolved to handle those big animals . " The Sydney Morning Herald concluded with the opinion that his message was confusing and amounted to " eating <unk> and <unk> is bad for tourism , and therefore more cruel than eating other animals " . 
 Criticism of Irwin 's career following his death came from Dan Mathews , vice @-@ president of the animal rights group People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals . Comparing Irwin to a " cheap reality TV star " , Mathews accused him of " antagonising frightened wild animals ... a very dangerous message to send to children " , contrasted his methods with the behaviour of " a responsible conservationist like Jacques Cousteau " , and said it was " no shock at all that Steve Irwin should die provoking a dangerous animal . " The son of Jacques Cousteau , Jean @-@ Michel Cousteau — also a producer of wildlife documentaries — took issue with Irwin 's " very , very spectacular , dramatic way of presenting things " and suggested instead that " You don 't touch nature , you just look at it . " Jacques Cousteau 's grandson and Jean @-@ Michel 's nephew , Philippe Cousteau , Jr . , on the other hand , called Irwin " a remarkable individual " ; describing the Ocean 's Deadliest project ( on which he worked along with Irwin ) , Philippe said , " I think why Steve was so excited about it that we were looking at these animals that people think of as , you know , dangerous and deadly monsters , and they 're not . They all have an important place in the environment and in the world . And that was what his whole message was about . " 
 = = Death = = 
 On 4 September 2006 Irwin was on location at Batt Reef , near Port Douglas , Queensland , taking part in the production of the documentary series Ocean 's Deadliest . During a lull in filming caused by inclement weather , Irwin decided to snorkel in shallow waters while being filmed in an effort to provide footage for his daughter 's television programme . 
 While swimming in chest @-@ deep water , Irwin approached a stingray with an approximate span of two metres ( 6 @.@ 5 ft ) from the rear , in order to film it swimming away . 
 According to the incident 's only witness , “ All of a sudden [ the stingray ] propped on its front and started stabbing wildly with its tail . Hundreds of strikes in a few seconds ” . Irwin initially believed he only had a punctured lung ; the stingray 's barb pierced his heart , causing him to bleed to death . The stingray 's behaviour appeared to have been a defensive response to being boxed in . Crew members aboard Irwin 's boat administered CPR and rushed him to shore . Medical staff pronounced him dead at the scene . 
 Irwin 's death is believed to be the only fatality from a stingray ever captured on video . 
 Footage of the incident was viewed by Queensland state police as part their mandatory investigations . All copies of the footage were then destroyed at the behest of Irwin 's family . Production was completed on Ocean 's Deadliest , which was broadcast in the US on the Discovery Channel on 21 January 2007 . The documentary was completed with footage shot in the weeks following the accident , but without including any mention of Irwin 's accidental death . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 News of Irwin 's death prompted reactions around the world . Then @-@ Prime Minister John Howard expressed " shock and distress " at the death , saying that " Australia has lost a wonderful and colourful son . " Queensland 's then @-@ Premier Peter Beattie remarked that Irwin would " be remembered as not just a great Queenslander , but a great Australian " . The Australian federal parliament opened on 5 September 2006 with condolence speeches by both Howard and the Leader of the Opposition , Kim Beazley . Flags at the Sydney Harbour Bridge were lowered to half mast in honour of Irwin . In the days following Irwin 's death , reactions dominated Australian online news sources , talk @-@ back radio programmes , and television networks . In the United States , where Irwin had appeared in over 200 Discovery Network television programmes , special tributes appeared on the Animal Planet channel , as well as on CNN and major TV talk shows . Thousands of Irwin 's fans visited Australia Zoo after his death , paying their respects and bringing flowers , candles , stuffed animals and messages of support . 
 In the weeks following Irwin 's death , at least ten stingrays were found dead and mutilated on the beaches of Queensland , with their tails cut off , prompting speculation as to whether they might have been killed by fans of Irwin as an act of revenge , although , according to the chairman of the Queensland fishing information service , anglers regularly cut the tails off accidentally caught stingrays to avoid being stung . Michael Hornby , a friend of Irwin and executive director of his Wildlife Warrior fund , condemned any revenge killings , saying that " We just want to make it very clear that we will not accept and not stand for anyone who 's taken a form of retribution . That 's the last thing Steve would want . " 
 = = = Funeral and memorial services = = = 
 Family and friends of Irwin held a private funeral service in Caloundra on 9 September 2006 . Irwin was buried in a private ceremony at Australia Zoo later that same day ; the grave site is inaccessible to the zoo 's visitors . Prime Minister Howard and Queensland Premier Beattie had offered to hold a state funeral , but Irwin 's family decided this would not be appropriate and — in the words of his father — he would have preferred to be remembered as an " ordinary bloke " . 
 On 20 September , a public memorial service , introduced by Russell Crowe , was held in Australia Zoo 's 5 @,@ 500 @-@ seat Crocoseum ; this service was broadcast live throughout Australia , the United States , the UK , Germany , and Asia , and it is estimated to have been seen by over 300 million viewers worldwide . The memorial included remarks by Prime Minister Howard ; Irwin 's father Bob and daughter Bindi ; his associates Wes Mannion and John Stainton ; and celebrities from Australia and around the world . Anthony Field of The Wiggles partly hosted the service , often sharing the screen with various animals , from koalas to elephants . Australian music star John Williamson sang " True Blue " , which was Irwin 's favourite song . In a symbolic finish to the service , Irwin 's truck was loaded up with gear and driven out of the arena for the last time as Williamson sang . As a final tribute , Australia Zoo staff spelled out Irwin 's catchphrase " Crikey " in yellow flowers as Irwin 's truck was driven from the Crocoseum for the last time to end the service . 
 = = Related events = = 
 On 1 January 2007 , Glass House Mountains Road , the road that runs by the Australia Zoo , was officially renamed Steve Irwin Way . 
 The Australian government announced in July 2007 that a 135 @,@ 000 @-@ hectare ( 334 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ) national park was being created in northern Queensland and would be named the Steve Irwin Wildlife Reserve . 
 An asteroid discovered in 2001 has been named <unk> Crikey in honour of Irwin and his " signature phrase " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = See You Again ( Miley Cyrus song ) = 
 " See You Again " is the debut single by American recording artist Miley Cyrus . It was recorded for Hannah Montana 2 : Meet Miley Cyrus ( 2007 ) , the second soundtrack album from the Disney Channel original series Hannah Montana and the debut studio album of Cyrus . It was written by Cyrus ( credited as Destiny Hope Cyrus ) with the song 's producers Antonina Armato and Tim James . It was released as the lead single from the album by Hollywood Records . Later , it was remixed by Rock Mafia and released on August 25 , 2008 by Hollywood Records , as the second single from Cyrus ' second studio album , Breakout ( 2008 ) . Musically , the track is a dance @-@ pop number that contains influences from various musical genres , including electronic music . Lyrically , the track speaks of teenage romance . 
 " See You Again " was a critical success , with contemporary critics praising its musical composition and vocal delivery . To follow , it also became Cyrus ' first commercially successful single . The song introduced her to new audiences and new countries , paving the way for future hits . " See You Again " became Cyrus ' best @-@ charting single at the time by peaking at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 . Its highest peak internationally was at number four on the Canadian Hot 100 . Although an official music video for the song was never filmed , it was given a promotional music video , taken from a performance at the 2007 Disney Channel Games . The song was promoted through a multitude of live television performances . It was included on the set list of Cyrus ' headlining tours , the Best of Both Worlds Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) , the Wonder World Tour ( 2009 ) and the Gypsy Heart Tour ( 2011 ) . " See You Again " has been covered by various notable artists , including Little Boots and Breathe Carolina . Even without a music video , the song managed to peak at 10 in the US and sold 2 @.@ 5 million copies . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Cyrus starred as Miley Stewart , a girl with a secret double life as the popstar Hannah Montana , on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana , she developed fame as a teen idol and released the series ' first soundtrack while being credited to Hannah Montana . In late 2006 , Cyrus began execution for her debut album . Cyrus ' debut studio album Meet Miley Cyrus was attached to the series ' second soundtrack , Hannah Montana 2 , and released as the second disc of the Hannah Montana 2 : Meet Miley Cyrus ( 2007 ) double @-@ disc album . " See You Again " was written by Cyrus , who was credited to her birth name Destiny Hope Cyrus , Antonina Armato , and Tim James . The writing group has executed numerous songs recorded by Cyrus , contributing to a large part of three of her five studio albums . 
 When composing tracks for Meet Miley Cyrus , Cyrus was originally very apprehensive in regards to adding " See You Again " to the album . " I 'm not sure about this song . I don 't think I want to put it on the album . I don 't really like it that much . It 's just O.K. " , she said . However , she was convinced to record it and , once she listened to the finished product , she changed her mind . She thought it was odd , but in a positive light , and decided to include it on her debut album . Cyrus says " See You Again " is a dance song with a special meaning to her . The song was remixed by Rock Mafia for the release of Cyrus ' second studio album Breakout ( 2008 ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " See You Again " is a pop rock song with a length of three minutes and ten seconds . The songs contains numerous influences from electronic , new wave , and techno music . The song is set in the time signature of common time and has a fast tempo of 138 beats per minute . It is written in the key of A minor and Cyrus ' vocals span one octave , from G3 to A4 . Throughout the song , Cyrus ' edgy and sultry vocal performance maintains in the contralto range . The lyrics of " See You Again " are about a teenage romance . In verses , Cyrus discusses her sentiments and perceptions about her love interest , such as believing the couple had previously encountered in a previous incarnation . " See You Again " ' s refrains detail previous scenes of an encounter between the couple : " The last time I freaked out / I just kept looking down / I st @-@ st @-@ stuttered when you asked me what I ’ m thinking ‘ bout . " Towards the conclusion of the refrains , Cyrus vows to redeem herself . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Chuck Taylor of Billboard felt that , by offering meaningful airplay to " See You Again " , mainstream radio stations were getting with the program . Taylor described the song " a sassy , uptempo stinger that adds appealing youthful buzz to the airwaves " and complimented Cyrus ' vocals with comparisons with Hilary Duff and Avril Lavigne . " Cyrus [ ... ] at last adds the missing link to TV and movie acclaim . Alas , FM , better late than never " , he concluded . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said , " The Hannah Montana star 's 2007 single ' See You Again ' managed to click with non @-@ tween listeners thanks [ to being ] <unk> than anything her fellow Disney Channel superstar Hilary Duff has ever put to digital . 
 Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times believed the song was " no shortage of crafty tween @-@ rock gems " . Ash Dosanjh of Yahoo ! Music believed the Rock Mafia remix of the song was a so " glorious " that it signaled Breakout would do exactly that . Josh Timmermann of PopMatters referred to the remix as the best song on Breakout , describing it as a " marvelous slice of teenaged life set to club rock beats . " Timmermann continued to praise the track , saying it felt " infinitely more genuine and thoughtful than " any other track on Breakout and that the small @-@ time teen drama fit Cyrus ' voice . " It sounds far less ludicrously melodramatic than it might have delivered by less forceful pipes " , he concluded . George Lang of The Oklahoman thought the inclusion of the song 's remix on Breakout was used to cover more musical genres in order to appeal to a wider fanbase . In 2008 , the track was listed as a " Winning Song " by Broadcast Music Incorporated ( BMI ) . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the week ending December 22 , 2007 , " See You Again " debuted at number 94 on the Billboard Hot 100 . In the succeeding week , the song ascended to number 78 and , on the week ending February 16 , 2008 , it charted at its newfound peak of number 17 , therefore becoming Cyrus ' best @-@ charting effort on the Billboard Hot 100 , surpassing the Hannah Montana @-@ credited " Life 's What You Make It " , which peaked at number 25 in August 2007 . On the week ending May 3 , 2008 , " See You Again " became Cyrus ' first top ten single by reaching its peak at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 . " See You Again " spent a total of 27 weeks upon the chart . It also peaked at number four on Mainstream Top 40 ( Pop Songs ) and number twenty @-@ one on Adult Pop Songs in the United States . The song entered at number 86 and peaked at number four on the Canadian Hot 100 , its highest peak internationally . As of August 2013 , " See You Again " has sold 2 @,@ 456 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 In Australia , " See You Again " debuted at number 25 on the week ending June 22 , 2008 . The following week , it ascended to number ten and , after five weeks of ascending the top ten , reached its peak at number six , where it remained for three consecutive weeks . The single was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for the sale of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . On the week ending August 4 , 2008 , " See You Again " debuted at number 32 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . It eventually peaked at number 11 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for the shipment of 7 @,@ 500 copies . In the United Kingdom , the track peaked at number 11 . The song is tied with " The Climb " and " Party in the U.S.A. " , which charted in March and November 2009 , respectively , for Cyrus ' best @-@ charting effort in the United Kingdom . Elsewhere in Europe , " See You Again " peaked at number 38 on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles , number 14 on the Irish Singles Chart and number seven on the Hungarian Singles Chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus performed " See You Again " live on the 2007 Disney Channel Games held on April 27 at Walt Disney World in Orlando , Florida , as part of Disney Channel 's summer @-@ season activities . She wore a yellow and black @-@ striped tank top , black and white @-@ plaid skirt , high knee socks , and black sneakers in the performance . Cyrus also performed the song on Idol Gives Back , as she continued to promote the single in the United States . " See You Again " was also a part of the set list for Cyrus ' first headlining concert tour , the Best of Both Worlds Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) . Cyrus was costumed in a white tank top , studded jeans , and metallic accessories . Cyrus and several backup dancers began the performance on the upper level of the stage , where they proceeded down a ramp as they perform dance routines . Cyrus and the backup dancers roamed throughout the stage for the remainder of the performance . Jane Stevenson of the Canadian Online Explorer listed " See You Again " as one of the highlights at the concert at Air Canada Centre on December 15 , 2007 , in Toronto , Canada . She said that Cyrus ' wardrobe indicated that " Miley , it turns out , is the marginally tougher cookie of the two singers . " 
 Cyrus performed " See You Again " at the opening of the 2008 Disney Channel Games , held on May 4 , 2008 . During the performance , which a recording of was used as a promotional music video for the Rock Mafia release , Cyrus was dressed in a white vest and white pants . In 2008 , Cyrus performed the song at the 2008 Zootopia , Good Morning America , The Today Show , and BBC Switch in the United Kingdom . Cyrus performed " See You Again " , dressed in casual clothing , on the Kids ' Inaugural : " We Are the Future " event . The event was held on January 19 , 2009 , in Washington D.C. at the Verizon Center to celebrate the inauguration of Barack Obama as President of the United States . Cyrus performed the song along with several other songs on April 24 , 2009 in a London Apple Store . These performances were recorded and sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as a live extended play titled iTunes Live from London . The song has been performed at the twentieth annual A Time for Heroes Celebrity Carnival , Rock in Rio concerts in Lisbon , Portugal , and Madrid , Spain , the 1515 Club in Paris , France , Heaven and G @-@ A @-@ Y in London , England . 
 The song was also used as the penultimate number of Cyrus ' Wonder World Tour ( 2009 ) , her first world tour . The performances began with backup dancers in bodysuits marching as they emerged from the bottom of the stage . The banging of a gong announced Cyrus ' arrival . She dressed in a white tank top and shorts , boots , and a metallic vest . Cyrus and the multiple backup dancers performed elaborate dance routines as images on overhead screens depicted geometric patterns . The dancers exited the stage by throwing themselves inside the stage as Cyrus prepared for the next performance . Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times , who attended the September 22 , 2009 , concert at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , California , referred to the performance of " See You Again " as an uptempo highlight that was , however , unable " to give her fans a deeper idea of who she is and what her music means " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 English electropop singer Little Boots recorded a cover version of " See You Again " that surfaced the Internet in December 2008 . In an interview with Digital Spy , Little Boots said , " That 's a wicked song ! The line ' My best friend Lesley said , " Oh she 's just being Miley " ' is awesome . Me and my friend have been obsessing over that lyrics for ages now , it 's getting ridiculous ! " Breathe Carolina 's act consisted of a balance of pop punk and rock music , which stood out to their record label , Fearless Records . Because of it , Fearless Records decided to reserve a spot for them on their upcoming compilation Punk Goes Pop 2 ( 2009 ) , where they performed a cover version of " See You Again " , produced by Mike Green . Breathe Carolina included their version of " See You Again " in their set list for the Warped Tour 2009 . The cover later appeared on the deluxe edition of the band 's second studio album Hello Fascination ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = 2 / 31st Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 31st Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army that served during World War II . It was raised in June 1940 and was assigned to the 25th Brigade , 7th Division . It initially served in the United Kingdom where it undertook defensive duties before being moved to the Middle East in 1941 . After taking part in the fighting in Syria and Lebanon , the battalion undertook garrison duties around Tripoli before being transferred back to Australia in 1942 . In late 1942 the battalion was sent to New Guinea to fight against the Japanese along the Kokoda Track . They subsequently fought a number of battles throughout 1942 , 1943 and early 1944 . Their last campaign came in mid @-@ 1945 when they landed on Borneo . After the war the battalion was disbanded in March 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The battalion was formed in the United Kingdom on 27 June 1940 from Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) personnel that had originally been designated for service in non @-@ infantry roles who were grouped together to form an infantry battalion . Initially designated as the " 70th Battalion " , due to manpower shortages at first it was composed of only three rifle companies instead of the normal establishment of four . Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Horace Strutt the battalion was initially based at Tidworth . In August 1940 , Strutt was replaced with Lieutenant Colonel Ragnar Garrett as commanding officer . In October 1940 , the battalion 's designation was changed to the " 2 / 31st Battalion " in order to bring it in line with the designations of the rest of the 2nd AIF , and it moved to Colchester . In November , the battalion was assigned to the 25th Brigade . It was during this time the battalion suffered its first casualty , when one of its members was killed in a German air raid . While in England the battalion undertook training and was employed on defensive duties , guarding against a possible invasion by German forces . 
 The circumstances of the battalion 's establishment overseas resulted in the situation of the battalion 's personnel being issued two different Unit Colour Patches ( UCP ) . Personnel who were in the United Kingdom at the end of 1940 were issued with a circular UCP consisting of black over red , with a border of grey . However , this UCP was issued without reference to Army Headquarters in Australia , who issued battalion reinforcements in Australia with a UCP consisting of an upright brown and yellow rectangle inside a grey circle : this was intended to link the battalion to the 31st Battalion , which had served during World War I. Upon arrival in the Middle East , though , these patches were replaced with the black and red patches . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 In January 1941 , with the threat of invasion of England reduced , it was decided to send the 2nd AIF units there to the Middle East and the battalion arrived in Egypt in March 1941 . Following this the battalion moved to Palestine where it undertook further training and received a draft of reinforcements which enabled it to raise a fourth company in order to bring it up to establishment . Having been transferred to the 7th Division , the battalion took up defensive positions around Mersa Matruh before taking part in the Syria @-@ Lebanon campaign , during which it took part in several battles . 
 The first of these came in early June , when the battalion captured the town of <unk> in Lebanon , before advancing towards Jezzine . On 13 June , the 2 / 31st , supported by a troop from the 7th Division Cavalry Regiment , crossed the Litani River bridge and led the advance . Coming under fire from Vichy French troops on the hills overlooking the town , the battalion suffered a number of casualties , including its commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Selwyn Porter . After clearing the French from the main position around Green Hill , Jezzine was finally secured . Between 15 and 29 June , the French brought up reinforcements and subsequently launched a series of counterattacks against the Australians . On 17 June , a French attack at Jezzine was repulsed . The 2 / 31st then launched an unsuccessful attack on " Hill 1332 " , a key feature in the area , during which they lost seven killed and 22 wounded . The following day a further 17 men were killed when French aircraft attacked the battalion 's positions around the Hotel Egypt . Throughout the rest of the month , fighting continued around Jezzine until on 29 June the Vichy French began to withdraw . 
 In early July the 2 / 31st commenced operations to the north of Jezzine with the aim of securing the high ground around <unk> and <unk> . On the night of 9 / 10 July they advanced up steep terrain under the cover of a heavy artillery barrage . During the fighting that followed , one of the battalion 's members , Private James Gordon , performed the deeds for which he subsequently received the Victoria Cross , crawling forward and single @-@ handedly attacking a French post that was holding up his company 's advance . 
 On 12 July an armistice was signed between the Allies and the Vichy French . Following this , the battalion established itself at <unk> where they undertook occupation duties until mid @-@ September when the 25th Brigade received orders to move to Tripoli . The 2 / 31st Battalion was assigned the task of fortifying Jebel <unk> , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Tripoli . Upon completion of this task , the battalion undertook defensive duties there until February 1942 . 
 = = = New Guinea campaigns 1942 – 44 = = = 
 Due to concerns about the entry of Japan into the war in the Pacific , the battalion was brought back to Australia in early 1942 . Departing Port Tewfik on 9 February on the MV Vernon , the battalion arrived at Port Adelaide , South Australia , on 9 March and moved to Camp Woodside . In early April they conducted a road and rail move to Casino , New South Wales , where a weeks ' leave was granted before moving on to Caboolture , Queensland . During this time the battalion undertook defensive duties securing the northern approach to Brisbane during the Battle of the Coral Sea . From June they began jungle training in preparation for deployment to New Guinea in September where the units of the Militia had been fighting a delaying campaign against the Japanese along the Kokoda Track . 
 On 31 August , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Colin Dunbar , the battalion was moved to Brisbane where they embarked upon the Cremer bound for Port Moresby . Arriving there on 9 September , the battalion received orders to proceed towards the Owen Stanley Range . They arrived at Ioribaiwa on 15 September , however , almost as soon as they arrived they were forced to pull back to Imita Ridge . The Japanese , however , had exhausted their supply lines and were unable to follow and thus the Australian force was able to begin its own advance . On 1 November , the 2 / 31st was in the vanguard as it entered the village of Kokoda . Following this , Dunbar handed over command of the battalion to Lieutenant Colonel James Miller , and under his command the battalion took part in significant battles at Gorari and Gona . In December , however , Miller died from scrub typhus , and has the casualties from combat and disease mounted the battalion was eventually withdrawn from the fighting to Port Moresby from where it embarked to return to Australia in January 1943 . By the end of the battalion 's involvement in the campaign , only 55 men were fit for duty . 
 Following six months of training and re @-@ organisation in Australia , the 2 / 31st returned to New Guinea in July 1943 where , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Murray Robson who had previously served as second in command , they took part in the Salamaua @-@ Lae campaign , before carrying out patrolling operations through the Markham Valley and into the Finisterre Range as part of the Finisterre Range campaign . After having been relieved by the 24th Battalion in January 1944 , the 2 / 31st was once again withdrawn to Australia , arriving there in February to reconstitute and train for the next phase of the war . 
 = = = Borneo 1945 = = = 
 After this the battalion spent over a year training on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland before moving to Morotai and then later taking part in the landing at Balikpapan along with the rest of the 7th Division in one of the last Australian campaigns of the war . Landing at Green Beach on 2 July 1945 , the second day of the operation , the 2 / 31st went ashore unopposed and moved inland , taking up positions in the centre of the Australian line around a location called " Ration " . After establishing themselves on the hill , later in the day they were struck by airburst artillery before commencing clearing patrols and occupying a smaller feature known as " Resort " . The following day the battalion commenced operations along the Milford Highway , as the Japanese began to withdraw towards <unk> . Attacking Japanese positions around the " Nobody " and " Nurse " features , the 2 / 31st encountered heavy opposition from the Japanese defenders . Having lost 50 men killed or wounded , the battalion occupied the positions on 4 July , after the Japanese withdrew , having lost 63 killed . 
 Following this , the Australians advanced along the open country along the Milford Highway . Relying heavily upon direct and indirect fire support to suppress the Japanese positions along the numerous ridges that lay astride the axis of advance , the going was slow . By 9 July the open country of the coast turned to thick bush and the Australians began to encounter improvised explosive devices and booby traps in the scrub . Early on 10 July , a company from the 2 / 31st Battalion launched a successful attack which saw them capture 12 3 @-@ inch naval guns that were being used as part of the Japanese defensive system for the loss of five wounded . Late in the afternoon , while fighting around the " Coke " feature , the battalion suffered a serious setback when a company was ambushed , resulting in 18 killed and 23 wounded . 
 A brief period of inactivity followed before the advance continued . On 26 July , as a result of the casualties that they had suffered earlier in the month , the battalion was withdrawn from the fighting and moved to the rear . Although they undertook security duties , they did not see action again before the war ended on 15 August 1945 . During the fighting around Balikpapan the 2 / 31st Battalion suffered the highest number of casualties of any Allied unit deployed in the Borneo campaign , losing 44 men killed and 134 wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Following the end of the war , the battalion remained in Borneo . Initially they were stationed around <unk> where they undertook garrison duties , but in October 1945 they were moved to Balikpapan . At this time , the demobilisation process began and some of the battalion 's long serving personnel were offered the opportunity to return to Australia . Others were transferred to the 65th Battalion , which was being raised as part of the Australian contribution to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . On 31 January 1946 , the remaining personnel embarked upon HMAS Kanimbla , for the return to Australia . They landed in Brisbane in February 1946 , where the battalion was disbanded early the following month . 
 During the course of the war a total of 2 @,@ 660 men served in the 2 / 31st Battalion of whom 251 were killed or died and 479 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one Victoria Cross , three Distinguished Service Orders , four Military Crosses , one Distinguished Conduct Medal , 20 Military Medals and 25 Mentions in Despatches . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 31st Battalion received 22 battle honours for its service during World War II . These honours are : 
 Syria 1941 , Syrian Frontier , Merjayun , Jezzine , Damour , Hill 1069 , <unk> , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , Kokoda Trail , Ioribaiwa , Eora Creek – Templeton 's Crossing II , Oivi – Gorari , Buna – Gona , Gona , Lae – Nadzab , Lae Road , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Ramu Valley , Shaggy Ridge , Borneo 1945 , Balikpapan , Milford Highway . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 2 / 31st Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Horace Strutt ( 1940 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ragnar Garrett ( 1940 – 41 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Selwyn Porter ( 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Reg Pollard ( 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Selwyn Porter ( 1941 – 42 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Colin Dunbar ( 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel James Miller ( 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Murray Robson ( 1942 – 46 ) . 
 = Fritz the Cat ( film ) = 
 Fritz the Cat is a 1972 American animated comedy film written and directed by Ralph Bakshi . It was Bakshi 's feature film debut and is loosely based on the Fritz the Cat comic strips by Robert Crumb . It was the first animated feature film to receive an X rating in the United States . 
 The film stars Fritz ( voiced by Skip Hinnant ) , an anthropomorphic cat in mid @-@ 1960s New York City who explores the ideals of hedonism and sociopolitical consciousness . The film is a satire focusing on American college life of the era , race relations , the free love movement , and left- and right @-@ wing politics . 
 The film had a troubled production history and controversial release . Crumb had disagreements with the filmmakers over the film 's political content . Fritz the Cat was controversial for its rating and content , which many viewers at the time found to be offensive . It was produced on a budget of $ 850 @,@ 000 and grossed over $ 90 million worldwide . Its success led to a slew of other X @-@ rated animated films and a sequel , The Nine Lives of Fritz the Cat ( 1974 ) , made without Crumb 's or Bakshi 's involvement . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a New York City park , hippies have gathered with guitars to sing protest songs . Fritz and his buddies show up in an attempt to meet girls . When a trio of attractive females walk by , Fritz and his friends exhaust themselves trying to get their attention , but find that the girls are more interested in the crow standing a few feet away . The girls attempt to flirt with the crow , making unintentionally condescending remarks about blacks , while Fritz looks on in annoyance . Suddenly , the crow rebukes the girls with a snide remark and walks away . Fritz invites the girls to " seek the truth " , bringing them up to his friend 's apartment , where a wild party is taking place . Since the other rooms are crowded , Fritz drags the girls into the bathroom and the four of them have group sex in the bathtub . Meanwhile , the police ( portrayed as pigs ) arrive to raid the party . As the two officers walk up the stairs , one of the partygoers finds Fritz and the girls in the bath tub . Several others jump in , pushing Fritz to the side where he takes solace in marijuana . The two officers break into the apartment , but find that it is empty because everyone has moved into the bathroom . Fritz takes refuge in the toilet when one of the pigs enters the bathroom and begins to beat up the partygoers . As the pig becomes exhausted , a very stoned Fritz jumps out , grabs the pig 's gun , and shoots the toilet , causing the water main to break and flooding everybody out of the apartment . The pigs chase Fritz down the street into a synagogue . Fritz manages to escape when the congregation gets up to celebrate the United States ' decision to send more weapons into Israel . 
 Fritz makes it back to his dormitory , where his roommates ignore him . He decides to ditch his bore of a life and sets all of his notes and books on fire . The fire spreads throughout the dorm , finally setting the entire building ablaze . In a bar in Harlem , Fritz meets Duke the Crow at a billiard table . After narrowly avoiding getting into a fight with the bartender , Duke invites Fritz to " bug out " , and they steal a car , which Fritz drives off a bridge , leading Duke to save his life by grabbing onto a railing . The two arrive at the apartment of a drug dealer named Bertha , whose cannabis joints increase Fritz 's libido . While having sex with Bertha , he comes to a realization that he " must tell the people about the revolution ! " He runs off into the city street and incites a riot , during which Duke is shot and killed . 
 Fritz hides in an alley where his older fox girlfriend , Winston Schwartz , finds him and drags him on a road trip to San Francisco . When the car runs out of gas in the middle of the desert , he decides to abandon her . He later meets up with Blue , a heroin @-@ addicted rabbit biker . Along with Blue 's horse girlfriend , Harriet , they take a ride to an underground hide @-@ out where several other revolutionaries tell Fritz of their plan to blow up a power station . When Harriet tries to get Blue to leave , he hits her several times and ties her down with a chain . When Fritz objects to their treatment of her , he is hit in the face with a candle by a member of the group . After setting the dynamite at the power plant , Fritz suddenly has a change of heart , and unsuccessfully attempts to remove it before being caught in the explosion . At a Los Angeles hospital , Harriet ( disguised as a nun ) and the girls from the New York park come to comfort him in what they believe to be his last moments . Fritz , after reciting the speech he used to pick up the girls from New York , becomes revitalized and has sex with the trio of girls while Harriet watches in astonishment . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Skip Hinnant as Fritz the Cat 
 Rosetta <unk> as Big Bertha / Additional voices 
 John McCurry as Duke / Additional voices 
 Judy Engles as Winston Schwartz / Lizard Leader 
 Phil Seuling as Pig Cop # 2 / Additional voices 
 Ralph Bakshi ( uncredited ) as Pig Cop # 1 / Narrator 
 Mary Dean ( uncredited ) as Girl # 1 / Girl # 2 / Girl # 3 / Harriet 
 Charles <unk> ( uncredited ) as Bar Patron / Duke the Crow 
 = = Background = = 
 Robert Crumb ( b . 1943 ) was still a teenager when he created the character Fritz the Cat for self @-@ published comics magazines he made with his older brother Charles . The character first appeared to a wider public in Harvey Kurtzman 's humor magazine Help ! in 1965 . The strips place anthropomorphic characters — normally associated with children 's comics — in stories with drugs , sex , and other adult @-@ oriented content . Crumb left his wife in 1967 and moved to San Francisco , where he took part in the counterculture and indulged in drugs such as LSD . He had countercultural strips published in underground periodicals and in 1968 published the first issue of Zap Comix . Crumb 's cartoons became progressively more transgressive , sexually explicit , and violent , and Crumb became the center of the burgeoning underground comix movement . Fritz became one of Crumb 's best @-@ known creations , particularly outside the counterculture . 
 Ralph Bakshi majored in cartooning at the High School of Art and Design . He learned his trade at the Terrytoons studio in New York City , where he spent ten years animating characters such as Mighty Mouse , Heckle and Jeckle , and Deputy Dawg . At the age of 29 , Bakshi was hired to head the animation division of Paramount Pictures as both writer and director , where he produced four experimental short films before the studio closed in 1967 . With producer Steve Krantz , Bakshi founded his own studio , Bakshi Productions . In 1969 , Ralph 's Spot was founded as a division of Bakshi Productions to produce commercials for Coca @-@ Cola and Max , the 2000 @-@ Year @-@ Old Mouse , a series of educational shorts paid for by Encyclopædia Britannica . However , Bakshi was uninterested in the kind of animation he was producing , and wanted to produce something personal . Bakshi was quoted in a 1971 article for the Los Angeles Times as saying that the idea of " grown men sitting in cubicles drawing butterflies floating over a field of flowers , while American planes are dropping bombs in Vietnam and kids are marching in the streets , is ludicrous . " Bakshi soon developed Heavy Traffic , a tale of inner @-@ city street life . However , Krantz told Bakshi that studio executives would be unwilling to fund the film because of its content and Bakshi 's lack of film experience . 
 While browsing the East Side Book Store on St. Mark 's Place , Bakshi came across a copy of R. Crumb 's Fritz the Cat ( 1969 ) . Impressed by Crumb 's sharp satire , Bakshi purchased the book and suggested to Krantz that it would work as a film . Bakshi was interested in directing the film because he felt that Crumb 's work was the closest to his own . Krantz arranged a meeting with Crumb , during which Bakshi showed Crumb drawings that had been created as the result of Bakshi attempting to learn Crumb 's style to prove that he could translate the look of Crumb 's artwork to animation . Impressed by Bakshi 's tenacity , Crumb lent him one of his sketchbooks as a reference . 
 As Krantz began to prepare the paperwork , preparation began on a pitch presentation for potential studios , including a poster @-@ sized painted cel setup featuring the strip 's cast against a traced photo background , as Bakshi intended the film to appear . In spite of Crumb 's enthusiasm , he was unsure about the film 's production , and refused to sign the contract . Cartoonist Vaughn Bodé warned Bakshi against working with Crumb , describing him as " slick " . Bakshi later agreed with Bodé 's assessment , calling Crumb " one of the slickest hustlers you 'll ever see in your life " . Krantz sent Bakshi to San Francisco , where Bakshi stayed with Crumb and his wife Dana in an attempt to persuade Crumb to sign the contract . After a week , Crumb left , leaving the film 's production status uncertain , but Dana had power of attorney and signed the contract . Crumb received US $ 50 @,@ 000 , which was delivered throughout different phases of the production , in addition to ten percent of Krantz 's take . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Funding and distribution = = = 
 With the rights to the character , Krantz and Bakshi set out to find a distributor . " When I say that every major distributor turned it down , this is not an exaggeration " , remembers Krantz . " There has never been a project that was received with less enthusiasm . Animation is essentially a dirty word for distributors , who think that only Disney can paint a tree , and in addition to that , Fritz was so far out that there was a failure to understand that we were onto something very important . " 
 In the spring of 1970 , Warner Bros. agreed to fund and distribute the film . The Harlem sequences were the first completed . Krantz intended to release these scenes as a 15 @-@ minute short in case the film 's funding was pulled ; Bakshi was nevertheless determined to complete the film as a feature . Late in November , Bakshi and Krantz screened a presentation reel for the studio with this sequence , pencil tests , and shots of Bakshi 's storyboards . Bakshi stated , " You should have seen their faces in the screening room when I first screened a bit of Fritz . I 'll remember their faces until I die . One of them left the room . Holy hell , you should have seen his face . ' Shut up , Frank ! This is not the movie you 're allowed to make ! ' And I said , Bullshit , I just made it . " 
 Warner executives wanted the sexual content toned down celebrities cast for the voices . Bakshi refused , and Warner pulled their funding from the film , leading Krantz to seek funds elsewhere . This led to a deal with Jerry Gross , the owner of Cinemation Industries , a distributor specializing in exploitation films . Although Bakshi did not have enough time to pitch the film , Gross agreed to fund its production and distribute it , believing that it would fit in with his grindhouse slate . Further financing came from Saul Zaentz , who agreed to distribute the soundtrack album on his Fantasy Records label . 
 = = = Direction = = = 
 Bakshi was initially reluctant to direct Fritz the Cat because he had spent years working on animated productions featuring animal characters and wanted to make films focusing on human characters . He became interested in working on the film because he loved Crumb 's work and considered him a " total genius " . During the development of the film , Bakshi says that he " started to get giddy " when he " suddenly was able to get a pig that was a cop , and this particular other pig was Jewish , and I thought , ' Oh my God — a Jewish pig ? ' These were major steps forward , because in the initial Heckle and Jeckle for Terrytoons , they were two black guys running around . Which was hysterically funny and , I think , great — like Uncle Remus stuff . But they didn 't play down south , and they had to change two black crows to two Englishmen . And I always told him that the black crows were funnier . So it was a slow awakening . " 
 In his notes to animator Cosmo Anzilotti , Bakshi is precise , and even specifies that the crows smoked marijuana rather than tobacco . Bakshi states that " The weed had to read on screen . It 's an important character detail . " The film 's opening sequence sets the satirical tone of the film . The setting of the story 's period is not only established by a title , but also by a voiceover by Bakshi playing a character giving his account of the 1960s : " happy times , heavy times " . The film 's opening dialogue , by three construction workers on their lunch break , establishes many of the themes discussed in the film , including drug use , promiscuity , and the social and political climate of the era . When one of the workers urinates off of the scaffold , the film 's credits play over a shot of the liquid falling against a black screen . When the credits end , it is shown that the construction worker has urinated on a long @-@ haired hippie with a guitar . Karl F. Cohen writes that the film " is a product of the radical politics of the period . Bakshi 's depiction of Fritz 's life is colorful , funny , sexist , raw , violent , and outrageous . " 
 Of his direction of the film , Bakshi stated , " My approach to animation as a director is live action . I don 't approach it in the traditional animation ways . None of our characters get up and sing , because that 's not the type of picture I 'm trying to do . I want people to believe my characters are real , and it 's hard to believe they 're real if they start walking down the street singing . " Bakshi wanted the film to be the antithesis of any animated film produced by the Walt Disney Company . Accordingly , Fritz the Cat includes two satirical references to Disney . In one scene , silhouettes of Mickey Mouse , Daisy Duck , and Donald Duck are shown cheering on the United States Air Force as it drops napalm on a black neighborhood during a riot . Another scene features a reference to the " Pink Elephants on Parade " sequence from Dumbo . A sequence of the camera panning across a garbage heap in an abandoned lot in Harlem sets up a visual device which recurs in Hey Good Lookin ' . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The original screenplay consisted mostly of dialog and featured only a few changes from Crumb 's stories . The script and storyboards went largely unused in favor of more experimental storytelling techniques . Bakshi said , " I don 't like to jump ahead on my films . The way you feel about a film on Day One , you may not feel the same way forty weeks down the road . Characters grow , so I wanted to have the option to change things , and strengthen my characters ... It was sort of a stream of consciousness , and a learning process for myself . " Bakshi wrote the characters without feral animal behavior to lend the material greater realism . 
 The first part of the film 's plot was adapted from a self @-@ titled story published in a 1968 issue of R. Crumb 's Head Comix , while the second part is derived from " Fritz Bugs Out " , which was serialized in the February to October 1968 issues of Cavalier , and the final part of the story contains elements of " Fritz the No @-@ Good " , first published in the September / October 1968 issue of Cavalier . The last half of the film makes a major departure from Crumb 's work . Animation historian Michael Barrier describes this section of the film as being " much grimmer than Crumb 's stories past that point , and far more violent . " Bakshi stated that he deviated from the comics because he felt that the strips lacked depth : 
 " It was cute , it was sweet , but there was nowhere to put it . That 's why Crumb hates the picture , because I slipped a couple of things in there that he despises , like the rabbis — the pure Jewish stuff . Fritz can 't hold that kind of commentary . Winston is ' just a typical Jewish broad from Brooklyn ' . ... [ The strip ] was cute and well @-@ done , but there was nothing that had that much depth . " 
 Bakshi 's unwillingness to use anthropomorphic characters that behaved like feral animals led him to rewrite a scene in " Fritz Bugs Out " where Duke saves Fritz 's life by flying while holding Fritz ; in the film , Duke grabs a railing before the car crashes into the river , a solution that Bakshi wasn 't entirely satisfied with , but prevented him from having to use any feral animal behavior in that scene . 
 In the film , there are two characters named " Winston " – one appears at the beginning and end of the film , the other is Fritz 's girlfriend Winston Schwartz . Michael Barrier notes that Winston Schwartz ( who appears prominently in " Fritz Bugs Out " and " Fritz the No @-@ Good " ) never has a proper introduction in Bakshi 's film , and interprets the naming of a separate character as Bakshi 's attempt to reconcile this ; however , the two characters look and sound nothing alike . Bakshi intended to end the film with Fritz 's death , but Krantz objected to this ending , and Bakshi eventually changed it to the final ending . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The film 's voice cast includes Skip Hinnant , Rosetta <unk> , John McCurry , Phil Seuling , and Judy Engles . Hinnant , who would become known as a featured performer on The Electric Company , was cast because he " had such a naturally phony voice " , according to Bakshi . Bakshi and Seuling improvised their dialogue as comically inept pig officers ; Bakshi enjoyed working as a voice actor and later went on to provide voice roles for some of his other films . Bakshi re @-@ created the voice he did in this film for the part of a storm trooper in his 1977 animated science fiction film Wizards . 
 = = = Audio design = = = 
 Some scenes used documentary recordings which were made by Bakshi and edited to fit the scene ; these were used because Bakshi wanted the film to " feel real " . According to Bakshi , " I made tons and tons of tapes . ... When I went to have the film mixed , the sound engineers gave me all kinds of crap about the tracks not being professionally recorded ; they didn 't even want to mix the noise of bottles breaking in the background , street noise , tape hiss , all kinds of shit . They said it was unprofessional , but I didn 't care . " Although the sound designers insisted that Bakshi needed to re @-@ record the dialogue in the studio , Bakshi persisted on their inclusion . 
 Almost all of the film 's dialogue , except for that of a few of the main characters , was recorded entirely on the streets of New York City . For the film 's opening sequence , Bakshi paid two construction workers US $ 50 each , and drank Scotch with them , recording the conversation . In the Washington Square Park sequence , only Skip Hinnant was a professional actor ; Fritz 's friends were voiced by young males Bakshi found in the park . One of the sequences that was not based upon Crumb 's comics involved a comic chase through a synagogue full of praying rabbis . For the voices of the rabbis , Bakshi used a documentary recording of his father and uncles . This scene continued to have a personal significance on Bakshi after his father and uncle died . Bakshi states , " Thank God I have their voices . I have my dad and family praying . It 's so nice to hear now . " Bakshi also went to a Harlem bar with a tape recorder and spent hours talking to black patrons , getting drunk with them as he asked them questions . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's score was composed by Ed Bogas and Ray Shanklin . The soundtrack was released by Fantasy Records and Ampex Tapes , along with the single , " You 're the Only Girl " b / w " Winston " . The film also featured songs by Charles Earland , Cal <unk> , Bo Diddley , and Billie Holiday . Bakshi bought the rights to use Holiday 's performance of the song " Yesterdays " for $ 35 . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Many of the animators who worked on the film were professionals that Bakshi had previously worked with at Terrytoons , including Jim Tyer , John <unk> , Nick Tafuri , Martin Taras , Larry Riley , and Cliff Augustine . According to Bakshi , it took quite a long time to assemble the right staff . Those who entered with a smirk , " wanting to be very dirty and draw filthy pictures " , did not stay very long , and neither did those with a low tolerance for vulgarity . One cartoonist refused to draw a black crow shooting a pig policeman . Two female animators quit ; one because she could not bring herself to tell her children what she did for a living , the other because she refused to draw exposed breasts . 
 In order to save money by eliminating the need for model sheets , Bakshi let animator John Sparey draw some of the first sequences of Fritz . Bakshi states that he knew that " Sparey would execute them beautifully . " Poses from his sequences were photocopied and handed out to the rest of the crew . The film was produced almost entirely without pencil tests . According to Bakshi , " We pencil tested I 'd say a thousand feet [ of footage ] , tops . [ ... ] We do a major feature without pencil tests — that 's tough . The timing falls off . I can always tell an animator to draw it better , and I know if the attitude of the characters is right , but the timing you really can 't see . " Bakshi had to judge the timing of the animation simply by flipping an animator 's drawings in his hand , until he could see the completed animation on the screen . Veteran Warner Bros. animator Ted <unk> was incredibly dedicated to his work on the film , to the point where he completed his animation for the synagogue sequence while suffering from leukemia , and would take the scenes home at night to work on them . 
 In May 1971 , Bakshi moved his studio to Los Angeles to hire additional animators there . Some animators , including Rod Scribner , Dick Lundy , Virgil Walter Ross , Norman McCabe , and John Sparey , welcomed Bakshi 's presence , and felt that Fritz the Cat would bring diversity to the animation industry . Other animators disliked Bakshi 's presence , and placed an advertisement in The Hollywood Reporter , stating that Bakshi 's " filth " was unwelcome in California . According to Bakshi , " I didn 't know who these guys were because I was from New York , so I threw the ad away . " However , Bakshi found the negative reaction to the film from his peers to be disheartening . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Because it was cheaper for Ira Turek to trace photographs to create the backgrounds , Bakshi and Johnnie Vita walked around the streets of the Lower East Side , Washington Square Park , Chinatown and Harlem to take moody snapshots . Turek inked the outlines of these photographs onto cels with a Rapidograph , the technical pen preferred by Crumb , giving the film 's backgrounds stylized realism that had never been portrayed in animation before . After Turek completed a background drawing in ink on an animation cel , the drawing would be photocopied onto watercolor paper for Vita and onto animation paper for use in matching the characters to the backgrounds . When Vita finished his painting , Turek 's original drawing , on the cel , would be placed over the watercolor , obscuring the photocopy lines on the painting . However , not every background was taken from live @-@ action sources . The tones of the watercolor backgrounds were influenced by the " Ash Can style " of painters , which includes George Luks and John French Sloan . The film also used bent and fisheye camera perspectives in order to replicate the way the film 's hippies and hoodlums viewed the city . 
 = = Rating = = 
 By the time production finished , Cinemation had released Melvin Van Peebles ' Sweet Sweetback 's Baadasssss Song to considerable success , and the distributor hoped that Fritz the Cat would be even more profitable . Fritz received an X rating from the Motion Picture Association of America , the first animated film to receive such rating . Producer Krantz stated that the film lost <unk> due to the rating , and 30 American newspapers rejected display advertisements for it or refused to give it editorial publicity . The film 's limited screenings led Cinemation to exploit the film 's content in its promotion of the film , advertising it as containing " 90 minutes of violence , excitement , and SEX ... he 's X @-@ rated and animated ! " According to Ralph Bakshi , " We almost didn 't deliver the picture , because of the exploitation of it . " 
 Cinemation 's advertising style and the film 's rating led many to believe that Fritz the Cat was a pornographic film . When it was introduced as such at a showing at the University of Southern California , Bakshi stated firmly , " Fritz the Cat is not pornographic . " In May 1972 , Variety reported that Krantz had appealed the X rating , saying " Animals having sex isn 't pornography . " The MPAA refused to hear the appeal . The misconceptions about the film 's content were eventually cleared up when it received praise from Rolling Stone and The New York Times , and the film was accepted into the 1972 Cannes Film Festival . Bakshi later stated , " Now they do as much on The Simpsons as I got an X rating for Fritz the Cat . " 
 Before the film 's release , American distributors attempted to cash in on the publicity garnered from the rating by rushing out dubbed versions of two other adult animated films from Japan , both of which featured an X rating in their advertising material : <unk> <unk> monogatari and <unk> , re @-@ titled One Thousand and One Arabian Nights and Cleopatra : Queen of Sex . However , neither film was actually submitted to the MPAA , and it is not likely that either feature would have received an X rating . The film Down and Dirty Duck was promoted with an X rating , but had not been submitted to the MPAA . The French @-@ Belgian animated film Tarzoon : Shame of the Jungle was initially released with an X rating in a subtitled version , but a dubbed version released in 1979 received an R rating . 
 For the DVD release , MGM / UA Home Entertainment has surrendered the X rating for an unrated video release , although the tagline " He 's X @-@ Rated and Animated ! " is still used on the cover . Also , the MPAA " This film has been rated X " screen is seen just before the MGM logo at the end of the film on the DVD . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fritz the Cat opened on April 12 , 1972 , in Hollywood and Washington , D.C. Although the film only had a limited release , it went on to become a worldwide hit . Against its $ 850 @,@ 000 budget , it grossed $ 25 million in the United States and over $ 90 million worldwide , and was the most successful independent animated feature of all time . The film earned $ 4 @.@ 7 million in video rentals in North America . ) 
 In Michael Barrier 's 1972 article on its production , Bakshi gives accounts of two screenings of the film . Of the reactions to the film by audiences at a preview screening in Los Angeles , Bakshi stated , " They forget it 's animation . They treat it like a film . ... This is the real thing , to get people to take animation seriously . " Bakshi was also present at a showing of the film at the Museum of Modern Art and remembers , " Some guy asked me why I was against the revolution . The point is , animation was making people get up off their asses and get mad . " 
 The film also sparked negative reactions because of its content . " A lot of people got freaked out " , says Bakshi . " The people in charge of the power structure , the people in charge of magazines and the people going to work in the morning who loved Disney and Norman Rockwell , thought I was a pornographer , and they made things very difficult for me . The younger people , the people who could take new ideas , were the people I was addressing . I wasn 't addressing the whole world . To those people who loved it , it was a huge hit , and everyone else wanted to kill me . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reaction was mixed , but generally positive . Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote that the film is " constantly funny ... [ There 's ] something to offend just about everyone . " New York magazine film critic Judith Crist reviewed the film as " a gloriously funny , brilliantly pointed , and superbly executed entertainment ... [ whose ] target is ... the muddle @-@ headed radical chicks and slicks of the sixties " , and that it " should change the face of the animated cartoon forever " . Paul Sargent Clark in The Hollywood Reporter called the film " powerful and audacious " , while Newsweek called it " a harmless , mindless , pro @-@ youth saga calculated to shake up only the box office " . The Wall Street Journal and Cue both gave the film mixed reviews . Thomas Albright of Rolling Stone wrote an enthusiastic preview in the December 9 , 1971 issue based on seeing thirty minutes of the film , declaring that it was " sure to mark the most important breakthrough in animation since Yellow Submarine " . But in a review published after its release , Albright recanted his earlier statement and wrote that the visuals were not enough to save the finished product from being a " qualified disaster " due to a " leaden plot " and a " juvenile " script that relied too heavily on tired gags and tasteless ethnic humor . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a score of 56 % positive reviews based on 18 critic reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 4 / 10 . 
 Film critic Andrew Osmond wrote that the epilogue hurt the film 's integrity for " giving Fritz cartoon powers of survival that the film had rejected until then " . 
 Patricia Evans found scenes with Jewish stereotypes " vicious and offensive " , and stated , " Only the jaundiced eye of director Ralph Bakshi , which denigrates all of the characters , the hero included , makes one reflect on the nature of the attack . " 
 = = = Crumb 's response = = = 
 Crumb first saw the film in February 1972 , during a visit to Los Angeles with fellow underground cartoonists Spain Rodriguez , S. Clay Wilson , Robert Williams , and Rick Griffin . According to Bakshi , Crumb was dissatisfied with the film . Among his criticisms , he said that he felt that Skip Hinnant was wrong for the voice of Fritz , and said that Bakshi should have voiced the character instead . Crumb later said in an interview that he felt that the film was " really a reflection of Ralph Bakshi 's confusion , you know . There 's something real repressed about it . In a way , it 's more twisted than my stuff . It 's really twisted in some kind of weird , unfunny way . ... I didn 't like that sex attitude in it very much . It 's like real repressed <unk> ; he 's kind of letting it out compulsively . " Crumb also criticized the film 's condemnation of the radical left , denouncing Fritz 's dialogue in the final sequences of the film , which includes a quote from The Beatles song " The End " , as " red @-@ neck and fascistic " and stated , " They put words into his mouth that I never would have had him say . " 
 Reportedly , Crumb filed a lawsuit to have his name removed from the film 's credits . San Francisco copyright attorney Albert L. Morse said that no suit was filed , but an agreement was reached to remove Crumb 's name from the credits . However , Crumb 's name has remained in the final film since its original theatrical release . In response to his distaste for the film , Crumb had " Fritz the Cat — Superstar " published in People 's Comics later in 1972 , in which a jealous girlfriend kills Fritz with an icepick ; he has refused to use the character <unk> and wrote the filmmakers a letter saying not to use his characters in their films . Crumb later cited the film as " one of those experiences I sort of block out . The last time I saw it was when I was making an appearance at a German art school in the mid @-@ 1980s , and I was forced to watch it with the students . It was an excruciating ordeal , a humiliating embarrassment . I recall Victor Moscoso was the only one who warned me , ' if you don 't stop this film from being made , you are going to regret it for the rest of your life ' — and he was right . " 
 In a 2008 interview , Bakshi referred to Crumb as a " hustler " and stated , " He goes in so many directions that he 's hard to pin down . I spoke to him on the phone . We both had the same deal , five percent . They finally sent Crumb the money and not me . Crumb always gets what he wants , including that château of his in France . ... I have no respect for Crumb . Is he a good artist ? Yes , if you want to do the same thing over and over . He should have been my best friend for what I did with Fritz the Cat . I drew a good picture , and we both made out fine . " Bakshi also stated that Crumb threatened to disassociate himself from any cartoonist that worked with Bakshi , which would have hurt their chances at getting work published . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In addition to other animated films aimed at adult audiences , the film 's success led to the production of a sequel , The Nine Lives of Fritz the Cat . Although producer Krantz and voice actor Hinnant returned for the follow @-@ up , Bakshi did not . Instead , Nine Lives was directed by animator Robert Taylor , who co @-@ wrote the film with Fred Halliday and Eric Monte . Nine Lives was distributed by American International Pictures , and was considered to be inferior to its predecessor . Both films have been released on DVD in the United States , Canada and the UK . Bakshi states that he felt constricted using anthropomorphic characters in Fritz , and focused solely on non @-@ anthropomorphic characters in Heavy Traffic and Hey Good Lookin ' , but later used anthropomorphic characters in Coonskin . 
 While review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes , which compiles contemporary reviews from a wide range of critics , gives the film a score of 56 % , the film is widely noted in its innovation for featuring content that had not been portrayed in animation before , such as sexuality and violence , and was also , as John Grant writes in his book Masters of Animation , " the breakthrough movie that opened brand new vistas to the commercial animator in the United States " , presenting an " almost disturbingly accurate " portrayal " of a particular stratum of Western society during a particular era , ... as such it has dated very well . " The film 's subject matter and its satirical approach offered an alternative to the kinds of films that had previously been presented by major animation studios . Michael Barrier described Fritz the Cat and Heavy Traffic as " not merely provocative , but highly ambitious " . Barrier described the films as an effort " to push beyond what was done in the old cartoons , even while building on their strengths " . 
 As a result of these innovations , Fritz was selected by Time Out magazine as the 42nd greatest animated film , ranked at number 51 on the Online Film Critics Society 's list of the top 100 greatest animated films of all time , and was placed at number 56 on Channel 4 's list of the 100 Greatest Cartoons . Footage from the film was edited into the music video for Guru 's 2007 song " State of Clarity " . 
 = Nea Salamis Famagusta FC = 
 Nea Salamis Famagusta FC or Nea Salamina Famagusta FC ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a professional football club based in Ammochostos ( also known by its romanized name , Famagusta ) , Cyprus . It has been a refugee club since the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus , when Turkey occupied the northern part of the island . The club is temporarily based in Larnaca . 
 Nea Salamina 's most notable achievements were its victories in the Cypriot Cup and the Cypriot Super Cup in 1990 . Its highest finish in the Cypriot First Division is third place . During its first five years ( 1948 – 1953 ) , the team participated in the Cyprus Amateur Football Federation championships . In 1953 the club joined the Cyprus Football Association ( CFA ) , participating regularly in association championships and cup competitions . It has played in more than 50 Cypriot First Division seasons , ranking seventh in that category . 
 The team participated for the first time in European competition in 1990 at the European Cup Winners ' Cup , and played in the 1995 , 1997 and 2000 UEFA Intertoto Cups . The team is part of the Nea Salamina Famagusta sports club , which was founded in 1948 ; the parent club also fields a men 's volleyball team . The club is named after the ancient city of Cyprus , Salamis or Salamina , which is located nearby modern Famagusta ( " Nea " means " new " in Greek language ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 When Nea Salamina Famagusta was founded , Greece was entering a period of civil war between leftists and rightists . The situation in Greece affected Cyprus , both politically and socially ; most athletes were also involved in politics . At this time , Famagusta had two sports clubs : the Evagoras <unk> Association , or GSE ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) and the Anorthosis Famagusta FC . The GSE had many talented leftist athletes on its rosters . At Anorthosis , many players were also leftists . Under the influence of the contemporary right @-@ wing political climate , the GSE and Anorthosis began to restrict leftist athletes . In early 1947 a group from Famagusta ( including leftists , members and non @-@ members of GSE and Anorthosis ) concluded there was room for another sports club in the city . Due to the existing restrictions , they envisioned a club which would appeal to everyone in Famagusta regardless of political affiliation . 
 On 14 February 1948 the decision was made to establish the club , and the Nea Salamina sports club was formed on 7 March 1948 as the first leftist athletic club in Cyprus . After the club 's founding , many citizens expressed a desire to join ; however , the football side was weak . 
 = = = GSE Stadium banning and the CAFF = = = 
 Before the Pancyprian Games in May 1948 , the Hellenic Amateur Athletic Association ( <unk> ) asked all gymnastics associations in Cyprus , their members and athletes , to sign a public declaration that would express their support to the rightists in Greek Civil War , to declare that they espoused " nationalist beliefs " and to repudiate the leftists . The right @-@ wing athletic clubs and athletes signed the statements ; the only club refusing to sign the statement was the <unk> Paphos gymnastic association , which was excluded from the games . The left @-@ wing athletes were opposed to the declaration , and refused to sign the statement . Among the first athletes who refused were GSE champions Antonis <unk> ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) and <unk> <unk> ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) . The GSE invited both athletes to apologize , but they insisted on their position that sports should be separate from politics . The left @-@ wing athletes decided to support the <unk> Paphos association if the decision to exclude it from the Pancyprian Games stood . The GSE was favored to win the competition , but finished third . As a reaction to the fact that athletes of Nea Salamina were not involved in the Pancyprian Games , the GSE president informed the club it was not welcome at the GSE Stadium . Persecution of GSE and Anorthosis athletes who supported their teammates followed . The stadium @-@ use prohibition meant that Nea Salamina had nowhere to play . 
 Negative attitudes toward left @-@ wing athletes prevailed in other Cypriot cities . In Larnaca , the Alki Larnaca F.C. was founded in April 1948 . A month later , the Gymnastics Club Zeno ( GSZ ) banned Alki from using its GSZ Stadium ; a similar proposal to exclude Turks and Catholics was rejected . The GSZ amended its constitution , prohibiting enrollment of new members unless they signed a declaration that " they espouse the Hellenic nationalistic ideals " . This excluded left @-@ wing athletes from becoming members or using its stadium . In May , Orfeas Nicosia was founded in Nicosia ; that month , APOEL F.C. sent a greeting by telegram to <unk> ( " cordial brotherly greetings to the entire Greek youth athletes " ) , on the occasion of national games , and wished for the cessation of inner @-@ nation mutiny . APOEL asked all members and athletes of the club to sign a declaration , supporting the content of the telegram . Leftist members and athletes of APOEL considered " inner @-@ nation mutiny " as a challenge and political statement of the club , thus they distanced themselves from that statement . The Cypriot press encouraged a hostile climate with articles and commentary . This was followed by the indefinite suspension of five APOEL athletes ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) , who founded AC Omonia in June 1948 with former members of the APOEL . AS Kyrenia was later founded . 
 Due to their left @-@ wing political beliefs , members of the new clubs were not accepted into the Cyprus Football Association ( CFA ) and they established a new football federation ( the Cyprus Amateur Football Federation , or CAFF ) in December 1948 . The new federation organized leagues and cups , which attracted thousands of fans . The CAFF matches became more popular than those of the CFA . Six teams belonged to the CAFF : Nea Salamina in Famagusta , Omonia and Orfeas in Nicosia , Alki at Larnaca , <unk> at Limassol ( renamed Antaeus in 1951 ) and Neos Asteras in <unk> . 
 = = = Unification of Cypriot football = = = 
 CAFF members favored the unification of football in Cyprus . They tried for three years to persuade the CFA to accept them as members , without success . The existence of two football federations ( with two separate championships ) in a country such as Cyprus was unprecedented . The situation created economic hardship , and hampered the development and improvement of Cypriot football . The clubs felt that sports should reflect fraternity and friendship rather than discrimination . In December 1952 , the first issue of the sports newspaper <unk> supported the unification of Cypriot football . Foreign coaches of CFA clubs also supported unification , leading the CFA to respond that " their statements opposed the spirit of the Federation " . Coaches of CFA 's teams were initially hostile towards consolidation supporters . In summer 1953 , the majority of Cypriot sportspeople expressed support for football unification . In August of that year Nea Salamina , Omonia , Alki and Antaeus submitted a joint application to the CFA to join the Cypriot First Division . On 19 September , the CFA accepted Nea Salamina and Omonia for membership . However , the organization 's negative attitude towards those clubs continued . The league rejected applications from Alki , Orfeas and Neos Asteras ( although the former two joined a year later ) , arguing that according to its constitution one team must participate in the Cypriot First Division and two teams in the second division . The CAFF clubs accepted these conditions in the interest of unification . In an ad hoc meeting of CAFF , members agreed that Omonia would join the first division and Nea Salamina and Antaeus the second division . Following these decisions , CAFF disbanded . The first game between teams from the two federations ( a friendly ) was played by Nea Salamina and Anorthosis at GSE Stadium on 27 September 1953 . 5 @,@ 200 fans were present at the game between the two <unk> clubs . The final result was 3 – 1 in favor of Anorthosis , and the match was described as an evidence of superior sportsmanship and brotherhood of fans by <unk> . 
 = = = Famagusta municipal stadium = = = 
 After being denied access to the GSE stadium , the club did not have a venue for training . They initially practiced at the Saint Lukas pitch ( <unk> ) in Famagusta and began efforts to build a privately owned stadium . In December 1948 Israel made a CYP £ 3 @,@ 000 donation to the city of Famagusta , in gratitude for aid by its inhabitants to Jewish refugees , for a community @-@ service project . Gabriel Makris , a Famagusta alderman and Nea Salamina footballer , supported the association 's recommendation to build the stadium . The city council recognized the " financial assistance granted to the Jews to create Municipal Sports Stadium , which is available to <unk> for the promotion and spread of mass popular sport " . The stadium was available to Nea Salamina and other sports clubs . 
 In early 1949 , volunteer construction work began on a municipal stadium in Saint John Famagusta parish . The stadium — the first in Cyprus with a roof over the stands — was built by supporters of the club and footballers and completed in 1952 . It served as Nea Salamina 's headquarters from 1952 to 1953 . 
 In 1953 , after the unification of football federations , Nea Salamina used GSE Stadium . The city 's Municipal Stadium was used by the team for training . This period lasted until 1974 , when Famagusta was occupied by the Turkish Army after the Turkish invasion in Cyprus and the club was forced to move its headquarters . 
 = = = Ammochostos Stadium = = = 
 From 1974 to 1991 Nea Salamina used GSZ Stadium in Larnaca , Dasaki Stadium in Dasaki Achnas , Municipal Stadium in Deryneia and Antonis Papadopoulos Stadium in Larnaca . In 1991 the team built its own stadium , Ammochostos Stadium . 
 Ammochostos Stadium , owned by Nea Salamina in Larnaca , has a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat capacity and is primarily used for football . The club offices are in the same area . The stadium is named for the town of Famagusta ( Greek : <unk> ; Ammochostos ) , the original home of Nea Salamina before the Turkish occupation , and was built in 1991 near the refugee camps . The decision to build the stadium was made in 1989 ; construction began in December of that year , and thanks to club supporters in Cyprus and abroad , the Cyprus Sports Organisation and volunteer labor , the stadium was completed on schedule . The first Nea Salamina Famagusta game in the new stadium was played on Saturday , 12 October 1991 , against Evagoras Paphos . Nea Salamina won , 4 – 1 . The stadium hosted the 1992 UEFA European Under @-@ 16 Championship final on 17 May 1992 between Germany and Spain , which Germany won 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Emblem and colors = = = 
 Nea Salamina 's emblem incorporates the Olympic flame , the color red and the five rings of the Olympic Games . The club 's colors during its first two years were yellow and crimson , when it was part of the Cyprus Amateur Football Federation . After 1950 , the governing council changed its colors to red and white : red symbolizing power , and white symbolizing peace . Red @-@ and @-@ white striped jerseys were chosen because they resembled those worn by Olympiakos Piraeus . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The anthem of Nea Salamina is ( translated from Greek ) : 
 = = Competitions = = 
 = = = CAFF = = = 
 In five leagues of the Cyprus Amateur Football Federation , Nea Salamina failed to win a title ; during its last two years , it finished second . The 1952 – 53 season saw the cup finalists losing 2 – 0 to AC Omonia at <unk> stadium ( Omonia 's home pitch ) . 
 For 1948 – 49 , no statistics are available . Nea Salamina played ten games , winning three ( two at Neos Asteras and one against Alki ) , losing six and drawing once ( against Alki ) . 
 = = = Cypriot championships = = = 
 = = = = 1953 – 1959 = = = = 
 After the 1953 unification of Cypriot football , Nea Salamina played in the Cypriot Second Division ; its goal during the first season was winning promotion to the first division . Games were played in GSE Stadium , and the Famagusta Municipal Stadium was used for training . The second division had two groups ; Nea Salamina was in the Nicosia @-@ Larnaca @-@ Famagusta group . The group winner faced the winner of the Limassol @-@ Paphos group for promotion to first division . Nea Salamina finished second in its group , losing the chance at promotion . In the 1953 – 54 Cypriot Cup , the team reached the semifinals . Nea Salamina was the first team , although struggling in the second division , qualified to the semi @-@ finals of the Cypriot Cup 
 The next season the team led the second division , ensured its promotion . The league now had three groups , with Nea Salamina playing in the Larnaca @-@ Famagusta group . With the conquest of the first position in the group , fought for the promotion with the first teams of the other two groups : the champion of the Limassol @-@ Paphos group , Antaeus <unk> , and the champion of the Nicosia group , Orfeas , in a new three teams championships . Nea Salamina finished in first place . During the same period , in the 1954 – 55 Cypriot Cup , excluded from subsequent phases one of the strongest teams of the season , APOEL with 3 – 2 win in GSE stadium . After 57 years , in the 2001 – 02 Cypriot Cup the team repeated this success ; after struggling in the second division , it defeated future champion APOEL F.C. 1 – 0 , winning away at GSP Stadium . 
 The 1955 – 56 Cypriot First Division saw the team participating for the first time as a newly promoted side . It finished third , four points behind champion AEL Limassol . Third position has been the team 's highest finish , a position it has reached four times . Nea Salamina 's first first @-@ division game was against rival Anorthosis at their common ground , GSE Stadium . Nea Salamina won 3 – 2 , its first victory against Anorthosis . The team 's first years in first division saw victories over traditional league powerhouses APOEL FC , EPA Larnaca FC , Anorthosis Famagusta FC , Pezoporikos Larnaca and AC Omonia , at home and away . 
 = = = = 1960s = = = = 
 During the early years of the decade , Nea Salamina was strong in home games but weak away . Noteworthy is the conquest of the amateur championship from farm team the period 1960 – 61 , The games of the farm team gathered the same interest with the main team among fans , who enthusiastically celebrated winning the title . During this period the nucleus for a successful team was created , including <unk> <unk> ( who later played for Olympiakos Piraeus ) . In December 1963 , the league disbanded ; at that time , Nea Salamina was in a tight three @-@ way race with Omonia and APOEL . With the creation of Cypriot National Guard , many Nea Salamina 's players joined the army ; players would often come straight from camps throughout Cyprus to play league games with no training . 
 The 1965 – 66 season was one of the best ( but painful ) periods for Nea Salamina ; the team arguably played the best football in Cyprus . The team contended for the championship until the last game of the season and lose its first cup final . In a game against APOEL at the old GSP stadium , Nea Salamina was leading 3 – 0 . In the 62nd minute , an APOEL player hit a Nea Salamina 's player ; an APOEL grabbed and hid a linesman 's flag . The game was halted , and the CFA ordered a rematch . The dispute lasted more than three weeks ; in the meantime Nea Salamina was defeated by the <unk> team , Aris Limassol F.C .. In the penultimate match of the tournament Omonia and Salamina were tied for first place on points , and Olympiacos was one point behind . In the game against Olympiakos Nicosia Nea Salamina was leading 2 – 1 , but Olympiakos tied the game in allegedly excessive extra time . After clashes in the last few seconds , the game was halted and ordered replayed . Omonia was in first place with 50 points ; Nea Salamina was second with 47 and Olympiakos third with 46 . With a victory over Olympiakos Nea Salamina would won the championship , since it had more goals than Omonia . On 31 May 1966 many buses and cars drove from Famagusta to Nicosia , where Nea Salamina was defeated 6 – 3 . The best defense in the league , which had allowed fifteen goals in nineteen games , allowed six in one game . For a second time , Nea Salamina finished third . This defeat affected team morale in the cup final with rival Apollon Limassol ; although it was favored , the team lost 4 – 2 . During this period Salamina had the best defense in the league , with 21 goals in 20 games ( a team record ) . 
 Near the end of the 1966 – 67 season the board of Olympiakos reported rumors of future match @-@ fixing between Nea Salamina and Anorthosis to the team , which its president denied . Nea Salamina defeated Anorthosis ; Olympiacos won the league championship , despite its defeat by Omonia . The Olympiakos board apologized , congratulating Nea Salamina on its victory . By the end of the decade Nea Salamina was finishing mid @-@ table , despite an outflow of players to other teams or the army . 
 = = = = 1970s = = = = 
 During the first two seasons of the 1970s , Nea Salamina finished in the middle of the table ; the next two seasons threatened relegation , which was avoided . The club 's low point was 14 August 1974 , when the occupation of Famagusta by Turkish troops led to Nea Salamina becoming a refugee club . Fans and players scattered to unoccupied areas of Cyprus and abroad . In October , board members met at the offices of Aris Limassol , deciding to revive the club . Since most players were in Larnaca , it was decided to make Larnaca the club 's temporary home . Its offices were housed temporarily at the offices of Alki Larnaca F.C. and in January 1975 acquired a rented building . Expenses were paid with contributions from members and friends of the club . Two youth academies were founded , in Larnaca and Limassol . 
