 It is known that a building called the George has existed on the site since the 16th century or earlier , and many sources date the core of the existing inn to 1615 . The George Hotel has three principal sections , facing east and running from south to north parallel with Crawley High Street . Nothing of the exterior is original , except perhaps for parts of the tiled roof . The hotel contains 84 rooms and 6 meeting rooms with a capacity of up to 150 , regularly used for conferences , weddings , exhibitions , seminars and training sessions . The present structure is made up of disparate parts of various dates : the inn expanded to take in adjacent buildings as its success grew in the 18th and 19th centuries . Major changes took place in the 1930s , and the annex was knocked down in 1933 . 
 The inn has been associated with royalty , bareknuckle prizefighting , smuggling among other things , and has been the subject of novels and paintings . It was central to the plot of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's mystery novel Rodney Stone , written in 1896 . John George Haigh , a notorious serial killer in the 1940s known for his " acid bath " murders , stayed at the hotel on numerous occasions , and dined there on the day he killed one of his victims . The hotel is also reputedly haunted by the ghost of a nightwatchman , Mark Hurston ( or <unk> ) and other curious figures . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Medieval history = = = 
 At the time of the Domesday survey in 1086 there was no manor or village of Crawley , but the thickly forested area was gradually being cleared and settled . The land on which the village of Crawley developed — a sloping site with higher land to the south , at the point where the Low Weald rises to become the High Weald — was probably owned by William de Warenne , 1st Earl of Surrey as part of one of the manors to the south . 
 During the Norman era in the late 11th and 12th centuries , a nucleated village began to appear , prompted by the development of a north – south " High Street " forming part of a longer route from the capital city , London , to the port of Shoreham on the English Channel coast . This replaced an earlier northeast – southwest route linking local farms to the older settlement of West Green , about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) west of Crawley , because a north – south route could take advantage of an area of drier , harder land formed by an outcrop of sandstone from the Hastings Beds that jutted into the sticky , waterlogged Weald Clay , which predominated around West Green and Crawley . 
 The main road quickly became established , and Crawley was a natural stopping place almost exactly halfway between the coast and London . Its development into an urban area was assured when King John granted a charter for a market in 1202 . St John the Baptist 's Church was founded a few decades later , a manor house was built in the late 14th or early 15th century , and the local iron industry brought further prosperity . Buildings appeared on both sides of the High Street , which widened significantly as it passed the manor house and church , and the market 's position on a long @-@ distance through road enabled it to thrive . 
 = = = 16th – 17th century = = = 
 The first mention of The George appears in 1579 , when landowner Richard Covert died and passed on an area of land ( a tenement ) to his son . This necessitated a payment to the Lord of the manor . The tenement bore the name of The George , and was situated in a valuable position : in the centre of Crawley , on the west side of the High Street ( and just inside the parish of Ifield , a nearby village ; the boundary between Ifield and Crawley parishes ran along the middle of the High Street ) . The building on the land was almost certainly an inn at that time , and many sources assert that its oldest parts date from about 1450 . Its centre section , an open hall @-@ house of a type common in the area , may be even older , possibly late 14th century . 
 An early remodelling came in 1615 , when a timber @-@ framed extension was built on the south side , a new jettied cross @-@ wing was added at the front and a stone fireplace was installed . This bears the date 1615 ( although this may have been carved later ) , and has carvings and arches . An inventory dated 1689 , carried out when the owner died , revealed that the George Hotel had 15 bedrooms , two parlours , a kitchen , a bakery , a small brewery , stables , a barn , a back yard and a cellar . Meanwhile , a gallows was erected outside the hotel , partly spanning the High Street ; one end was attached to the top floor of the building . 
 Until the 18th century , the narrow , waterlogged road northwards from Crawley towards Reigate and London could only be used by horses , and even then only with difficulty ; it was impassable for carriages , carts and other wheeled vehicles . Trade was being affected , demand for travel between Crawley and London was growing ( by the late 17th century it was one of several towns in Sussex to be served by scheduled packhorse @-@ drawn goods wagons to and from the capital ) , and the nearby market towns of Horsham and East Grinstead threatened to overtake Crawley in importance . ( Like Crawley , they each had two licensed taverns in 1636 , when an inventory of Sussex 's 61 licensed premises was drawn up . ) In 1696 , one of England 's first turnpike Acts was passed , which allowed tolls to be collected to pay for repairs and improvement . A tollgate was built at the north end of Crawley , which gave its name to the present neighbourhood of Northgate . 
 = = = 18th – 19th century = = = 
 The growth of Brighton as a fashionable seaside resort from the mid @-@ 18th century was also invaluable to Crawley 's prosperity : it lay directly south of Crawley , and replaced Shoreham as the main focus of north – south traffic . In 1770 , the section between Lowfield Heath ( north of Crawley ) and Brighton was turnpiked , and for the first time the full length of the London – Brighton road was properly constructed and maintained . The journey by horse and carriage now took about eight hours , and Crawley was perfectly placed to become a daytime or overnight stopping point . Within a few years , about 60 coaches were making the journey every day , and The George — as the town 's largest and best @-@ equipped hotel — became " the recognised halfway house between London and Brighton " . 
 Artist Thomas Rowlandson 's aquatint of 1789 , An Excursion to Brighthelmstone in 1789 ( the title uses Brighton 's original name ) , shows The George Hotel prominently . It is the earliest artistic depiction of Crawley , and shows a riotous horse auction underneath the original gallows . The horses were reputedly seized from smugglers apprehended in the area , which was notorious for that activity at the time . <unk> prizefighting was also a major local attraction from which The George benefited : nearby Crawley Down and Copthorne were " the most renowned battlefields in the south of England " , and The George itself became " the hub of the pugilistic universe " . Tens of thousands of people of all classes — including members of the Royal Family ( such as the Prince Regent ) , statesmen and famous playwrights — would visit Crawley Down or Copthorne Common to watch and bet on extremely violent contests which could last for hours ; the George was invariably used as the base from which to visit these illegal bouts . Other famous visitors of this era included Lord Nelson — whose sister lived in the nearby village of <unk> — Queen Victoria , who on one occasion was stranded overnight when her carriage broke down , and the Prince Regent , whose patronage of Brighton and regular travelling of the London – Brighton road indirectly brought about the upturn in fortunes experienced by Crawley in general , and the George Hotel in particular , during the 18th century . In this era , it was one of Britain 's best @-@ known and most important coaching inns , and it held " the premier position " among Sussex 's many such establishments . 
 Also by this time , the former gallows had been converted into an inn sign that soon became a landmark , and some structural and exterior alterations were made — the first of many over the subsequent years . The earliest known photograph of the George , dated 1867 , shows a dilapidated building of several uncoordinated parts : it had expanded over the years to take in buildings on each side of the original medieval inn , and it was considered a purely functional building with no obvious architectural merit . By this time , the coaching era was in terminal decline because of the increasing popularity of rail travel ; a line was opened between London and Brighton in 1841 , with a station at Three Bridges just east of Crawley , and the town centre received its own branch line and station in 1848 . Despite this , Crawley High Street remained busy as the town continued to grow , and The George underwent more renovation and was extended further . In particular , an old ( possibly 18th @-@ century ) free @-@ standing building which stood in the middle of the wide High Street , and which was once used as a candle factory , was acquired by the George 's owners and became an annex . It was this building , rather than the main part of the hotel , which accommodated Queen Victoria when she was forced to stay overnight . Cycling for leisure purposes became a fad in the late 19th century , and the London – Brighton road was a popular route ; the George became a regular stopping point for groups of cyclists . 
 = = = 20th century to present = = = 
 Major changes took place in the 1930s . The annex was knocked down in 1933 , and the site in the middle of the High Street was converted into a bus stop and a car park for the hotel ( itself removed since the street 's pedestrianisation in the early 21st century ) . The gallows sign was replaced with a replica , and two smaller facsimiles were added in the car park , which was also flanked by four medieval @-@ style lanterns . Meanwhile , wide @-@ ranging renovations to the hotel itself made the building look even older than it did before ; all structural changes took its medieval character into account and were made in a complementary style , making all the disparate parts of the hotel " look an integrated whole " . 
 Soon after World War II , Crawley was designated as England 's second New Town by the Labour government of Clement Attlee , who passed the New Towns Act 1946 . Housing , industry and offices developed rapidly around the core of the old town ; despite early fears that historic buildings ( including The George Hotel ) would have to be destroyed , most of the historic High Street was preserved . The growth of nearby Gatwick Airport from a little @-@ used airstrip into an international airport provided further impetus , and by the start of the 21st century Crawley had become a regional centre with 100 @,@ 000 people — compared to a population of about 7 @,@ 000 before World War II . Demand for hotel space grew continuously , and The George was extended to the rear and began marketing itself as the Gatwick George Hotel . As of 2016 it is branded Ramada Crawley Gatwick . 
 The George Hotel was listed at Grade II * by English Heritage on 21 June 1948 . Such buildings are defined as " particularly important " and " of more than special interest " . As of August 2013 , it was one of 12 Grade II * structures , and 100 listed buildings and structures of all grades , in the Borough of Crawley . Since the New Town was established , Crawley has been split into 13 neighbourhoods , and all listed buildings in the borough are described on the council 's schedule of listed buildings as being in one of these neighbourhoods ; the George Hotel is classed as being in West Green , and is one of six listed buildings in that neighbourhood . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The George Hotel has three principal sections , facing east and running from south to north parallel with Crawley High Street . Despite uncertainty over its early history , the building is generally agreed to have 15th @-@ century origins , which are most evident in the northernmost bay . This section has a much lower roofline than the rest of the hotel , although the whole building is two @-@ storey . The northern section is believed to have been a two @-@ bay open hall @-@ house with a parlour wing ; their thick wooden roof beams ( in the form of crown posts ) , blackened by smoke , and timber @-@ framed walls survive . The centre section was the south wing of the original building ; it would have been the service area to the hall @-@ house , with kitchen facilities and similar , and formed a cross @-@ wing with large joists and a cellar . The rear wall has braces which suggest the former existence of a rear entrance leading to the stables behind . A stone fireplace inside may be as old as the date carved on it — 1615 — but the inscription is believed to be more recent . 
 None of the exterior is original , although parts of the tiled roof may be . It is laid with slabs of Horsham stone — a local material commonly used on old roofs in the Crawley area . The façade is mostly tile @-@ hung to the first floor with timber framing below . The entrance is gabled and has a canted bay window of 18th @-@ century origin . The southern part of the façade is stuccoed and topped by a parapet . It is probably an 18th @-@ century refacing of an older building ( or buildings ) incorporated into the hotel as it grew . 
 The hotel , now known as Ramada Crawley Gatwick , has 84 rooms , including singles , doubles , twin rooms , family rooms and four @-@ bed rooms . Its six meeting rooms , with a capacity of up to 150 , are regularly used for conferences , weddings , exhibitions , seminars and training sessions . There is also a Thai restaurant , a Chinese buffet and a Roman Empire @-@ themed cocktail bar . 
 = = Notable associations = = 
 Mark Lemon , the first editor of the satirical magazine Punch , lived on the High Street in Crawley from 1858 until his death in 1870 . He became an important figure in Crawley society , and was generous with his time and money : for example , in 1863 , he organised and paid for festivities at The George Hotel and the nearby White Hart Inn to celebrate the wedding of Edward , Prince of Wales and Princess Alexandra of Denmark . A blue plaque outside the George commemorates his time in the town . 
 The hotel was central to the plot of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's mystery novel Rodney Stone , written in 1896 . Sussex 's bareknuckle prizefighting tradition was a central theme , and the novel described at length the build @-@ up to a fight involving the eponymous narrator 's friend Boy Jim , including the moment they arrived at " the high front door of the old George Inn , glowing from every door and pane and crevice , in honour of the noble company who were to sleep within that night " . Jem Belcher , one of several real bareknuckle fighters who featured in fictionalised form in the novel , trained Boy Jim at the hotel . 
 John George Haigh , a notorious serial killer in the 1940s known for his " acid bath " murders , stayed at the hotel on numerous occasions , and dined there on the day he killed one of his victims . 
 = = Haunting = = 
 The hotel is reputedly haunted by the ghost of a nightwatchman , Mark Hurston ( or <unk> ) , who died by drinking poisoned wine — either planted to trap a recurring intruder to the inn , or adulterated by a guest angered at being woken by him . It has been reported that a locked broom cupboard has been found open , strange figures have been seen , and electric lights have turned on and off . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past = 
 The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , known as The Legend of Zelda : Triforce of the Gods ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 <unk> , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu : Kamigami no <unk> ) in Japan , is an action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game console . It is the third installment in The Legend of Zelda series and was released in 1991 in Japan and 1992 in North America and Europe . 
 The plot of A Link to the Past focuses on Link as he travels on a journey to save Hyrule , defeat Ganon and rescue maidens related to the Sages . A Link to the Past uses a 3 / 4 top @-@ down perspective similar to that of the original The Legend of Zelda , dropping the side scrolling elements of Zelda II : The Adventure of Link . A Link to the Past introduced elements to the series that are still commonplace today , such as the concept of an alternate or parallel world , the Master Sword and other new weapons and items . 
 Released to critical and commercial success , A Link to the Past was a landmark title for Nintendo and is widely considered today to be one of the greatest video games of all time . Over four million units of the game have been sold worldwide . A Link to the Past was ported to the Game Boy Advance with slight changes , and is available for the Wii , Wii U , and New Nintendo 3DS via the Virtual Console . 
 A successor to the game , titled The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in November 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Instead of continuing to use the side @-@ scrolling perspective introduced to the series by Zelda II : The Adventure of Link , A Link to the Past reverts to an overhead perspective similar to that of the original . While A Link to the Past still uses mechanics and concepts from the original game , it also introduces new elements and innovations . For instance , arrows are now separate items , as bombs are in the original , instead of using a Rupee to fire an arrow . A Link to the Past also takes concepts from The Adventure of Link , such as the magic meter , which is used by items such as the Lamp . Control of Link is more flexible than in previous games , as he can walk diagonally and can run with the aid of the Pegasus Boots ( Pegasus Shoes in the GBA version ) . Link 's sword attack was improved to swing sideways instead of merely stabbing forward ; this gives his sword a broader range and makes combat easier . Link swings his sword as the default attack in future Zelda games , although stabbing is also possible in the later 3D incarnations . 
 Recurring items and techniques were introduced for the first time in A Link to the Past , such as the <unk> , the Master Sword , the Spin Attack technique , the Flute ( even though its icon is an ocarina ) , and the Pegasus Boots . Heart Containers that increase the player 's maximum health ( hit points ) in the earlier two games are present , but many are split into " Pieces of Heart " , four of which make up one Heart Container . Most of them are well hidden , adding replay value to the game . All dungeons are multi @-@ level , requiring Link to walk between floors and sometimes fall through holes to land on lower levels . 
 A Link to the Past is the first appearance of what would subsequently become a major Zelda trademark : the existence of two parallel worlds between which the player travels . The first , called the Light World , is the ordinary Hyrule where Link grew up with his uncle . The second is what was once the Sacred Realm , but became the Dark World when Ganon acquired the Triforce . The Dark World is a corrupted version of Hyrule ; the water is a dark , unpleasant blue @-@ green color , the grass is dead , skulls replace rocks and pots , and trees have faces . People change forms in the Dark World based on their nature ; without an item to prevent it ( in this case , the Moon Pearl ) , Link turns into a pink rabbit . Each location in the Light World corresponds to a similar location in the Dark World , usually with a similar physical structure but an opposite nature ( e.g. a desert in the Light World corresponds to a swamp in the Dark World , a peaceful village in the Light World corresponds to a dilapidated town of thieves in the Dark World ) . 
 Link can travel from the Dark World to the Light World at almost any outside location by using the Magic Mirror , and can travel back to the Dark World again from the same location using a temporary portal left behind on the map at the point where he reappears in the Light World . Otherwise , Link must use hidden warp locations throughout the Light World to travel from the Light World to the Dark World . Travel between worlds allows for puzzles in A Link to the Past that exploit structural differences between the Light and Dark Worlds , as Link may travel to otherwise inaccessible areas in one world by warping from parallel but accessible locations in the other world . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Players assume the role of hero Link , a young boy living with his uncle south of Hyrule Castle . Princess Zelda , a descendant of the seven sages , is held captive in the castle dungeon by Agahnim , a treacherous wizard who has set forth a chain of events to unleash Ganon . <unk> , a descendant of those who forged the Master Sword , mentors Link on his quest . Series antagonist Ganon remains sealed in the Dark World . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 A Link to the Past is a prequel to the original The Legend of Zelda and Zelda II : The Adventure of Link . At the beginning of the game , a young boy named Link is awakened by a telepathic message from Princess Zelda , who says that she is locked in the dungeon of nearby Hyrule Castle . As the message closes , Link finds his uncle ready for battle , telling Link to remain in bed . After his uncle leaves , however , Link ignores his uncle 's command and follows him to the dungeons under Hyrule Castle . When he arrives , he finds his uncle mortally wounded . Link 's uncle tells Link to rescue Princess Zelda from her prison , giving him his sword and shield . Link navigates the castle and rescues Zelda from her cell , and the two escape into a secret passage through the sewers that leads to a sanctuary . 
 Link is told by a man in the sanctuary that Agahnim , a wizard who has usurped the throne , is planning to break a seal made hundreds of years ago by the Seven Sages . The seal was placed to imprison a dark wizard named Ganon in the Dark World , a near @-@ mirror of Hyrule which was once known as the Sacred Realm before Ganon invaded it , obtained the legendary Triforce held there , and used its power to turn the realm into a land of darkness . Agahnim intends to break the seal by sending the descendants of the Seven Sages who made the seal into the Dark World . The only thing that can defeat Agahnim is the Master Sword , a sword forged to combat evil . To prove that he is worthy to wield it , Link needs three magic pendants , hidden in dungeons guarded by mythical defenders . On his way to retrieve the first , he meets an elder , <unk> , who becomes Link 's mentor offering hints and advice at key stages of the journey . After retrieving the pendants , Link takes them to the resting place of the Master Sword . As Link draws the sword from its pedestal , Zelda telepathically calls him to the Sanctuary , informing him that soldiers of Hyrule Castle have arrived . Link arrives at the Sanctuary moments after the soldiers have vacated , where he learns from the dying Sanctuary keeper that Zelda has been taken to Hyrule Castle . Link goes to rescue her but arrives too late ; Agahnim sends Zelda to the Dark World . Link then faces Agahnim in battle and defeats him , but Agahnim 's last act is to send Link to the Dark World as well . 
 To save Hyrule , Link is required to rescue the seven descendants of the Seven Sages from dungeons scattered across the Dark World . Once the seven maidens are freed , they use their power to break the barrier around Ganon 's Tower , where Link faces Agahnim , who creates two ghostly specters each as powerful as he is . After Link defeats Agahnim for a second time , Ganon rises up from Agahnim 's body , turns into a bat , and flies away . Link chases him , finally confronting him inside the Pyramid of Power at the center of the Dark World . After a battle resulting in Ganon 's demise , Link touches the Triforce and restores both the Dark World and Hyrule to their state before Ganon intervened . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1988 , development of a new NES Zelda began , but one year later , the project was brought to Nintendo 's next console ; the Super Famicom in Japan , the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in other regions . Due to the success of previous titles in the series , Nintendo was able to invest a large budget and ample development time and resources into the game 's production . At the time , most SNES game cartridges had 4 Mbit ( 512 KB ) of storage space . This game broke the trend by using 8 Mbit ( 1 MB ) , allowing the Nintendo development team to create a remarkably expansive world for Link to inhabit . Like Super Mario World , this game used a simple graphic compression method on the SNES by limiting the color depth of many tiles to eight colors instead of the SNES 's native 16 @-@ color tiles . The tiles were decompressed at runtime by adding a leading bit to each pixel 's color index . Storage space was also saved by eliminating duplication : The Light World and the Dark World are almost identical in layout ( though using differing texture tiles ) , and the Dark World exists in the game 's ROM only as an " overlay " of the Light World . 
 The script of the game was written by series newcomer Kensuke Tanabe , while Yoshiaki Koizumi was responsible for the background story explained in the instruction manual . The English language localization included changes to the original Japanese game . The most common change was the removal of religious references to conform with Nintendo of America 's content guidelines . The most obvious change was made to the subtitle of the game , which was renamed from Kamigami no Triforce ( lit . " The Triforce of the Gods " ) to A Link to the Past . The " Sanctuary " in which Zelda hides during the first act is quite obviously modeled on the Christian chapel , with rows of pews , stained glass windows , a raised chancel and altar , but it contains no overt religious symbols , and the dialogue of characters within it was simplified to remove any religious implication . The font used to represent an unreadable language , Hylian , originally had designs of a vulture and an ankh . These designs were based on Egyptian hieroglyphs which carry religious meanings , and they were altered in the English version . The localization also changed plot details included in the instruction manual . The priest Agahnim became a wizard , and his background , which originally implied that he was sent by the gods , was altered to remove any celestial origin . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score to A Link to the Past was composed , arranged , and produced by Koji Kondo . The overworld theme of The Legend of Zelda ( " Hyrule Overture " ) returns in A Link to the Past , redone in S @-@ SMP style . The theme is also featured in " Light World Overworld " and in " End Credits " . A Link to the Past helped to establish the musical core of the Zelda series . While the first game originated the " Hyrule Overture " , many recurring motifs of the Zelda scores come from A Link to the Past , including " Zelda 's Lullaby " ( Princess Zelda 's Theme ) , " Ganondorf 's Theme " , " Hyrule Castle " ( Royal Family Theme ) , " <unk> Village " and " Select Screen / Fairy Cave " . These themes have been used in subsequent The Legend of Zelda games . A soundtrack to Kamigami no Triforce , entitled The Legend of Zelda : Sound and Drama , was released by Sony Records in Japan on June 22 , 1994 . The first disc is 44 minutes long and features rearranged versions of a selection of the game 's themes , along with a bonus drama track . The second disc features 54 minutes of the original arrangements for the game and those of the original NES game , The Legend of Zelda . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Chris Houlihan Room = = = 
 Nintendo Power held a contest which selected a winner at random to appear in the next The Legend of Zelda game . A certain single room in A Link to the Past contained 45 Blue Rupees and a note bearing a greeting from Chris Houlihan , the winner of the contest . The room has been found through five different methods , and was intended as a crash prevention measure ; the game would send players to this room if it couldn 't determine where Link was going when he goes to another area . The message reads : " My name is Chris Houlihan . This is my top secret room . Keep it between us , okay ? " There was not wide awareness of the room until more than a decade after the release of A Link to the Past after the increased popularity of the Internet and Super NES emulators . The Game Boy Advance re @-@ release of A Link to the Past titled The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past & Four Swords removed the ability to access the room , though it could still be found in the game 's code . The Virtual Console re @-@ releases on the Wii and Wii U of A Link to the Past however allowed players to access the room . 
 GamesRadar included it in its lists of the greatest video game Easter eggs and the nine " video game secrets that were almost never found . " GamesRadar 's Jason Fanelli called it " one of the Zelda franchise 's biggest mysteries . " GamesRadar 's Justin Towell included it in his list of the top seven secret rooms in video games at number two . He felt that the contest prize was exciting , and called it " one of the coolest and most exclusive secrets in the Zelda universe . " 1UP.com featured it in its list of " 25 things you didn 't know about The Legend of Zelda . " American Broadcasting Company 's Good Game , The Escapist , IGN , GameSpy , G4TV , PALGN , and Nintendo Life referenced it in articles which discuss video game Easter eggs and secrets . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 A comic book adaptation of A Link to the Past illustrated by Shotaro <unk> was published in Nintendo Power that was serialized for 12 issues from January to December 1992 . The comic was then re @-@ released as a trade paperback in 1993 . The comic is a loose adaptation of the original game 's story , featuring several plot changes and new characters . Two other manga were released in Japan : a manga by Ataru <unk> from 1995 to 1996 that was serialized in Enix Corporation 's Monthly GFantasy and later collected into three volumes and a one @-@ volume manga by the duo Akira Himekawa released in 2005 corresponding with the release of Game Boy Advance version . Both follow the game 's plot more closely , and the latter introduced a new character called " <unk> " , a thief with a single devil 's horn and a star under her eye . 
 = = = Related games = = = 
 A French version of this game was released in Canada , making it the only French @-@ only release in North America for the SNES . This version had the same case as the English release in North America , but the whole game was translated in French . On December 2 , 2006 in Japan and January 22 , 2007 in America , the game was added to the Wii Shop Channel 's Virtual Console . Players can download the game for 800 Wii Points , or US $ 8 . The English version is nearly identical to the English SNES version , with none of the GBA additions or changes . The next Zelda title , Link 's Awakening was released in 1993 for the Nintendo Game Boy . It retained many of A Link to the Past 's gameplay mechanics , including the top @-@ down perspective , as well as an overworld which resembled that of A Link to the Past . After traveling to train abroad , Link is shipwrecked and awakens on an island called Koholint . Beginning on March 2 , 1997 a simple unaltered re @-@ release of the original Japanese version of A Link to the Past was broadcast via Satellaview . The game would be rebroadcast more often than any other Zelda title on the Satellaview , and was the only Zelda title broadcast by St.GIGA after ties with Nintendo were broken in April 1999 . Unlike the two other Satellaview Zelda titles , Kamigami no Triforce lacked SoundLink support . In 2011 Shigeru Miyamoto expressed desire to have A Link to the Past remade for the Nintendo 3DS , stating how attractive the two layers would look . In April 2013 , Nintendo announced in its Nintendo Direct presentation that a new game based on the same world as A Link to the Past is currently in development for Nintendo 3DS , featuring new 3D visuals . Apart from official sequels and re @-@ releases made or licensed by Nintendo , A Link to the Past has proven to be very popular within the game @-@ modding community , inspiring the development of numerous fangames , such as the unofficial 2007 sequel The Legend of Zelda : Parallel Worlds . 
 = = = = Inishie no <unk> = = = = 
 In 1997 , a follow @-@ up entitled BS Zelda no Densetsu : Inishie no <unk> ( lit . " BS The Legend of Zelda : Ancient Stone Tablets " or " Stone Tablets of Antiquity " ) was released in Japan . Designed exclusively for the Super Famicom 's Satellaview peripheral , the game would make notable use of a voice broadcast system called SoundLink to provide voice @-@ acting for several of the characters from A Link to the Past . The game takes place six years after the events in A Link to the Past and it is set in Hyrule 's Light World . The game notably lacks a Link character , and instead the player character is known as the Hero of Light . The available player @-@ characters are actually the male and female BS @-@ X avatars that also featured in BS Zelda no Densetsu . The game was divided into four weekly episodes . These episodes were played live , and a voice @-@ acted soundtrack simultaneously ran on the satellite network , sometimes containing suggestions , clues , and plot development for the game currently being broadcast . Each week , the player could only access certain portions of the overworld . Areas shrouded in clouds were unreachable . Two dungeons were accessible per week , however the episode ended only when time expired and not when the player had completed all the objectives for that week . The game could only be played during the set hours because the SoundLink content was central to gameplay ( and not stored on the base unit or flash @-@ RAM cartridge in any way ) , and the timer was based on a real @-@ time clock set by the satellite itself . 
 = = = = A Link to the Past and Four Swords = = = = 
 The game was re @-@ released for the Game Boy Advance in 2002 in North America and 2003 in other territories as part of The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past and Four Swords , a collaborative development effort between Nintendo and Capcom . The port of A Link to the Past contains minor changes from the original , including the addition of vocal grunts and other sound effects taken from Ocarina of Time and Majora 's Mask . Four Swords is a multi @-@ player adventure that interacts with the single @-@ player adventure . Accomplishments can be transferred between the two ; for example , if the player learns a new sword technique , it is made available in both modes . By completing Four Swords , a new dungeon called the Palace of the Four Sword is unlocked in A Link to the Past . Dungeons are randomly generated and are affected by the number of players . If only two players are active , the game ensures that all puzzles generated do not require a third or fourth player to solve . The plot of Four Swords revolves around the wind mage Vaati who escapes from the Four Sword he is sealed in and captures Princess Zelda to marry her . Link uses the Four Sword to create three copies of himself and rescues Zelda , trapping Vaati in the sword once again . At the time of its release , the story of Four Swords was considered the oldest tale in the series ' timeline . 
 = = = = A Link Between Worlds = = = = 
 On November 22 , 2013 , Nintendo released The Legend of Zelda : A Link Between Worlds , which takes place in the same world , but features a new storyline , new puzzles and original dungeons . Height and depth play a large role in the game by taking advantage of the 3DS ’ 3D feature , while maintaining the traditional top @-@ down perspective . IGN gave the game a score of 9 @.@ 4 out of 10 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A Link to the Past is one of the best @-@ selling SNES games , with 4 @.@ 61 million units sold worldwide , and has had an exceptionally long stay on Nintendo Power 's top games list ( ranking number 2 in Nintendo Power 's last issue ) : when the SNES list was finally retired , A Link to the Past had more than five consecutive years in the number one spot . It was re @-@ released as a Player 's Choice title in North America , indicating that it has sold a minimum of one million copies there . 
 A Link to the Past was critically acclaimed upon release for its graphics and gameplay , and has since been recognized by critics as one of the greatest video games of all time . In 2005 , IGN editors placed it 11th in its " Top 100 Games " , while readers voted it to 5th place . The following year Entertainment Weekly chose it as the best game of all @-@ time . Members of GameFAQs ranked it the 4th best , and readers of Japanese magazine Famitsu ranked it 31st in a 2006 poll . It also placed 3rd in Electronic Gaming Monthly 's list , 23rd in Game Informer 's , and 3rd in a best 200 Nintendo games list by Nintendo Power . In July 2007 , readers of the magazine Edge voted it sixth in a poll of the 100 best games of all time . ScrewAttack placed it 2nd on their list of top 20 Super Nintendo games . GamesRadar named A Link to the Past the 3rd best Super NES game of all time , losing only to Chrono Trigger ( 2nd ) and Super Metroid ( 1st ) . It was awarded Best Sequel of 1992 by Electronic Gaming Monthly . The game placed eighth ( the second @-@ highest Zelda game on the list ) in Official Nintendo Magazine 's " 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time " list . In 2009 , Game Informer put A Link to the Past 12th on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time " , saying that it " remains a blast today " . This is 11 places ahead of the rank it had back in 2001 . The game was reviewed in 1993 in Dragon No. 198 by Sandy Petersen in the " Eye of the Monitor " column . Petersen gave the game 5 out of 5 stars . 
 A Link to the Past & Four Swords for the Game Boy Advance received positive reviews and sold over 1 @.@ 81 million units . IGN praised it for being a faithful conversion of the original , but noted that the audio did not sound as crisp on the Game Boy Advance , and found the frequent sound effects tiresome . The game holds the top spot of Metacritic 's all @-@ time high scores for Game Boy Advance games with a score of 95 . In 2007 , IGN named A Link to the Past & Four Swords the third best Game Boy Advance game of all time . GamePro 's Star Dingo called it a " masterpiece , " as well as an " important part of the Grand Renaissance of the Second Dimension . " He also praised the overworld for its secrets and " quirky random characters , " adding that playing it required patience and exploring . Star Dingo praised the port of A Link to the Past 's ability to retain its visuals . He specifically praises its " clean sprites , " calling its overworld a " colorful , happy place , " sarcastically calling it kiddy . He also questioned how the series ' cartoon style was abnormal for the series . Star Dingo called the sound effects " indelible , " though he noted that they were " a little dated . " UGO Networks compared Four Swords to The Legend of Zelda : Oracle of Ages and Oracle of Seasons , calling it " similarly gimmicky " . They commented that the best Four Swords brought was its sequel , The Legend of Zelda : The Minish Cap . CNET praised both the original A Link to the Past release as well as the Four Swords multiplayer mode , calling the former a " great handheld port of one of the greatest games ever released for Nintendo 's 16 @-@ bit system " , while describing the latter as " an exciting , replayable multiplayer experience " . 
 = Libris Mortis = 
 Libris Mortis : The Book of Undead is a book which is an official supplement for the 3 @.@ 5 edition of the Dungeons and Dragons role @-@ playing game . It is about the fictional undead within the D & D universe and comprises seven chapters , introducing new content for Dungeon Masters and players , as well as providing general information about undead . 
 It was received positively by reviewers , with praise for its material for Dungeon Masters and its illustrations , but received criticism for its weak player @-@ oriented content . The book was the second in the series of books about specific monster types , the first being <unk> . Similar books published since include Lords of Madness . Libris Mortis included content from older books , such as Tome and Blood and the Book of Vile Darkness , that had been reworked . 
 = = Inspiration and production = = 
 Libris Mortis was written to present " a comprehensive overview of the undead " within the Dungeons & Dragons universe , offering new game rules and content , for both players and Dungeon Masters . The book is in the same format as the earlier published <unk> , which instead focused on Dragons , and was described as " a super @-@ sized monster ecology " by the Nuketown podcast . Similar books that have since been released include Fiendish Codex I : Hordes of the Abyss , Fiendish Codex II : Tyrants of the Nine Hells and Lords of Madness . 
 Inspiration for the book 's content came from numerous sources . In an interview posted on the Wizards of the Coast website , Collins said that inspiration came from Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Angel , various Dracula films , along with films The Mummy and The Mummy Returns . Cordell said that pop culture has " less impact on [ his ] conceptualizations of the undead " , but he did mention The Evil Dead , 28 Days Later and the novel Salem 's Lot . According to Collins , he and Cordell worked equally on the book , with Collins focusing more on material relating to character building , sample undead and running undead , while Cordell dealt with monster design and undead material , but he said that they " dabbled in each others ' " sections quite a bit as well " . He also mentioned a monster template designed by Matt <unk> that was originally written for the Monster Manual III and had been included in Libris Mortis . 
 = = Origin of the name = = 
 Libris Mortis was named after a book from within the Dungeons & Dragons universe written by an <unk> cleric of <unk> named <unk> in a dialect of the Celestial language of good outsiders . The title of the fictional book probably translates into English as From the Books of Death , though the dialect is no longer used . 
 The title Libris Mortis ' was intended to be interpreted as Latin , but Book of the Dead would translate as Liber <unk> . On the subject of name , Collins was quoted as saying " I don 't have any insight on the naming process that produced Libris Mortis . I don 't know Latin and wasn 't involved in selecting that name . Regardless , I think what 's in the book is far more important that what name is attached to it . " 
 = = Content = = 
 Libris Mortis has seven chapters and an introduction . The chapters are named " All About Undead " , " Character Options " , " Prestige Classes " , " Spells " , " Equipment " , " New Monsters " and " Campaigns " . 
 = = = " All About Undead " = = = 
 The first chapter , " All About Undead " , contains general information about undead monsters . The chapter discusses the ecology of undead creatures , though this section was described as " very small " , and talks about undead religion , introducing new deities . The chapter also discusses " stranger areas " , including the idea of undead citizenship in cosmopolitan cities . Variant rules are introduced for areas including hauntings and exorcisms , which were received positively , and for undead hunger and appetites . The section also includes advice on how to combat undead , but according to Casey Smith of D20 Magazine Rack , " veteran players probably won 't get much out of this part of the book " . Overall , the section was described by one reviewer as " one of the more interesting " . 
 = = = " Character Options " = = = 
 The second chapter , " Character Options " , lists 59 feats , discusses undead characters in the party , and offers rules for undead monster classes . Many of the feats are geared towards spellcasters , with few martial feats , a single <unk> feat and no feats geared specifically towards Druids or Barbarians . Different types of feats include the <unk> tree , for spellcasters to improve their undead , monstrous feats to modify the special abilities of undead creatures , and tomb @-@ tainted feats , allowing living characters to gain undead traits . Smith commended feats that Dungeon Masters may use , such as Spell Drain , <unk> and Necrotic Reserves , but said that " feats that players might use aren 't nearly as interesting " . The discussion of and rules for undead characters was said to be the " weakest section of the book " . Five alternate base classes were introduced in the Savage Species " monsters as classes " format . These are classes for the Ghoul / <unk> , <unk> , Mummy , Vampire Spawn and Wight . 
 = = = " Prestige Classes " = = = 
 Chapter three , " Prestige Classes " , introduces eleven new prestige classes . 
 Death 's Chosen , for mortals with undead masters . 
 The <unk> is a Bard @-@ specific class , and a " personal favourite " of Smith . 
 Master of Radiance is a Druid specific class for fighting undead , 
 Master of the <unk> can summon incorporeal undead . 3 @.@ 5 edition versions of the Pale Master and the True Necromancer ( originally from Tome and Blood ) can also be found . 
 The chapter has four prestige classes specifically for undead : 
 <unk> Exemplar is a class for incorporeal undead 
 The Lurking Terror is a stealthy undead class 
 The Master Vampire strengthens the abilities already possessed by a vampire 
 The Tomb Warden is a prestige class designed for undead who guard tombs . 
 Kenneth Newquist , of Nuketown , said that the undead prestige classes " are excellent for turning traditional undead threats into something exceptional " , and said that his " only complaint with these prestige classes is that there aren 't enough of them " . 
 = = = " Spells " = = = 
 Chapter four , " Spells " , introduces 57 new spells . The spells mostly focus around the school of <unk> , with many domain spells for the new deities introduced in the first chapter . Spells commented on by reviewers included <unk> Field , Awaken Undead , Wither Limb , <unk> , Necrotic <unk> ( and related spells , including Necrotic Domination and Necrotic <unk> ) , along with spells aimed at players , such as Spawn Screen and Mass Death Ward , described as " more pragmatic than exciting " . Some of the spells included in the chapter were version 3 @.@ 5 reworks of spells found in the Book of Vile Darkness . 
 = = = " Equipment " = = = 
 Chapter five , " Equipment " , contains sections on special items and alchemical substances , " <unk> " , magic items and undead grafts . <unk> , poisons that affect undead , were poorly received by reviewers , with the Nuketown podcast asking " we have plenty of folklore remedies for combating undead , why not create magical versions of those ? " Magic items included profane weapons , sacred weapons , ectoplasmic armor and specific items including the Ghoul Globe and Unholy Shroud . This section was also criticized by the Nuketown podcast , which said that the " Magic item section is only six pages ; I 'd like to have seen more magic items , particularly more unique ones alone with a few lesser artifacts " . The grafts section worked on rules introduced in the Book of Vile Darkness and the Fiend Folio , adding new undead " grafts " , but did not include rules for creating your own . 
 = = = " New Monsters " = = = 
 Chapter six , " New Monsters " , introduces 47 new monsters , the weakest of which is the Carcass Eater and the strongest of which is the Dream <unk> . Newquist praised ooze like Blood <unk> , while the Nuketown podcast commended the Swarm templates . Smith praised the Brain in a Jar , swarm @-@ shifter templates , <unk> , Revived Fossil and <unk> <unk> , but called the <unk> Corpse and Murk " surprisingly benign " . Mike MacKenzie , of RPGnet , called the Skin Kite and Angel of Decay " ghastly " , the Revived Fossil and <unk> " less interesting " and the Half Vampire an " extraordinarily bad idea " . 
 = = = " Campaigns " = = = 
 The seventh and final chapter , " Campaigns " , includes tips on how to use undead in campaigns and adventures , as well as how to control specific undead monsters . It also has adventure sites and back @-@ stories for various cults . The chapter was well received , being called the " best section of the book " and being " better than I [ the reviewer ] expected " . The maps were commended by some , being called " useful right out of the box " but Mike MacKenzie , of RPGnet , said they were " basically a Book of <unk> for undead . Nothing terribly remarkable here . " The section includes statistics and back @-@ stories for alternatives classic undead monsters , including ten different ghosts , six <unk> , 19 skeletons , ten vampires , and fifteen zombies . 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 The Libris Mortis art staff comprises Dawn Murin as art director , Dee Barnett , Dawn Murin and <unk> <unk> as graphic designers . The graphic production specialist was Angelika <unk> , with Candice Baker as image technician . Cartography was provided by Dennis <unk> , with the cover designed by Tom Kidd . Interior illustrations were provided by Thomas <unk> , Steve <unk> , Jeff Easley , Steve Ellis , Wayne England , Emmanuelle Hunter , Jeremy Jarvis , Chuck Lukacs ( who provided the images for the start of each chapter ) , David Martin , Michael <unk> , Steve Prescott , Wayne Reynolds and Brian Snoddy . The artwork was praised by Mike MacKenzie of RPGnet , who said that " the art is good . Its re @-@ assuring to see the quality we expect from WotC in this department . " He criticized the " unintentionally goofy " images of the <unk> Barbarian and Wight archer , but commended the " sepia @-@ tinged " work of Wayne England as fitting the book 's mood . The work by Chuck Lukacs was also praised , as were the images by Jeremy Jarvis . Jarvis ' Angel of Decay and <unk> Scion were said to be " just as creepy as we would expect " . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 Libris Mortis was generally received positively by reviewers . Mike MacKenzie , of RPGnet , gave the book a 5 / 5 for style and a 4 / 5 for substance , with the summary comment : " As a DM , I personally think this is a great ( creepy ) book , especially the first and last chapters , and there is some good crunch to be found . " Casey Smith , of D20 Magazine Rack , gave the book 80 % " reviewer opinion " , averaging with other scores to give an overall grade of 82 % . Kenneth Newquist , of Nuketown , gave Libris Mortis a rating of 9 / 10 , with the comment " Libris Mortis isn 't an essential source book , but it is a useful one . " The Nuketown podcast gave the book 8 / 10 , saying it was " good , but not essential . Worth picking up for anyone for whom the undead play a major role in their campaign . " Vincent Venturella , of Flames Rising Dot Com , gave the book 3 / 5 for style , 5 / 5 for substance and 4 / 5 overall . 
 The reviewer from Pyramid commented : " There 's a little more campaign advice here than in previous Wizards of the Coast products , though not a whole lot . You get a short introduction to what undead are and how they <unk> , eat ( <unk> ) , and procreate . Theories on whence they come , examples of cities and religions for the cosmopolitan zombie , and advice on strategy when facing ( or being ) the dead ( especially the self @-@ aware threats ) make good reading , but these are sadly brief . " 
 = Thomas Charles Lethbridge = 
 Thomas Charles Lethbridge ( 23 March 1901 – 30 September 1971 ) , better known as T.C. Lethbridge , was an English archaeologist , parapsychologist , and explorer . A specialist in Anglo @-@ Saxon archaeology , he served as honorary Keeper of Anglo @-@ Saxon Antiquities at the Cambridge University Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology from 1923 to 1957 , and over the course of his lifetime wrote twenty @-@ four books on various subjects , becoming particularly well known for his advocacy of dowsing . 
 Born in Somerset to a wealthy family , Lethbridge was educated at Trinity College , Cambridge , during the course of which he attended an expedition to Jan Mayen island , becoming part of the first group to successfully climb the Beerenberg . After a failed second expedition to the Arctic Circle , he became involved in archaeology . In his capacity as Keeper of Anglo @-@ Saxon Antiquities at the Cambridge University Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology , Lethbridge carried out excavations at various sites around Britain . His claims regarding the existence of Iron Age hill figures on Wandlebury Hill in Cambridgeshire caused significant controversy within the archaeological community , with most archaeologists believing that Lethbridge had erroneously misidentified a natural feature . Lethbridge 's methodology and theories were widely deemed unorthodox , and in turn he became increasingly critical of the archaeological profession . 
 After resigning from the university museum in 1957 , Lethbridge moved with his wife to Branscombe , Devon . There he devoted himself to researching paranormal phenomena , publishing a string of books on the subject aimed at a popular rather than academic audience . Most of this involved his research into the use of pendulums for dowsing , although in other publications he championed the witch @-@ cult hypothesis of Margaret Murray , articulated the Stone Tape theory as an explanation for ghost sightings , and argued that extraterrestrial species were involved in shaping human evolution ; in this he came to embrace and perpetuate the esoteric ideas of the Earth mysteries movement . Although his work in parapsychology was derided and ignored as pseudo @-@ scientific by the academic establishment , he attracted a cult following , and his work was posthumously championed by esotericists like Colin Wilson and Julian Cope . In 2011 he was made the subject of a biography by Terry Welbourn . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth : 1901 – 21 = = = 
 Thomas Charles Lethbridge was born on 23 March 1901 . His parents , Violet Lethbridge ( née Murdoch ) and her husband Ambrose Lethbridge , were wealthy and lived at Knowle House in Timberscombe , Somerset in south @-@ west England , where they employed seven servants . The family 's fortune stemmed from Ambrose 's father Charles Lethbridge , who had married the wealthy coal heiress Susan Anne <unk> . Neither Charles nor Ambrose had to earn a living , and as gentlemen of " independent means " spent their time engaged in rural hobbies . By 1907 the Lethbridge family had moved to <unk> Lodge , Dorchester in Dorset , where Violet gave birth to daughter Jacintha in June . They then moved to a house named <unk> in Flushing , Cornwall , where a second son , Ambrose " Bill " William Speke Lethbridge , was born . Thomas ' father Ambrose contracted tuberculosis at the end of the decade , resulting in the family moving into Charles ' house in Heytesbury , Wiltshire , where Ambrose died in September 1909 , aged 34 . 
 Around this time , Thomas developed an interest in archaeology , entomology , and ornithology , as well as drawing . In 1913 his family made plans for him to join the Royal Navy , although he failed the entrance exam due to alleged poor eyesight . At the outbreak of the First World War , Lethbridge was sent to Wellington College in Berkshire , while his mother and siblings moved to Buckhurst in Wokingham , Berkshire . In February 1919 Violet and her children moved to Manor House in <unk> , where Jacintha and Bill became seriously ill as a result of a flu pandemic ; the former survived but Bill died in March . 
 = = = University and Jan Mayen : 1921 – 23 = = = 
 In October 1921 Lethbridge enrolled at Trinity College , Cambridge , intent on studying geology and geography . Finding geology to be " crushingly dull " , he rarely attended lectures and took little interest in his studies , instead spending much of his time shooting , fishing , and sailing . He graduated with a third class BA in June 1923 . 
 During his studies Lethbridge decided to join an expedition to visit Jan Mayen island in the Arctic Circle , alongside fellow Cambridge students James <unk> @-@ Musters and William <unk> <unk> and a don from St. John 's College , Cambridge , the geologist James Wordie . Although initially planning to travel independently , they decided to join a Norwegian expedition led by <unk> <unk> and accompanied by Swiss mountaineer and glaciologist Paul Louis <unk> . The expedition set sail from Bratvaag aboard two ships in August 1921 , and upon arriving at Jan Mayen they became the first team to successfully climb the Beerenberg . During the expedition , Lethbridge was also able to explore his growing interest in archaeology by excavating at an abandoned Eskimo settlement . The Times recognised the expedition as the mountaineering event of the year . 
 At Cambridge , Lethbridge had entered into a romantic relationship with Sylvia Robertson , a clergyman 's daughter , and they were engaged to be married in March 1922 . In mid @-@ 1922 he went on a sailing voyage around the Hebrides in Scotland with his fellow Trinity student Geoffrey Walford . In summer 1923 Lethbridge was part of a second expedition led by Wordie , designed to explore the eastern coast of Greenland to conduct geological and archaeological investigations and repeat Edward Sabine 's pendulum gravity experiments . Sailing from Newcastle , they stopped first at Bergen and then Jan Meyen before getting stuck in pack ice . With food reserves running low , the crew resorted to killing and eating grey seals and polar bears , before they eventually aborted the mission and returned home . 
 = = Archaeological career = = 
 = = = Becoming Keeper of Anglo @-@ Saxon Antiquities : 1923 – 47 = = = 
 During his student years , Lethbridge had frequented the Cambridge University Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology , where he had befriended its curator , Louis Clarke . Upon Lethbridge 's graduation , Clarke offered him the honorary position of Keeper of Anglo @-@ Saxon Antiquities at the museum . Lethbridge took up the voluntary and unpaid post , being able to subsist on his family 's finances . There , Lethbridge befriended the archaeologist Cyril Fox , aiding in Fox 's excavation of the Devil 's Dyke in Cambridgeshire . Lethbridge 's archaeological excavations were however deemed of poor quality by many of his peers . In turn , Lethbridge derided the archaeological establishment , being frustrated by how long it took them to accept what he deemed to be " facts " , and he believed in focusing on what he believed to be instinct and common sense . There were exceptions to his scorn ; for instance , he developed a friendship with T. D. Kendrick , an Anglo @-@ Saxon art historian who then worked as Keeper of the British Museum in London . Over the course of his career at the museum , Lethbridge produced 60 archaeological reports , written in an unusually informal manner that used humour and wit and included narrative descriptions of the excavation process . 
 In February 1924 , Lethbridge married Sylvia Robertson in a ceremony held at Salisbury Cathedral . Together they moved into a house known as The Lodge in <unk> . There , their first two sons were born : Christopher John in March 1925 and Hugh <unk> in July 1926 . In 1927 , they moved to Mount Blow , a house in Shelford designed by architect Edwin Lutyens . It was there that Sylvia gave birth to a daughter , Belinda Mary , in April 1930 . Sylvia suffered from mental illness however , resulting in repeated hospitalisation . Lethbridge meanwhile devoted much of his time to yachting around the British Isles , sometimes taking family members with him . Over the course of the 1930s he self @-@ published a series of books featuring his own sketches and engravings of maritime scenes . He also deepened his interest in the paranormal during this period , coming to believe that an acquaintance of his was a genuine psychic and observing an unidentified flying object in Bracknell . 
 In 1937 , Wordie organised an expedition to North West Greenland to investigate cosmic radiation at high latitudes and great altitudes . He assembled a team of ten men , nine of whom were from Cambridge University , among them Lethbridge and two other archaeologists . Setting sail in June 1937 , Lethbridge undertook excavations of Eskimo sites at <unk> Island , Cary Island , North West Island , and <unk> Island . On returning home in October 1937 , it was decided that various geographical features encountered would be named after team members , and thus two lakes on Baffin Island were named the Lethbridge Lakes . During the trip , Lethbridge became particularly interested in the design of Eskimo boats , resulting in the self @-@ publication of his 11 @-@ page booklet , <unk> – the European Ancestry of the ' Women 's Boat ' , in 1937 . He followed this with a second book , The Fishermen of Durness ( 1938 ) , in which he argued that a study of contemporary traditional fishing communities could inform archaeologists more about ancient boat @-@ making and fishing . 
 As the Second World War loomed , the British Admiralty commissioned Lethbridge to undertake a reconnaissance mission to Iceland to analyse German naval activity around the country , which he carried out in summer 1939 . Lethbridge however treated the mission with contempt , spending much of the time visiting sites that interested him , such as locations mentioned in the Icelandic Sagas . Back in Britain , he self @-@ published a short volume discussing his Icelandic journey , News from <unk> . As war broke out , Lethbridge organised the transfer of much of the museum 's collections to <unk> Caves for safe keeping , while also becoming a warden of the Air Raid Precautions . He also led the rescue excavation of ten prehistoric tumuli that were being destroyed to enable the construction of Snailwell Airfield for the Royal Air Force . 
 Meanwhile , Lethbridge 's wife Sylvia had been having affairs with various men , and he himself had begun an affair with Sylvia 's younger cousin Mina , who was a secretary at the museum . The couple divorced in June 1943 , and in November Lethbridge sold Mount Blow to pay a settlement to Sylvia . He married Mina in July 1944 at Oban , and together they moved from Cambridge to a farm on the Scottish island of Kerrera , where Lethbridge excavated some local caves . But the couple found life on Kerrera too isolated and soon returned to Cambridge , despite Lethbridge 's dislike of the place and most of the university staff whom he worked alongside . He nevertheless continued his archaeological investigations , excavating an Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery at <unk> on <unk> Heath , and involving himself in the investigation of the newly unearthed Mildenhall Treasure , being the individual responsible for locating its probable discovery spot . He was among the first to take an interest in the cemeteries of the Mid Anglo @-@ Saxon period , believing that the lack of ' pagan ' objects such as weapons reflected the fact that those buried in two seventh @-@ century cemeteries were among the earliest Anglo @-@ Saxon Christians . In January 1948 , Lethbridge received word that his son Hugh had committed suicide after suffering post @-@ traumatic stress disorder during his time in the armed forces . 
 = = = Major publications and Gogmagog : 1948 – 57 = = = 
 1948 also saw the publication of Lethbridge 's first major book , Merlin 's Island : Essays on Britain in the Dark Ages , a collection of six essays on various elements of Early Medieval Britain . Representing Lethbridge 's unorthodox and eclectic approach , it was aimed at a popular rather than academic audience , and although some academic reviewers were critical , it received much qualified praise . This was followed in 1950 by Herdsman and Hermits : Celtic Seafarers in the Northern Sea , in which he returned to his interest in seafaring and boats . Containing a foreword by Kendrick , it was published by Bowes and Bowes . In 1952 , Lethbridge published Coast Wise Craft , which again looked at boat building but was aimed at a general rather than specialist readership . That same year , Thames and Hudson published Lethbridge 's Boats and Boatmen as part of their " The Past in the Present " series edited by archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes . In 1954 , Andrew Melrose published Lethbridge 's The Painted Men , a book about the Picts of Northern Britain . It was deemed to be his last conventional book within the archaeological and academic community . As part of his increasing public profile , the BBC invited him to give the third talk in their second series of Myth or Legend ? , which he devoted to the question of whether Europeans had arrived in the Americas prior to Christopher Columbus ; in particular he looked at the claims that St. Brendan and Thorfinn <unk> had made the journey across the Atlantic . Over several seasons he also carried out excavations of wheelhouses at South Uist , and on one occasion was visited at the site by Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh . 
 Lethbridge 's next project focused on searching for a chalk hill figure that was reported to have once existed on Wandlebury Hill in the Gog Magog Downs , Cambridgeshire . Towards the end of 1954 he began investigating the site , inserting metal rods into the ground to determine where he believed the turf had once been removed to expose the chalk below . He believed that he had revealed three large figures , a warrior , a hooded goddess , and a sun god , asserting them to be likely 3000 years old , and then began excavation to remove the turf and reveal the figures . Lethbridge sought much publicity for his discovery , reporting on it to The Times and being interviewed by the London Evening News . However , many archaeologists were sceptical of Lethbridge 's methodology and the existence of the hill figures ; they believed that the soft patches of chalk were the result of chalk solifluction and were only interpreted as human @-@ made figures through Lethbridge 's vivid imagination . The Council for British Archaeology brought together a committee to assess Lethbridge 's findings , composed of I. W. Cornwall , W. F. Grimes , Christopher Hawkes , and Stuart Piggott . With the aid of geologist F. E. <unk> , the committee concluded that the shapes Lethbridge had discovered were natural , having been formed during the last Ice Age . However , Hawkes disagreed with his colleagues , and believed that while not proven , Lethbridge 's conclusions could not be disproved . Lethbridge stuck by his original ideas , and wrote a book aimed at a general audience , Gogmagog – The Buried Gods on the basis of them . It was published by Routledge and Kegan Paul in 1957 , but received no supportive reviews . In May 1957 , the Egyptologist Margaret Murray involved herself in the Gogmagog debate , championing Lethbridge 's ideas against the academic fraternity in a letter she sent to The Times . W. F. Grimes responded by claiming that she was out of touch with contemporary scholarship . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Embracing parapsychology : 1957 – 64 = = = 
 As a result of the widespread rejection of his Gogmagog claims , Lethbridge became increasingly critical of the academic and professional archaeological community , believing that an attitude of what he called " trade unionism " had caused most archaeologists to reject independent thought . As a result , he decided to resign and move away from Cambridge in late 1957 . Relocating to Branscombe in southern Devon , he and Mina set up home in Hole House , a fortified building that dated to the Early Modern period , and angered some of the locals by banning fox hunters from crossing his land . Lethbridge came to believe that Hole House was haunted , describing unexplained noises and smells there ; this increased his interest in the paranormal , and he decided to devote much of his time to investigating such phenomena in what he deemed to be a scientific manner . Lethbridge believed that ghosts were projections stored in rock and other material substances and which echoed particularly emotional or traumatic events that either happened in the past or will happen in the future . He focused many of his experiments on dowsing using a pendulum , coming to believe that the length of string used and the number of oscillations could be used to determine the type of object being detected . 
 His first book on the subject of what he often termed " the odd " was Ghost and Ghoul , published in 1961 by Routledge and Kegan Paul . In this work he argued that the mind was separate from the brain ; he believed that the mind was connected to an ancestral collective mind which everyone inherited . Many of the ideas expressed in the work were akin to those of Carl Jung , Richard Semon , and Amy Warburg , although it is not clear if Lethbridge had been aware of this beforehand . An extract was subsequently published in the January 1963 edition of Fantastic Stories of Imagination . He followed this work with Witches – Investigating an Ancient Religion ( 1962 ) , which articulated a form of Murray 's witch @-@ cult hypothesis but also contained many digressions and anecdotes unrelated to that topic . Returning to the themes present in Ghost and Ghoul , Lethbridge published Ghost and Divining Rod in 1963 , in which he discussed his progress with his pendulum experiments . On the basis of this , the BBC filmed a short documentary titled Ghost Hunting with T.C. Lethbridge in May 1964 , in which Lethbridge was filmed repeating his pendulum experiences in his garden . 
 = = = Final years : 1965 – 71 = = = 
 Lethbridge 's next book was ESP – Beyond Time and Distance , published in 1965 . It dealt with the theme of extra @-@ sensory perception and articulated Lethbridge 's argument that rays of energy were transmitted from every object , and that they could be detected using pendulum dowsing . In 1966 he then published A Step in the Dark , which repeated many of his theories regarding pendulum dowsing present in earlier works . Early that year , Lethbridge first began struggling against heart disease , an affliction that had resulted from his obesity . In both his books and private letters from this period he regularly ranted against modern life and society , while in other correspondences with individuals in the United States he championed the authenticity of the Kensington Runestone and Westford Knight . 
 In 1969 , Lethbridge published The Monkey 's Tail , in which he discussed Darwinian evolution . Although agreeing that the evolution of species was an objective fact , he nevertheless argued that there was a blueprint for existence and that genetic memory was a reality . In a sequel published in 1969 , The Legend of the Sons of God – A Fantasy ? , Lethbridge argued that extraterrestrials had been responsible for aiding Earth 's evolutionary development . Echoing many of the claims made by Erich von Däniken in Chariots of the Gods ( 1968 ) , Lethbridge argued that the late prehistoric stone circles of the British Isles had been beacons for extraterrestrial spacecraft . In this , his work has been cited as an anticipation of the Earth mysteries movement that expanded across Britain in the following decade . 
 Lethbridge 's heart condition worsened , to the extent that he was unable to attend his mother 's funeral in 1970 . He eventually required 24 @-@ hour care , and was transferred to Nuffield Hospital in Exeter , where he soon became delirious before dying in his sleep on 30 September 1971 . His body was interned at the family plot in <unk> , Wiltshire . As the Branscombe house was owned by the Lethbridge Family Trust , Mina was forced to move out after her husband 's death , and she sold his belongings out of financial necessity . Mina also collected together Lethbridge 's unfinished book with the help of writer Colin Wilson ; together they assembled it into publishable form and it was brought out by Routledge in 1976 as The Power of the Pendulum . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Archaeologist Niall Finneran asserted that Lethbridge had a " distinguished if fairly unspectacular reputation " within British archaeology prior to his adoption of fringe theories . Various colleagues expressed critical praise of his work in this field ; for instance , Lethbridge 's fellow Anglo @-@ Saxon archaeologist Audrey Meaney noted that his " observations on features in the cemeteries he excavated around Cambridge were perspicacious but in advance of his time " . Another Anglo @-@ Saxon archaeologist , Sam Lucy , later noted that Lethbridge 's observation that those buried with Anglo @-@ Saxon material culture need not have been ethnically descended from continental migrants was – while largely ignored by his contemporaries – widely accepted in scholarship by the end of the 20th century . However , his embrace of unorthodox and pseudo @-@ scientific views later led to professional archaeologists becoming increasingly critical of his work ; as his biographer Terry Welbourn noted , Lethbridge 's peers came to view him as being " too radical ... a loose cannon and maverick " . 
 On his death , Glyn Daniel described Lethbridge as " a colourful , stimulating , provocative and often controversial figure in British archaeology " , who represented " one of the last of that invaluable band of dilettante scholars and devoted amateurs of whom we have had so many in Britain " . Although stating that Lethbridge only emerged as a " semi @-@ professional " for a " short time " , he praised much of Lethbridge 's writing for its " freshness and an eager restless sense of enquiry " . An anonymously authored obituary in The Antiquaries Journal referred to " the strength and honesty of Lethbridge 's character as a man , and the singleness of purpose that united all his work , as experimental testing of what he found by observation " , seeing these as the unifying characteristics behind his divergent research interests . According to the historian Ronald Hutton , as a result of both his unorthodox ideas and his " contempt for professionalism in all fields " , Lethbridge 's " status as a scholar never really rose above that of an unusually lively local antiquary " . His books continue to be largely ignored by academics into the 21st century . 
 Describing Lethbridge as " one of the most compelling " figures in 20th @-@ century British archaeology , Finneran believed that at the start of the 21st century , Lethbridge was best known for his advocacy of dowsing . As such , Finneran asserted that Lethbridge 's " true legacy " lay outside of " conventional archaeology " , and could instead be located within the Earth mysteries movement . Lethbridge 's work continued to attract interest from <unk> after his death . In 1978 , the author Colin Wilson devoted part one of his book Mysteries to a discussion of Lethbridge 's ideas . In 2003 , a group of admirers of his work calling themselves " The Sons of T.C. Lethbridge " ( <unk> Foster , Kevlar Bales and Welbourn <unk> ) , with the aid of Wilson and Julian Cope , released A Giant : The Definitive T.C. Lethbridge , a set comprising a booklet and two CDs containing music accompanying discussions of Lethbridge 's work . Welbourn subsequently published a biography of Lethbridge in 2011 , titled T.C. Lethbridge : The Man who Saw the Future ; in it , he expressed his view that the archaeologist was " one of the most remarkable , yet overlooked men of the twentieth century " . 
 = SMS Deutschland ( 1904 ) = 
 SMS Deutschland was the first of five Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Kaiserliche Marine between 1903 and 1906 . She was named after the German name for Germany , and built at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , where she was launched on 20 November 1904 . She was commissioned on 3 August 1906 , only a few months before HMS Dreadnought was commissioned , the first of a revolutionary new standard of " all @-@ big @-@ gun " battleships which rendered Deutschland and the rest of her class obsolete . 
 She served as the flagship of Prince Heinrich until 1913 . With the outbreak of World War I in mid @-@ 1914 , Deutschland and her sisters were tasked with defending the mouth of the Elbe and the German Bight from possible British incursions while the rest of the fleet was being mobilized . Deutschland and the other four ships of her class were then attached to the High Seas Fleet as the II Battle Squadron ; the unit participated in most of the large @-@ scale fleet actions in the first two years of war , culminating in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . Late on the first day of the battle , Deutschland and the other pre @-@ dreadnoughts briefly engaged several British battlecruisers before retreating . 
 After the battle , Deutschland and her three surviving sisters were assigned to coastal defense duties . By 1917 , they had been withdrawn from combat service completely and tasked with auxiliary roles . Deutschland was used as a barracks ship in Wilhelmshaven until the end of the war . She was struck from the naval register on 25 January 1920 , sold to ship breakers that year , and broken up for scrap by 1922 . Her bow ornament is preserved at the Eckernförde underwater weapons school and her bell is on display at the Mausoleum of Prince Heinrich on the <unk> estate . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Deutschland was the second naval vessel to bear the name , after SMS Deutschland ( 1874 ) ( an armored frigate ) , and was intended to fight in the German battle line with the other battleships of the Imperial German Navy . She was laid down on 20 July 1903 at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel , and launched on 19 November 1904 . Her trials lasted from 3 August 1906 until September . The British battleship HMS Dreadnought — armed with ten 12 inch ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) guns — was commissioned in December 1906 . Dreadnought 's revolutionary design rendered every capital ship of the German navy obsolete , including Deutschland . 
 Deutschland was 127 @.@ 6 m ( 418 ft 8 in ) long , had a beam of 22 @.@ 2 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 8 @.@ 21 m ( 26 ft 11 in ) . She had a full @-@ load displacement of 14 @,@ 218 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 993 long tons ) and was equipped with coal @-@ fired triple expansion engines that produced a rated 15 @,@ 781 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 768 kW ) and gave her a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . At a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , she could steam for 4 @,@ 850 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 980 km ; 5 @,@ 580 mi ) . 
 Deutschland 's primary armament consisted of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in two twin turrets . She was also equipped with fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) guns mounted in casemates , twenty 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) guns in pivot mounts , and six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 72 in ) torpedo tubes were submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 26 September 1906 the ship officially joined the fleet , when Admiral Prince Heinrich made her his flagship . She was tactically assigned to the II Battle Squadron , though as the fleet flagship she was not subordinate to the Squadron commander . She took part in training exercises in the North Sea in December 1906 before returning to Kiel . On 16 February 1907 , the fleet was renamed the High Seas Fleet . Fleet maneuvers in the North Sea followed in early 1907 and again in May – June . A cruise to Norway followed the fleet training in June . After returning from Norway , Deutschland went to Swinemünde . Another round of fleet training followed in September 1907 . In November , she was taken into drydock for an annual refit . 
 Deutschland participated in fleet maneuvers in February 1908 in the Baltic Sea ; in May – June training was conducted off the island fortress of Helgoland in the North Sea . In July 1908 , Deutschland and the rest of the fleet sailed into the Atlantic Ocean to conduct training there . During the cruise , Deutschland stopped at Funchal and Santa Cruz de Tenerife . The fleet returned to Germany on 13 August . The following month another set of training maneuvers was conducted in the Baltic and North Seas , with a winter cruise into the Baltic afterward . 
 The following year — 1909 — followed much the same pattern . Another cruise into the Atlantic was conducted from 7 July to 1 August , during which Deutschland stopped in Bilbao . After another round of exercises , Deutschland went in for another periodic overhaul . During the refit , she was given additional pedestal @-@ mounted search lights , as well as becoming the first ship in the German navy to be equipped with an X @-@ ray machine . In May 1910 , the fleet conducted training maneuvers in the Kattegat , between Norway and Denmark . The annual summer cruise went to Norway , and was followed by fleet training . In November , Deutschland hosted Kaiser Wilhelm II during the celebration of the opening of the Naval Academy at Mürwik . A training cruise into the Baltic followed at the end of the year . 
 The next two years followed the same pattern of training exercises and cruises to Norway in the summer , with the exception of 1912 when , due to the Agadir Crisis , the cruise only went into the Baltic . In September , following maneuvers , Deutschland was partially grounded in the Baltic . The damage necessitated dry @-@ docking , and repairs were completed by November . In January 1913 , the new dreadnought battleship Friedrich der Grosse replaced Deutschland as the flagship of the fleet . The golden bow ornament that denoted the flagship was removed , and Deutschland returned to the ranks of the II Battle Squadron . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of war , the ship was deployed to the mouth of the Elbe to guard the area . Deutschland remained with the High Seas Fleet in the II Battle Squadron for the first two years of the war . While her sisters covered the raid on the English coast on 15 – 16 December , Deutschland remained on picket duty in the mouth of the Elbe . On 21 February 1915 , Deutschland went into dock in Kiel , where work lasted until 12 March . Afterward , Deutschland returned to the Elbe for guard duty . On 21 September the ship went to the Baltic for training , which was completed by 11 October , after which she went into the dockyard in Kiel again for maintenance . Deutschland went to the AG Vulcan drydock in Hamburg for additional work from 27 February to 1 April 1916 . After returning to the fleet , Deutschland was made the flagship of the II Battle Squadron under the command of Admiral Franz Mauve . 
 On 24 – 25 April 1916 , Deutschland and her four sisters joined the dreadnoughts of the High Seas Fleet to support the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group on a raid of the English coast . While en route to the target , the battlecruiser Seydlitz was damaged by a mine ; she was detached to return home while the operation proceeded . The battlecruisers conducted a short bombardment of the ports of Yarmouth and Lowestoft . Visibility was poor , and the operation was called off before the British fleet could intervene . On 4 May , Deutschland took part in a sortie against British ships off Horns Reef , without result . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Admiral Scheer immediately planned another foray into the North Sea , but the damage to Seydlitz delayed the operation until the end of May . Deutschland was the first ship in the III Division of the II Battle Squadron and the flagship of Rear Admiral Franz Mauve . The II Battle Squadron , with the weakest battleships involved in the battle , was positioned at the rear of the German line . During the " Run to the North , " Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander of the fleet , ordered the fleet to pursue the retreating battleships of the British V Battle Squadron at top speed . Deutschland and her sisters were significantly slower than the dreadnoughts , and quickly fell behind . By 19 : 30 , the Grand Fleet had arrived on the scene and confronted Admiral Scheer with significant numerical superiority . The German fleet was severely hampered by the presence of the slower Deutschland @-@ class ships ; if Scheer ordered an immediate turn towards Germany , he would have to sacrifice the slower ships to make good his escape . 
 Admiral Scheer reversed the course of the fleet via the Gefechtskehrtwendung ( ' battle turn ' ) , a maneuver that required every unit in the German line to turn 180 ° simultaneously . Having fallen behind , the ships of the II Battle Squadron could not conform to the new course following the turn . Deutschland and the other five ships of the squadron were therefore on the disengaged side of the German line . Admiral Mauve considered moving his ships to the rear of the line , astern of the III Battle Squadron dreadnoughts , but decided against it when he realized the movement would interfere with the maneuvering of Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers . Instead , he attempted to place his ships at the head of the line . 
 Later on the first day of the battle , the hard @-@ pressed battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group were being pursued by their British opponents . Deutschland and the other so @-@ called " five @-@ minute ships " came to their aid by steaming between the opposing battlecruiser squadrons . Poor visibility made the subsequent engagement brief . Deutschland fired only one round from her 28 cm guns during this period . Admiral Mauve decided it would be inadvisable to continue the fight against the much more powerful battlecruisers , and so ordered an 8 @-@ point turn to starboard . 
 Late on the 31st , the fleet organized for the night march back to Germany ; Deutschland , Pommern , and Hannover fell in behind König and the other dreadnoughts of the III Battle Squadron towards the rear of the line . British destroyers conducted a series of attacks against the fleet , some of which targeted Deutschland . In the melee , Deutschland and König turned away from the attacking destroyers , but could not make out targets clearly enough to engage them effectively . Soon after , Pommern was struck by at least one torpedo and exploded . Fragments of the ship rained down around Deutschland . Regardless , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British destroyer forces and reached Horns Reef by 4 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later , where the undamaged dreadnoughts of the Nassau and Helgoland classes took up defensive positions . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After Jutland , Deutschland and her sisters returned to picket duty in the mouth of the Elbe . They were also occasionally transferred for guard duty in the Baltic . From 22 December 1916 to 16 January 1917 , Deutschland lay idle in the Bay of Kiel . On 24 January , the ship was taken to Hamburg where she went into the drydock for maintenance ; this work lasted until 4 April . Deutschland sailed out of the Altenbruch roads at the mouth of the Elbe and then to the Baltic for continued guard duty . On 15 August , the II Battle Squadron was disbanded ; two weeks later , on 31 August , Deutschland arrived in Kiel and was decommissioned on 10 September . Deutschland had her guns removed in Kiel before she was transferred to Wilhelmshaven to serve as a barracks ship . On 25 January 1920 the ship was struck from the naval register and sold for scrapping , which was complete by 1922 . The ship 's bow ornament is on display at the Eckernförde underwater weapons school and her bell is located in the mausoleum of Prince Heinrich at the <unk> estate . 
 = <unk> society of Meghalaya = 
 Multiple tribes in the state of Meghalaya in northeast India practise matrilineal descent . Often referred to as Khasi people , Khasi is used as a blanket term for various subgroups in Meghalaya who have distinguishing languages , rites , ceremonies , and habits , but share an ethnic identity as Ki <unk> <unk> ( The Seven Huts ) . The Khasi , Garo , and other subgroups have a proud heritage , including <unk> , although it was reported in 2004 that they were losing some of their matrilineal traits . The tribes are said to belong to one of the " largest surviving matrilineal culture [ s ] " in the world . 
 = = Background = = 
 Khasi , among multiple tribes in the state of Meghalaya in northeast India , practise matrilineal descent . They are referred to as Khasi people ; Khasi is used as an umbrella phrase to refer to many subgroups in Meghalaya who have distinguishing languages , rites , ceremonies , and habits , but share an ethnic identity as Ki <unk> <unk> ( The Seven Huts ) . 
 Khasi are an ancient tribe said to be the " largest surviving matrilineal culture [ s ] " in the world. who , along with other subgroups , such as Garo , live in Meghalaya , as well as bordering areas of Assam and Bangladesh . <unk> are believed to be migrants with ancestral links to the Mon @-@ Khmer people of East Asia . The matrilineal tradition which the Khasi and other subgroups practice in Meghalaya is unique within India . <unk> principles among the Khasi are emphasised in myths , legends , and origin narratives . Khasi kings embarking on wars left the responsibility of running the family to women and thus their role in society became very deep rooted and respected . Reference to Nari Rajya ( female kingdom ; or land of matriarchy ) in the epic Mahabharata likely correlates with the Khasi and <unk> Hills and Meghalaya 's present @-@ day matrilineal culture . The proud heritage of the Khasi , Garo , and other subgroups is <unk> ; however in 2004 it was reported that their matrilineal traits were on the wane . 
 = = Rights , roles , responsibilities = = 
 Women have a dominant role in the matrilineal society of Meghalaya . The youngest daughter of the family , the Ka <unk> , inherits all ancestral property . After marriage , husbands live in the mother @-@ in @-@ law 's home . The mother 's surname is taken by children . When no daughters are born to a couple , they adopt a daughter and pass their rights to property to her . The birth of a girl is celebrated while the birth of a son is simply accepted . There is no social stigma attributed to a woman remarrying or giving birth out of wedlock as the " Khasi Social Custom of Lineage Act " gives security to them . Women are known to intermarry outside their tribe . The women who enjoy all the rights live an independent life , dress well , attend church , and many prefer not to get married . They enjoy total security , unlike in the rest of the country . A successful career women of the Khasi society feels that " their societal anomaly " has enabled her to be successful in every way . Most small businesses are managed by women . 
 In 1994 , Bina Agarwal compared characteristic features between the Garo and Khasi . She reported that Garo practiced matrilineal inheritance , matrilocal post @-@ marital residence , a preference for cross @-@ cousin marriage , acceptance of pre @-@ marital sex by women , but adultery by women is punished , while the Khasi practised matrilineal inheritance , matrilocal and <unk> post @-@ marital residence ( in which the husband lives in a separate house while the wife stays at her parents ’ residence ) , an aversion to cross @-@ cousin marriage , and again , acceptance of pre @-@ marital sex by women , but adultery by women is punished . 
 Care of children is the responsibility of mothers or mothers @-@ in @-@ law . The youngest daughter of this society who inherits the ancestral property holds a pivotal role of looking after the welfare of her parents in their old age , as well as the welfare and education of her siblings . 
 Some Khasi men perceive themselves to be accorded a secondary status . They have established societies such as the <unk> <unk> <unk> ( SRT ) ( 3 @,@ 000 members ) and Sam Kam Rin Ku Mai ( Societal Restructuring Association ) to protect equal rights for men . They express that " Khasi men don ’ t have any security , they don ’ t own land , they don ’ t run the family business and , at the same time , they are almost good for nothing . ” However , Patricia <unk> , who edits the Shillong Times feels : " I tend to think Khasi men feel diminished in their manhood compared with outsiders ... it 's a pity , because that 's what distinguishes us from the others " . 
 While the society is matrilineal , it is not matriarchal . In past monarchies of the state , the son of the youngest sister of the king inherited the throne . Even now in the Meghalaya Legislative Assembly or village councils or panchayats the representation of women in politics is minimal . As of 2013 , in a Meghalaya Legislative Assembly of 60 members , there are only four women . In the male centric <unk> <unk> , which is the basic political arm of the tribes , women are not permitted to hold office . However , women feel that they take better care of money matters than men and they enjoy economic freedom . 
 = Talyllyn Railway = 
 The Talyllyn Railway ( Welsh : Rheilffordd Talyllyn ) is a narrow @-@ gauge preserved railway in Wales running for 7 @.@ 25 miles ( 11 @.@ 67 km ) from Tywyn on the Mid @-@ Wales coast to Nant Gwernol near the village of Abergynolwyn . The line was opened in 1866 to carry slate from the quarries at Bryn Eglwys to Tywyn , and was the first narrow gauge railway in Britain authorised by Act of Parliament to carry passengers using steam haulage . Despite severe under @-@ investment , the line remained open , and in 1951 it became the first railway in the world to be preserved as a heritage railway by volunteers . 
 Since preservation , the railway has operated as a tourist attraction , expanding its rolling stock through acquisition and an engineering programme to build new locomotives and carriages . In 1976 , an extension was opened along the former mineral line from Abergynolwyn to the new station at Nant Gwernol . In 2001 , the preservation society celebrated its 50th anniversary , and in 2005 a major rebuilding and extension of Tywyn Wharf station took place , including a much @-@ expanded facility for the Narrow Gauge Railway Museum . 
 The fictional <unk> Railway , which formed part of The Railway Series of children 's books by The Rev. W. Awdry , was based on the Talyllyn Railway . The preservation of the line inspired the Ealing Comedy film The Titfield Thunderbolt . 
 = = Name and gauge = = 
 The origin of the railway 's name is uncertain : it may refer to the parish of Tal @-@ y @-@ llyn , which contains its eastern terminus , or it may come from Tal @-@ y @-@ llyn , a large glacial ribbon lake at the foot of Cadair Idris 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) further east . The 2 ft 3 in ( 686 mm ) gauge of the track is unusual , and was shared by only three other public railways in the United Kingdom : the nearby Corris Railway , and the subsequent <unk> and <unk> Tramway and Campbeltown and <unk> Light Railway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and construction : up to 1866 = = = 
 Slate quarrying began in the hills above Tywyn in the 1830s , but although many small quarries and test levels were established , only one major quarry was developed in the region , at Bryn Eglwys , 7 miles ( 11 km ) north east of the town . Underground working began in the early 1840s , and by 1847 the quarry was being worked by local landowner John <unk> . The finished slates were sent by packhorse to the wharf at <unk> , transferred to boats for a river trip to Aberdyfi ( or the Anglicised Aberdovey still commonly used ) , and then finally loaded into seagoing vessels , a complex and expensive transportation arrangement which limited the quarry 's output . In 1861 the outbreak of the American Civil War cut off supplies of cotton to the mills of the north west of England and as a result a number of prosperous mill owners looked for new business opportunities to diversify their interests . One such owner was William McConnel of Lancashire who , in 1859 , had purchased a house near Dolgellau , north of Tywyn . In January 1864 , McConnel formed the Aberdovey Slate Company , which leased the land including Bryn Eglwys from the landowner , Lewis Morris of Machynlleth . 
 McConnel set about improving Bryn Eglwys to increase its output and in 1865 his company earmarked money for the construction of a narrow gauge railway connecting the quarry with the port of Aberdyfi . The standard gauge Aberystwyth and Welsh Coast Railway was expanding rapidly from its base at Machynlleth , however , and in 1863 had reached Tywyn , so McConnel decided to build his line from the quarry to Tywyn , as the nearest point where slate could be transferred to the standard gauge railway . This was despite the line 's initial isolation from the rest of the system because of difficulties in bridging the estuary of the Afon Dyfi to the south . An Act of Parliament ( 28 and 29 <unk> , cap <unk> ) allowing the company to operate passenger trains as a public railway was given Royal Assent on 5 July 1865 , and the company appointed James Swinton Spooner as engineer for the construction . He laid out plans for a relatively straight line climbing steadily from Tywyn to the quarry and work quickly got underway . By September 1866 construction had advanced to the point where the Board of Trade inspector Captain Henry Tyler could make an initial inspection and report . 
 Tyler 's report led to an unusual alteration , as it was discovered that the loading gauge of the line was too small . The internal width of the <unk> was only 9 ft 1 in ( 277 cm ) , but the railway 's passenger carriages were 5 ft 3 @.@ 5 in ( 161 @.@ 3 cm ) wide , leaving less than 2 ft ( 61 cm ) clearance on either side , less than the minimum required clearance of 2 ft 6 in ( 76 cm ) . To alleviate this problem , McConnel proposed that the doors on one side of each carriage be permanently barred and the track slewed off @-@ centre beneath the bridges to allow adequate clearance at least on the side with doors , which would allow passengers to get out of the carriages if the train stopped underneath a bridge . Tyler agreed to this arrangement , and to this day all carriages on the Talyllyn have doors on one side only , an unusual feature for a public railway which is shared ( albeit for different reasons ) with the neighbouring Corris Railway . Tyler also required that improvements be made to the railway 's first two steam locomotives , as locomotive No. 1 suffered from excessive " vertical motion " and No. 2 was said to suffer from " horizontal oscillation " . No. 1 was returned to its manufacturer where a set of trailing wheels was added to reduce the rear overhang , and the springs on No. 2 were adjusted and the crank pins shortened to reduce its oscillation . 
 Tyler did not approve the opening until his listed improvements were completed . During the first half of 1866 , the various changes required were made and construction of the line was finished , and in October 1866 the railway began an unofficial passenger service , despite not being authorised by the Board of Trade . Passengers were carried " at their own risk " and possibly free of charge until the line was officially sanctioned . In November of that year , Tyler returned to Tywyn and re @-@ inspected the railway following which , subject to some further minor improvements , he approved its formal opening for passenger service . The first public passenger timetable was issued in December 1866 , and the first purpose @-@ built , steam @-@ worked , narrow gauge public railway in Britain opened for service . 
 = = = Prosperity under McConnel : 1866 – 1880s = = = 
 The railway opened with two locomotives , one carriage and several goods vehicles in use and was operated under a " one engine in steam " policy to ensure that two trains could not collide . Initially the working locomotive was housed in a wooden shed at Ty Dwr on the mineral line above Abergynolwyn station , while the main engineering works at Pendre were constructed . The Pendre works opened on 17 February 1867 and from then on trains began working from Pendre instead of Abergynolwyn . 
 At the time of the line 's opening , stations were provided at Pendre and Abergynolwyn . In 1867 , the halt at Rhydyronen opened , followed by Brynglas and Dolgoch in 1873 . Some time shortly after the opening of the railway a branch to Abergynolwyn village was provided . A steep incline dropped from the mineral line east of Abergynolwyn station to the village below , where a series of tram lines radiated . Coal , building materials and general goods were delivered down the incline and the contents of the village cesspits were hauled back up for disposal along the lineside . 
 The railway used steam locomotives from the start , unlike its neighbour the horse @-@ drawn Corris Railway . The original two locomotives , although of entirely different design , were both purchased from Fletcher , Jennings & Co. of Whitehaven in Cumbria , and both are still in service , 150 years on , although so many of their parts have been replaced down the years that much of their present @-@ day component metal is not original . The Talyllyn 's rare gauge is thought to have been adopted to match that of the Corris Railway , and the line 's two original steam locomotives were among the earliest locomotives built for such a narrow gauge . No. 1 Talyllyn is an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> ( saddle tank ) and No. 2 Dolgoch is an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> ( well tank ) . The line carried slate from the quarry to the wharf at Tywyn and general goods along its length . Public passenger trains initially ran between Abergynolwyn , Dolgoch and Pendre stations only ; quarrymen were carried on unofficial trains that continued on from Abergynolwyn to the foot of the Alltwyllt incline in Nant Gwernol gorge . 
 The line operated successfully during its early years , serving the quarry and the local district . By 1880 , Bryn Eglwys employed 300 workers and was producing 8 @,@ 000 long tons ( 8 @,@ 100 t ) of finished slate per year , all shipped via the railway . Passenger traffic was substantial , rising from 11 @,@ 500 passengers carried in 1867 to over 23 @,@ 000 ( roughly equivalent to 40 @,@ 000 passenger journeys ) in 1877 . 
 = = = Declining fortunes : 1880s – 1910 = = = 
 From the 1880s onwards the " Grand Tour " was a popular option with tourists . This used <unk> to link the Talyllyn and Corris railways via Tal @-@ y @-@ llyn Lake and Cadair Idris , returning on Cambrian Railways trains . The last two decades of the 19th century saw a decline in the demand for slate and many smaller quarries fell on hard times , including Bryn Eglwys , where by 1890 production had halved to 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) a year . In 1896 , production at the Penrhyn Quarry in north Wales , one of the largest producers of slate , was stopped due to labour disputes , resulting in a temporary increase in demand at other quarries . McConnel expanded production at Bryn Eglwys to take advantage of the sudden demand , but only with the aim of maximising profits during the remainder of his lease , which was to expire in 1910 . He built new trial levels without proper provision for the removal of overburden and pushed the limits of safe working in the existing chambers . As McConnel 's lease drew to its close , there was no prospect of a further lessee coming forward and work began on dismantling the quarry 's equipment . 
 = = = Haydn Jones era : 1911 – 1950 = = = 
 The Bryn Eglwys quarry was the primary employer in the Abergynolwyn district , so its closure caused significant distress . Local landowner Henry Haydn Jones purchased the company in 1910 , the same year he was elected the Liberal MP for Merioneth , and reopened the quarry in January 1911 . He did not have any capital to invest in the quarry , however , and the first workings reopened were on the " Broad Vein " , which yielded relatively hard slate that was less popular and harder to sell . The lack of an available market for this output forced the quarry to switch to extracting softer slate from the " Narrow Vein " but , because Haydn Jones could not afford to open new workings into the Narrow Vein , he resorted to the dangerous practice of narrowing the columns that supported the roofs of the underground chambers . This practice had begun under McConnel 's ownership and Haydn Jones continued it throughout his ownership of the quarry . A brief construction boom after the First World War saw production return to around 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) per year . 
 The 1920s also saw an upsurge in holiday traffic , as Britain recovered from the war and tourism gained in popularity . The Talyllyn saw summer passenger numbers grow significantly and regularly had to supplement its formal passenger stock with slate wagons fitted with planks as seats . An unusual tourist service offered by the railway was to hire a slate wagon , which would be left at Abergynolwyn . At the end of the day the tourists would return to Tywyn in the wagon , powered by gravity . This service was discontinued in the early 1930s . The additional income from the tourist trade defrayed some of the costs of operating the railway , but never enough for it to make a profit during Haydn Jones ' ownership . 
 The lease on Bryn Eglwys expired in 1942 , but was extended on an annual basis . The October 1942 Bradshaw 's Guide shows two return passenger trains operating only on Monday , Wednesday and Fridays , taking 45 minutes in each direction . No passenger service was provided on other days . In 1946 the weakened columns gave way in a significant collapse and the quarry was deemed unsafe and closed immediately . Haydn Jones had promised to continue operating the railway as long as he was alive and so , despite the closure of the quarry , the railway continued to run trains on a shoestring budget . In 1947 the British railway system was nationalised and the Talyllyn was one of the few operating railways not included . The reasons for this are unclear , but it is significant that all official mention of the railway had ceased several decades before and it is likely that the line was simply forgotten by officialdom . Between 1947 and 1949 the railway ran a passenger service two days a week . On 2 July 1950 Haydn Jones died and closure of the railway seemed inevitable , but the line continued to operate for the remainder of the summer season , ending on 6 October . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 = = = Rescue : 1951 – 1960 = = = 
 The author and biographer Tom Rolt , visited the line in 1949 , along with the locomotive engineer David Curwen . In the summer of 1950 , Rolt wrote a letter to the Birmingham Post newspaper suggesting that a rescue of the Talyllyn be undertaken . He received sufficient positive response for a meeting of interested enthusiasts to be held on 11 October 1950 at the Imperial Hotel in Birmingham . Around 70 people attended the meeting and Rolt proposed the formation of a committee to look into the acquisition of the railway . With the support of the meeting , the committee met for the first time on 23 October and immediately entered into negotiation with Haydn Jones ' executors . 
 The transfer of ownership to the committee was legally complex , but both parties agreed that all shares in the railway company would be transferred from Haydn Jones ' estate to a new company called Talyllyn Holdings Ltd . , whose board consisted of two directors from the executors and two from the committee . The transfer took place on 8 February 1951 , at which point the newly formed Talyllyn Railway Preservation Society effectively took control of the railway . The Society immediately began to publicise its efforts , hoping to raise funds and find further volunteers to help reopen the railway , and by May nearly 650 members had joined the society . The railway re @-@ opened under the control of the Society for the first time on the Whit Monday bank holiday , 14 May 1951 , with trains running between Wharf and Rhydyronen stations . Regular trains began to run on 4 June and continued through the summer , with David Curwen acting as the first Chief Mechanical Engineer . 
 In the early years of preservation , the line struggled to operate using the original rolling stock . When the line was taken over in 1950 Dolgoch was the only operating locomotive and it was apparent that it was in need of a major overhaul . To enable operations to continue two further steam locomotives , Nos. 3 and 4 , were purchased from the recently closed Corris Railway in 1951 and named Sir Haydn and Edward Thomas respectively . Because both railways were built to the unusual gauge of 2 ft 3 in ( 686 mm ) it was relatively easy to adapt the Corris locomotives to work on the Talyllyn . No. 3 became the first new locomotive to travel on the railway for over 80 years in 1951 , but it frequently derailed , and on inspection it turned out that the Talyllyn track was laid approximately half an inch ( 13 mm ) wider than the official gauge , a deliberate policy by the old company to accommodate the long wheelbase of Talyllyn . Both Talyllyn and Dolgoch had unusually wide wheel treads that allowed them to stay on the wide @-@ of @-@ gauge track . This problem was eventually cured by relaying the railway to its correct gauge and altering Talyllyn 's trailing wheels to allow them to swivel horizontally , shortening the locomotive 's fixed wheelbase . No. 4 was unserviceable when it arrived , but John Alcock , the chairman of the Hunslet Engine Company , was a member of the Preservation Society and had No. 4 overhauled free of charge at his works . No. 4 then began service on the railway in 1952 and worked the majority of the trains that season . 
 Another early addition to the locomotive fleet was No. 6 Douglas , donated to the society by the Birmingham engineering firm <unk> Ltd . This locomotive was built for the depot railway serving RAF Calshot where it worked until 1945 , and , after rebuilding from its original 2 ft ( 610 mm ) gauge , it entered service in 1954 . Through the 1950s the volunteers and staff members of the <unk> rebuilt the line and rescued it from its state of decay , during a period characterised by a " Boy 's Own comic spirit of adventure , involving enthusiasm , ingenuity and a fair degree of irresponsibility " . 
 On 22 May 1957 the BBC produced a live outside broadcast from the railway , during which Wynford Vaughan Thomas and Huw Weldon commentated on a trip from Dolgoch to Abergynolwyn . The publicity from this broadcast drew substantial numbers of visitors to the railway that summer , with more than 57 @,@ 500 passengers carried , and this increase in revenue in turn enabled the railway to continue to improve its infrastructure and provide tourists with a better experience . The following year locomotive No. 1 Talyllyn returned to steam after an extensive overhaul . 
 An important development during this period was the establishment of the Narrow Gauge Railway Museum at Tywyn Wharf station . The first exhibit for what was to become the museum was a locomotive donated in 1952 by Guinness from their recently closed St. James 's Gate Brewery railway . In 1954 the Preservation Society agreed to start work on a formal museum and exhibits from around the United Kingdom were acquired to form the nucleus of the collection . In 1955 work started on converting the old gunpowder store at Wharf station into a temporary museum building , and in 1956 the first exhibit arrived at Tywyn . 
 = = = Securing the infrastructure : 1960 – 1969 = = = 
 The 1960s proved to be a decade of consolidation for the Talyllyn . Pendre works underwent several much @-@ needed expansions , adding additional covered storage for carriages and more workshop room . Modern machine tools , along with proper lighting and a new power supply were added . Substantial improvements to Tywyn Wharf station were also made , along with continued relaying and upgrading of the track to Abergynolwyn . Passenger numbers continued to climb after the 1957 BBC broadcast ; in 1960 , 67 @,@ 000 passenger journeys were made , increasing to 78 @,@ 500 in 1964 . In response to this growing popularity the railway undertook a programme of new rolling stock construction . 
 By the early 1960s Tywyn Wharf station was in need of major improvements . Before preservation , the station had contained only a fan of sidings , which meant that there was no way for the locomotive of an arriving train to run round the carriages . As a result , trains were pushed from behind as far as Pendre , where the locomotive could be moved past the carriages to the front of the train . A loop was installed at Wharf for the first time in August 1952 , to avoid having to propel trains to Pendre , but in the winter of 1964 / 65 a major upgrade of the station was carried out . This improved the track layout and extended the original office building to provide covered accommodation for passengers and a shop . 
 As passenger numbers continued to grow during the late 1960s it became clear that further motive power was needed , especially as the rebuilt No. 1 was not performing well . The Talyllyn 's unusual track gauge and restricted loading gauge meant that it was unlikely that a locomotive could be found that could work on the line unaltered , so in 1969 a 3 ft ( 914 mm ) gauge steam locomotive was purchased from the Bord na Mona ( Irish Peat Board ) with a view to rebuilding it for use on the Talyllyn . This locomotive was unofficially known as Irish Pete , a nod to its original use . 
 = = = Extension to Nant Gwernol : 1969 – 1980 = = = 
 The preservation society had long held ambitions to extend the railway along the former mineral extension from Abergynolwyn to the foot of the Alltwyllt incline , and as early as 1959 work had begun to trace the owners of the land that the extension traversed . Planning began in the mid @-@ 1960s , but construction did not start until 1968 when the winding house for the Abergynolwyn village incline was demolished . To bring the line up to passenger standards some of the curves needed to be eased , and this required blasting work , as the line runs on a narrow ledge on the hillside at this point . The extension and new station at Nant Gwernol were opened on 22 May 1976 by Wynford Vaughan Thomas who drove in the ceremonial " golden spike " to complete the extension . Despite this official opening ceremony , minor work still remained to bring the extension to the standard required to run regular passenger trains , but regular train services began on 29 May 1976 . 
 Although the extension of the railway was completed in 1976 , work in the vicinity continued with the creation of footpaths connecting to the new station . A new footbridge was built crossing the Nant Gwernol gorge and connecting the station with the existing path on the east side of the river . The bridge and paths were opened on 3 May 1980 by Lord Parry , the chairman of the Wales Tourist Board . By the mid @-@ 1970s , it had become clear that passenger numbers were no longer increasing . After 1973 , the peak year for passengers on the Talyllyn with 186 @,@ 000 passenger journeys made , numbers were to decline consistently until the 1990s . Preliminary work on the conversion of Irish Pete for use on the Talyllyn , which had begun in the early 1970s , was put on hold in 1975 and the chassis and boiler were put into storage at Pendre . 
 = = = Consolidation : 1980 – 2001 = = = 
 With passenger numbers falling and the line extended to Nant Gwernol , the railway entered a period of consolidation . By 1987 , the boiler on locomotive No. 6 Douglas was life expired and in need of replacement . Consideration was given to reviving the project to build a new locomotive from the components of Irish Pete instead of purchasing a new boiler for Douglas and in early 1988 work recommenced on the rebuilding of the ex @-@ Bord na Mona locomotive . A new design for an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 side tank locomotive was prepared by the railway 's Chief Engineer John Bate , which reused the chassis and boiler from the locomotive with a new superstructure and the addition of trailing wheels , and the new locomotive , officially named Tom Rolt after the Preservation Society 's first chairman , was put into service on 6 May 1991 . During this period further expansions of both Tywyn Wharf and Pendre stations were undertaken and Abergynolwyn station , which had been rebuilt as part of the Nant Gwernol extension in the 1970s , was expanded further to provide an additional attraction at the eastern end of the line . 
 One major anomaly remained in the railway 's operations : the 1889 Regulation of Railways Act had required , amongst other measures , that all British passenger trains be fitted with continuous brakes . McConnel had secured an exemption for the Talyllyn Railway , on the basis that the low speed of operation meant they were unnecessary and that the cost of compliance would bankrupt the enterprise , but by the end of the 1990s the Railway Inspectorate was insisting that the Talyllyn be brought into compliance with the act , a little over 100 years after it had passed . By 2001 , the railway had fitted its entire passenger fleet with the necessary equipment , operated by air brake pumps mounted on the locomotives . 
 = = = New museum : 2001 – present = = = 
 The Preservation Society celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2001 , and as part of the year of celebrations a major new project was launched to once more extend and improve facilities at Tywyn Wharf station . For many years the station had been home to semi @-@ permanent buildings housing the Narrow Gauge Railway Museum , but the new plans for the station included the construction of a new two @-@ storey building to house the museum and the extension of the existing station building to house a new cafe and booking office . Work began on the first phase of the project in January 2002 . In 2003 the railway received a £ 682 @,@ 500 Heritage Lottery grant towards the £ 1 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 cost of redeveloping Wharf station , and the new station and museum were officially opened by Prince Charles and The Duchess of Cornwall on 13 July 2005 . The railway has seen a steady increase in passengers carried since the turn of the millennium , with nearly 51 @,@ 000 passenger bookings and 95 @,@ 500 passenger journeys recorded in 2006 , although this figure is still only around half the peak figure carried in 1973 . In 2011 , the railway celebrated 60 years of preservation , and received an Engineering Heritage Award from the Institute of Mechanical Engineers in recognition of its importance in Welsh industrial heritage . In April 2012 , locomotive No.2 Dolgoch appeared at the Steel Steam and Stars Gala at the Llangollen Railway , running on a temporary section of narrow gauge track . This was the first time that that Dolgoch had operated away from its home railway in 146 years . In June 2013 the railway was awarded the Queen 's Award for Voluntary Service . 
 = = Today = = 
 The Talyllyn Railway remains a successful and popular tourist attraction . The original 1860s locomotives and passenger stock still run regularly alongside the roster of more modern rolling stock . The railway is promoted as one of The Great Little Trains of Wales , a joint marketing scheme launched in 1970 that encompasses ten narrow gauge railways in the country , mostly found in north and mid Wales . 
 In 2003 the railway employed 13 full @-@ time staff , plus the equivalent of an extra six part @-@ time staff in the summer and some 350 volunteers . 
 = = = Special events = = = 
 The railway operates a programme of special events throughout the year . These include the Have @-@ A @-@ Go Gala , Tom Rolt Steam and Vintage Rally , children 's Duncan Days and Tywyn Victorian week . Since 1984 there has been an annual running event called Race the Train , which follows the railway track 7 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 11 @.@ 7 km ) from Tywyn to Abergynolwyn and back again . The challenge is for runners to complete the 14 ½ <unk> ( 23 @.@ 3 km ) cross country route faster than the train , which takes around 1 hour 45 minutes . 
 = = = Young Members Group = = = 
 The Young Members Group ( <unk> ) are members and volunteers of the Talyllyn Railway Preservation Society who are between the ages of 14 and 25 . On occasions during the peak season , the Railway has held Young Members Days in which the youngest qualified people available that day run the railway . 
 = = Route = = 
 = = = Original passenger line = = = 
 The main terminus of the line is at Tywyn Wharf ( originally known as King 's Station , after a local landowner ) , where the railway 's administrative headquarters and the Narrow Gauge Railway Museum are located . When the line carried traffic from the quarry , slates were transferred to the Cambrian Railways on the transhipment sidings . Leaving Wharf station , which stands at an elevation of 40 ft ( 12 m ) above sea level , the line passes immediately under the <unk> Machynlleth to Dolgellau road and enters a long cutting that climbs towards Pendre , at a maximum gradient of 1 in 60 . On the left ( north ) side of the cutting there was once a long siding used for gravity shunting of wagons into the sidings at Wharf station . The railway runs through the cutting for about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) , before passing under another road bridge and passing the locomotive and carriage sheds and works at Pendre . 
 From Pendre , the railway passes over a gated level crossing and runs beside an industrial estate before climbing up to Ty Mawr bridge and on to Hendy , the first of five minor halts , which serves the adjacent farm . The railway runs in an approximately north @-@ easterly direction along the <unk> valley , mainly through fields of local farms on the valley floor , although this is where some of the steepest gradients on the line are to be found . The ruling gradient of the line is 1 in 60 . 
 More local halts follow at Fach Goch , and <unk> , the latter having a small platform . The section from <unk> to Rhydyronen was relaid in 1951 using rail purchased from the Corris Railway after the latter line 's closure in 1948 . Rhydyronen , a request stop , was the first intermediate station built on the line , opening in 1867 . A siding at the station was shortened in 1957 and removed completely circa 1975 . A short steep climb under a road bridge follows the station , followed by a slight downhill gradient . Unlike the Ffestiniog Railway , the Talyllyn was not designed to be worked as a gravity line , however this is the only downhill section between Pendre and Nant Gwernol . Another minor halt follows at <unk> , before the passing loop and request stop at Brynglas . 
 Above Brynglas , the line crosses the Cwm Pandy stream and enters a shallow cutting , climbing as it goes . The cutting ends at a road <unk> after which the line runs through open countryside as it starts to ascend the valley side on a ledge . After approximately 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @,@ 210 m ) it enters woodlands west of Dolgoch , climbing steadily , then curves to the south east and crosses the Dolgoch gorge on the Dolgoch viaduct , which carries the line 51 ft ( 16 m ) above the Dolgoch ravine . Dolgoch station is immediately east of the viaduct , situated on a left @-@ hand curve at 187 ft ( 57 m ) above sea level , and is the main intermediate station on the line , being popular with tourists visiting the nearby falls . The railway continues in a north easterly direction , curving through the woods and climbing the valley side . It shortly passes Quarry Siding , where a halt and passing loop are located ; this is the site of a small old shale quarry , the rock from which was used for ballasting on the railway . A large permanent way and storage shed opened on the site in 2013 . The line continues its ascent towards Abergynolwyn station , situated on a ledge cut into the hillside . 
 = = = Abergynolwyn to Nant Gwernol = = = 
 The original terminus of the statutory railway was Abergynolwyn , beyond which the railway continued as a 0 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) long mineral extension , now converted for passenger use . The extension was originally sharply curved , as the line turns south east into the steeply sided Nant Gwernol gorge but these curves were eased when conversion for passenger use took place in 1976 . The whole section is within woods , now owned by the Forestry Commission . Shortly after crossing over the forestry road the line reaches Ty Dwr , where the original locomotive shed stood from 1865 until it was demolished after Pendre works opened in 1867 , although the slate water tower continued in use into the 1950s . 
 After passing the site of Ty Dwr the railway bends around ' Amen ' corner and soon after the Village Incline is reached . From here the line runs into the gorge , high above the river on a narrow ledge , ending at the foot of the first incline leading to the Bryn Eglwys quarry . The original line fanned out into a set of three sidings , used to marshal trains of loaded slate wagons coming down from the quarry and empty wagons waiting to ascend . Nant Gwernol station , the eastern terminus of the line , was built on the site of the sidings . 
 The village of Abergynolwyn was built to house the quarrymen of Bryn Eglwys and their families , and to serve the village an incline with winding house was laid three quarters of the way along the mineral extension . The winding house for the incline stood on the narrow ledge , with the mineral line passing through it . The two @-@ track incline dropped 150 ft ( 46 m ) over a distance of 363 ft ( 111 m ) . At its foot , the line crossed the Nant Gwernol on a girder bridge . Immediately after the bridge , short lines branched off to the east from a wagon turntable to the coal yard and smithy of Pandy Farm and west to a writing slate factory ( later a carpenter 's yard ) . The main branch then split to form a storage loop , with a further wagon turntable and a longer branch serving the houses and school to the north east . The main branch continued north , crossing the main road then passing between the two main terraces in the village before ending in a turntable and a final short line connecting to the Capel Jerusalem chapel . The village incline was lifted during the early years of preservation , to provide much needed rail to replace the existing track . The winding house was demolished in 1968 to allow realignment of the railway to form the extension to Nant Gwernol . 
 = = = <unk> Tramway = = = 
 Until the closure of the quarries in 1946 , the line east from Abergynolwyn was worked as a mineral tramway – only slate and goods trains serving Bryn Eglwys ran on this section . The quarry lay about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south @-@ east of Nant Gwernol station and 300 ft ( 91 m ) above it , with a further mineral tramway connecting the quarry with the railway . What is now Nant Gwernol station was the terminus of the Talyllyn Railway proper . Here the line fanned out into a set of sidings where inbound trains were left and outbound slate trains assembled . The sidings were located on a narrow ledge in the side of the Nant Gwernol gorge . 
 Rising south @-@ east from the end of the sidings was the 633 ft ( 193 m ) long , double track gravity operated , Alltwyllt incline , from the top of which the <unk> Tramway ran south @-@ east towards the quarry for about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) . The tramway was laid in light bridge rail and worked for its entire existence using horses . The tramway ended at the foot of the <unk> Incline , a 440 ft ( 130 m ) long double track , gravity operated incline . This final incline rose to the north edge of Bryn Eglwys quarry , reaching a height of 612 ft ( 187 m ) above sea level . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The line has six steam locomotives for passenger trains and five diesel locomotives , which are primarily used for shunting and to haul works trains . It is unusual for all steam locomotives to be operable at the same time , as at least one is normally scheduled for overhaul . The railway also owns 23 carriages and vans , including all of the original carriages and the brake van built for the railway . 
 The railway is single track , so special measures have to be taken to prevent collisions . Before preservation , the railway operated a " one engine in steam " policy , but with growing passenger numbers it became necessary to install passing loops and a more stringent method of single line control was introduced . The line is worked by Electric Key tokens , which authorise the driver to enter a section of single line , and these are interlocked to prevent more than one token being withdrawn for a section at any one time . There is a loop at Pendre , which was used from the opening of the railway for shunting purposes , and further loops were installed at Brynglas in 1953 and Quarry Siding in 1963 . When the Nant Gwernol extension opened in 1976 , Abergynolwyn also became a passing loop . Between Abergynolwyn and Nant Gwernol the line is controlled by staff and ticket operation , which is controlled by the Abergynolwyn <unk> when on Duty 
 Each passing loop is controlled by a small signal box , known as a block @-@ post . These house the lever frames that control the points , the token equipment and telephones . The railway has few signals ; instead it has stop boards at Pendre , Brynglas , Quarry Siding and Nant Gwernol , and the <unk> allows trains to proceed by use of flags . There are colour light signals located at Tywyn Wharf , operated from the Control Office and disc signals controlled from the ground frame . Abergynolwyn has colour light signals , which are operated from the <unk> . When the block @-@ post is unmanned , it is the responsibility of the locomotive crew to change the token before proceeding . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 The Talyllyn Railway is represented in The Railway Series books by the Reverend W. Awdry and the spin @-@ off TV series Thomas & Friends as the <unk> Railway ; most of the fictional locomotives are based on real @-@ life equivalents . Awdry visited the line on a family holiday in the early days of preservation and became involved as a volunteer soon afterwards . Several of the stories in The Railway Series come from his real @-@ life experiences at the Talyllyn , and some of the books contain full @-@ page illustrations of Talyllyn locomotives . 
 The preservation of the Talyllyn Railway by volunteers was the inspiration for the 1953 film The Titfield Thunderbolt , an Ealing Studios comedy about a group of villagers attempting to run a service on a disused branch line after closure . T. E. B. Clarke , the script writer for the film , had heard about the preservation of the Talyllyn and spent a day on the railway in 1951 , and some of the early incidents in preservation were incorporated into the film . In the book Railway Adventure Tom Rolt recalled that he had hoped the film might be produced on the Talyllyn , but it was eventually filmed on the recently closed Camerton branch of the Bristol and North Somerset Railway branch line along the Cam Brook valley in Somerset . 
 = HMS Esk ( H15 ) = 
 HMS Esk was an E @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . She was designed to be easily converted into a fast minelayer by removing some guns and her torpedo tubes . Although assigned to the Home Fleet upon completion , the ship was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1935 – 36 , during the Abyssinia Crisis . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 , she spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . Esk was converted to a minelayer when World War II began in September 1939 , and spent most of her time laying mines . During the Norwegian Campaign of April – June 1940 , the ship laid mines in Norwegian territorial waters before the Germans invaded , but was recalled to home waters to resume her minelaying duties in early May . During one such sortie , Esk was sunk during the Texel Disaster on the night of 31 August 1940 , when she ran into a newly laid German minefield . 
 = = Description = = 
 The E @-@ class ships were slightly improved versions of the preceding D class . They displaced 1 @,@ 405 long tons ( 1 @,@ 428 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 940 long tons ( 1 @,@ 970 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet 3 inches ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . They were powered by two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers . The turbines developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . Esk carried a maximum of 480 long tons ( 490 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 6 @,@ 350 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 760 km ; 7 @,@ 310 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ships ' complement was 145 officers and ratings . 
 The ships mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . The E class was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . To compensate for the weight of her 60 Mark XIV mines and their rails , two of Esk 's 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns , their ammunition , both sets of torpedo tubes , her whalers and their davits had to be removed . She was given small sponsons at the stern to ensure smooth delivery of her mines . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered 1 November 1932 , from Swan Hunter & Wigham Richardson at Wallsend under the 1931 Naval Programme , for use as a destroyer that could quickly be converted for use as a minelayer when required . She was laid down on 24 March 1933 , and launched on 19 March 1934 . The ship was commissioned on 28 September 1934 , at a total cost of £ 247 @,@ 279 , excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament . The ship accompanied the Home Fleet during its West Indies cruise between January and March 1935 . Esk was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet from September 1935 to March 1936 , during the Abyssinian Crisis . The ship patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War , enforcing the edicts of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee until March 1939 , when she returned to the United Kingdom . During the Munich Crisis , Esk and her sister ship HMS Express were temporarily attached to the 9th Destroyer Flotilla at the Nore , and practiced minelaying on 3 October 1938 . Esk was reduced to reserve on 24 June 1939 , and was not recommissioned until 2 August . She attended the Reserve Fleet Review on the 15th , and then began conversion as a minelayer beginning on 28 August . 
 The conversion was completed on 7 September 1939 , and the ship was assigned to the 20th Destroyer Flotilla the next day . Esk laid mines in the Heligoland Bight with her sister Express on the night of 9 / 10 September . She escorted the battleship Royal Sovereign from Scapa Flow to Portsmouth from 23 – 26 September , and then conducted minelaying operations from Milford Haven and Portsmouth through December . On 17 – 18 December , Esk , Express , HMS Intrepid and Ivanhoe laid 240 mines off the mouth of the Ems . She was refitted at Portsmouth from 29 December to 26 January 1940 . 
 After the completion of her refit , Esk escorted the auxiliary minelayers HMS Princess Victoria and HMS Teviot Bank for the next six months , as they laid mines in the East Coast Barrier , as well as making occasional minelaying sorties of her own . On 3 March , Esk , Express , HMS Icarus and HMS Impulsive laid mines near Horns Reef in the Heligoland Bight , that sank the German submarine U @-@ 44 about 13 March . The ship was assigned to the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow at the beginning of April , and was allocated to " Force WV " with the ships of the 20th Flotilla for Operation Wilfred , an operation to lay mines in the Vestfjord to prevent the transport of Swedish iron ore from Narvik to Germany . On 5 April , " Force WV " sailed from Scapa Flow , escorted by the destroyers HMS Hardy , HMS Havock , HMS Hotspur and HMS Hunter of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla . The ships of the 20th Destroyer Flotilla laid 234 mines in Vestfjord on the morning of 8 April , and later rendezvoused with the battlecruiser HMS Renown . On the 15th , she returned to Scapa Flow , escorting the battleship Rodney . 
 On 10 May , Esk , Express , Intrepid and Princess Victoria laid 236 mines off Bergen , North Holland , and on 15 May , she joined with Express and Ivanhoe to lay 164 mines off the Hook of Holland . Three German minesweepers , M 61 , M 89 , and M 136 , were sunk by this minefield on 26 July . The ship joined the evacuation of Allied troops from Dunkirk on 29 May . Esk evacuated <unk> troops between 29 May and 3 June , including over 1 @,@ 000 French troops rescued from the TSS Scotia , which was sinking after German air attacks . After repairs to the minor damage suffered by the ship during the evacuation , she resumed her previous duties . 
 On 31 August 1940 , she sailed with Intrepid , Icarus , Ivanhoe and Express to lay a minefield off the Dutch coast , north of Texel . Express hit a mine in a newly @-@ laid German field that night and had her bow blown off . Esk closed to assist her and almost immediately struck another mine . Some 15 minutes later , there was another explosion amidships which caused Esk to break in two , and she quickly sank in position 53 ° 26 ′ 36 ″ N 03 ° 48 ′ 00 ″ E. Ivanhoe rescued some survivors , but 127 of the ship 's company were killed . 
 = Mean Streak = 
 Mean Streak is a wooden roller coaster located at Cedar Point in Sandusky , Ohio . Built by Dinn Corporation , it opened to the public on May 11 , 1991 , breaking world records for tallest lift and the longest drop on a wooden roller coaster . Although the height record was only held for one season , it is still one of the tallest , fastest , and longest wooden coasters in the world . It is located in the Frontiertown section of the park behind the Cedar Point & Lake Erie Railroad station . 
 With a duration of 3 minutes and 13 seconds , Mean Streak had the longest ride time of any roller coaster in the park until 2000 . It is also one of only two wooden roller coasters operating at Cedar Point ; the other is the Blue Streak . 
 = = History = = 
 The ride was announced in late 1990 and was officially named " Mean Streak " on October 24 , 1990 . Construction on Mean Streak continued throughout the winter and spring . Mean Streak opened to the public on May 11 , 1991 and media day was held on May 22 . In 1994 , trim brakes were installed on the first drop , slowing the ride down . In September 2010 , a small 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) section caught fire . The fire was contained to that section and no other damage was reported . The ride was originally set to shut down for the remainder of the season for maintenance anyway . 
 Over the years , Mean Streak has been <unk> several times . Some <unk> has been completed by Martin & Vleminckx . Prior to the 2012 operating season , many sections of track after the first drop were replaced . This was the most major work done on the ride since it opened . Also , in 2012 , a portion of the queue was removed to make room for a new building . The building is located in the infield of Mean Streak and is used for the HalloWeekends haunted house , Eden Musee . It is used for storage during the offseason and summer . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After leaving the station , the train passes through the storage tracks and makes a U @-@ turn to the right , before ascending the 161 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 49 m ) lift hill . After cresting the top of the hill , the train drops 155 feet ( 47 m ) at a 52 @-@ degree @-@ angle , reaching a top speed of 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) . While dropping , riders go through a set of trim brakes on the first drop . Riders then go through a 123 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 37 m ) twisted turnaround followed a small airtime hill then another twisted turnaround . The train then travels over the lift hill and dips down to the right . After that , the train travels through the rides structure and goes down another hill , turning to the left into the mid @-@ course brake run . The train then dips down to the left into another airtime hill . Riders then go through several small airtime hills and turns in the ride 's structure followed by the final brake run . One cycle of the ride lasts 3 minutes and 13 seconds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Manufacturer = = = 
 Mean Streak was only one of 12 roller coasters manufactured by Ohio @-@ based Dinn Corporation before dismantling in 1992 . It is a Twister model . It was manufactured at a cost of $ 7 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . The ride was designed by Curtis D. Summers . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The wooden track is approximately 5 @,@ 427 feet ( 1 @,@ 654 m ) in length and the height of the lift is approximately 161 feet ( 49 m ) . It was constructed from 1 @.@ 7 million board feet ( 4 @,@ 000 m ³ ) of treated southern yellow pine . A trim brake was installed in 1994 on Mean Streak 's first drop to reduce its overall speed , therefore , reducing track wear and increasing ride comfort . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Mean Streak operates with three Philadelphia Toboggan Coasters trains , colored red , gold and green . Each train has seven cars with riders arranged two across , in two rows , for a total of 28 riders per train . Riders must be 48 inches ( 120 cm ) tall to ride and are secured by an individual ratcheting lap bar and seat belt . During the 2011 – 2012 offseason , all three trains were sent to the Philadelphia Toboggan Coasters headquarters where they were refurbished and received maintenance . 
 = = Records = = 
 When Mean Streak opened , it broke three records among wooden roller coasters . It was the wooden roller coaster with the world 's tallest lift and the longest drop . As of 2016 , Mean Streak has the seventh tallest lift , the tenth fastest speed , the fourth longest track @-@ length and the seventh longest drop . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writers from The Pantagraph stated that the ride is " the best kept @-@ secret at Cedar Point " as it is located at the very back of the park . The ride was also featured on the Today show in 1992 in connection with the 100th anniversary of roller coasters . 
 Mean Streak has been ranked as one of the most popular wooden roller coasters in the world . It has been ranked nine times in the top 50 , since the Golden Ticket Awards were introduced in 1998 . The ride has not been ranked in the other seven seasons . 
 = Alfred E. Montgomery = 
 Vice Admiral Alfred Eugene Montgomery ( 12 June 1891 – 15 December 1961 ) was an officer in the United States Navy who served in World War I and World War II . A graduate of the Naval Academy , he participated in operations on the Mexican Border . He trained for submarines , and became executive officer of the submarine USS E @-@ 1 . In November 1914 he reported to the Mare Island Naval Shipyard where the new submarine USS F @-@ 1 was being fitted out , and served as its commander from June 1917 until it was lost on 17 December 1917 . 
 In June 1922 , Montgomery qualified as a naval aviator . He commanded observation and torpedo squadrons , and was Executive Officer of the aircraft carrier USS Ranger from November 1936 until June 1938 , and its commanding officer from June 1940 to June 1941 . In June 1941 , he became Chief of Staff and Aide to Commander Aircraft , Atlantic Fleet . He became commander of Carrier Division 12 , flying his flag on USS Essex in August 1943 , and commander of Carrier Division 3 in March 1944 , with his flag on USS Bunker Hill . As such , he commanded a Task Group of the Fast Carrier Task Force in the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign , Battle of the Philippine Sea , and the Philippines campaign . After the war , he commanded the Fifth Fleet and the First Task Fleet . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alfred Eugene Montgomery was born in Omaha , Nebraska , on 12 June 1891 , the son of Eugene and Julia Smith Montgomery . He was educated in Omaha and at Brookline High School in Massachusetts . He was appointed to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland , from Nebraska in 1908 . He graduated with the class of 1912 on 8 June 1912 , and was commissioned as an ensign in 1914 . 
 His first assignment was to the battleship USS Virginia . He was also assigned as an instructor on the USS Constellation , which was then serving as a training ship at the Naval Training Station , Newport , Rhode Island . Between February 1914 and July 1915 he served on the cruiser USS Tacoma , participating in operations on the Mexican Border , the cruiser USS Chester and the battleship USS Connecticut . 
 In July 1915 , he joined the submarine service . After a training course on the old monitor USS Tonopah , he became executive officer of the submarine USS E @-@ 1 . In November 1914 he reported to the Mare Island Naval Shipyard where the new submarine USS F @-@ 1 was being fitted out . He served as its commander from June 1917 until 17 December 1917 , when F @-@ 1 collided with her sister ship USS F @-@ 3 during maneuvers , and sank within seconds with the loss of nineteen of her crew . 
 Montgomery was then assigned to the submarine USS R @-@ 20 , which was being fitted out at the Union Iron Works in San Francisco , California . He became its commander when it was commissioned on 26 October 1918 . He returned to the Union Iron Works in October 1920 to fit out and commission the USS S @-@ 32 but before this occurred he was sent to Mare Island in January 1921 as Superintendent of New Works in the Machinery Division . 
 In January 1922 , Montgomery reported to the Naval Air Station , Pensacola , Florida , where he qualified as a naval aviator on 8 June 1922 . He then became Executive Officer of VO @-@ 2 , the observation squadron operating from the aircraft tender USS Aroostook . In 1923 he became commander of VO @-@ 1 and then VO @-@ 6 . After a short period as aide to Captain Walter R. Gherardi , who commanded the Scouting Fleet 's aircraft squadrons from the aircraft tender USS Wright , he became commander of the torpedo bomber squadron VT @-@ 1 . He was posted to the Naval Air Station San Diego as assembly and repair officer in 1925 , becoming its executive officer the next year . He then returned to sea as head of the air department on the aircraft carrier USS Langley . In July 1929 , he became commander of VT @-@ 2 on the USS Saratoga . 
 Following the usual pattern of alternating sea and shore duty , he commanded the Naval Air Station Seattle from August 1930 to May 1932 . From July 1932 until May 1933 he was as Aviation Officer on the Staff of Commander Cruisers , Scouting Force , on its flagship , USS Chicago . He then became the head of the Aviation Section , Ship 's Movement Division in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations at the Navy Department in Washington , D.C. , and commanded the Naval Air Station Anacostia from July 1934 to February 1936 . 
 He returned to sea in February 1936 as Plans and Operations Officer on the Staff of Commander Aircraft , Battle Force , Rear Admiral Henry V. Butler , and later Rear Admiral Frederick J. Horne . He was Executive Officer of the aircraft carrier USS Ranger in November 1936 until June 1938 , and of Naval Air Station San Diego again from July 1938 to July 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Montgomery served as head of the Flight Division in the Bureau of Aeronautics in the Navy Department from July 1939 until June 1940 , when he assumed command of Ranger . In June 1941 he became Chief of Staff and Aide to the Commander Aircraft , Atlantic Fleet , subsequently redesignated Commander Carriers , Atlantic Fleet , Rear Admiral Arthur B. Cook . He was serving in this post when the United States entered World War II after the bombing of Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . In this role , he was preoccupied with hunting and sinking German U @-@ Boats in the Atlantic . 
 Promoted to rear admiral in May 1942 , Montgomery became commander of the Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in June , and then the Naval Air Training Center there in November . For his service at Corpus Christi , he was awarded the Legion of Merit . His citation read : 
 Assigned the task of transforming a training station with auxiliary fields to a training center with seven individual commands , ( he ) achieved distinctive success in executing a program involving vast expansion of facilities and personnel . 
 In August 1943 he became commander of Carrier Division 12 , flying his flag on USS Essex . He became commander of Carrier Division 3 in March 1944 , with his flag on USS Bunker Hill . As such , he commanded a Task Group of the Fast Carrier Task Force , which was known as Task Force 58 when part of the Fifth Fleet and Task Force 38 when part of the Third Fleet . During the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign he led Task Group 50 @.@ 3 , with the carriers Essex , Bunker Hill and Independence . His Task Group attacked Rabaul on 11 November , and then bombed Tarawa for three days from 18 to 20 November . For his part in the campaign , he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal : 
 As Commander of a Carrier Task Group in action against enemy Japanese forces in the Central and South Pacific Areas from November 18 to December 10 , 1943 ... ( He ) directed the operations of his Task Group in repeated aerial attacks against Tarawa , Gilbert Islands , through the preparatory periods and in support of the subsequent landings , greatly assisting our forces in the successful occupation of this strategic island ... carried out numerous vital air raids on Japanese shipping , aircraft and installations on Kwajalein Atoll , Marshall Islands , despite a persistent hostile night attack lasting five hours ... and previous operations against Rabaul , New Britain , and Wake Island , contributed in large measure to our ultimate victories in the Pacific Areas ... 
 For a raid on Saipan , Montgomery was award the Navy Cross : 
 For extraordinary heroism as Officer in Tactical Command of a Carrier Task Group , in action ... in the vicinity of Saipan , February 12 , 1944 . With his task group subjected to repeated attacks by enemy torpedo and bomber planes , ( he ) ... skillfully and successfully directed their gunfire and combat air patrols in destroying seventeen hostile planes ... delivered damaging attacks against enemy shipping , aircraft and shore installations and ... also obtained valuable photographs . By his outstanding leadership and excellent tactical ability , ( he ) brought his task group undamaged through this engagement ... 
 For the Mariana and Palau Islands campaign , Montgomery led Task Group 58 @.@ 2 , with the Bunker Hill , Wasp , Monterey and Cabot . While his forces won a great victory in the Battle of the Philippine Sea , Montgomery , in his report on the battle , expressed his opinion that : 
 results of the battle were extremely disappointing to all hands , in that important units of the enemy fleet , which came out in the open for the first time in over a year and made several air attacks on our superior force , were able to escape without our coming to grips with them . 
 Montgomery was awarded a second Navy Distinguished Service Medal for his part : 
 as commander of a Task Group of Carriers and screening vessels in operations against the Japanese forces from March through June 1944 . In attacks on Palau ... Marcus and Wake ... the aircraft under his command inflicted great damage on enemy shipping and shore installations . At Hollandia ... his task group contributed invaluable assistance to the Amphibious forces engaged in establishing a beachhead and continued to support advances on land after the beachhead was firmly in our hands . At Truk ... finally in the battle for the Marianas and in the attacks on the Japanese fleet in June , 1944 his forces participated in the decisive destruction of Japanese air resistance and inflicted damaging blows on the important fleet units . 
 A third Navy Distinguished Service Medal was awarded for the Philippines campaign : 
 as Commander of Task Group 38 @.@ 1 , operating against enemy Japanese forces in the Philippine Islands Area from October 30 , 1944 to December 29 , 1944 . After effectively organizing and expeditiously developing the forces of his command ( he ) ably directed his group in highly successful concentrated operations against the enemy , inflicting severe and costly damage on the aircraft , shipping and shore installations at Leyte , Manila and Luzon . By his superb professional skill in all the phases of aerial warfare and his capable leadership , he inspired the men of his command to maximum effort throughout this critical period and contributed to the sustained prosecution of the war in this vital theater ... 
 Montgomery became Commander Fleet Air , West Coast , with his headquarters at the Naval Air Station , San Diego , in January 1945 . He tried to bring his experiences in combat to bear in his new role , which involved supplying the combat units with men and equipment . For his services in this job , he was awarded a second Legion of Merit . In July 1945 he became commander of Pacific Fleet Air Forces , with the rank of vice admiral . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war , Montgomery became commander of the Fifth Fleet in August 1946 , flying his flag from the command ship USS Appalachian . He then became commander of the First Task Fleet in July 1947 , flying his flag from the battleship USS Iowa . He reverted to his permanent rank of rear admiral in August 1947 , and became commander of the Alaskan Sea Frontier and the 17th Naval District . He commanded the US Naval Base Bermuda from 1949 to 1950 . His last command , in February 1950 , was Commander Fleet Air , at Jacksonville , Florida . He retired in July 1951 , upon which he was given a tombstone promotion to vice admiral . 
 Montgomery died at the Naval Hospital in Bremerton , Washington on 13 December 1961 . He was survived by his wife , Alice Claire Smith Montgomery , and his daughter Anne . His son , Lieutenant Brooke Montgomery , was killed in a plane crash on 1 February 1956 . 
 = History of Somerset = 
 Somerset is a historic county in the south west of England . There is evidence of human occupation since prehistoric times with hand axes and flint points from the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic eras , and a range of burial mounds , hill forts and other artefacts dating from the Neolithic , Bronze and Iron Ages . The oldest dated human road work in Great Britain is the Sweet Track , constructed across the Somerset Levels with wooden planks in the 39th century BCE . 
 Following the Roman Empire 's invasion of southern Britain , the mining of lead and silver in the Mendip Hills provided a basis for local industry and commerce . Bath became the site of a major Roman fort and city , the remains of which can still be seen . During the Early Medieval period Somerset was the scene of battles between the Anglo @-@ Saxons and first the Britons and later the Danes . In this period it was ruled first by various kings of Wessex , and later by kings of England . Following the defeat of the Anglo @-@ Saxon monarchy by the Normans in 1066 , castles were built in Somerset . 
 Expansion of the population and settlements in the county continued during the Tudor and more recent periods . Agriculture and coal mining expanded until the 18th century , although other industries declined during the industrial revolution . In modern times the population has grown , particularly in the seaside towns , notably Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Agriculture continues to be a major business , if no longer a major employer because of mechanisation . Light industries are based in towns such as Bridgwater and Yeovil . The towns of Taunton and Shepton Mallet manufacture cider , although the acreage of apple orchards is less than it once was . 
 = = Palaeolithic and Mesolithic = = 
 The Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods saw hunter @-@ gatherers move into the region of Somerset . There is evidence from flint artefacts in a quarry at Westbury that an ancestor of modern man , possibly Homo heidelbergensis , was present in the area from around 500 @,@ 000 years ago . There is still some doubt about whether the artefacts are of human origin but they have been dated within Oxygen Isotope Stage 13 ( 524 @,@ 000 – 478 @,@ 000 BP ) . Other experts suggest that " many of the bone @-@ rich Middle Pleistocene deposits belong to a single but climatically variable interglacial that succeeded the <unk> , perhaps about 500 @,@ 000 years ago . Detailed analysis of the origin and modification of the flint artefacts leads to the conclusion that the assemblage was probably a product of geomorphological processes rather than human work , but a single cut @-@ marked bone suggests a human presence . " Animal bones and artefacts unearthed in the 1980s at Westbury @-@ sub @-@ Mendip , in Somerset , have shown evidence of early human activity approximately 700 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Homo sapiens sapiens , or modern man , came to Somerset during the Early Upper Palaeolithic . There is evidence of occupation of four Mendip caves 35 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 years ago . During the Last Glacial Maximum , about 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago , it is probable that Somerset was deserted as the area experienced tundra conditions . Evidence was found in Gough 's Cave of deposits of human bone dating from around 12 @,@ 500 years ago . The bones were <unk> and probably ritually buried though perhaps related to cannibalism being practised in the area at the time or making skull cups or storage containers . Somerset was one of the first areas of future England settled following the end of Younger Dryas phase of the last Ice Age c . 8000 BC . Cheddar Man is the name given to the remains of a human male found in Gough 's Cave in Cheddar Gorge . He is Britain 's oldest complete human skeleton . The remains date from about 7150 BC , and it appears that he died a violent death . Somerset is thought to have been occupied by Mesolithic hunter @-@ gatherers from about 6000 BCE ; Mesolithic artefacts have been found in more than 70 locations . Mendip caves were used as burial places , with between 50 and 100 skeletons being found in Aveline 's Hole . In the Neolithic era , from about 3500 BCE , there is evidence of farming . 
 At the end of the last Ice Age the Bristol Channel was dry land , but later the sea level rose , particularly between 1220 and 900 BC and between 800 and 470 BCE , resulting in major coastal changes . The Somerset Levels became flooded , but the dry points such as Glastonbury and Brent Knoll have a long history of settlement , and are known to have been occupied by Mesolithic hunters . The county has prehistoric burial mounds ( such as Stoney Littleton Long Barrow ) , stone rows ( such as the circles at Stanton Drew and Priddy ) and settlement sites . Evidence of Mesolithic occupation has come both from the upland areas , such as in Mendip caves , and from the low land areas such as the Somerset Levels . Dry points in the latter such as Glastonbury Tor and Brent Knoll , have a long history of settlement with wooden trackways between them . There were also " lake villages " in the marsh such as those at Glastonbury Lake Village and Meare . One of the oldest dated human road work in Britain is the Sweet Track , constructed across the Somerset Levels with wooden planks in the 39th century BC , partially on the route of the even earlier Post Track . 
 = = Neolithic , Bronze and Iron Ages = = 
 There is evidence of Exmoor 's human occupation from Mesolithic times onwards . In the Neolithic period people started to manage animals and grow crops on farms cleared from the woodland , rather than act purely as hunter gatherers . It is also likely that extraction and smelting of mineral ores to make tools , weapons , containers and ornaments in bronze and then iron started in the late Neolithic and into the Bronze and Iron Ages . 
 The caves of the Mendip Hills were settled during the Neolithic period and contain extensive archaeological sites such as those at Cheddar Gorge . There are numerous Iron Age Hill Forts , which were later reused in the Dark Ages , such as Cadbury Castle , Worlebury Camp and Ham Hill . The age of the henge monument at Stanton Drew stone circles is unknown , but is believed to be from the Neolithic period . There is evidence of mining on the Mendip Hills back into the late Bronze Age when there were technological changes in metal working indicated by the use of lead . There are numerous " hill forts " , such as Small Down Knoll , Solsbury Hill , Dolebury Warren and Burledge Hill , which seem to have had domestic purposes , not just a defensive role . They generally seem to have been occupied intermittently from the Bronze Age onward , some , such as Cadbury Camp at South Cadbury , being refurbished during different eras . <unk> Burial Chamber is a Bronze Age burial chamber at Williton which is composed of three round barrows and possibly a long , chambered barrow . 
 The Iron Age tribes of later Somerset were the Dobunni in north Somerset , Durotriges in south Somerset and Dumnonii in west Somerset . The first and second produced coins , the finds of which allows their tribal areas to be suggested , but the latter did not . All three had a Celtic culture and language . However , Ptolemy stated that Bath was in the territory of the Belgae , but this may be a mistake . The Celtic gods were worshipped at the temple of Sulis at Bath and possibly the temple on Brean Down . Iron Age sites on the Quantock Hills , include major hill forts at Dowsborough and Ruborough , as well as smaller earthwork enclosures , such as Trendle Ring , Elworthy Barrows and <unk> Camp . 
 = = Roman = = 
 Somerset was part of the Roman Empire from 47 AD to about 409 AD . However , the end was not abrupt and elements of <unk> lingered on for perhaps a century . 
 Somerset was invaded from the south @-@ east by the Second Legion Augusta , under the future emperor Vespasian . The hillforts of the Durotriges at Ham Hill and Cadbury Castle were captured . Ham Hill probably had a temporary Roman occupation . The massacre at Cadbury Castle seems to have been associated with the later <unk> Revolt of 60 – 61 AD . The county remained part of the Roman Empire until around 409 AD . 
 The Roman invasion , and possibly the preceding period of involvement in the internal affairs of the south of England , was inspired in part by the potential of the Mendip Hills . A great deal of the attraction of the lead mines may have been the potential for the extraction of silver . 
 Forts were set up at Bath and Ilchester . The lead and silver mines at Charterhouse in the Mendip Hills were run by the military . The Romans established a defensive boundary along the new military road known the Fosse Way ( from the Latin fossa meaning ditch ) . The Fosse Way ran through Bath , Shepton Mallet , Ilchester and south @-@ west towards Axminster . The road from Dorchester ran through Yeovil to meet the Fosse Way at Ilchester . Small towns and trading ports were set up , such as Camerton and Combwich . The larger towns decayed in the latter part of the period , though the smaller ones appear to have decayed less . In the latter part of the period , Ilchester seems to have been a " civitas " capital and Bath may also have been one . Particularly to the east of the River Parrett , villas were constructed . However , only a few Roman sites have been found to the west of the river . The villas have produced important mosaics and artifacts . Cemeteries have been found outside the Roman towns of Somerset and by Roman temples such as that at <unk> . Romano @-@ British farming settlements , such as those at <unk> and <unk> , have been found in Somerset . There was salt production on the Somerset Levels near Highbridge and quarrying took place near Bath , where the Roman Baths gave their name to Bath . 
 Excavations carried out before the flooding of Chew Valley Lake also uncovered Roman remains , indicating agricultural and industrial activity from the second half of the 1st century until the 3rd century AD . The finds included a moderately large villa at Chew Park , where wooden writing tablets ( the first in the UK ) with ink writing were found . There is also evidence from the Pagans Hill Roman Temple at Chew Stoke . In October 2001 the West Bagborough Hoard of 4th century Roman silver was discovered in West Bagborough . The 681 coins included two denarii from the early 2nd century and 8 <unk> and 671 Siliqua all dating to the period AD 337 – 367 . The majority were struck in the reigns of emperors Constantius II and Julian and derive from a range of mints including Arles and Lyons in France , Trier in Germany and Rome . 
 In April 2010 , the Frome Hoard , one of the largest @-@ ever hoards of Roman coins discovered in Britain , was found by a metal detectorist . The hoard of 52 @,@ 500 coins dated from the 3rd century AD and was found buried in a field near Frome , in a jar 14 inches ( 36 cm ) below the surface . The coins were excavated by archaeologists from the Portable Antiquities Scheme . 
 = = Sub @-@ Roman period = = 
 This is the period from about 409 AD to the start of Saxon political control , which was mainly in the late 7th century , though they are said to have captured the Bath area in 577 AD . Initially the Britons of Somerset seem to have continued much as under the Romans but without the imperial taxation and markets . There was then a period of civil war in Britain though it is not known how this affected Somerset . The Western <unk> may have been constructed in this period but archaeological data shows that it was probably built during the 5th or 6th century . This area became the border between the Romano @-@ British Celts and the West Saxons following the Battle of Deorham in 577 AD . The ditch is on the north side , so presumably it was used by the Celts as a defence against Saxons encroaching from the upper Thames Valley . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , the Saxon Cenwalh achieved a breakthrough against the British Celtic tribes , with victories at Bradford @-@ on @-@ Avon ( in the Avon Gap in the Wansdyke ) in 652 AD , and further south at the Battle of Peonnum ( at Penselwood ) in 658 AD , followed by an advance west through the Polden Hills to the River Parrett . 
 The Saxon advance from the east seems to have been halted by battles between the British and Saxons , for example ; at the siege of Badon Mons Badonicus ( which may have been in the Bath region e.g. at Solsbury Hill ) , or Bathampton Down . During the 5th , 6th and 7th centuries , Somerset was probably partly in the Kingdom of Dumnonia , partly in the land of the Durotriges and partly in that of the Dobunni . The boundaries between these is largely unknown , but may have been similar to those in the Iron Age . Various " tyrants " seem to have controlled territories from reoccupied hill forts . There is evidence of an elite at hill forts such as Cadbury Castle and Cadbury Camp ; for example , there is imported pottery . Cemeteries are an important source of evidence for the period and large ones have been found in Somerset , such as that at Cannington , which was used from the Roman to the Saxon period . The towns of Somerset seem to have been little used during that period but there continued to be farming on the villa sites and at the Romano @-@ British villages . 
 There may have been effects from plague and volcanic eruption during this period as well as marine transgression into the Levels . 
 The language spoken during this period is thought to be Southwestern Brythonic , but only one or two inscribed stones survive in Somerset from this period . However , a couple of curse tablets found in the baths at Bath may be in this language . Some place names in Somerset seem to be Celtic in origin and may be from this period or earlier , e.g. <unk> . Some river names , such as Parrett , may be Celtic or pre @-@ Celtic . The religion of the people of Somerset in this period is thought to be Christian but it was isolated from Rome until after the Council of Hertford in 673 AD when Aldhelm was asked to write a letter to Geraint of Dumnonia and his bishops . Some church sites in Somerset are thought to date from this period , e.g. , <unk> Street . 
 Most of what is known of the history of this period comes from Gildas 's On the Ruin of Britain , which is thought to have been written in <unk> territory , possibly at Glastonbury . 
 The earliest fortification of Taunton started for King Ine of Wessex and Æthelburg , in or about the year 710 AD . However , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle this was destroyed 12 years later . 
 = = Early Mediaeval = = 
 This is the period from the late 7th century ( for most of Somerset ) to 1066 , though for part of the 10th and 11th centuries England was under Danish control . Somerset , like Dorset to the south , held the West Saxon advance from Wiltshire / Hampshire back for over a century , remaining a frontier between the Saxons and the Romano @-@ British Celts . 
 The Saxons conquered Bath following the Battle of Deorham in 577 , and the border was probably established along the line of the Wansdyke to the north of the Mendip Hills . Then Cenwalh of Wessex broke through at Bradford @-@ on @-@ Avon in 652 , and the Battle of Peonnum possibly at Penselwood in 658 , advancing west through the Polden Hills to the River Parrett . In 661 the Saxons may have advanced into what is now Devon as a result of a battle fought at <unk> , possibly <unk> near Crediton . 
 Then in the period 681 – 85 Centwine of Wessex conquered King Cadwaladr and " advanced as far as the sea " , but it is not clear where this was . It is assumed that the Saxons occupied the rest of Somerset about this time . The Saxon rule was consolidated under King Ine , who established a fort at Taunton , demolished by his wife in 722 . It is sometimes said that he built palaces at Somerton and South Petherton but this does not seem to be the case . He fought against Geraint in 710 . In 705 the diocese of Sherborne was formed , taking in Wessex west of Selwood . Saxon kings granted land in Somerset by charter from the 7th century onward . The way and extent to which the Britons survived under the Saxons is a debatable matter . However , King Ine 's laws make provision for Britons . Somerset originally formed part of Wessex and latter became a separate " shire " . Somersetshire seems to have been formed within Wessex during the 8th century though it is not recorded as a name until later . Mints were set up at times in various places in Somerset in the Saxon period , e.g. , Watchet . 
 Somerset played an important part in defeating the spread of the Danes in the 9th century . Viking raids took place for instance in 987 and 997 at Watchet and the Battle of Cynwit . King Alfred was driven to seek refuge from the Danes at Athelney before defeating them at the Battle of Ethandun in 878 , usually considered to be near Edington , Wiltshire , but possibly the village of Edington in Somerset . Alfred established a series of forts and lookout posts linked by a military road , or Herepath , so his army could cover Viking movements at sea . The Herepath has a characteristic form which is familiar on the Quantocks : a regulation 20 m wide track between avenues of trees growing from hedge laying embankments . The Herepath ran from the ford on the River Parrett at Combwich , past Cannington hill fort to Over Stowey , where it climbed the Quantocks along the line of the current Stowey road , to Crowcombe Park Gate . Then it went south along the ridge , to Triscombe Stone . One branch may have led past Lydeard Hill and Buncombe Hill , back to Alfred 's base at Athelney . The main branch descended the hills at Triscombe , then along the avenue to Red Post Cross , and west to the Brendon Hills and Exmoor . A peace treaty with the Danes was signed at Wedmore and the Danish king Guthrum the Old was baptised at Aller . <unk> ( fortified places ) had been set up by 919 , such as Lyng . The Alfred Jewel , an object about 2 @.@ 5 inch long , made of filigree gold , cloisonné @-@ enamelled and with a rock crystal covering , was found in 1693 at Petherton Park , North Petherton . Believed to have been owned by Alfred the Great it is thought to have been the handle for a pointer that would have fit into the hole at its base and been used while reading a book . 
 Monasteries and minster churches were set up all over Somerset , with daughter churches from the minsters in manors . There was a royal palace at Cheddar , which was used at times in the 10th century to host the Witenagemot , and there is likely to have been a " central place " at Somerton , Bath , Glastonbury and Frome since the kings visited them . The towns of Somerset seem to have been in occupation in this period though evidence for this is limited because of subsequent buildings on top of remains from this period . Agriculture flourished in this period , with a re @-@ organisation into centralised villages in the latter part in the east of the county . 
 In the period before the Norman Conquest , Somerset came under the control of Godwin , Earl of Wessex , and his family . There seems to have been some Danish settlement at <unk> and Spaxton , judging from the place @-@ names . After the Norman Conquest , the county was divided into 700 fiefs , and large areas were owned by the crown , with fortifications such as Dunster Castle used for control and defence . 
 This period of Somerset 's history is well documented , for example in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle and Asser 's Life of Alfred . 
 = = Later Mediaeval = = 
 This is the period from 1066 to around 1500 . Following the defeat of the Saxons by the Normans in 1066 , various castles were set up in Somerset by the new lords such as that at Dunster , and the manors was awarded to followers of William the Conqueror such as William de Moyon and Walter of Douai . Somerset does not seem to have played much part in the civil war in King Stephen 's time , but Somerset lords were main players in the murder of Thomas Becket . 
 A good picture of the county in 1086 is given by Domesday Book , though there is some difficulty in identifying the various places since the hundreds are not specified . The total population given for the county , which had different boundaries to those today , was 13 @,@ 399 , however this only included the heads of households , so with their families this may have been around 67 @,@ 000 . Farming seems to have prospered for the next three centuries but was severely hit by the Black Death which in 1348 arrived in Dorset and quickly spread through Somerset , causing widespread mortality , perhaps as much as 50 % in places . It re @-@ occurred , resulting in a change in feudal practices since the manpower was no longer so available . 
 Reclamation of land from marsh in the Somerset Levels increased , largely under monastic influence . Crafts and industries also flourished , the Somerset woollen industry being one of the largest in England at this time . " New towns " were founded in this period in Somerset , i.e. Newport , but were not successful . Coal mining on the Mendips was an important source of wealth while quarrying also took place , an example is near Bath . 
 The towns grew , again often by monastic instigation , during this period and fairs were started . The church was very powerful at this period , particularly Glastonbury Abbey . After their church burnt down , the monks there " discovered " the tomb of " King Arthur " and were able rebuild their church . There were over 20 monasteries in Somerset at this period including the priory at Hinton Charterhouse which was founded in 1232 by Ela , Countess of Salisbury who also founded Lacock Abbey . Many parish churches were re @-@ built in this period . Between 1107 and 1129 William Giffard the Chancellor of King Henry I , converted the bishop 's hall in Taunton into Taunton Castle . It was his successor , Henry of Blois , who transformed the manor @-@ house here into a mighty castle in 1138 . Bridgwater Castle was built in 1202 by William Brewer . It passed to the king in 1233 and in 1245 repairs were ordered to its motte and towers . During the 11th century Second Barons ' War against Henry III , Bridgwater was held by the barons against the King . In the English Civil War the town and the castle were held by the Royalists under Colonel Sir Francis Wyndham . Eventually , with many buildings destroyed in the town , the castle and its valuable contents were surrendered to the Parliamentarians . The castle itself was deliberately destroyed in 1645 . 
 During the Middle Ages sheep farming for the wool trade came to dominate the economy of Exmoor . The wool was spun into thread on isolated farms and collected by merchants to be woven , <unk> , dyed and finished in thriving towns such as Dunster . The land started to be enclosed and from the 17th century onwards larger estates developed , leading to establishment of areas of large regular shaped fields . During this period a Royal Forest and hunting ground was established , administered by the Warden . The Royal Forest was sold off in 1818 . 
 In the medieval period the River Parrett was used to transport Hamstone from the quarry at Ham Hill , Bridgwater was part of the Port of Bristol until the Port of Bridgwater was created in 1348 , covering 80 miles ( 130 km ) of the Somerset coast line , from the Devon border to the mouth of the River Axe . Historically , the main port on the river was at Bridgwater ; the river being bridged at this point , with the first bridge being constructed in 1200 AD . Quays were built in 1424 ; with another quay , the Langport slip , being built in 1488 upstream of the Town Bridge . A Customs House was sited at Bridgwater , on West Quay ; and a dry dock , launching slips and a boat yard on East Quay . The river was navigable , with care , to Bridgwater Town Bridge by 400 to 500 tonnes ( 440 to 550 tons ) vessels . By trans @-@ shipping into barges at the Town Bridge the Parrett was navigable as far as Langport and ( via the River Yeo ) to Ilchester . 
 = = Early Modern = = 
 This is the period from around 1500 to 1800 . In the 1530s , the monasteries were dissolved and their lands bought from the king by various important families in Somerset . By 1539 , Glastonbury Abbey was the only monastery left , its abbot Richard Whiting was then arrested and executed on the orders of Thomas Cromwell . From the Tudor to the Georgian times , farming specialised and techniques improved , leading to increases in population , although no new towns seem to have been founded . Large country houses such as at Hinton St George and Montacute House were built at this time . 
 The Bristol Channel floods of 1607 are believed to have affected large parts of the Somerset Levels with flooding up to 8 feet ( 2 m ) above sea level . In 1625 , a House of Correction was established in Shepton Mallet and , today , HMP Shepton Mallet is England 's oldest prison still in use . 
 During the English Civil War , Somerset was largely Parliamentarian , although Dunster was a Royalist stronghold . The county was the site of important battles between the Royalists and the Parliamentarians , notably the Battle of Lansdowne in 1643 and the Battle of Langport in 1645 . Taunton Castle had fallen into ruin by 1600 but it was repaired during the Civil War . The castle changed hands several times during 1642 – 45 along with the town . During the Siege of Taunton it was defended by Robert Blake , from July 1644 to July 1645 . After the war , in 1662 , the keep was demolished and only the base remains . This war resulted in castles being destroyed to prevent their re @-@ use . 
 In 1685 , the Duke of Monmouth led the Monmouth Rebellion in which Somerset people fought against James II . The rebels landed at Lyme Regis and travelled north hoping to capture Bristol and Bath , puritan soldiers damaged the west front of Wells Cathedral , tore lead from the roof to make bullets , broke the windows , smashed the organ and the furnishings , and for a time stabled their horses in the nave . They were defeated in the Battle of Sedgemoor at Westonzoyland , the last battle fought on English soil . The Bloody Assizes which followed saw the losers being sentenced to death or transportation . 
 The Society of Friends established itself in Street in the mid @-@ 17th century , and among the close @-@ knit group of Quaker families were the Clarks : Cyrus started a business in sheepskin rugs , later joined by his brother James , who introduced the production of woollen slippers and , later , boots and shoes . C & J Clark still has its headquarters in Street , but shoes are no longer manufactured there . Instead , in 1993 , redundant factory buildings were converted to form Clarks Village , the first purpose @-@ built factory outlet in the United Kingdom . 
 The 18th century was largely one of peace and declining industrial prosperity in Somerset . The Industrial Revolution in the Midlands and Northern England spelt the end for most of Somerset 's cottage industries . However , farming continued to flourish , with the Bath and West of England Agricultural Society being founded in 1777 to improve methods . John Billingsley conducted a survey of the county 's agriculture in 1795 but found that methods could still be improved . 
 Arthur Wellesley took his title , Duke of Wellington from the town of Wellington . He is commemorated on a nearby hill with a large , spotlit obelisk , known as the Wellington Monument . 
 In north Somerset , mining in the Somerset coalfield was an important industry , and in an effort to reduce the cost of transporting the coal the Somerset Coal Canal was built ; part of it was later converted into a railway . Other canals included the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal , Westport Canal , Grand Western Canal , Glastonbury Canal and Chard Canal . The Dorset and Somerset Canal was proposed , but very little of it was ever constructed . 
 = = Late Modern = = 
 The 19th century saw improvements to Somerset 's roads with the introduction of turnpikes and the building of canals and railways . The usefulness of the canals was short @-@ lived , though they have now been restored for recreation . The railways were nationalised after the Second World War , but continued until 1965 , when smaller lines were scrapped ; two were transferred back to private ownership as " heritage " lines . 
 In 1889 , Somerset County Council was created , replacing the administrative functions of the Quarter Sessions . 
 The population of Somerset has continued to grow since 1800 , when it was 274 @,@ 000 , particularly in the seaside towns such as Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Some population decline occurred earlier in the period in the villages , but this has now been reversed , and by 1951 the population of Somerset was 551 @,@ 000 . 
 Chard claims to be the birthplace of powered flight , as it was here in 1848 that the Victorian aeronautical pioneer John Stringfellow first demonstrated that engine @-@ powered flight was possible through his work on the Aerial Steam Carriage . North Petherton was the first town in England ( and one of the few ever ) to be lit by acetylene gas lighting , supplied by the North Petherton Rosco Acetylene Company . Street lights were provided in 1906 . Acetylene was replaced in 1931 by coal gas produced in Bridgwater , as well as by the provision of an electricity supply . 
 Around the 1860s , at the height of the iron and steel era , a pier and a deep @-@ water dock were built , at Portishead , by the Bristol & Portishead Pier and Railway to accommodate the large ships that had difficulty in reaching Bristol Harbour . The Portishead power stations were coal @-@ fed power stations built next to the dock . Construction work started on Portishead " A " power station in 1926 . It began generating electricity in 1929 for the Bristol Corporation 's Electricity Department . In 1951 , Albright and Wilson built a chemical works on the opposite side of the dock from the power stations . The chemical works produced white phosphorus from phosphate rock imported , through the docks , into the UK . The onset of new generating capacity at Pembroke ( oil @-@ fired ) and Didcot ( coal @-@ fired ) in the mid @-@ 1970s brought about the closure of the older , less efficient " A " Station . The newer of the two power stations ( " B " Station ) was converted to burn oil when the Somerset coalfields closed. and it has now been developed into a marina and residential area . 
 During the First World War hundreds of Somerset soldiers were killed , and war memorials were put up in most of the towns and villages ; only a few villages escaped casualties . There were also casualties – though much fewer – during the Second World War , who were added to the memorials . The county was a base for troops preparing for the 1944 D @-@ Day landings , and some Somerset hospitals still date partly from that time . The Royal Ordnance Factory ROF Bridgwater was constructed early in World War II for the Ministry of Supply . It was designed as an Explosive ROF , to produce RDX , which was then a new experimental high @-@ explosive . It obtained water supplies from two sources via the Somerset Levels : the artificial Huntspill River which was dug during the construction of the factory and also from the King 's Sedgemoor Drain , which was widened at the same time . The Taunton Stop Line was set up to resist a potential German invasion , and the remains of its pill boxes can still be seen , as well as others along the coast . A decoy town was constructed on Black Down , intended to represent the blazing lights of a town which had neglected to follow the black @-@ out regulations . Sites in the county housed Prisoner of War camps including : Norton Fitzwarren , Barwick , Brockley , Goathurst and Wells . Various airfields were built or converted from civilian use including : RNAS Charlton <unk> ( HMS Heron II ) , RAF Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , RNAS Yeovilton ( HMS Heron ) , Yeovil / Westland Airport , RAF Weston <unk> , RAF <unk> , RAF Culmhead and RAF Charmy Down . 
 Exmoor was one of the first British National Parks , designated in 1954 , under the 1949 National Parks and Access to the Countryside <unk> and is named after its main river . It was expanded in 1991 and in 1993 Exmoor was designated as an Environmentally Sensitive Area . The Quantock Hills were designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) in 1956 , the first such designation in England under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 . The Mendip Hills followed with AONB designation in 1972 . 
 Hinkley Point A nuclear power station was a Magnox power station constructed between 1957 and 1962 and operating until ceasing generation in 2000 . Hinkley Point B is an Advanced Gas @-@ cooled Reactor ( AGR ) which was designed to generate 1250 MW of electricity ( MWe ) . Construction of Hinkley Point B started in 1967 . In September 2008 it was announced , by <unk> de France ( EDF ) , that a third , twin @-@ unit European Pressurized Reactor ( EPR ) reactor known as Hinkley Point C is planned , to replace Hinkley Point B which is due for closure in 2016 . 
 Somerset today has only two small cities , Bath and Wells , and only small towns in comparison with other areas of England . Tourism is a major source of employment along the coast , and in Bath and Cheddar for example . Other attractions include Exmoor , West Somerset Railway , Haynes Motor Museum and the Fleet Air Arm Museum as well as the churches and the various National Trust and English Heritage properties in Somerset . 
 Agriculture continues to be a major business , if no longer a major employer because of mechanisation . Light industries take place in towns such as Bridgwater and Yeovil . The towns of Taunton and Shepton Mallet manufacture cider , although the number of apple orchards has reduced . 
 In the late 19th century the boundaries of Somerset were slightly altered , but the main change came in 1974 when the county of Avon was set up . The northern part of Somerset was removed from the administrative control of Somerset County Council . On abolition of the county of Avon in 1996 , these areas became separate administrative authorities , " North Somerset " and " Bath and North East Somerset " . The Department for Communities and Local Government was considering a proposal by Somerset County Council to change Somerset 's administrative structure by abolishing the five districts to create a Somerset unitary authority . The changes were planned to be implemented no later than 1 April 2009 . However , support for the county council 's bid was not guaranteed and opposition among the district council and local population was strong ; 82 % of people responding to a referendum organised by the five district councils rejected the proposals . It was confirmed in July 2007 that the government had rejected the proposals for unitary authorities in Somerset , and that the present two @-@ tier arrangements of Somerset County Council and the district councils will remain . 
 = Warlugulong = 
 Warlugulong ( 1977 ) is an acrylic on canvas painting by Indigenous Australian artist Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri . Owned for many years by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia , the work was sold by art dealer Hank Ebes on 24 July 2007 , setting a record price for a contemporary Indigenous Australian art work bought at auction when it was purchased by the National Gallery of Australia for A $ 2 @.@ 4 million . The painting illustrates the story of an ancestral being called Lungkata , together with eight other dreamings associated with localities about which Clifford Possum had traditional knowledge . It exemplifies a distinctive painting style developed by Papunya Tula artists in the 1970s , and blends representation of landscape with ceremonial iconography . Art critic Benjamin Genocchio describes it as " a work of real national significance [ and ] one of the most important 20th @-@ century Australian paintings " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Contemporary Indigenous Australian art originated with the Indigenous men of Papunya , located around 240 kilometres ( 150 mi ) northwest of Alice Springs in Australia 's Western Desert , who began painting in 1971 . The youngest was Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri , encouraged by his older brother Tim Leura Tjapaltjarri . A number of the men developed a distinctive style of narrative painting that , beginning around 1976 , resulted in the production of several " monumental " works that included representations of both their traditional lands and of ceremonial iconography . Clifford Possum was the first to make this transition commencing with a related painting , also titled Warlugulong ( 1976 ) , now held by the Art Gallery of New South Wales . The two images are amongst five that the artist created between 1976 and 1979 that linked images of sacred stories to geographic representation of his country – the land to which he belonged and about which he had traditional knowledge . The artist 's images of this period are visually complex , and contain a wide variety of patterns , unified by strong background motifs and structure . 
 = = The painting = = 
 Created in synthetic polymer paint on canvas , and a substantial 2 by 3 @.@ 3 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft × 10 @.@ 8 ft ) in size , the work 's title is taken from a location roughly 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) " northwest of Alice Springs associated with a powerful desert dreaming " . Clifford Possum would often collaborate with other artists , particularly his brother Tim Leura , and the brothers together created the 1976 work of the same name . Art critic Benjamin Genocchio has referred to the 1977 work as also being by the brothers ; however , the National Gallery of Australia credits it solely to Clifford Possum . Like the other four works of the period that are symbolic maps of the artist 's country , the painting is accompanied by annotated diagrams of the images and notes that explain the dreamings that they include . 
 While the painting has been described as showing the story of an ancestral being called Lungkata starting the first bushfire , it portrays elements of nine distinct dreamings , of which Lungkata 's tale is the central motif . Lungkata was the Blue @-@ Tongue Lizard Man , an ancestral figure responsible for creating bushfire . The painting portrays the results of a fire , caused by Lungkata to punish his two sons who did not share with their father the kangaroo they had caught . The sons ' skeletons are on the right hand side of the image , shown against a background representing smoke and ashes . 
 Around this central motif are arranged elements of eight other stories , all of them represented at least in part by sets of footprints . Human footprints include a set left by dancing women from a place called Aileron ; another shows a family group travelling to a place called <unk> , and a third trail is that of a Tjungurrayi man , which lead to his skeleton , representing his death after committing the crime of trying to steal sacred items . Animal representations include tracks of a cluster of emus from a place called <unk> , on the artist 's country , as well as those left by the rock wallaby , or Mala , men journeying north from Port Augusta in South Australia , as well as , on the left hand edge of the picture , those of two groups of dingoes going to a place called <unk> . A little closer to the centre of the painting are marks representing a dreaming called the Chase of the <unk> Men . Throughout the work , <unk> the Possum Man 's footsteps follow the wandering lines that give the painting its overall structure . 
 This work excludes elements of several dreamings associated with country further south , which had been included in the painting created by Clifford Possum and his brother a year earlier . The omission led scholar Vivien Johnson to conclude that Warlugulong ( 1977 ) portrays a narrower geographic area than the preceding work . The artist also modified some of the iconography , and limited the explanations of the painting , omitting secret @-@ sacred dimensions of the stories to avoid offending other Indigenous men , and in recognition that most of the audience for the work would be uninitiated non @-@ Indigenous people . 
 Johnson 's analysis of the painting emphasises the relationship between the representation of geographical sites in the Yuendumu region and the dreaming stories associated with those sites . She concludes that there is " a topographic rationale for the order in which the Dreamings appear from left to right ( that is , east to west ) across the painting [ as well as for ] the transverse Dreaming trails " . However , beyond this general principle , she argues that the layout of symbols and images is influenced by the desire to present a symmetrical work . There is greater visual symmetry in this painting than in its 1976 predecessor ; symmetry is a strong influence in the works of many of the early Western Desert artists , including Clifford Possum , Billy Stockman Tjapaltjarri and <unk> Tjampitjinpa . 
 Warlugulong ( 1977 ) is acclaimed as a landmark Indigenous painting ; a great work by one of the country 's foremost artists . Described as " epic " and " sprawling " , Genocchio said of it that is " a work of real national significance [ and ] one of the most important 20th @-@ century Australian paintings " . The authors of the National Gallery of Australia 's book , Collection Highlights , characterises the painting as the artist 's most significant . Artist and curator Brenda Croft agreed , considering it " an epic painting , encyclopaedic in both content and ambition " and " the artist 's most significant work " . The work and the price it achieved at auction in 2007 are cited as evidence of both the importance of Clifford Possum as an artist , and of the maturation and growth of the Australian Indigenous art market . 
 = = Sale history = = 
 Warlugulong was first exhibited at a show in Alice Springs , where it attracted crowds of interested viewers , but failed to sell . Realities Gallery in Melbourne then included the work in a major exhibition of Papunya Tula artworks . It was purchased for A $ 1 @,@ 200 by the Commonwealth Bank , which hung it in a bank training centre cafeteria on the Mornington Peninsula . The bank sold it by auction in 1996 . The auction house trading the work expected it to fetch around $ 5 @,@ 000 and did not make a feature of it in the catalogue , but dealers including Hank Ebes , the successful bidder , recognised the painting 's significance and it sold for $ 36 @,@ 000 plus commission . After hanging in Ebes 's living room for eleven years , it was auctioned in Melbourne by Sotheby 's on 24 July 2007 . It sold for $ 2 @.@ 4 million , thoroughly eclipsing the previous record for an Indigenous Australian painting , set when Emily Kngwarreye 's Earth 's Creation was bought in May of the same year for just over $ 1 million . Warlugulong 's buyer was the National Gallery of Australia , which considers the painting to be possibly the most important in its collection of Indigenous Australian art . As of 2014 , the work is on display in the National Gallery . 
 When the Australian government in 2009 introduced a resale royalty scheme , the sale history of Warlugulong was frequently used to argue in favour of the scheme , designed to ensure that artists and their families continued to benefit from the appreciating value of old works . 
 = Live Show = 
 " Live Show " is the fourth episode of the fifth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 84th episode overall . It was directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , and co @-@ written by series creator Tina Fey and co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock . The episode originally aired live on the NBC television network in the United States on October 14 , 2010 , with separate tapings for the East Coast television audience as well as the West Coast . " Live Show " featured appearances by Rachel Dratch , Bill Hader , Matt Damon , Jon Hamm , and Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus . 
 30 Rock follows the production of the fictional sketch comedy program The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) . In this episode , on the night of a show , head writer Liz Lemon grows increasingly infuriated when no one seems to remember her 40th birthday . Just before TGS 's live taping , Tracy Jordan decides to break character , to his co @-@ workers ' chagrin . Meanwhile , television executive Jack Donaghy struggles with the consequences of his promise to give up drinking while his girlfriend Avery Jessup is pregnant with their child . 
 " Live Show " was an experiment for 30 Rock — filming with a multiple @-@ camera setup before a studio audience to broadcast live — and the episode received positive reviews for its boldness as well as the nostalgia it showed for classic sitcom conventions and meta @-@ humor — for instance , guest star Louis @-@ Dreyfus portrays Liz Lemon in some cutaway scenes where it would be physically impossible for series regular Fey to be on two separate stages at once . The episode was also a ratings success , improving upon the audience that 30 Rock had grown since its last season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon — the head writer of The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) — is preparing to air another episode of TGS , but is angry that her co @-@ workers have forgotten her 40th birthday . Tracy Jordan frustrates her further by deciding to break character during the show 's live broadcast in an homage to The Carol Burnett Show . TGS co @-@ star Jenna Maroney is determined to not let Tracy upstage her and declares she will have a deliberate wardrobe malfunction and bare her breast on live television if Tracy does not stop . As the show goes awry due to Tracy and Jenna 's unprofessionalism , Liz is forced to cut away from their regularly scheduled programming to commercials for Dr. Leo Spaceman 's new album of erotic ballads to cure erectile dysfunction and Drew Baird 's public service announcement for hand @-@ transplant surgery . 
 Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy struggles with a promise that he made to his girlfriend Avery Jessup — he will not drink alcohol during her entire pregnancy in a show of solidarity with her . Instead , he takes up knitting and stage magic , but finds the urge to drink so strong that he begins sniffing paint cans and Jenna 's breath just to get a whiff of alcohol . During TGS , Liz gets a phone call from her boyfriend airline pilot Carol informing her that he is going through extreme turbulence and may crash his plane . 
 In the final act of the show , Jack conspires with the cast and crew to give Liz a last @-@ minute birthday surprise which he wants to appear as though it had been planned all along . Meanwhile , Carol safely lands his plane and rushes to greet Liz on set . All they can muster on short notice is a polka band and a large cake with Fonzie on it — gifts that were intended to celebrate janitor Jadwiga 's birthday . She proceeds to ruin the TGS <unk> and tear into the cake with her bare hands . In Jack 's office , Liz and Jack share a drink as Liz 's birthday wish . In the final scene , as Jack takes a drink , the program reverts to a pre @-@ recorded segment and Jack says , " That 's more like it . " The episode ends with a live goodnight from the TGS stage by the cast of the episode , a la Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Live Show " was co @-@ written by series creator , executive producer , and lead actress Fey and co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock . It was directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , a long @-@ time television director who worked with Fey on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . 
 On July 30 , 2010 , the NBC network announced that an episode of 30 Rock 's fifth season would be filmed and broadcast live on two occasions in the evening of October 14 , 2010 . The decision was made in part due to lagging ratings for all of NBC 's Must @-@ See TV line @-@ up . The idea was originally conceived during the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , when the cast performed two live versions of the season two episode " Secrets and Lies " as a benefit at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in New York City . When asked by Entertainment Weekly the reason of doing a live episode , Fey said " [ The live performance ] was what made us think that it would be fun to do [ a live episode ] . And how far we 've come ... Now we 're going to do it on TV . " In this same interview , Fey revealed that the episode would also be performed in front of a live audience . " It will be exciting for us to do it for a live audience and see if we get live laughter . " Fey noted that the experience " was so fun to feel the different timing of the show live and the audience response , which you just don 't get in a single @-@ camera show . " In another interview , Fey revealed that the staff have talked about doing a live show for years " because we felt we had sort of interesting personnel for it . " Following the conclusion of the writers ' strike they spoke to NBC about performing live and attempted to film it during the fourth season ; however , they were unable to schedule it . For the fifth season , the writing staff began planning the live performance and waited until McCarthy @-@ Miller — a recurring 30 Rock director — was available to helm it . Fey and Carlock said in separate discussions that another decision to do this episode of 30 Rock was based on the cast having theater and improvisation experience . Alec Baldwin had previously performed in the East and West live broadcasts of the Will & Grace season 8 premiere episode , " Alive and Schticking " . 
 Prior to the broadcast , the cast rehearsed " Live Show " for three days and had one rehearsal before a live audience the day of broadcast . The two separate broadcasts of the episode resulted in a live telecast to American viewers in both the East and West Coasts of the United States ( with viewers in the Central Time Zone receiving the East Coast feed live , per standard U.S. broadcasting practice ) — the crew briefly considered a third broadcast for the Mountain Time Zone , but decided against it . The initial East Coast broadcast included a theme song sung by Jane Krakowski and the later West Coast version 's song was performed by Cheyenne Jackson — the two also performed to warm @-@ up the crowd in the rehearsal . In addition , the two episodes had a few scripted differences , such as the lyrics to Spaceman 's song , Liz Lemon mocks Jack Donaghy 's office assistant Jonathan by referring to him as a character from Slumdog Millionaire in the East Coast broadcast and as Aladdin in the West Coast airing , and the subtitle in the Fox News skit . Additionally , the fictional commercial that featured Drew Baird is different — in the East Coast broadcast he is given a hand transplant from an executed black man ; in the West Coast broadcast he has a woman 's hand . This episode marks Rachel Dratch 's first appearance on 30 Rock since season one , and her first work since giving birth to her son Eli on August 24 , 2010 . 
 = = Connection with television tropes = = 
 As the live broadcast of " Live Show " was recorded with TV cameras edited live to video rather than film stock , the video quality for this episode was noticeably different from standard episodes of 30 Rock . Jack acknowledges this at the start of the episode by asking why everything looks like a " Mexican soap opera . " Throughout the episode , the characters broke the fourth wall : Tracy Jordan 's unprofessional acting within the TGS episode , Jack 's references to the video quality , Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ' portrayal of Liz in cut @-@ away sequences , and the re @-@ hashing of standard sitcom plot elements . 
 In addition , there were several connections with SNL : Fey , Morgan , Dratch , Bill Hader , Louis @-@ Dreyfus , Parnell , and director McCarthy @-@ Miller are all SNL alumni ( fellow alumnus Will Ferrell was asked to reprise his recurring " Bitch Hunter " character , but had a scheduling conflict ) ; the show was filmed in SNL 's Studio 8H before a live audience ; the ending sequence was a good night from the cast while the credits scrolled ( and the credits used the same font as SNL ) ; and promos leading up to the episode were voiced by long @-@ time SNL announcer Don Pardo . The music for the episode — both for the TGS sequences and incidental underscore — was provided live by the SNL house band under the direction of Fey 's husband Jeff Richmond and Leon Pendarvis . Furthermore , long @-@ time SNL producer Lorne Michaels attended the rehearsal and performances to give his advice . Each commercial break during the show was predicated on an emergency commercial break on TGS , including a fictional commercial and a fake NBC technical difficulties screen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Live Show " drew in the largest audience for 30 Rock , season five , with 6 @.@ 701 million viewers , and reached a season high 3 @.@ 1 Nielsen rating / 9 % share with adults 18 – 49 , which was a 43 % increase over the previous episode and a 15 % increase from the season premiere ; it trailed CBS competitor and timeslot leader $ h * ! My Dad Says by 0 @.@ 1 . This rating was the show 's highest since December 10 , 2009 , episode " Secret Santa " and the highest overall for NBC in the 8 : 30 p.m. Thursday timeslot for non @-@ sports events since December 2009 . 
 Critical reception of the episode was largely positive . Todd VanDerWerff — writing for The A.V. Club — gave the episode an A − , noting the nostalgia for classic television and specifically three @-@ camera sitcoms that this episode displayed . While the pace and tone of " Live Show " were different from a standard episode of 30 Rock , he considers this episode , " an experiment , as a weird hybrid of 30 Rock , an old sitcom , and Saturday Night Live " and ultimately a success . James Poniewozik of Time also wrote that the episode was uneven , but successful as a tribute to television . TV Squad 's Bob Sassone was impressed by the episode , specifically Fey 's performance and Louis @-@ Dreyfus ' imitation of Liz Lemon . Other positive reviews have noted the lack of mistakes in the comic timing and performance , the strength of the guest stars , and the performers ' ability to keep up the pace that is expected in a 30 Rock episode . Frazier Moore of the Associated Press gave the episode a negative review , calling it " vaudevillian " and " a slice of self @-@ indulgence and excess . " Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald considered the episode " so @-@ so " due to its " humdrum script . " As a live television experiment , reviewers have considered it a success , particularly in reference to other live broadcast experiments , such as NBC drama ER 's 1997 episode " Ambush " and SNL , with Entertainment Weekly declaring it " like SNL , only funny . " In reviewing the best television programs of 2010 , The A.V. Club named 30 Rock number 18 and cited this episode as amongst the best of the year . McCarthy @-@ Miller was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for this episode . 
 On March 21 , 2012 , Baldwin announced in an interview with Extra that a second live episode — " Live from Studio 6H " — would air the following April 26 . 
 = Love , Loss , and What I Wore = 
 Love , Loss , and What I Wore is a play written by Nora and Delia Ephron based on the 1995 book of the same name by Ilene Beckerman . It is organized as a series of monologues and uses a rotating cast of five principal women . The subject matter of the monologues includes women 's relationships and wardrobes and at times the interaction of the two , using the female wardrobe as a time capsule of a woman 's life . 
 The show was initially presented as a part of the 2008 summer series at Guild Hall in East Hampton , New York , and then as a benefit series at the DR2 Theatre in New York in early 2009 . Later the same year , the show was produced Off @-@ Broadway as an ongoing commercial theatrical production at the Westside Theatre in New York , where it continues to run as the second @-@ longest running show in the theatre 's history . The production and its cast received positive critical attention . The production won the 2010 Drama Desk Award for Unique Theatrical Experience as well as the 2010 <unk> Audience Award for Favorite New Off @-@ Broadway Play . 
 The show has been produced on six continents and more than eight countries . It began a national tour in the United States in September 2011 in Chicago . It is making an encore performance in Paris in January 2012 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Nora Ephron was a writer , director and producer best known for writing the screenplays of romantic comedy films . She received three Academy Award nominations for Original Screenplay , for Silkwood ( 1983 ) , When Harry Met Sally ... ( 1989 ) and Sleepless in Seattle ( 1993 ) . She had also written five best @-@ selling books , and she wrote the 2002 play Imaginary Friends , which fictionalizes the antagonistic relationship between Lillian Hellman and Mary McCarthy . Ephron sometimes co @-@ authored screenplays with her sister , writer @-@ producer Delia Ephron , including You 've Got Mail ( 1998 ) , Hanging Up ( 2000 ) and Bewitched ( 2005 ) . 
 Nora Ephron wrote the introduction to Beckerman 's eponymous 1995 book , which she immediately thought had dramatic possibilities . She identified with the stories in Love , Loss , and What I Wore because the book " is not about fashion ; it is about what clothes really are to us , those moments when we are constantly trying to find our identity through them " . Soon after its publication , Ephron gave the book to eight of her friends for Christmas . She became interested in writing her own version of the book . Once she decided to adapt Love , Loss , and What I Wore into a play , she and her sister emailed 100 women for stories . 
 The show 's monologues are sourced largely from Beckerman 's book . The Ephrons wove together a collection of stories adapted from the book with recollections of friends , including Rosie O 'Donnell . One of the monologues that became a highlight of the original production was based on Nora Ephron 's 2006 best @-@ seller I Feel Bad About My Neck . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A character called Gingy acts as the narrator . The show opens with her sketching various parts of her wardrobe that stir the most poignant memories . She weaves her life story among the other tales , describing her three marriages , " motherhood and the death of a child , each turning point marked by a particular item of clothing " . Her life is represented beginning with experiences in a Brownies uniform and extending through her full life . 
 In addition to Gingy , one character serves as the vixen , another plays a vulnerable gang member from Chicago , a third portrays a brave cancer patient , and the last serves as a mature woman pierced by vivid memories . One of these characters , named Heather , chooses conservative " think " shoes over high heels in her youth , but at a later stage in life shows a preference for high heels . The gang member likes insignias that are prominent on sweaters and their creator . Among the 28 stories , other notable tales include one about the influence of Madonna ( with discourse including " Any American woman under 40 who says she 's never dressed as Madonna is either lying or Amish . " ) ; one about dressing room anxiety ( a story revolving around the concept that " I 'm an 8 . I 've always been an 8 " ) ; and one about your mother 's tastes in clothes ( " I don 't understand , you could look so good if you tried " ) . Three of the characters sometimes work as a trio and all characters have monologues . 
 The Los Angeles Times spent a full paragraph on a vignette about two high school prom dresses . The junior prom dress was a conservative powder blue gown to wear with a nerdy date . The senior prom dress was a sexy black mini dress that was befitting of her more desirable date . The dresses presented an identity crisis to one character : " Here 's the thing – I 've never really known for sure which of those two people I am – the girl who almost doesn 't get asked to the prom at all or the girl who gets to go with the really cute guy . Every time I thought I knew which one I was , I turned out to be the other . Which is one reason I think I got married , to , like , end the confusion . " 
 The New York Times presented three stories that it felt were particularly emotional : the first was about a woman who removed miniskirts from her college wardrobe after being raped , but continued wearing her favorite boots ; another was about wedding attire anxieties ; and the third was about the choice of adorning a newly reconstructed breast with a tattoo . In addition to these three stories , the same article also noted a humorous ode to black as a part of a wardrobe or in fact as a wardrobe , when one character notes : " Sometimes I buy something that isn 't black , and I put it on and I am so sorry " . 
 Other stories include recollections about the dress purchased for the date with a guy who subsequently married someone else ; the foibles of spandex bras that result in a look known as the <unk> ; issues involving toe cleavage ; the Juicy Couture tracksuit that is a prominent staple of California wardrobes ; wardrobe choice on the wrong day of the month ; and the story about an incarcerated lover and the strategic hole in a certain pair of pants . 
 = = Production history = = 
 = = = Initial benefit productions = = = 
 Initially , Love , Loss , and What I Wore was presented on August 2 , 2008 at the Bridgehampton Community House as a benefit for the renovation of the John Drew Theatre / Guild Hall in East Hampton , New York . The production , directed by Karen Lynn Carpenter , starred Linda Lavin , Karyn Quackenbush , Leslie Kritzer , Kathy Najimy , and Sara Chase . Then Daryl Roth produced the play in a Monday night series of benefit performances for Dress for Success , which is a charity organization that serves low @-@ income women by enabling them to afford work clothing and providing job support , again under the direction of Karen Lynn Carpenter . The set of seven Monday night readings were held from February 2 – March 9 , 2009 at the Off @-@ off @-@ Broadway DR2 Theatre . The first seven performances had seven different casts . The first cast at DR2 Theatre was Marian Seldes , Joy Behar , Katie Finneran , Heather Burns and Lucy DeVito . Other participants in the original readings included Tyne Daly ( who created the narrator character , Gingy , for the New York Production ) , Rosie O 'Donnell , Samantha Bee , <unk> Reed , America Ferrera , Debi Mazar , Marlo Thomas , Blythe Danner , Christine Lahti , Parker Posey , Julie White , Kelly Bishop , Sarah Jones , <unk> Cox and Kristen Wiig . 
 = = = Off @-@ Broadway = = = 
 The play was then performed Off @-@ Broadway , beginning on September 21 , 2009 , with 3 consecutive runs each lasting 4 weeks and having an entirely new 5 @-@ person cast . The production officially opened on October 1 , 2009 at the Westside Theatre . The cast originally included Daly , O 'Donnell , Bee , Katie Finneran and Natasha Lyonne . The rotating cast also included Mary Birdsong , Kristin Chenoweth , Lucy DeVito , Jane Lynch , Rhea Perlman , Mary Louise Wilson and Rita Wilson . Chenoweth was replaced in the last of the initial three 4 @-@ week runs by Finneran . The production benefited Dress for Success . Karen Lynn Carpenter directed , with scenic design by Jo <unk> , costume design by Jessica Jahn , lighting design by Jeff <unk> , sound design by Walter Trarbach and make @-@ up design by Maria <unk> . Daryl Roth was the producer and Alexander Fraser was the co @-@ producer . The production was staged with the five women seated , all dressed in black , at the lip of the stage , consulting scripts on music stands as needed . Ilene Beckerman 's original drawings were presented on placards , hung on clothes hangers on a clothes rack , stage right of the Gingy actress . 
 The production continued at the Westside Theatre with an open @-@ ended commercial run with the casting strategy of rotating 4 @-@ week casts because it enabled the production to pursue higher caliber actors . Nora Ephron stated at one question and answer session : " We keep re @-@ casting it so we can get really great actresses to come for four weeks . It is really hard to get really good people to work Off @-@ Broadway for six months because it does not pay much , but you can get them for four weeks . " Other well @-@ known actresses who have performed in the Off @-@ Broadway production include the following : Carol Kane , Debra Monk , Janeane Garofalo , Fran Drescher , Melissa Joan Hart , Brooke Shields , Victoria Clark , Tovah Feldshuh , Loretta Swit , Mary Testa , Nikki Blonsky , Donna <unk> , B. Smith and Marla Maples . As of October 2011 , it was the second @-@ longest running show in the history of Westside Theatre . 
 The show won the 2010 Drama Desk Award for Unique Theatrical Experience as well as the 2010 <unk> Audience Award for Favorite New Off @-@ Broadway Play . Daly and O 'Donnell were nominated for 2010 Drama League Awards for Distinguished Performance . Tara Rubin , Merri Sugarman , Eric Woodall , and Lauran <unk> were nominated for the 2010 Casting Society of America Artios Awards for NY Off @-@ Broadway Comedy / Musical Excellence in Casting . The show 's 1,000th performance played on March 15 , 2012 . The production closed on March 25 , 2012 after 1 @,@ 013 performances . 32 rotating casts and 120 actresses participated in the production over its entire run . The final cast was Sierra <unk> , Joyce Van Patten , Karyn Quackenbush , Erica Watson and Ally Walker . 
 = = = US National Tour = = = 
 Carpenter directed a US national tour that began in Chicago in September 2011 with an engagement at the Broadway Playhouse at Water Tower Place . Roth produced the Chicago production . The Chicago cast included Nora Dunn , Felicia Fields , Roni Geva , Katie O 'Brien and Barbara Robertson as Gingy . Although the show was originally scheduled to run through October 23 , 2011 , it was extended to December 4 before opening and later extended again to January 1 , 2012 . The post @-@ Chicago national tour performances were set to be headlined by the December 7 – 30 Off @-@ Broadway cast that included Daisy Eagan , Sonia Manzano and Loretta Swit . 
 = = = Other productions = = = 
 The play was next produced at the Geffen Playhouse in Los Angeles . The Geffen production ran from May 12 , 2010 to November 19 , 2010 , breaking box office records . The Geffen casts also rotated . Well @-@ known actresses there included Kane , DeVito , Rhea Perlman , Nancy Travis , Daly , Bonnie Franklin , Meredith Baxter , Florence Henderson , Marissa Jaret Winokur , María Conchita Alonso , Christine Lahti , Lauren Hutton , Teri Garr , Mimi Rogers and Sally Struthers . Most of the initial Geffen cast had performed in the Off @-@ Broadway run . At the Geffen Playhouse , the show was directed by Jenny Sullivan . Kane played the role of Gingy when it debuted in Los Angeles . 
 By the end of 2010 , the play had been staged in New York , Los Angeles , Toronto and Buenos Aires , and numerous other productions around the world have run since then . Carpenter directed the international production that has run in many countries . The Toronto production ran from July 16 to October 2 , 2010 at the Panasonic Theater . The play was presented in Sydney from January 3 – 30 , 2011 at the Sydney Opera House with an opening cast of Natalie Bassingthwaighte , Judi Farr , Amanda Muggleton , Magda <unk> and <unk> Foulkes , under the direction of Wayne Harrison , with some minor modifications to localize some of the Americanisms . In South Africa , the show was performed from April 8 – June 12 , 2011 at Studio Theatre , <unk> near Johannesburg and at the Theatre on the Bay in Cape Town from June 15 to July 2 under the direction of Moira Blumenthal . It made its Asian premiere in Manila from July 14 – 17 , 2011 at <unk> Plaza with a cast that included <unk> Escalante ; the production was directed by Michael Williams and <unk> @-@ Dy . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The show , which has a running time of about 1 hour and 30 minutes , is composed of 28 different stories that seek to illuminate the female identity . Generally composed of comic stories , the show often addresses sad , bitter or sentimental issues . Beckerman 's memoir takes as its departure the clothing worn at pivotal times of her life and serves as the foundation for the show . The Ephrons augmented this with a collection of similarly themed stories presented by four additional characters . 
 The show is staged in what is described as an " unapologetically low @-@ tech " manner . The play uses clothing as a metaphor for women 's experiences . In addition to clothing , accessories such as a purse are important , and Charles Isherwood of The New York Times notes that when Ms. Ephron views a purse , " In the chaos of its interior she sees a symbol of herself , as in a dark mirror smudged with old lipstick and smelling of spilled perfume . " The show consists of five women 's monologues about wardrobe malfunctions , puberty 's relationship with personal wardrobe , first date outfits , lucky underwear , prom dresses , favorite boots , irreplaceable shirts , the detested , disorganized purse , and experiences in the dressing room . The recollections about the clothing prompt the women 's memories about their mothers , boyfriends , husbands , ex @-@ husbands , sisters and grandchildren . 
 = = Critical reaction = = 
 The original benefit series was described as intimate and starry by <unk> Isherwood described the Off @-@ Broadway play as a " show about matters of the heart and matters of the closet " in The New York Times . In Variety , Marilyn Stasio called it " a bittersweet meditation on the joys and tribulations of women 's lives , reflected through the prism of their clothes " . In Bloomberg News , the critics commented that the playwrights were " literary alchemists expert at mixing the sentimental and the satirical and turning out something poignant " and noted that the clothing and accessories dominated the memories while " The men are extras . " The Los Angeles Times described the show as a cross between The Vagina Monologues and What Not to Wear . Helen Shaw , writing for Time Out , also described the Ephrons ' style as similar to The Vagina <unk> ' Eve Ensler . Jay Reiner of The Hollywood Reporter also notes that from the work " a tapestry of the collective female psyche emerges that is tender and insightful without being sentimental " . <unk> , Inc. describes the show as " So insightful and entertaining is this survey of sartorial preoccupations and the deeper questions underlying them that multiple viewings would be advisable . " 
 A highlight derived from Ephron 's book and that was consistently praised was the O 'Donnell portrayal of the role of the purse in the scene " I Hate My Purse ! " . While Reiner says , " There 's an amusing ' I hate my purse ' segment " , Isherwood notes " The smartest and <unk> piece of writing in the show is that acerbic essay by Nora Ephron about her troublesome relationship with purses ... <unk> to Ms. O 'Donnell , who does it proud , the essay is a defiant denunciation of the tyranny of the pocketbook , a ' j <unk> ' for the era of the ' it ' bag . " Shaw described O 'Donnell 's purse performance as an aria , and Jerry <unk> of The Villager called it " one of the pillars of the show " . This scene is sometimes performed alone outside of the theatre . 
 Isherwood also notes that this serves a female audience . " If there are chick flicks and chick lit – derogatory though some might find those terms to be – Love , Loss , and What I Wore should clearly be classified as chick legit ... for the women who can share deeply in the particulars of experience dissected and discussed . " The Los Angeles Times notes the light nature of the subject matter : " ... isn 't out to reclaim female sexuality from centuries of oppression ; it wittily celebrates wardrobe malfunctions ... " According to Reiner , the show points out that " ... if there is one thing the females of the species have in common , it 's a deep and abiding love / hate relationship with their wardrobe ... this wonderfully witty show illustrates , what one wears to the party is sometimes more memorable than the party itself . " He also notes that the entire performance has meaning as it is " jam @-@ packed and resonant " throughout . Shaw notes that " The cozy humor strikes many women 's funny bones with a mighty whack , perhaps because it reaffirms so perfectly their own preoccupations . " 
 Certain monologues on subjects such as weight , status bags and high heels did not achieve their full potential according to The Los Angeles Times reviewer . Time Out magazine describes certain lines as <unk> , but <unk> so . 
 = = = Major awards and nominations = = = 
 The original Off @-@ Broadway production earned several recognitions : 
 At the November 2009 Casting Society of America Artios Awards , the Ephrons earned the New York Big Apple Award . 
 = USS West Carnifax ( ID @-@ 3812 ) = 
 USS West Carnifax ( ID @-@ 3812 ) was a cargo ship in the United States Navy shortly after World War I. After she was decommissioned from the Navy , the ship was known as SS West Carnifax , SS Exford , and SS Pan Royal ( or sometimes Pan @-@ Royal ) in civilian service under American registry . 
 West Carnifax was one of the West boats , a series of steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) on the West Coast of the United States . The ship was the first ship built at Southwestern Shipbuilding in San Pedro , California , and was launched in October 1918 and delivered to the US Navy upon completion in late December . After commissioning , West Carnifax sailed from California with a load of wheat flour for the East Coast of the United States and , from there , to Europe . When she docked at Hamburg , Germany , in March 1919 , she became the first American ship to dock at Hamburg since before the start of World War I. At the conclusion of her trip to Germany she was decommissioned and returned to the USSB . 
 West Carnifax sailed to European ports for a time and in South American service for the American Republics Line while under USSB ownership . After her sale for operation by the American Export Lines in 1928 , she began sailing in Mediterranean service . After a rename to SS Exford later in 1928 , she was used on a cargo service to Soviet Black Sea ports , and became the first American ship to dock in the Soviet Union since World War I. After a brief stint in intercoastal service , the ship was renamed Pan Royal in 1933 for service with a subsidiary of the Waterman Steamship Company . In convoy sailing during World War II , Pan Royal made two roundtrips between the United States and the United Kingdom , and one roundtrip to North Africa . At the beginning of her second voyage to Africa in February 1943 , Pan Royal was accidentally rammed by two other convoy ships and sunk . Eight crewmen lost their lives in the accident . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) for emergency use during World War I. All were given names that began with the word West , like West Carnifax , the first of some 18 West ships built by Southwestern Shipbuilding . 
 West Carnifax ( Southwestern Shipbuilding No. 1 ) was laid down on 17 July as the first ship of the new Southwestern Shipbuilding shipyard . She was launched at 09 : 30 on 19 October 1918 by sponsor <unk> Hellman , the six @-@ year @-@ old daughter of yard superintendent Marco Hellman . When West Carnifax was delivered to the United States Navy upon completion in late December , the Los Angeles Times heralded the 134 @-@ workday completion time as a " world record " for the completion of a new ship in a new shipyard . 
 West Carnifax was 5 @,@ 799 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 410 feet 5 inches ( 125 @.@ 10 m ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 54 feet 6 inches ( 16 @.@ 61 m ) abeam . West Carnifax had a steel hull , a mean draft of 24 feet 1 inch ( 7 @.@ 34 m ) , and a displacement of 12 @,@ 211 t . The ship had a single triple @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , and moved the ship at up to 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ; 12 @.@ 1 mph ) . 
 = = Military career = = 
 USS West Carnifax ( ID @-@ 3812 ) was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service ( NOTS ) at San Pedro , California , on 31 December 1918 with Lieutenant Commander Robert H. Cowan , USNRF , in command . West Carnifax sailed from San Pedro on 4 January 1919 for San Francisco , where she took on an initial load of flour . She sailed for Norfolk , Virginia , on 31 January , and arrived at Hampton Roads on 15 March . 
 Setting out four days later , West Carnifax was slated to sail to Danzig via Falmouth and the Hook of Holland , but was diverted en route . When she arrived at her new destination of Hamburg on 25 March , she became the first American ship to dock in that city since before World War I had begun over 4 1 ⁄ 2 years before . When she had completed unloading her cargo of flour , noted as the " choicest California flour " by onlookers , she sailed for New Orleans by way of Plymouth on 2 April . On 9 May , four days after her arrival at New Orleans , West Carnifax was decommissioned and returned to the USSB . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 Incomplete information is available regarding West Carnifax 's activities after her return to the USSB in 1919 . One incident of note was reported in The New York Times on February 1922 . The news item reported that West Carnifax , while heading from Rotterdam to Galveston , Texas , ran short of provisions and fuel and had to be towed into New York by United States Coast Guard cutter USCGC Tampa ( <unk> @-@ 48 ) . By late 1923 , West Carnifax had been laid up at Norfolk , Virginia , but was reactivated and reconditioned in February 1924 . In early 1925 , West Carnifax had begun sailing for American Republics Lines , a USSB @-@ owned line that sailed in South American service . West Carnifax sailed in this service into 1927 and called at ports like Buenos Aires and Santos . 
 In early 1928 , West Carnifax was sold to the Export Steamship Corporation for operation under their American Export Lines brand . In the first half of that year , West Carnifax was sailing in New York – Mediterranean service . While near the Azores sailing from Alexandria , Egypt , to Boston in October , West Carnifax responded to an SOS from the American tanker David C. Reid which reported being in trouble during a storm . According to a report in the Los Angeles Times , when the cargo ship arrived at the specified location after steaming overnight , no trace of the crew was found ; only oil slicks and a floating vegetable box were found on the surface . In October the following year , under her new name of SS Exford , the ship docked at the Soviet Black Sea port of Novorossiysk to deliver a cargo of machinery and became the first American ship to dock at a Soviet port since the end of World War I. Exford remained in Black Sea service into 1931 . 
 In August 1933 , the Los Angeles Times reported that the Shepard Line had secured a year @-@ long charter of Exford for their expanded intercoastal service between North Atlantic ports and the Pacific ports of Los Angeles ; San Francisco ; Portland , Oregon ; and Seattle . Later in 1933 , the ship was renamed Pan Royal to reflect the naming style of her new owners , the Pan @-@ Atlantic Steamship Company , a subsidiary of Waterman Steamship Company . The Pan @-@ Atlantic Line sailed in coastal service along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts , and it is likely that Pan Royal called at typical Pan @-@ Atlantic ports such as Baltimore , Miami , Tampa , New Orleans , Philadelphia , New York , and Boston from this time . 
 At 03 : 50 on 24 September 1934 , Cunard @-@ White Star ocean liner RMS Laconia collided with Pan Royal in a thick fog off the tip of Cape Cod . Pan Royal developed a leak and had to return to Boston , from which she had left for Galveston , Texas , the previous day . Laconia , leaving Boston after debarking 225 passengers , also had damage but proceeded to her destination of New York under her own power . No one was injured on either ship . <unk> R. Callaway , master of Pan Royal , claimed that Laconia could have avoided the collision by proper steering ; Laconia 's master , B. B. <unk> , contended that the collision was unavoidable because of the " impenetrable haze " . 
 In November 1939 , Pan Royal was one of 21 ships that had been idled because of a strike by 5 @,@ 000 longshoremen in New York . In June the following year , The Christian Science Monitor reported that Pan Royal had been engaged to return " Big Joe " to the Soviet Union . " Big Joe " was a nickname given to the 79 @-@ foot tall ( 24 m ) Soviet worker holding a red star in his up @-@ stretched hand . The statue had graced the column in front of the Soviet Socialist Republics Building at the New York World 's Fair during the 1939 fair season . The Soviet pavilion was dismantled prior to the 1940 fair season after popular American opinion turned against the Soviet Union because of its November 1939 invasion of Finland . As part of the dismantling , " Big Joe " had been warehoused in Hoboken , New Jersey , but prevented from export by a United States Maritime Commission ruling enforcing a " moral embargo " that prohibited the charter of American ships on behalf of the Soviet Union . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In June 1942 , seven months after the United States had entered World War II , Pan Royal made two roundtrips in transatlantic convoys between Boston and the United Kingdom via Halifax . While in the UK during her second visit , the ship had called at Belfast Lough , Barry , and Milford Haven before returning to New York in October . In mid November , Pan Royal sailed from Hampton Roads , Virginia , to Casablanca , and returned in mid @-@ January 1943 . 
 On 7 February 1943 , Pan Royal departed Hampton Roads in Convoy UGS @-@ 5 for North Africa . Two days out , Pan Royal was accidentally rammed by both the Norwegian cargo ship Evita and the American Liberty ship George Davis . Pan Royal sank at position 36 ° 40 ′ N 67 ° 20 ′ W with the loss of eight men . Her 54 survivors were rescued by US Navy destroyer USS Boyle ( DD @-@ 600 ) . 
 = Alexander of Lincoln = 
 Alexander of Lincoln ( died February 1148 ) was a medieval English Bishop of Lincoln , a member of an important administrative and ecclesiastical family . He was the nephew of Roger of Salisbury , a Bishop of Salisbury and Chancellor of England under King Henry I , and he was also related to Nigel , Bishop of Ely . Educated at Laon , Alexander served in his uncle 's diocese as an archdeacon in the early 1120s . Unlike his relatives , he held no office in the government before his appointment as Bishop of Lincoln in 1123 . Alexander became a frequent visitor to King Henry 's court after his elevation to the episcopate , often witnessing royal documents , and he served as a royal justice in Lincolnshire . 
 Although Alexander was known for his ostentatious and luxurious lifestyle , he founded a number of religious houses in his diocese and was an active builder and literary patron . He also attended church councils and reorganized his diocese by increasing the number of archdeaconries and setting up prebends to support his cathedral clergy . Under Henry 's successor , King Stephen , Alexander was caught up in the fall from favour of his family , and was imprisoned together with his uncle Roger in 1139 . He subsequently briefly supported Stephen 's rival , Matilda , but by the late 1140s Alexander was once again working with Stephen . He spent much of the late 1140s at the papal court in Rome , but died in England in early 1148 . During his episcopate he began the rebuilding of his cathedral , which had been destroyed by fire . Alexander was the patron of medieval chroniclers Henry of Huntingdon and Geoffrey of Monmouth , and also served as an ecclesiastical patron of the medieval hermit Christina of Markyate and Gilbert of Sempringham , founder of the <unk> . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alexander was a nephew of Roger , Bishop of Salisbury , probably the son of Roger 's brother Humphrey . His mother 's name , Ada , is known from the Lincoln Cathedral libri <unk> , or obituary books . Alexander 's brother David was archdeacon of Buckingham in the diocese of Lincoln . Other relatives included Nigel , another nephew of Roger 's ; and Adelelm , later Treasurer of England , who was recorded as Roger 's nephew but perhaps was his son . It is possible , although unproven , that Nigel was really Alexander 's brother rather than his cousin . Roger 's son Roger le Poer , who later became Chancellor of England , was also a cousin . Alexander 's cousin Nigel had a son , Richard FitzNeal , who later became Treasurer of England and Bishop of London . Alexander also had a nephew William , who became an archdeacon , and a great @-@ nephew named Robert de <unk> . 
 Alexander 's birthdate is unknown . Together with his cousin Nigel he was educated at Laon , under the schoolmaster Anselm of Laon , and returned to England at some unknown date . The historian Martin Brett feels that Alexander probably served as a royal chaplain early in his career , although no sources support this conjecture . Alexander was an archdeacon in the diocese of Salisbury by 1121 , under his uncle . While occupying that office he was credited with a writing a glossary of Old English legal terms in the Anglo Norman language , entitled the <unk> <unk> . Unlike his cousin Nigel , Alexander does not appear to have entered the king 's household or administration before his appointment as a bishop , and only attested , or witnessed , one royal charter before his elevation to the episcopate in 1123 . 
 = = Bishop = = 
 Alexander was nominated to the see of Lincoln in April 1123 and was consecrated bishop on 22 July 1123 , at a ceremony held in Canterbury . He owed his appointment to his uncle 's influence with King Henry I ; the Peterborough version of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle noted that Alexander 's elevation to the episcopate was done entirely for the love of Roger . 
 During his time as bishop Alexander secured the submission of St Albans Abbey to his diocese and founded a number of monasteries , including Haverholme Priory ( a Gilbertine house ) , Dorchester on Thames ( an Arrouaisian Order house ) , Louth Park , and Thame ; Louth was one of the first Cistercian houses founded in England , and Dorchester was the refoundation of a former collegiate church . During Alexander 's episcopate 13 Cistercian abbeys and seven nunneries were founded in his diocese . Alexander himself consecrated the church at Markyate used by the medieval mystic Christina of Markyate and her nuns , and it was he who consecrated her as a hermit at St Albans Abbey . Alexander also founded a hospital for lepers at Newark @-@ on @-@ Trent . 
 Although Alexander was a frequent witness to royal charters and documents , there is no evidence that he held an official government position after his appointment as bishop , unlike his relatives Roger and Nigel . Nevertheless , Alexander subsequently appears to have become a regular presence at the royal court . He frequently attested royal charters after 1123 , and probably acted as a royal justice in Lincolnshire and the town of Lincoln . He also held the royal castles at Newark , Sleaford and Banbury , and gave confirmations of grants to the church at <unk> . 
 Alexander was probably at the 1125 church council held at Westminster by the papal legate John of Crema , and shortly afterwards accompanied the legate on his journey back to Rome . He was still in Rome in 1126 , and may have helped to obtain a papal confirmation of his uncle 's possession of Malmesbury Abbey , Abbotsbury Abbey , and Horton . At some point during his episcopate , an eighth archdeaconry was established in his diocese , for the West Riding area of Lindsey . Besides these reorganizations , Alexander had a number of clerics in his personal household , including Gilbert of Sempringham , who later founded the Gilbertine order . Other members of the bishop 's household were Ralph <unk> , who became abbot of St Albans , and an Italian Bible scholar named Guido or <unk> , who taught that subject while serving Alexander . 
 Alexander presided over the organization of his diocese into prebends to support the cathedral clergy ; he established at least one new prebend and augmented two others . He also attended the church councils in 1127 and 1129 that were convened by William de Corbeil , the Archbishop of Canterbury . Later , during 1133 and 1134 , he and the archbishop quarrelled , but the exact nature of their dispute is unknown . William and Alexander travelled to Normandy in 1134 to seek out King Henry to settle their dispute . 
 = = Reign of Stephen = = 
 After Henry 's death in 1135 the succession was disputed between the king 's nephews — Stephen and his elder brother Theobald II , Count of Champagne — and Henry 's surviving legitimate child Matilda , usually known as the Empress Matilda because of her first marriage to the Holy Roman Emperor , Henry V. King Henry 's only legitimate son , William , had died in 1120 . After Matilda was widowed in 1125 she returned to her father , who married her to Geoffrey , Count of Anjou . All the magnates of England and Normandy were required to declare fealty to Matilda as Henry 's heir , but after Henry I 's death in 1135 Stephen rushed to England and had himself crowned , before Theobald or Matilda could react . The Norman barons accepted Stephen as Duke of Normandy , and Theobald contented himself with his possessions in France . But Matilda was less sanguine and secured the support of the Scottish king , David , her maternal uncle , and in 1138 that of her half @-@ brother , Robert , Earl of Gloucester , an illegitimate son of Henry I. 
 The election of Theobald of Bec to the Archbishopric of Canterbury was announced at the Council of Westminster in 1138 . The medieval chronicler Gervase of Canterbury writes that 17 bishops attended the council , which implies that Alexander was present . After a failed expedition to Normandy in 1137 , the influence of Alexander 's uncle , Roger of Salisbury , waned at the court of King Stephen , but the king took no action against the family that might incite them to rebel . In early 1139 Stephen may have named William d 'Aubigny as Earl of Lincoln , perhaps in an effort to limit Alexander 's influence in Lincolnshire . 
 In June 1139 a knight was killed during a fight in Oxford between a party of Roger of Salisbury 's men and a group of noblemen . The king ordered Roger to attend his court to explain the circumstances of the incident and to surrender custody of his castles , which Roger refused to do , resulting in his and Alexander 's arrest ; Roger 's other nephew , Nigel , evaded capture . Another possible explanation for the arrests is offered by the Gesta Stephani , a contemporary chronicle , which reported the king 's fear that Roger and his nephews were plotting to hand their castles to the Empress Matilda . Stephen may alternatively have been attempting to assert his rights over the castles , and demonstrate his authority over powerful subjects . Alexander was imprisoned in Oxford , in conditions described by some medieval chroniclers as bad . 
 Since the work of Henry of Huntingdon , who wrote in the years before 1154 and who regarded Stephen 's actions as treachery against the clergy that earned him punishment from God , Alexander 's arrest has been seen by many historians as a turning point in Stephen 's reign . Writing in the 1870s , the historian William Stubbs felt that the arrest destroyed the royal administration , but modern historians have advanced differing explanations for the troubles that followed , not all of which are related to the bishop 's arrest . 
 After Roger and Alexander 's arrests Nigel defied the king . The bishops ' castles refused to surrender to the king , therefore Stephen threatened to starve Alexander and Roger until they did . Sleaford and Newark surrendered and were given into the custody of Robert , the Earl of Leicester . Earl Robert also seized some of Lincoln 's episcopal estates that had been disputed between the earl and the bishop . Alexander subsequently excommunicated Earl Robert when the earl refused to return the castle to Alexander 's custody . Alexander then successfully applied to Pope Innocent II in 1139 for support in his efforts to recover Newark castle from Earl Robert . 
 Stephen 's brother , Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester and one of the king 's main supporters , had recently been appointed papal legate . Henry objected to Stephen 's actions in arresting the bishops and confiscating their property , as they were in contravention of canon law . Henry called a legatine council , a church council convened by a papal legate , at Winchester to discuss the issue , which ended in nothing being done , although both sides threatened excommunication and stated they would appeal to Rome and the papacy for support . Alexander did not attend the council of Winchester , but his uncle did . He seems to have borne Stephen no ill will over the arrest , and worked with the king during Stephen 's later reign . 
 In 1141 Alexander and the citizens of the town of Lincoln requested that Stephen come to Lincoln and intercede with Ranulf de Gernon , the Earl of Chester , who was attempting to enforce what he regarded as his rights to Lincoln Castle . Stephen arrived and besieged Ranulf 's wife and half @-@ brother in the castle , but the earl escaped and sought aid from Robert of Gloucester , Matilda 's half @-@ brother and leading supporter . Following Robert 's arrival in Lincoln a battle took place there on 2 February 1141 , during which Stephen was captured by Matilda 's forces . Alexander was present at Oxford in July 1141 , when the Empress Matilda held court and attempted to consolidate her hold on England . The citizens of London objected to Matilda 's rule when she arrived in their city , and drove her away ; Robert of Gloucester was captured shortly afterwards . This reversal of the Empress ' fortunes resulted in Stephen 's release , after he was exchanged for Robert . The next few years , until 1148 , saw a period of civil war in England , often called The Anarchy , when neither Matilda nor Stephen controlled the country . 
 = = Patronage = = 
 Alexander was a supporter of Gilbert of Sempringham 's new monastic order of the <unk> , and he was also known as a patron of literature . He commissioned Geoffrey of Monmouth to compose the Prophecies of Merlin , which Geoffrey dedicated to him . Alexander was a patron of the medieval chronicler Henry of Huntingdon , and requested that Henry write his historical work . 
 Alexander rebuilt Lincoln Cathedral after it had been destroyed by fire at an unknown date . He had the roof done with stone vaulting and began construction of the west front of the cathedral , which was finished under his successor . The only remaining major traces of Alexander 's work on the west end are the carved doors and the frieze on the west front . The author of the Gesta Stephani claimed that Alexander 's additions made Lincoln Cathedral " more beautiful than before and second to none in the realm " . Traditionally , Alexander has been credited with the commissioning of the baptismal font in Lincoln Cathedral , made of Tournai marble . Recent scholarship , however , has cast doubt upon this theory and suggests that the font was carved on the orders of Alexander 's successor , Robert de Chesney . 
 Stephen granted to Alexander the land on which the Old Palace of the bishops stands in Lincoln , although it is unclear whether it was Alexander or his successor as bishop who began the construction of the existing building . Stephen 's grant added to an earlier one by King Henry , of the Eastgate in Lincoln as an episcopal residence . Work commissioned by Alexander has survived at the three castles he built at Newark @-@ on @-@ Trent , Sleaford , and probably Banbury . 
 Alexander 's nickname , " the Magnificent " , reflected his ostentatious and luxurious lifestyle . Henry of Huntingdon records that this was a contemporary nickname . Alexander was rebuked by Bernard of Clairvaux for his lifestyle . He may have been responsible for the education of an illegitimate son of King Henry 's , as two charters of Alexander 's are witnessed by a William , who is described as a son of the king . He also advanced the careers of his family , naming his relative Adelelm as Dean of Lincoln during his episcopate . Another member of his household was Robert <unk> , who later became abbot of St Albans Abbey . 
 The medieval chronicler William of Newburgh wrote that Alexander founded a number of monasteries , " to remove the odium " that he had incurred because of his castle building . Alexander himself stated explicitly that his foundation of Louth was intended to secure the remission of his sins , as well as the salvation of King Henry I , his uncle Roger of Salisbury , and his parents . Alexander also played a part in the founding of Newhouse Abbey in about 1143 . Although the actual foundation was by Peter of <unk> , Alexander and his successor issued confirmation charters and took the new monastery into their protection . 
 = = Death = = 
 Alexander spent most of 1145 and 1146 at the papal court in Rome , although some time during that period he was in England as one of the witnesses to the peace accord signed between the earls of Chester and Leicester . He returned to the papal court , then at Auxerre , in 1147 , but he was back in England by the time of his death the following year . Henry of Huntingdon says that Alexander picked up his last illness while travelling . Alexander died in February 1148 , probably on the 20th , as that was the date on which his death was commemorated at Lincoln Cathedral , and he was buried at Lincoln on 25 February 1148 . No tomb remains , but 12th @-@ century documents record that Alexander left the cathedral a number of books , mostly biblical works . 
 = His Last Vow = 
 " His Last Vow " is the third and final episode of the third series of the BBC Television series Sherlock , which follows the modern @-@ day adventures of Sherlock Holmes . The episode was first broadcast on 12 January 2014 , on BBC One . It was written by Steven Moffat and directed by Nick Hurran with music composed by Michael Price and David Arnold . The episode is a contemporary adaption of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's short story " The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton " . 
 In the episode , Sherlock Holmes ( Benedict Cumberbatch ) and John Watson ( Martin Freeman ) take on a case about stolen letters . This leads the pair into conflict with Charles Augustus Magnussen ( Lars Mikkelsen ) , a media mogul specialising in blackmail whom Sherlock despises . Holmes and Watson try to get Magnussen arrested , but their attempt fails when they confront him at Appledore , Magnussen 's home . 
 On its first broadcast on BBC One , the episode received 11 @.@ 37 million viewers , a 32 @.@ 1 % audience share . Although this was a drop from " The Sign of Three " and " The Empty Hearse " , it became the most tweeted @-@ about single episode of a drama series in the UK . The episode received critical acclaim , and Mikkelsen 's performance as Magnussen , in particular , was praised . For their performances in the episode , Cumberbatch and Freeman both won the Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie , respectively . Moffat also won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Miniseries , Movie or a Dramatic Special for his work on the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 John Watson , whose wife Mary is now visibly pregnant , finds a disheveled Sherlock Holmes in a crack house under the influence of drugs . John attempts to force him to rehabilitate , but Sherlock insists that he was undercover for a case . Mycroft confronts Sherlock about the drug use and realises that Sherlock is investigating Charles Augustus Magnussen , a newspaper owner who blackmails people . Sherlock has been enlisted by Lady Elizabeth Smallwood to negotiate the return of stolen letters written by Smallwood 's husband . Mycroft warns Sherlock not to go after Magnussen , which Sherlock dismisses . 
 John is also shocked to discover that Sherlock is in a relationship with Mary 's bridesmaid , Janine . Sherlock tells John that he is dating her because she is Magnussen 's personal assistant , and he uses their relationship to assist him with breaking into Magnussen 's office in London . Inside , Sherlock and John find an incapacitated Janine , and Sherlock happens upon Mary holding Magnussen at gunpoint . Mary shoots Sherlock , who harnesses all his mental powers to stay conscious . He is taken to hospital . In his mind palace , Sherlock fades away , at the same time in the real world Sherlock dies on the operating table in pre @-@ op preparation . In the mind palace , Moriarty convinces Sherlock that he 's letting John down by dying , which convinces the mind palace Sherlock to get up and escape . At this time , in the real world , Sherlock 's heart begins to beat again . The surgeons attempt to help revive him , by giving him oxygen . Sherlock wakes up in surgery and mouths " Mary " . Mary comes into the hospital and is met by John , who says that Sherlock had survived surgery . Mary visits the exhausted and in critical condition Sherlock and warns him not to denounce her . John nonetheless begins to suspect something after he finds that Sherlock replaced John 's chair in the Baker Street flat and left a bottle of Mary 's perfume on the table next to it . 
 Sherlock slips out from the hospital and arranges a meeting with Mary . Using a ruse , Sherlock exposes Mary 's secret life as an assassin to John , and all three return to Baker Street to sort it out . She tells them about her past , and that Magnussen has information on her that would put her in jail for the rest of her life . Sherlock deduces that she intentionally shot him in a non @-@ lethal spot and called an ambulance . Sherlock tells John that he observes John 's addiction to danger and that John was most probably attracted to Mary because of her hidden past . Mary gives John a memory stick containing information on her , marked with her true initials A. G. RA . , telling him the contents will destroy his love for her . After not viewing the memory stick for a few months , John decides to destroy it without reading it and to love Mary regardless . The couple spend Christmas with the Holmes brothers at their parents ' home , where Sherlock takes the opportunity to drug everyone but John so that they can steal Mycroft 's laptop . Sherlock takes a confused John to meet Magnussen at his estate , Appledore , which he believes contains Magnussen 's blackmail archive . During their confrontation , Magnussen explains his purpose in putting pressure on Mary was to arrive at Mycroft via John and Sherlock . He also reveals that he was behind the kidnapping of John , as seen in " The Empty Hearse " . 
 Sherlock offers to trade Magnussen 's information on Mary for the state secrets contained in Mycroft 's laptop . However , Magnussen is aware that Sherlock is setting him up in a trap . Magnussen then explains Sherlock 's plan to John ; security services looking for the laptop using a GPS tracker it contains will raid Appledore and , upon finding the laptop , will have a legal reason to search the blackmail vaults . Magnussen , with considerable glee , reveals that the plan will not work because Appledore 's vaults don 't physically exist , but are stored in his Mind Palace . By giving Magnussen the laptop , Sherlock and John are now guilty of attempting to sell government secrets and can be imprisoned for high treason , whereas Magnussen remains legally untouchable . When Mycroft and the police arrive , Sherlock shoots Magnussen in the head , having realised that this is the only way to free his friends and everyone else from his power . 
 Mycroft convinces the government to spare Sherlock a trial and , as an alternative punishment , press him into a highly dangerous mission in Eastern Europe . He is , however , recalled within minutes when TV screens all over Great Britain are hacked to broadcast a loop of a static image of Jim Moriarty asking " Did you miss me ? " A post @-@ credits scene shows a very much alive Moriarty asking if the audience missed him as well . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In July 2013 , it was announced that Danish actor Lars Mikkelsen would star as the main villain of the third series of Sherlock . Mikkelsen first appeared in a non @-@ speaking cameo appearance at the end of " The Empty Hearse " . The portrayal of Magnussen was described by Steven Moffat as " terrifying " . Mikkelsen was suggested for the role by producer Sue Vertue and recorded an audition video for the production team in which he urinated in his barn . Mikkelsen was starring in a film set in East London at the time and had picked up a London accent , so he had to " re @-@ Dane @-@ <unk> " his accent . 
 Moffat and Vertue 's son , Louis Moffat , played a young Sherlock in two scenes and Benedict Cumberbatch 's real @-@ life parents , Timothy Carlton and Wanda Ventham , reprised their roles as Sherlock 's parents from " The Empty Hearse " . Steven Moffat has commented that Sherlock " runs on nepotism " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Steven Moffat confirmed that the cliffhanger , the return of Moriarty , had been planned as far back as series two , when he discussed the plan for Moriarty 's character with actor Andrew Scott . However , he joked that he was as surprised as the viewers to see Moriarty return , noting that it is impossible to fake shooting oneself in the head . Scott appeared in a short post @-@ credits scene talking to the camera , both firsts for the show . Moffat has commented that viewers will have to wait " years " to see the resolution of the cliffhanger . 
 Gatiss and Moffat had considered adapting the character of Charles Augustus Milverton for some time , considering him to be a " brilliantly realised " villain . Moffat viewed Magnussen as Sherlock 's " intellectual mirror " and a " unique <unk> " , and stated that he fell in love with him . The character of Magnussen was originally conceived as an American retaining the name of Milverton , but Moffat changed both his nationality and name when Mikkelsen was cast . He found the name Magnussen on a website of Danish names , looking for one that resembled Milverton , the name of the original character from Doyle 's short story . Gatiss noted that the character is a " fascinating new place to go " due to his differences from Moriarty . When Mikkelsen received the script , he stated that his first impression was that it was " the best script I 've ever read " . Contrasting Magnussen to Moriarty , Cumberbatch stated that he was " so chilling because of how real he is , how normal he is " , and that he is " not driven by a mad , chaotic joker 's energy that Moriarty has " . 
 On the introduction of young Sherlock , Moffat noted that it was the logical course to take after the introduction of the Holmes parents : " Once you 've got the parents in and you 've got the sibling rivalry and stuff , people start to think , ' well what was young Sherlock like ? ' You just want those things , you want to see those things , it 's part of updating it . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Director Nick Hurran had previously worked with Steven Moffat on several episodes of Doctor Who , including the fiftieth anniversary special . 
 Filming for " His Last Vow " began on 29 July 2013 . Some filming was in Cardiff , and part in Leinster Gardens , where houses 23 and 24 were shown to be mere façades . Scenes set at ' Appledore ' , Magnussen 's house , were filmed at <unk> House in Gloucestershire , owned by Sir David McMurtry , boss of <unk> engineering . 
 The post @-@ credits scene — depicting Moriarty ( Andrew Scott ) saying " Miss me ? " to the camera — was originally longer , but was cut at Gatiss 's recommendation to tease the audience . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The last Sherlock episode of series 3 , " His Last Vow " was first broadcast on BBC One on Sunday 12 January 2014 between 8 : 30pm and 10 : 00pm GMT . Overnight , the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 77 million viewers , a 31 @.@ 9 % share , which was down from 9 @.@ 2 million ( 33 @.@ 8 % ) for the opening episode of the series , " The Empty Hearse " . However , when final ratings were factored , it increased to 11 @.@ 38 million , the same as " The Sign of Three " , but still down from " The Empty Hearse " . The episode was later repeated on the digital channel BBC Three on Friday , 17 January 2014 from 9pm GMT . 
 The British Board of Film Classification gave the episode a 12 certificate , for " moderate violence , drug references and one use of strong language " . The episode was released in the UK on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc with the other episodes in the series ( " The Empty Hearse " and " The Sign of Three " ) on 20 January 2014 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " His Last Vow " received critical acclaim , with Louisa Mellor of Den of Geek saying that the episode was " as good a finale as Sherlock 's ever had " , with a very strong plot . Mark Jefferies of The Mirror called the episode " easily the best yet in this run " , with a " fascinating " plot . He also praised Mikkelsen as " brilliant " . Josh Wilding , also writing for The Mirror , said the episode " was in many ways the best episode of Sherlock yet " and called it " simply one of the greatest TV shows of all @-@ time " , giving it 5 / 5 . Caroline Frost of the Huffington Post called it a " fitting finale to the series , with writers and actors all saving their best for last " , despite the third series ' " patchy " performances . <unk> Davies of The Telegraph called the episode " the best of the lot " and gave 4 out of 5 stars , calling Moffat " the superior Sherlock writer " . Although her review was mainly positive , she questioned whether the programme had become " a little vain , rather a show @-@ off " . Lucy Mangan of The Guardian said the episode was " perfect " , and a " ceaseless flow of wit , invention and intelligence " , a sentiment echoed by Ellen Jones of The Independent , who stated that it contained " intelligence , humour and obscure fanboy references galore " which " delivered the goods " . She went on to state that it is " enough detail in this episode to justifying watching it again and again , once weekly , until series four " . Chris Harvey of The Telegraph praised the " beautifully done " conclusion of the episode featuring Moriarty , saying it was " very playful , very neat . And very unexpected " . <unk> Deb , writing in Indian newspaper Mint , was positive about the episode , calling it " the best " episode in the series , and praised its " stunning twists and turns , its thrilling upending of what we have known about the characters for a lifetime , an emotional depth not seen before , and its clever throwaway references to the Canon " . Deb also praised the " uber @-@ cool cinematic technique " , singling out the moment when Sherlock has been shot and falls to the floor as an " extraordinary leap of the imagination and cinematic bravura " . However , it was stated that the writers were " influenced by the zoned @-@ out Holmes films directed by Guy Ritchie " . 
 However , Neela Debnath , also of The Independent , said that the episode was " trying far too hard and is coming across a tad foolish " , and consequently " failed to hit new heights " . Despite this , she did praise Mikkelsen as Magnussen , calling his performance " sterling " . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly took issue with Sherlock killing Magnussen at the end , instead of outsmarting him , viewing it as out of character : " He [ Sherlock ] had the smarts to brainstorm more inspired solutions to the problem of Magnusson [ sic ] , and the seasoning to resist a degrading one " . An article in the Daily Mail penned by Tom Kelly , claimed that the episode was symptomatic of the BBC 's " left @-@ wing bias " , arguing the episode 's villain , Charles Augustus Magnussen , was portrayed as a capitalist , foreign @-@ born newspaper baron , with similarities to Rupert Murdoch . Media commentator Roy Greenslade <unk> the criticism by suggesting the BBC , rather than Sherlock , is the Daily Mail 's " real enemy " . The episode angered fans as it had removed the woman who , in Doyle 's story , had shot Milverton . After the airing of " His Last Vow " , Moffat and Gatiss said in an interview with Empire Cinemas : 
 Moffat : Also , if you read [ The Adventure Of ] Charles Augustus Milverton , Dr. Watson in the opening paragraph tells you that he 's about to tell you a <unk> . He says , ' I even now must be very reticent . ' I think what Doyle is hinting at is that Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson sat in Baker Street and said , ' Right , we 're going to have to go and kill him , aren 't we ? That 's the only way we can do this . ' So they break in , kill him , and then Dr. Watson writes up a version of the story that puts the murder [ on someone else ] . 
 Gatiss : They 're hiding in their burglar masks behind the curtain , and this random woman comes and shoots Milverton in the face and then grinds her heel into his face . It 's odd , isn 't it ? So I mean really , it 's just an extrapolation of saying , ' Well , he probably did it , I <unk> 
 Moffat : If Sherlock Holmes decided that somebody should die , he would kill them . I don 't think he 'd have any problem with that . 
 Gatiss : He regards Milverton as a sort of plague , something that should be eradicated . 
 Gavia Baker @-@ Whitelaw , writing in The Daily Dot , said that the removal of a female character was " An unfortunate occurrence that neatly fits in with Moffat 's track record with female characters in both Doctor Who and Sherlock " , Baker @-@ Whitelaw goes on to question whether Mary could have killed Mikkelsen , instead of " playing right into the hands of fans who believe Moffat is a misogynist who writes all of his female characters into the same corner " , and questions whether Moffat is indeed a misogynist . 
 Steven Moffat 's writing , said Emma Dibdin of Digital Spy , is " a few degrees colder than his colleagues ' " , which helped the episode go back to the " cerebral , mystery @-@ driven tone some viewers have been left craving " . Paul Jones , of the Radio Times , praised Moffat 's " grand , filmic episode " , whilst Daniel Krupa , writing for IGN , said the episode was a reminder of " just how brilliant Sherlock [ ... ] can be " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " His Last Vow " was nominated for several Emmy Awards and several Critics ' Choice Television Awards . At the 4th Critics ' Choice Television Awards , the episode was nominated in four categories . At the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards , " His Last Vow " won seven Emmys , the most for any TV programme . 
 = Climate of North Carolina = 
 North Carolina 's climate varies from the Atlantic coast in the east to the Appalachian Mountain range in the west . The mountains often act as a " shield " , blocking low temperatures and storms from the Midwest from entering the Piedmont of North Carolina . Most of the state has a humid subtropical climate ( Köppen climate classification Cfa ) , except in the higher elevations of the Appalachians which have a subtropical highland climate ( Köppen Cfb ) . For most areas in the state , the temperatures in July during the daytime are around 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) . In January the average temperatures range near 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) . ( however a polar vortex or " cold blast " can significantly bring down average temperatures , seen in Winter 2014 and Winter 2015 . ) 
 = = Precipitation = = 
 There is an average of forty @-@ five inches of rain a year ( fifty in the mountains ) . July storms account for much of this precipitation . As much as 15 % of the rainfall during the warm season in the Carolinas can be attributed to tropical cyclones . Mountains usually see some snow in the fall and winter . Moist winds from the southwest drop an average of 80 inches ( 2 @,@ 000 mm ) of precipitation on the western side of the mountains , while the northeast @-@ facing slopes average less than half that amount . 
 = = = Snow = = = 
 Snow in North Carolina is seen on a regular basis in the mountains . North Carolina averages 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of snow a year . However , this also varies greatly across the state . Along the coast , most areas register less than 2 inches ( 51 mm ) per year while the state capitol , Raleigh averages 7 @.@ 5 inches ( 190 mm ) . Farther west in the Piedmont @-@ Triad the average grows to around 9 inches ( 230 mm ) . The Charlotte area averages around 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 170 mm ) . Again , the mountains in the west act as barrier preventing most snow storms from entering the Piedmont of North Carolina . When snow does make it past the mountains , it is usually light and is seldom on the ground for more than two or three days . However , several storms have dropped 18 inches ( 460 mm ) or more of snow within normally warm areas . The 1993 Storm of the Century that lasted from March 11 to March 15 , 1993 affected places from Canada to Central America , brought a significant amount of snow to North Carolina . Newfound Gap received more than 36 inches ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of snow with drifts more than 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) while Mount Mitchell measured over 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of snow with drifts to 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . Most of the northwestern part of the state received somewhere between 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) an 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of snow . 
 Another significant snowfall hit the Raleigh area in January 2000 when more than 20 inches ( 510 mm ) of snow fell . There was also a heavy snowfall totaling 18 inches ( 460 mm ) that hit the Wilmington just before Christmas in 1989 , with little snow measured west of I @-@ 95 . Most of the big snows that impact areas east of the mountains come from extratropical cyclones which approach from the south across Georgia and South Carolina and move offshore the Carolinas . If the storms track too far east , the snow will be limited to the eastern part of the state . If the cyclones travel close to the coast , warm air will get pulled into eastern North Carolina due to increasing flow off the milder Atlantic Ocean , bringing a rain / snow line well inland with heavy snow restricted to the piedmont . If the storm tracks inland into eastern North Carolina , the rain / snow line ranges between Raleigh and Greensboro . 
 = = Tropical cyclones = = 
 Located along the Atlantic Coast , North Carolina is no stranger to hurricanes . Many hurricanes that come up from the Caribbean Sea make it up the coast of eastern America , passing by North Carolina . 
 On October 15 , 1954 , Hurricane Hazel struck North Carolina , at that time it was a category 4 hurricane within the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Hazel caused significant damage due to its strong winds . A weather station at Oak Island reported maximum sustained winds of 140 miles per hour ( 230 km / h ) , while in Raleigh winds of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) were measured . The hurricane caused 19 deaths and significant destruction . One person at Long Beach claimed that " of the 357 buildings that existed in the town , 352 were totally destroyed and the other five damaged " . Hazel was described as " the most destructive storm in the history of North Carolina " in a 1989 report . 
 In 1996 , Hurricane Fran made landfall in North Carolina . As a category 3 hurricane , Fran caused a great deal of damage , mainly through winds . Fran 's maximum sustained wind speeds were 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) , while North Carolina 's coast saw surges of 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) to 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) above sea level . The amount of damage caused by Fran ranged from $ 1 @.@ 275 to $ 2 billion in North Carolina . 
 = = = Rain = = = 
 Heavy rains accompany tropical cyclones and their remnants which move northeast from the Gulf of Mexico coastline , as well as inland from the western subtropical Atlantic ocean . Over the past 30 years , the wettest tropical cyclone to strike the coastal plain was Hurricane Floyd of September 1999 , which dropped over 24 inches ( 610 mm ) of rainfall north of Southport . Unlike Hazel and Fran , the main force of destruction was from precipitation . Before Hurricane Floyd reached North Carolina , the state had already received large amounts of rain from Hurricane Dennis less than two weeks before Floyd . This saturated much of the Eastern North Carolina soil and allowed heavy rains from Hurricane Floyd to turn into floods . Over 35 people died from Floyd . In the mountains , Hurricane Frances of September 2004 was nearly as wet , bringing over 23 inches ( 580 mm ) of rainfall to Mount Mitchell . 
 = = Severe weather = = 
 In most years , the greatest weather @-@ related economic loss incurred in North Carolina is due to severe weather spawned by summer thunderstorms . These storms affect limited areas , with their hail and wind accounting for an average annual loss of over US $ 5 million . 
 North Carolina averages 31 tornadoes a year with May seeing the most tornadoes on average a month with 5 . June , July and August all have an average of 3 tornadoes with an increase to 4 average tornadoes a month in September . It is through September and into early November when North Carolina can typically expect to see that smaller , secondary , severe weather season . While severe weather season is technically from March through May , tornadoes have touched down in North Carolina in every month of the year . [ 1 ] 
 = = Seasonal conditions = = 
 = = = Winter = = = 
 In winter , North Carolina is protected by the Appalachian Mountains on the western front . Cold fronts from Canada and the Gulf of Mexico rarely make it past the towering mountains . Cold winds make it across the peaks once or twice a year and force the temperatures to drop to about 10 ° F ( − 12 ° C ) in central North Carolina . Although temperatures below zero degrees Fahrenheit are extremely rare outside of the mountains . The coldest ever recorded temperature in North Carolina was − 34 ° F ( − 37 ° C ) on January 21 , 1985 , at Mount Mitchell . The winter temperatures on the coast are mostly due to the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf Stream . The average ocean temperature in Southport in January is still higher than the average ocean temperature in Maine during July . Snow is common in the mountains , although many ski resorts use snowmaking equipment to make sure there is always snow on their land . North Carolina 's relative humidity is highest in the winter . 
 = = = Spring = = = 
 Tornadoes are most likely early in the spring . The month of May experiences the greatest rise in temperatures . During the spring , there are warm days and cool nights in the piedmont . Temperatures are somewhat cooler in the mountains and warmer , particularly at night , near the coast . North Carolina 's humidity is lowest in the Spring . 
 = = = Summer = = = 
 North Carolina experiences high summer temperatures . Sometimes , cool , dry air from the north will invade North Carolina for brief periods of time , with temperatures quickly rebounding . It remains colder at high elevations , with the average summer temperature in Mount Mitchell lying at 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) . Morning temperatures are on average 20 ° F ( 12 ° C ) lower than afternoon temperatures , except along the Atlantic Coast . The largest economic loss from severe weather in North Carolina is due to severe thunderstorms in the summer , although they usually only hit small areas . Tropical cyclones can impact the state during the summer as well . <unk> are also frequent in the summer . 
 = = = Fall = = = 
 Fall is the most rapidly changing season temperature wise , especially in October and November . Tropical cyclones remain a threat until late in the season . The Appalachian Mountains are frequently visited at this time of year , due to the leaves changing color in the trees . 
 = = = Southern Oscillation = = = 
 During El Niño events , winter and early spring temperatures are cooler than average with above average precipitation in the central and eastern parts of the state and drier weather in the western part . La Niña usually brings warmer than average temperatures with above average precipitation in the western part of the state while the central and coastal regions stay drier than average . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 The water on North Carolina 's shores have risen 2 inches ( 50 mm ) but the reason is heavily discussed . Temperatures in North Carolina have risen too . Over the last 100 years , the average temperature in Chapel Hill has gone up 1 @.@ 2 ° F ( 0 @.@ 7 ° C ) and precipitation in some parts of the state has increased by 5 percent . 
 = Homicide : Life on the Street ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of Homicide : Life on the Street , an American police procedural drama television series , originally aired in the United States on NBC between January 31 and March 31 , 1993 . The show was created by Paul Attanasio , with film director Barry Levinson and television writer and producer Tom Fontana serving as executive producers . Adapted from David Simon 's 1991 non @-@ fiction book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , the season followed the fictional detectives of Baltimore Police Department homicide unit and the murder cases they investigate . The show was broadcast on Wednesdays at 9 p.m. EST , with the exception of the series premiere , which aired immediately after Super Bowl XXVII . 
 The season introduced regular cast members Daniel Baldwin , Ned Beatty , Richard Belzer , Andre Braugher , Clark Johnson , Yaphet Kotto , Melissa Leo , Jon Polito and Kyle Secor . Most of the primary characters were based on real @-@ life Baltimore detectives from Simon 's book , including Gary D 'Addario , Terrence McLarney , Harry Edgerton , Donald Worden and Jay Landsman . Many of the first season story arcs were also adapted from the book , most notably the 1988 Baltimore slaying of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Latonya Kim Wallace , which was the basis for the murder case of Adena Watson in Homicide . Another multi @-@ episode arc included Lee Tergesen as an officer who is friends with the homicide squad and later gets shot . " Night of the Dead Living " , originally written as the third episode , was moved to become the season finale at the insistence of NBC executives , which led to several notable continuity errors . 
 The first season received consistently positive reviews , with several commentators declaring it one of the best shows on television at the time . The episode " Three Men and Adena " , which consists almost entirely of one police interrogation with three actors , received particularly positive reviews and was declared one of the 100 greatest television moments by Entertainment Weekly . The series premiere , " Gone for Goode " , opened to a season @-@ high viewership of 18 @.@ 2 million households due to a lead @-@ in from the Super Bowl . The Nielsen ratings declined throughout the season , which Homicide producers attributed to a poor time @-@ slot and heavy competition from the ABC comedies Home Improvement and Coach . The ratings led NBC executives to demand changes to the show before renewing Homicide for a second season . 
 Homicide : Life on the Street received four Emmy Award nominations during its first season and won two , and also received a Writers Guild of America award and a Directors Guild of America Award . The first and second seasons of Homicide were released together in a four @-@ DVD box @-@ set on May 27 , 2003 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Film director Barry Levinson sought to create a police drama television series based on Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , a 1991 non @-@ fiction book by David Simon based on one year he spent with Baltimore Police Department homicide detectives . In addition to the book 's being set in Levinson 's home city of Baltimore , the director was attracted to the realistic way Simon portrayed police work and the detectives . The book contradicted many popular myths that had been built into past police dramas : it portrayed the detectives as not always getting along with each other and told stories of criminals who were not always caught or punished . It also portrayed detectives as solving cases primarily through physical evidence , witnesses and confessions , not by investigating motives like on many other police shows . Simon also sought to dispel the popular television perception that all detectives take their cases very personally and identify with their victims : in Simon 's experience , homicide cases were primarily a job to the detectives , not personal . Levinson and Tom Fontana , who had past television experience as executive producer on the drama series St. Elsewhere , hired screenwriter Paul Attanasio to adapt elements of the book into the teleplay for the first episode . It was the first television script Attanasio ever wrote . 
 Attanasio based the characters in Homicide on the detectives featured in Simon 's book . Frank Pembleton was based on Detective Harry Edgerton , although the two were so different that both the producers and detectives agreed their only true similarity was that they were black . Meldrick Lewis was only loosely based on Detective Donald <unk> , and Levinson admitted Lewis did not start to become strongly developed until season three because , " I thought it 'd be great to have a character who was totally unwilling to share with the people he worked with . " Tim Bayliss was based on the real @-@ life Baltimore detective Tom Pellegrini , the primary detective who investigated the 1988 Baltimore slaying of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Latonya Kim Wallace . The extremely personal approach Bayliss took in attempting to solve Adena Watson 's murder , and his strong disappointment over failing to solve it , was based on the emotions Pellegrini went through in the Wallace case . Pellegrini provided advice to actor Kyle Secor about how to play the Bayliss role . 
 The part of John Munch was based on Jay Landsman , a practical joker who was known in his homicide unit for his morbid wit . Both Belzer and the character Munch he portrays are cynical , caustic former hippies who are so similar that Belzer declared the character " exactly as I would be if I were a cop " . Stanley Bolander was inspired by Detective Donald Worden who , like his on @-@ screen counterpart , was nicknamed " The Big Man " . Ned Beatty only met Worden once before taking on the role , and he said the detective had " an uncluttered mind and a near @-@ photographic memory " . Beau Felton was based on Detective Donald Kincaid , and Felton 's clashes with Pembleton were based on Kincaid 's real @-@ life strong dislike for Harry Edgerton . Kay Howard was based in part on the female Detective Bert Silver , and in part on the male Detective Rich Garvey , who experienced a real @-@ life string of good luck in solving consecutive cases , just as Howard did in the first season . 
 NBC ordered a full season of Homicide : Life on the Street before a pilot episode was even produced . Planned as a mid @-@ season replacement , the network ordered six episodes for their 1993 winter season , and then ordered another three after watching the completed pilot episode . The network had been consistently placing third behind their competitor networks ABC and CBS , and was suffering due to the loss of several successful shows in 1992 , including The Cosby Show , The Golden Girls and Matlock , as well as the upcoming end of Cheers in 1993 . NBC had tried appealing to audiences in their 20s through several comedies , but those efforts proved unsuccessful and the network decided to focus on high @-@ quality dramas like Homicide . NBC Entertainment president Warren Littlefield considered it the most promising new series of the season . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Paul Attanasio was billed as the creator of Homicide : Life on the Street , with Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana serving as executive producers . The show was produced by Levinson 's company Baltimore Pictures , which partnered with Reeves Entertainment . Wayne Ewing , who was cinematographer for Levinson 's film Toys ( 1992 ) , was director of photography during the first season and also directed the episode " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " . 
 Stan <unk> started out working as editor on the season premiere " Gone for Goode " , but he departed before the process was done due to creative differences with Levinson . Tony Black finished the editing for that episode , but did not return for the rest of the season . Jay Rabinowitz worked as editor for the remaining episodes , along with editors Cindy Mollo and Richard Harkness . Van Smith designed the costumes for " Gone for Goode " , but he did not return to work on subsequent episodes , where the costumes were handled by Rolande Berman . 
 The real @-@ life detectives portrayed in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets signed waivers allowing themselves to be portrayed in the show , and some became consultants for the series . Gary D 'Addario , the homicide lieutenant with the Baltimore Police Department and inspiration for the Al " Gee " Giardello character , worked as a consultant and approved the teleplays for accuracy . Fontana said of the real @-@ life detectives ' contributions : " They have great stories , and the rhythms of their different personalities are so special that it 's great to have them around . " 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana took the unusual step of basing the ethnicity and gender of the characters on the actors they cast , even though the roles were based on real @-@ life detectives . For example , the role of Frank Pembleton , although based on the African @-@ American Detective Harry Edgerton , was not race @-@ specific until Andre Braugher auditioned and was cast . This impressed Braugher , who believed fully developed roles were often written for white characters and black roles were generally two @-@ dimensional and stereotypical . This belief developed in part from Braugher 's poor experience playing Detective Winston Blake on the television series Kojak , where he objected to the show 's treatment of race . Ned Beatty , the best @-@ known member of cast when the series debuted , was personally approached by Levinson and Fontana to play Stanley Bolander . Although Beatty respected the two men and liked the show , he was reluctant to take the role because he believed NBC would corrupt the series and change it to a typical police show . Beatty claimed his agents and managers " pushed , dragged and hauled " him into meeting with Levinson , but Beatty ultimately accepted the role . Kyle Secor was cast as Tim Bayliss by Fontana , who remembered the actor from his role as gay AIDS patient Bret Johnson in Fontana 's previous show , St. Elsewhere . 
 In casting Al " Gee " Giardello , Levinson decided not to make the character Italian @-@ American like the real @-@ life counterpart Gary D 'Addario , but rather cast Yaphet Kotto and made the character a Sicilian @-@ African American . Kotto , who turned down two feature film offers to accept the Homicide role , was extremely impressed with Levinson 's choices for the character , saying , " They had the daring to make the artistic choice without prejudice of any kind . I don 't think there 's another network show on the air with this sort of cast composition . " Kotto struggled at first with the show 's production style and constantly moving camera style , which flustered him and made him forget his lines . Levinson had to personally reassure him that he could handle the part . Clark Johnson was cast as Meldrick Lewis , and Jon Polito as his partner , Steve Crosetti . When Polito first auditioned , he read the role of a Polish cop , then did a second reading for an Irish role based on Detective Sergeant Terrence McLarney . He was cast in the McLarney role , but it was rewritten to an Italian character for Polito . The actor found working on Homicide intense and demanding , claiming , " Everybody 's working so hard . This is much more of a theater atmosphere . " 
 The first Homicide season featured the first performances of Richard Belzer as Detective John Munch , a character the actor has been credited for in 459 television episodes ( as of a May 2016 appearance ) in nine different television series , including Homicide and Law & Order : Special Victims Unit . Levinson asked Belzer to audition for the part after hearing the comedian ranting on The Howard Stern Show , where Belzer was a frequent guest . Levinson said Belzer was a " lousy actor " during his first audition with the " Gone for Goode " script . Levinson asked Belzer to take some time to reread and practice the material , then come back and read it again . During his second reading , Levinson said Belzer was " still terrible " , but that the actor eventually found confidence in his performance . Daniel Baldwin was cast as Beau Felton , and dyed his naturally blond hair black for the role . Baldwin became one of the most vocal supporters of the show , giving many press interviews about it and defending it amid declining ratings . Baldwin declared , " Homicide is the best material I 've had the chance to do . " Melissa Leo was cast as Kay Howard , which was considered a particularly strong part compared to other female characters in police dramas at the time , which were usually limited to love interests or minor parts . While most cast members shadowed real @-@ life Baltimore detectives to prepare for the roles , Leo did not because , she said , " I don 't like to look at the horror that 's in the world . " Wendy Hughes was cast as medical examiner Carol Blythe . 
 The first season also introduced several minor characters that would make recurring appearances throughout the rest of the series . Colonel Burt Granger and Captain George Barnfather , the Baltimore Police Department bosses , were introduced in the second episode , " Ghost of a Chance " . They were played , respectively , by Gerald F. Gough and Clayton LeBouef , the latter of whom later portrayed drug front worker @-@ turned @-@ informer Wendell " Orlando " Blocker in David Simon 's other police drama , The Wire . Also introduced in " Ghost of a Chance " was prosecutor Ed Danvers , who was played by Željko Ivanek , a long @-@ time friend of Tom Fontana . The executive producer felt Danvers was written in a dull and simple way , but felt confident Ivanek could " make it a real character " . Ami Brabson , the real @-@ life wife of actor Andre Braugher , played Mary Pembleton , the spouse of Braugher 's detective counterpart character . Brabson auditioned for the role shortly after Braugher was cast in the series , and Braugher said of their on @-@ screen pairing , " We have an instant rapport that we don 't have to create . " Michael Willis made his first of several appearances as defense attorney Darin Russom in the first season . Willis also later appeared in The Wire as the corrupt property developer Andy Krawczyk . 
 Lee Tergesen played Officer Chris Thormann , a patrolman who is shot in the head and blinded . His wife , Eva Thormann , was portrayed by Edie Falco , whom Fontana cast after watching her performance in Laws of Gravity ( 1992 ) . Fontana was so impressed with Falco 's work in Homicide that he later cast her in his HBO series Oz . Film and theater actor Moses Gunn 's final performance before his death was as Risley Tucker , a murder suspect questioned for 12 hours by Pembleton and Bayliss in " Three Men and Adena " . Several other notable actors made guest appearances throughout the first season of Homicide , including Gwen Verdon , Luis Guzmán , Paul Schulze , Walt MacPherson , Bai Ling , Lisa Gay Hamilton , Steve Harris , Alexander Chaplin , N 'Bushe Wright , and Baltimore filmmaker John Waters . Larry Gilliard , Jr . , who later starred as drug dealer D 'Angelo Barksdale in The Wire , made a brief appearance in the Homicide episode " A Dog and Pony Show " . Mel Proctor , then the home team sports announcer for the Washington Bullets , made his first of five guest performances in " Son of a Gun " as recurring reporter character Grant Besser . Detective Tom Pellegrini , the basis for the Tim Bayliss character , made an on @-@ screen cameo in " Ghost of a Chance " as the police officer who discovered Adena Watson 's body . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Homicide : Life on the Street was unique among police dramas for weaving multiple intricate story @-@ lines into single episodes ; the season premiere " Gone for Goode " , for example , included four separate subplots . As the first season of Homicide progressed , NBC officials complained to the show 's producers about the large number of subplots , but the producers resisted the pressure to scale them back until the second season . Despite intense advance promotion of the Homicide premiere due to a planned Super Bowl lead @-@ in , Attanasio deliberately sought to introduce the show with little fanfare , avoiding sensational gimmicks in favor of character @-@ driven plot , quirky dialogue and morbid dark humor . Homicide was noted for its deliberate lack of gun @-@ play and car chases in favor of dialogue and story . The writers also wanted the dialogue to reflect the kinds of things detectives would talk about when not discussing murders or cases , which led to the inclusion of several scenes in which detectives talk casually among themselves during lunch or around the office . One of the " running gags " was Crosetti 's obsession of the Lincoln assassination and his quest to discover the " truth " and his arguments with Lewis or anyone else willing to listen . Fontana , who compared the scenes to Levinson 's 1982 film Diner , said , " That really made the show different from other shows , because we had the room to have conversations that seemingly didn 't [ <unk> ] connect anything , but they did reveal a lot about the characters . " 
 " Gone for Goode " included several storylines , and even exact bits of dialogue , adapted straight from Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets . One of the biggest story arcs from the first season was the murder of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Adena Watson , which is introduced in " Gone for Goode " and lasts for five episodes until " Three Men and Adena " . The case was based on the murder of 11 @-@ year @-@ old Latonya Kim Wallace , which made up a major part of Simon 's book . The Watson case , like the Wallace case , ultimately goes unsolved . A subplot from " Gone for Goode " and " Son of a Gun " involved the investigation into Calpurnia Smith , an elderly woman suspected of murdering five husbands in order to collect their life insurance policies . This was based on the real @-@ life case of Geraldine Parrish , who was also accused of killing five husbands for insurance money , and was eventually convicted for three of their murders . Another multi @-@ episode arc involved the near @-@ fatal shooting of Patrolman Chris Thormann , which leaves the officer blind . This was also adapted from true @-@ life events in Simon 's book , although Homicide writers added the twist of Steve Crosetti taking the case personally based on his close friendship with the victim . 
 Attanasio , Levinson and Fontana strove to make Homicide more realistic than other police dramas , even in minor details . For example , Levinson specifically asked that a dead body found by detectives in " Gone for Goode " be badly decomposing and attracting flies because he felt other shows did not portray corpses in a realistic way . Some episodes , like " Ghost of a Chance " , focus on murders that take place in wealthy rural settings , rather than an urban or predominantly poorer location as most police dramas did . Homicide was noted for demonstrating better than most American television police shows that murders can take place in various socioeconomic circumstances . In striving for realism , some cases in Homicide remain unsolved and murderers go free , most notably in the Adena Watson case . This theme often put the show 's producers at odds with NBC executives , who wanted happier endings with more closure . Fontana said of the Watson investigation , " We never solved it because we felt that it would be a disservice to the real girl , to have this fake TV solution . Because it 's not O.K. that she died , that no one took responsibility . " 
 The writers also used details from real @-@ life criminal investigations in their script . During one scene in " Ghost of a Chance " , a busload of rookie police officers straight out of the academy are brought in to investigate a crime scene . The New York Police Department employed exactly the same tactic while searching for the remains of a missing girl in upstate New York in 1987 . One episode written by Tom Fontana , " Three Men and Adena " , took place entirely within the confines of the police interrogation room known colloquially by the detectives as " The Box " . Fontana was partially inspired to write it by comments made by Barry Levinson during filming of an interrogation scene in " Gone for Goode " , when Levinson said the acting by Braugher and Secor was so good , an entire episode could be filmed around it . Fontana acknowledged a certain amount of risk in producing such an unusual episode in only the fifth week of the show , but he said , " It was important for [ exec producer ] Barry Levinson and I to establish that we weren 't going to do the same old show every week . " Multiple police departments have requested copies of " Three Men and Adena " for use in training sessions due to its accurate portrayal of the intricacies of the police interrogation process . 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was originally supposed to be the first season finale , while " Night of the Dead Living " was meant to be the third episode . However , NBC programmers felt it was too slow @-@ paced to run so early in the season : the episode takes place entirely within the squad room and lacked traditional police drama action , which NBC executives felt was not appropriate for an early stage when the series was still trying to woo viewers . As a result , " Night of the Dead Living " was shown out of sequence and made the season finale . This created several notable continuity errors . For example , Officer Chris Thormann has not yet been shot and blinded in " Night of the Dead Living " , and Tim Bayliss is still working on the Adena Watson case , which was already ended earlier in the season . These errors were addressed by Homicide producers by adding the words " One hot night , last September ... " to the beginning of the episode , thus establishing the events of the episode took place within the correct timeline of the series , even though the episodes are shown out of order . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The inaugural season of Homicide established a realistic visual style that would remain largely intact throughout the duration of the series . Among the stylistic elements were the near @-@ constant movement with hand @-@ held Super 16 cameras to give the show a naturalistic documentary look and an editing style involving jump cuts that was unusual for television at the time . Wayne Ewing had used Super 16 cameras while filming promotional material for Toys , and that format allowed Homicide producers to film cheaply and with a smaller crew , giving them more time to focus on the actor 's performances . While filming , Levinson said he would simply allow the actors to perform while he switched back and forth between them with the hand @-@ held camera instead of filming carefully planned shots and individual scenes from multiple angles . Levinson said the camera and editing style was partially inspired by the Jean @-@ Luc Godard film Breathless ( 1960 ) , which he would often ask his directors to watch before filming Homicide episodes . 
 Some individual scenes involved several jump cuts repeated several times in fast succession . Another unusual stylistic element used throughout the season involved sudden changes in jump @-@ screen direction ; a shot with an actor looking from left to right might immediately jump to another shot of the same actor looking from right to left . This process came from Levinson 's insistence that the footage be edited together to include the actor 's best performances . While editing " Gone for Goode " , Tony Black cut together two shots that did not match and began looking for a cutaway shot he could use to disguise the edit . Levinson liked the technique that came from cutting the two conflicting shots together and insisted it stay in . This technique became commonly used throughout the series , although it was toned down in future seasons at the insistence of NBC executives who found it too unconventional . 
 Like the rest of the series , the scenes for the first season episodes were shot on @-@ location in Baltimore . The use of hand @-@ held cameras allowed the film to be shot more easily in the city , rather than on a sound @-@ stage in Los Angeles or New York City , where most shows are typically shot . Levinson said being on location at all times allowed Baltimore " to be a character in the show " . The Recreation Pier Building , a Fells Point structure built in 1914 which once housed Baltimore 's marine police , was used as the set of the police department station , which was the principal set for the show . The building looked so realistic that Baltimore residents would occasionally wander into it to report actual crimes . Production director Vincent <unk> created the squad room set inside the Recreation Pier Building . While most sets include a few fake walls opposite an open space for the cameras and crew , <unk> designed the entire room as if it were a real setting , including separate areas for the detectives ' coffee room and the interrogation room known as " The Box " . The actors began storing their actual belongings at their desks on the set , left real personal messages to each other on the bulletin boards , and got business cards with their characters ' actual names for their desks . 
 Many other scenes in Homicide were filmed primarily in the Fells Point <unk> , including actual streets , bars and houses to create authenticity . Scenes at the Homicide morgue were filmed inside Baltimore 's actual Office of the Medical Examiner , which the actors hated performing in due to the unsettling atmosphere ; Ned Beatty said of filming there , " The one thing you can 't get on camera is , oh boy , it smells . " Homicide footage was transferred from film to videotape for editing at the Maryland studio <unk> Motion Picture Services . There , Levinson and Ewing worked with colorist Drexel Williams to drain the footage of color value , leaving a gritty visual style almost reminiscent of black @-@ and @-@ white . This technique was downplayed starting in the second season , giving the show a more colorful look . 
 The opening credits for season one were developed by Mark Pellington , a director and Baltimore native . Pellington filmed the images used in the credits with an 8 mm camera to give it a gritty look . Levinson and Fontana wanted images of all the regular cast members in the credits , but wanted a different approach than the typical image of an actor looking at the camera , which they felt was a television cliche . Instead , Pellington included each of their images , but in quick close @-@ up shots using a variety of lighting methods and camera angles ; the names were only shown after the last close @-@ up , and not in the same order . This approach was used until the beginning of the show 's fifth season . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme song for Homicide : Life on the Street was composed by Lynn F. Kowal , who submitted one of several tapes sent to the producers for consideration . Homicide producers initially had trouble finding the right song , and Levinson ultimately chose Kowal 's themes because , while most of the candidates too closely resembled typical television theme songs , Levinson felt Kowal 's song " had that odd quality to it , drums or whatever , and it was very unusual " . Music is presented in various ways throughout the first season of Homicide . Some songs are played on radios that play in the homicide squad room , like " Lay Down My Life " by Carole King , " Texas Slide " by Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> , " <unk> ( Can You Believe This City ? ) " by Charles and Eddie , " Little Boy Blues " and " Break Up " by Gary Fitzgerald , and " Tropic Call " by Mitchell <unk> and Andrew Snitzer , all of which are featured in " Night of the Dead Living " . Other songs are more integrated into the show itself , like " Hazy Shade of Blue " , a Tor Hyams song that plays while the police raid several neighborhood homes in search of clues during " Ghost of a Chance " , and the hymn " The Sweet By and By " , which is sung at a church during Adena Watson 's funeral in that same episode . Several other songs are featured in episodes throughout the first season , including " Elephant Walk " by The Kings , " The Beat Goes On " by Sonny Bono , " Going ' Around in Circles " by Jules Taub , " Telephone Blues " by Sam Ling and George Smith , and " It 's So Hard to Say Goodbye to Yesterday " by Freddie Perren and Christine <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Reviews were consistently positive from the beginning of the series . The Washington Post television critic Tom Shales called Homicide " the least compromised and the most intense " drama show on television , adding , " In every department , the level of excellence has been awesome . " Shales complimented it for portraying the tension of a homicide squad without resorting to gratuitous violence . Harold Schindler of The Salt Lake Tribune said the series " ranks among the best programs of their kind to appear on television anywhere " . He praised the acting and called the filming style " camera vérité at its best without actually becoming a documentary " . Lon Grahnke of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called it " the season 's best new series of any genre " , praising it for not depending on action sequences and claiming it " has the spice , dry wit and ethnic diversity of the Hill Street Blues crew , with even more eccentricities and a heightened sense of realism " . Paul <unk> of The Palm Beach Post called it " the best new drama to come along on any network since NBC canceled Shannon 's Deal " . Newsday critic Marvin Kitman called Homicide " an old @-@ fashioned NBC signature show " <unk> of the network during the time of Grant Tinker and Brandon Tartikoff . 
 Associated Press writer Scott Williams praised the series as unique : " It had superb writing , a gifted cast that created complex , fully realized characters , a unique visual style , and stories of compelling power and intensity . " Knight Ridder Newspapers television writer Mike Duffy praised what he called the show 's witty writing , stylish visuals and superb acting , and declared it the best police drama since Hill Street Blues . The Scripps Howard News Service called Homicide " the best new drama of the season " , and The Buffalo News writer Alan Pergament ranked it among the ten best television shows of 1993 . Eric Kohanik of The Hamilton Spectator called it " the best new series of the midseason " , and praised it for not resorting to " silly car chases [ and ] blazing guns " . Not all reviews were positive . James Endrst , television columnist for The Hartford Courant , felt the series was over @-@ hyped and said " seen it , done it , been there before " of the filming techniques otherwise being praised as cutting edge . In writing about " Gone for Goode " , Time reviewer Richard Zoglin praised the " strong cast " and said he appreciated the lack of violence , but said , " the characters are too pat , their conflicts too predictable " , particularly the rookie character Bayliss . 
 The New York Times writer John O 'Connor praised the acting and originality of the series , which he called " simultaneously funny and harrowing " . He also said Homicide occasionally gratuitously emphasized style over substance in an attempt to be original , " [ as if ] trying to signal , ' See how much better we are than ordinary television . ' " Many commentators were impressed with the high number of strong , complex , well @-@ developed and non @-@ stereotypical African American characters like Pembleton , Lewis and Giardello . When the show risked facing cancellation due to poor Nielsen ratings , Benjamin Hooks , executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , took what was considered an unusual move and wrote a letter to NBC Entertainment president Warren Littlefield urging the network not to cancel Homicide . Hooks said the show presented many positive portrayals of African Americans , as well as " a compelling and realistic rendering of today 's multiracial and multicultural urban society " . 
 " Three Men and Adena " received especially positive reviews and has been described as one of the " classic episodes " of Homicide : Life on the Street . It ranked number 74 in an Entertainment Weekly list of the 100 greatest television moments , and number 15 among the top television moments from the 1990s . David Bianculli of the New York Daily News said the episode " remains one of TV 's best drama hours ever " , Entertainment Weekly writer Bruce Fretts said the episode was " one of the most powerful prime @-@ time hours ever " and literary critic John Leonard called it " the most extraordinary thing I 've ever seen in a television hour " . Emily Nussbaum of The New York Times called " Three Men and Adena " the standout episode of the series , and described it as " a potent showcase for the series ' smartly mordant dialogue , and its willingness to explore the cliches of TV detectives instead of merely repeating them " . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The series premiered on January 31 , 1993 , in the time slot immediately following Super Bowl XXVII . Having consistently placed third in the Nielsen ratings during prime time since September 1992 , NBC hoped a large football audience coupled with an extensive advertising campaign would allow Homicide : Life on the Street to give the network a large ratings boost . NBC ran numerous television commercials advertising the premiere episode , some of which focused on the involvement of Barry Levinson with the hope of capitalizing on the feature film director 's household name . " Gone for Goode " was seen by 18 @.@ 24 million household viewers , which was largest viewership of the first season , and marked the best ratings performance of a preview or premiere following a Super Bowl since The Wonder Years in 1988 . Nevertheless , NBC considered it a disappointing performance based on the amount of advertising and press coverage the episode received . " Gone for Goode " received less than half the audience that the Super Bowl itself did . 
 Ratings for Homicide : Life on the Street gradually declined throughout the first season , and it ultimately finished 99th in the Nielsen ratings among network shows for the season . It aired Wednesdays at 9 p.m. EST and was consistently defeated in the ratings by a high @-@ rating comedy block featuring Home Improvement and Coach on ABC . Barry Levinson said the scheduling was a serious detriment to Homicide which , like many other drama series at the time , was designed for a 10 p.m. time @-@ slot . Tom Fontana also believed Homicide suffered in the ratings because it aired between Unsolved Mysteries and Law & Order , which he believed was too many police dramas for one night : " I never understood the concept of three hours of people in handcuffs as a way to entice an audience . " 
 Viewership also suffered in part due to heavy competition in its time @-@ slot from several major television events , such as a live Oprah Winfrey 90 @-@ minute interview with pop singer Michael Jackson on February 10 , the 35th Grammy Awards ceremony on February 24 , and the Sixth Annual American Comedy Awards on March 3 . As the ratings declined , NBC announced to fans that a decision about whether Homicide would be renewed or canceled would depend on how the last four episodes of the season fared in the ratings . During the first week of March , the network started airing a television commercial with Barry Levinson making a direct appeal to viewers to watch the show , in which he said : 
 If you 're wondering when we 're on , remember the Michael Jackson special ? We were opposite that . And when the president spoke ? Pre @-@ empted for it . And the Grammys ? You got it – we were opposite that . So where are we , exactly ? Well there 's a show called Home Improvement – and as soon as you get there , then quickly switch to NBC . 
 Homicide was considered at high risk of cancellation by the end of the first season . When questioned , NBC spokesman Curt Block only said the network was " on the fence " about the series . By the time the season ended , four additional scripts had already been written , but NBC executives asked for several refinements – including fewer episode subplots and less camera movements and jump cuts – before approving a second season . Fontana said he was willing " to do anything to keep NBC from forgetting us " , although Levinson said the show would maintain its realistic visual style , claiming , " We want a camera that 's almost a participant in the show . " Homicide was ultimately renewed , but the producers slightly toned down the show 's bleak visual style and hand @-@ held photography motif , and focused more strongly on single stories rather than multiple subplots . Tom Fontana said of the changes to the series , " We were experimenting with our first nine episodes . Whenever you try something new , you tend to err on the side of breaking ground . But we 'd rather have more people watching , so the colors and lighting are slightly brighter , and the camera movements are not as jarring . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Homicide : Life on the Street won two Emmy Awards during its first season and received two additional nominations . Barry Levinson won an Emmy for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for his work on " Gone for Goode " and Tom Fontana won for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for the " Three Men and Adena " script . After winning his Emmy , Fontana made an emotional acceptance speech about the need to save the hour @-@ long television drama , in which he said : " It 's not the fault of the American public that the drama is in trouble . It 's us : the writers , producers , the network executives , the studio money @-@ <unk> . We have to figure out a way to reignite the imagination of the American people . " Fontana said of the response to his speech : 
 " I didn 't think I was going to win , but I decided if they were going to give it to me , I was going to yell ... Writers told me , ' Boy , you really gave it to the producers . ' Producers told me , ' Boy , you really stuck it to the networks . ' The networks told me , ' Boy , you really hammered the studios . ' Nobody got to the point . I was indicting all of us . What is frustrating about this is nothing has changed . Everybody wants to do everything the way it has been done 100 times before . " 
 Mark Pellington received a Creative Arts Emmy nomination for the main title sequence of the show , and Gwen Verdon was nominated for the Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series her guest performance in " Ghost of a Chance " as Jessie Doohan , an unhappily married woman accused of killing her husband of 60 years . That same year , Verdon was also nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her performance in the series Dream On . 
 The first season also received other awards and nominations . Frank Pugliese and Tom Fontana won a Writers Guild of America award for Outstanding Achievement in Television Writing for Episodic Drama for the " Night of the Dead Living " teleplay . Paul Attanasio was nominated for the same award his " Gone for Goode " script . Levinson was nominated for a Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Direction in a Drama Series for " Gone for Goode " , but lost to Gregory Hoblit for his direction of the pilot episode of the police drama NYPD Blue . Homicide was nominated for best drama series at the American Television Awards , a new awards show established in 1993 by the producers of the American Music Awards . The American Television Awards differed from the Emmys in that nominees were determined by reporters and critics rather than members of the television industry . Homicide was defeated by I 'll Fly Away , an NBC drama series that was canceled in 1993 . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The first and second seasons of Homicide were released together in a four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 . The set included an audio commentary by Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana for the " Gone for Goode " episode , as well as a collection of the commercials that advertised the episode during the Super Bowl . 
 = Ofotbanen ( company ) = 
 Ofotbanen Drift AS , trading as Ofotbanen , was a Norwegian passenger and freight railway company . The company operated a fleet of six locomotives , three multiple units , 22 passenger and 48 freight cars . The sole service was the passenger train Unionsexpressen between Oslo and Stockholm ; it had previously offered freight haulage on contract . 
 The company was founded in 2001 , and took over Norges Statsbaner 's ( NSB ) passenger operation of the Ofoten Line in 2003 . The following year it entered the freight market , in particular with timber trains for Norske Skog . It further expanded into other services , such as charter trips . In 2006 , the company almost went bankrupt , and was taken over by Rail Management . In 2007 , the automotive distributor Autolink started purchasing the autorack operations from Ofotbanen , and at the same time bought 40 % of the company . 2008 saw a dramatic decline in operations , as both the Norske Skog , Autolink and passenger train services were terminated . In April the company started service with the <unk> between Oslo and Stockholm . The company went bankrupt in October , but was immediately re @-@ established as Ofotbanen Drift . In May 2010 , the new company filed for bankruptcy . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The company was based in Narvik , a city that is only connected to the rest of the Norwegian railway network through Sweden . The company was led by CEO Terje Østensen and Chairman Thor Ask <unk> . 
 = = = Unionsexpressen = = = 
 The Union Express is a passenger train service between the Norwegian and Swedish capitals of Oslo and Stockholm . The service was a cooperation between Ofotbanen and the Swedish company Scandinavian Railway . In competition with SJ , it operates one daily round trip , in 5 hours 45 minutes , between Oslo and Stockholm , using renovated stock from the 1960s . While more expensive than SJ , the service aims at being more luxurious . One of the four cars is a traditional dining car , and the company markets the product as a first @-@ class only service . Each train has a capacity of 84 riders , and provides perks such as Wi @-@ Fi and 2 + 1 seating . The service has not operated since 7 October 2008 , due to the bankruptcy in Ofotbanen , and SJ no longer being willing to rent out locomotives to the company . 
 = = = Rolling stock = = = 
 The company had five Di 3 diesel locomotives , and a single El 13 electric locomotive . Ofotbanen had 22 B3 passenger carriages , used for charter trains . These were supplemented by three two @-@ car Class 68 electric multiple units . The 48 freight cars the company used were owned by Nord @-@ Norsk <unk> . Of these , 19 were timber cars . All stock was painted dark green . All motorized stock was used stock that NSB has chosen to take out of service . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 Ofotbanen AS was founded on 20 March 2001 . In November , it bought five used Di 3 for NOK 250 @,@ 000 each , well under market price , from Norges Statsbaner ( NSB ) . The purchase raised controversy , because the potential operator <unk> had offered full market price for the trains . Also , NSB had to rent back several of the locomotives for six months , while six of eleven brand @-@ new Class 93 trains were out of service . NSB paid the whole purchase price for the six @-@ month rental . 
 In 2003 , NSB announced that they wanted to discontinue their operations in Narvik , hoping they could leave operation of passenger trains on the Ofot Line to Ofotbanen . In May , NSB signed an agreement with Ofotbanen , where the latter would take over NSB 's responsibilities to operate trains from Narvik to <unk> along the Ofot Line . The initial contract would last until 2006 , and NSB paid NOK 13 million for the service . From 15 June , Ofotbanen took over all passenger transport on the line , including employing all former NSB employees in Narvik . On the same day , Connex Tåg took over the operations on the Swedish side of the border after winning a public service obligation contract with the Swedish government , and dismissing SJ of the right to offer the service . An operating and security license was granted from the Norwegian Railway Inspectorate to Ofotbanen on 11 June . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 In 2003 , the company managed to cover it costs , and the company stated that it hoped to have a revenue of NOK 30 million the following year , through an ambitious expansion plan . A private offering for NOK 8 million was issued to allow this expansion . Among the purchasers was the Municipality of Narvik and Narvik Port Authority . In March , Chair Rune <unk> was forced to withdraw after accusations of conflict of interest , since he was both chair of Ofotbanen and <unk> at the Port of Narvik . CargoNet , a freight competitor of Ofotbanen , had felt that they were being unfairly treated by the port after the municipality had bought shares in Ofotbanen and appointed <unk> as chair . The legality of the port 's purchase of the shares was considered by the Norwegian Coastal Administration ; though deemed legal , the port authority was required to sell the shares within three years . In April , Ofotbanen received a permit to operate in Sweden , and started offering charter trains between Narvik and Kiruna in Sweden , primarily for cruise ship passengers . It also announced that it was going to bid for the public service obligations for subsidized passenger railway transport that the government was planning to conduct in 2006 . In June , Ofotbanen received permission to operate freight trains throughout the entire railway network in Norway . This was the first time such permission was granted to a different company than NSB or its subsidiaries . 
 In September , Ofotbanen was one of six companies <unk> to bid for the first public service obligation tender on the Gjøvik Line . However , the company chose to not submit a bid , and the contract was won by the NSB subsidiary NSB Anbud . In September , the mechanical company Narvik <unk> , that had provided maintenance for the Norwegian National Rail Administration in Narvik since 1999 , accused the municipality of illegally subsidizing Ofotbanen through providing the company with subsidized rent for their workshops . Ofotbanen had just won the public tender for the contract , and the company threatened to take the municipality to court for violation of competition laws . The matter was soon resolved , without the courts being involved . In December , the government granted permission for Ofotbanen to operate charter trains throughout the entire railway network . 
 By November 2004 , the largest owners of Ofotbanen were Cargo Nor ( 26 @.@ 1 % ) , the Municipality of Narvik ( 12 @.@ 5 % ) , Narvik Port ( 12 @.@ 5 % ) and Moe Media ( 8 @.@ 5 % ) . In addition , employees had bought shares for more than NOK 1 million . During a general meeting on 13 December 2004 , a capital placement was initiated for NOK 5 @.@ 2 million . An anonymous , British consortium named GB Group bought a 36 % stake for NOK 2 @.@ 5 million . In 2004 , the company had a revenue of NOK 20 million . The following general assembly in December 2005 , GB Group made a private placement of NOK 11 @.@ 7 million in Ofotbanen , increasing the consortium 's ownership to 52 % . 
