 Freight transport started in 2004 , when an agreement with Norske Skog was made to transport timber along the Røros , Meråker and Nordland lines to the paper mill at Skogn . The activity was further increased in 2006 , when a contract worth NOK 30 million was signed to transport 250 @,@ 000 t ( 250 @,@ 000 long tons ; 280 @,@ 000 short tons ) of timber , including some to the other paper mill in Halden . The following year , Ofotbanen also entered the container freight market , with a train running from Narvik via Sweden to Oslo , both via the Meråker Line and via the Kongsvinger Line . The trains would continue to Drammen when necessary . Ofotbanen was also in negotiations about transporting 700 annual trains of ore for Rana Gruber , but the contract was instead awarded to CargoNet . By 2005 , Ofotbanen only had a 50 % utilization of their stock , but in March a contract for the rest of the year was signed securing full use of the equipment to transport timber in Southern Sweden , with two trains in continual traffic . The extraordinary traffic was needed to clean up after the Gudrun storm , and the contract gave a revenue of NOK 20 million . 
 = = = Troubles = = = 
 In April 2006 , Ofotbanen declared that they were in severe financial difficulties . Accounts payable were giving liquidity problems , and Ofotbanen announced that they needed more capital , estimated at NOK 8 million . GB Group said they were not willing to invest more money in the railway company . Ofotbanen had then been losing money continually since the start @-@ up in 2001 ; in 2004 , it had a deficit of NOK 4 million of a NOK 20 million revenue . At the extraordinary general meeting on 4 September 2006 , the company was sold for NOK 1 million to Rail Management , a holding company for the London @-@ based shipping owner Mons Bolin . In November , the Norwegian Rail Inspectorate threatened to withdraw the company 's safety license , since they had failed to show proper maintenance of the rolling stock . 
 On 31 January 2007 , Autolink — <unk> largest distributor of automobiles — bought 40 % of Ofotbanen , and transferred their train haulage contract to them . This made Autolink Ofotbanen 's largest customer . In March , Autolink ordered an additional 70 new autoracks for NOK 175 million . In June 2007 , a new report from the Rail Inspectorate showed that Ofotbanen had severe safety problems — the company was using engineers without necessary licenses , and was not performing safety analysis . Director of the inspectorate , Erik Ø . Johnsen , stated that the inspectorate did not believe that Ofotbanen was taking safety seriously . CEO of Ofotbanen , Terje Østensen , felt that the issues taken up by the inspectorate were mere formalities , and that it was difficult to make necessary documentation , stating that in his opinion , none of the procedures criticized actually influenced safety . 
 From the beginning of 2008 , Ofotbanen lost two important contracts . All the timber contracts with Norske Skog were transferred to CargoNet and Hector Rail . At the same time , the public service obligation contract on the Ofot Line was won by SJ . This included a subsidy of NOK 3 @.@ 0 million from the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications for the 40 km ( 25 mi ) section on the Norwegian side of the border . Therefore , SJ started operating trains all the way to Narvik , and Ofotbanen lost the contract of operating the trains on the Norwegian side of the border . Ofotbanen had been receiving NOK 4 @.@ 5 million in subsidies from NSB for the operation from 15 June . 
 = = = Unionsexpressen = = = 
 With the termination of NSB and SJ cooperation Linx on the Oslo – Stockholm route in January 2005 , Ofotbanen announced they would be willing to take over operation of the route from the summer . However , SJ and NSB held monopolies on non @-@ subsidized passenger trains services in their respective countries , and it would not be possible for a private company to operate the route . In May 2007 , the company announced its plans for the Oslo – Stockholm train , after necessary permissions had been granted from Norwegian and Swedish authorities . By then , SJ had already reopened its route on the line . In March 2008 , plans had been launched to start operations in April , but Ofotbanen had not met the requirements to get a safety licence from the inspectorate . The company rented rolling stock from SJ , including an Rc locomotives , and newly renovated cars from the 1960s . The service was a cooperation between Ofotbanen and the Swedish company Scandinavian Railway . 
 The necessary certificates were granted on 10 April , and the first trial run was made the following day . Ordinary service started on 25 April , though without the dining car . The initial price was NOK 422 , and travel time was 5 hours 45 minutes . The trains have four cars , of which three are regular open seating , and one is a dining car . From 15 June , full service was introduced . The company stated that the service was meant to be more luxurious than with SJ , including wider seating ( three instead of four abreast ) and a wooden interior . The company markets the service as all first @-@ class seating . The trains also had Wi @-@ Fi . After the full service was introduced , the price increased to NOK 593 . By July , Ofotbanen had still not found a locomotive for the second train , and was still operating only a single round service . Passenger numbers were at 35 per departure , not close to the capacity of 84 , or the necessary annual 100 @,@ 000 needed to make a profit . 
 = = = Bankruptcy = = = 
 In July 2008 , Autolink canceled their contract with Ofotbanen . Two weeks later , Autolink announced that they would establish their own railway company , which they had been working with since March . They stated that the deal with Ofotbanen was discontinued because Rail Management would not allow additional private placements of capital , nor sell their shares to Autolink . From 29 July , all automotive trains stopped running , and no cars were transported for ten days . The same day , all board members in Ofotbanen representing Autolink withdrew from their positions . 
 The matter ended in court , concerning if Autolink should be allowed to take control over four train radios that were located in locomotives owned by Autolink , but operated by Ofotbanen . In a shareholder agreement between Autolink and Rail Management , the ownership of the train radios had been transferred to Autolink , but the agreement has clauses that specified that Autolink could not start a competing railway company . Stating that Autolink had been disloyal with regard to the contract , Ofoten District Court ruled on 17 July 2008 against Autolink 's demand for an interim order to transfer the possession of the radios to Autolink . The court ruled that an interim decision could not be made due to the complexity of the contracts , and that a normal lawsuit would have to be carried out to determine the matter . The parties agreed that Autolink , on 13 February 2008 , had bought five shunters from Ofotbanen for NOK 12 million , of which NOK 9 @.@ 5 million was paid by Autolink deleting debt . On 18 September , Autolink won the appeal in Hålogaland Court of Appeal , where Ofotbanen was convicted of stealing four radios . 
 Ofotbanen lost their license from the Norwegian Railway Inspectorate on 7 October 2008 at 12 : 00 . This was because Ofotbanen had not documented necessary accounting for 2007 , nor provided evidence of necessary liquidity . On 24 October , the company filed for bankruptcy . 
 Autolink had already founded their company Cargolink on 27 March , and received an operating and safety licence from the inspectorate on 18 September . They took control over the five shunters they owned , in addition to leasing ten Di 6 diesel locomotives . Operations started on 2 November , when all autorack trains were taken over by the new company . 
 = = = Rebirth = = = 
 Immediately after the bankruptcy , Rail Management established a new company , Ofotbanen Drift AS , to take over the estate in bankruptcy . They also stated that the cause of the bankruptcy was that Autolink had not let them make a private placement of NOK 10 million . The new company received an operation and safety licence from the inspectorate in January 2009 , and plans to start operation again in February . On 9 April 2010 , the Norwegian Railway Inspectorate withdrew Ofotbanen 's operating certificate because it was not economically sound to operate . The company filed for bankruptcy in May , after the Norwegian Tax Administration could not claim NOK 700 @,@ 000 in due taxes . 
 = Flying Spaghetti Monster = 
 The Flying Spaghetti Monster ( FSM ) is the deity of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster or Pastafarianism ( a portmanteau of pasta and Rastafarian ) , a social movement that promotes a light @-@ hearted view of religion and opposes the teaching of intelligent design and creationism in public schools . According to adherents , Pastafarianism is a " real , legitimate religion , as much as any other . " Pastafarianism is legally recognized as a religion in the Netherlands and New Zealand – where Pastafarian representatives have been authorized to celebrate weddings and where the first legally recognized Pastafarian wedding was performed in April 2016 . In the United States the same month , a federal judge ruled that the " Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster " is not a real religion . 
 The " Flying Spaghetti Monster " was first described in a satirical open letter written by Bobby Henderson in 2005 to protest the Kansas State Board of Education decision to permit teaching intelligent design as an alternative to evolution in public school science classes . After Henderson published the letter on his website , the Flying Spaghetti Monster rapidly became an Internet phenomenon and a symbol of opposition to the teaching of intelligent design in public schools . 
 Because of its popularity and exposure , the Flying Spaghetti Monster is often used as a contemporary version of Russell 's teapot — an argument that the philosophic burden of proof lies upon those who make unfalsifiable claims , not on those who reject them . Pastafarianism has received praise from the scientific community and criticism from proponents of intelligent design . Pastafarians have engaged in disputes with creationists , including in Polk County , Florida , where they played a role in dissuading the local school board from adopting new rules on teaching evolution . 
 Pastafarian tenets ( generally satires of creationism ) are presented both on Henderson 's Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster website , where he is described as " prophet " , and in The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster , written by Henderson in 2006 . The central belief is that an invisible and undetectable Flying Spaghetti Monster created the universe . Pirates are revered as the original Pastafarians . Henderson asserts that a decline in the number of pirates over the years is the cause of global warming . The FSM community congregates at Henderson 's website to share ideas about the Flying Spaghetti Monster and crafts representing images of it , as well as to discuss " sightings " of the Flying Spaghetti Monster . 
 = = History = = 
 In January 2005 , Bobby Henderson ( fr ) , then a 24 @-@ year @-@ old Oregon State University physics graduate , sent an open letter regarding the Flying Spaghetti Monster to the Kansas State Board of Education . In that letter , Henderson satirized creationism by professing his belief that whenever a scientist carbon @-@ dates an object , a supernatural creator that closely resembles spaghetti and meatballs is there " changing the results with His <unk> Appendage " . Henderson argued that his beliefs were just as valid as intelligent design , and called for equal time in science classrooms alongside intelligent design and evolution . The letter was sent prior to the Kansas evolution hearings as an argument against the teaching of intelligent design in biology classes . Henderson , describing himself as a " concerned citizen " representing more than ten million others , argued that intelligent design and his belief that " the universe was created by a Flying Spaghetti Monster " were equally valid . In his letter , he noted , 
 I think we can all look forward to the time when these three theories are given equal time in our science classrooms across the country , and eventually the world ; one third time for Intelligent Design , one third time for Flying Spaghetti <unk> , and one third time for logical conjecture based on overwhelming observable evidence . 
 According to Henderson , since the intelligent design movement uses ambiguous references to a designer , any conceivable entity may fulfill that role , including a Flying Spaghetti Monster . Henderson explained , " I don 't have a problem with religion . What I have a problem with is religion posing as science . If there is a god and he 's intelligent , then I would guess he has a sense of humor . " 
 In May 2005 , having received no reply from the Kansas State Board of Education , Henderson posted the letter on his website , gaining significant public interest . Shortly thereafter , Pastafarianism became an Internet phenomenon . Henderson published the responses he then received from board members . Three board members , all of whom opposed the curriculum amendments , responded positively ; a fourth board member responded with the comment " It is a serious offense to mock God " . Henderson has also published the significant amount of hate mail , including death threats , that he has received . Within one year of sending the open letter , Henderson received thousands of emails on the Flying Spaghetti Monster , eventually totaling over 60 @,@ 000 , of which he has said that " about 95 percent have been supportive , while the other five percent have said I am going to hell " . During that time , his site garnered tens of millions of hits . 
 = = = Internet phenomenon = = = 
 As word of Henderson 's challenge to the board spread , his website and cause received more attention and support . The satirical nature of Henderson 's argument made the Flying Spaghetti Monster popular with bloggers as well as humor and Internet culture websites . The Flying Spaghetti Monster was featured on websites such as Boing Boing , Something Awful , <unk> , and <unk> Moreover , an International Society for Flying Spaghetti Monster Awareness and other fan sites emerged . As public awareness grew , the mainstream media picked up on the phenomenon . The Flying Spaghetti Monster became a symbol for the case against intelligent design in public education . The open letter was printed in many large newspapers , including The New York Times , The Washington Post , and Chicago Sun @-@ Times , and received " worldwide press attention " , according to one journalist . Henderson himself was surprised by its success , stating that he " wrote the letter for [ his ] own amusement as much as anything " . 
 In August 2005 , in response to a challenge from a reader , Boing Boing announced a $ 250 @,@ 000 prize — later raised to $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 — of " <unk> Designed currency " payable to any individual who could produce empirical evidence proving that Jesus is not the son of the Flying Spaghetti Monster . It was modeled as a parody of a similar challenge issued by young @-@ earth creationist Kent Hovind . 
 According to Henderson , newspaper articles on the Flying Spaghetti Monster attracted the attention of book publishers ; he said that at one point , there were six publishers interested in the Flying Spaghetti Monster . In November 2005 , Henderson received an advance from Villard to write The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster . 
 In November 2005 , the Kansas State Board of Education voted to allow criticisms of evolution , including language about intelligent design , as part of testing standards . On February 13 , 2007 , the board voted 6 – 4 to reject the amended science standards enacted in 2005 . This was the fifth time in eight years that the board had rewritten the standards on evolution . 
 = = Positions = = 
 Although Henderson has stated that " the only dogma allowed in the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster is the rejection of dogma " , some general beliefs are held by Pastafarians . Henderson proposed many Pastafarian tenets in reaction to common arguments by proponents of intelligent design . These " canonical beliefs " are presented by Henderson in his letter to the Kansas State Board of Education , The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster , and on Henderson 's web site , where he is described as a " prophet " . They tend to satirize creationism . 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The central creation myth is that an invisible and undetectable Flying Spaghetti Monster created the universe " after drinking heavily " . According to these beliefs , the Monster 's intoxication was the cause for a flawed Earth . Furthermore , according to Pastafarianism , all evidence for evolution was planted by the Flying Spaghetti Monster in an effort to test the faith of Pastafarians — parodying certain biblical literalists . When scientific measurements such as radiocarbon dating are taken , the Flying Spaghetti Monster " is there changing the results with His <unk> Appendage " . 
 = = = Afterlife = = = 
 The Pastafarian conception of Heaven includes a beer volcano and a stripper ( or sometimes prostitute ) factory . The Pastafarian Hell is similar , except that the beer is stale and the strippers have sexually transmitted diseases . 
 = = = Pirates and global warming = = = 
 According to Pastafarian beliefs , pirates are " absolute divine beings " and the original Pastafarians . Furthermore , Pastafarians believe that the concept of pirates as " thieves and outcasts " is misinformation spread by Christian theologians in the Middle Ages and by Hare <unk> . Instead , Pastafarians believe that they were " peace @-@ loving explorers and spreaders of good will " who distributed candy to small children , adding that modern pirates are in no way similar to " the fun @-@ loving buccaneers from history " . In addition , Pastafarians believe that ghost pirates are responsible for all of the mysteriously lost ships and planes of the Bermuda Triangle . Pastafarians celebrate International Talk Like a Pirate Day on September 19 . 
 The inclusion of pirates in Pastafarianism was part of Henderson 's original letter to the Kansas State Board of Education , in an effort to illustrate that correlation does not imply causation . Henderson presented the argument that " global warming , earthquakes , hurricanes , and other natural disasters are a direct effect of the shrinking numbers of pirates since the 1800s " . A deliberately misleading graph accompanying the letter ( with numbers humorously disordered on the x @-@ axis ) shows that as the number of pirates decreased , global temperatures increased . This parodies the suggestion from some religious groups that the high numbers of disasters , famines , and wars in the world is due to the lack of respect and worship toward their deity . In 2008 , Henderson interpreted the growing pirate activities at the Gulf of Aden as additional support , pointing out that Somalia has " the highest number of pirates and the lowest carbon emissions of any country " . 
 = = = Holidays = = = 
 Pastafarian beliefs extend into lighthearted religious ceremony . Pastafarians celebrate every Friday as a holy day . Prayers are concluded with a final declaration of affirmation , " R <unk> " ( or " <unk> " ) ; the term is a parodic portmanteau of the terms " Amen " and " Ramen " , referring to instant noodles and to the " <unk> appendages " of their parodic deity . 
 Around the time of Christmas , Hanukkah , and Kwanzaa , Pastafarians celebrate a vaguely defined holiday named " Holiday " . Holiday does not take place on " a specific date so much as it is the Holiday season , itself " . Because Pastafarians " reject dogma and formalism " , there are no specific requirements for Holiday . Pastafarians celebrate Holiday in any manner they please . Pastafarians also celebrate " <unk> " as a parody of Passover , and " <unk> " as a parody of Ramadan . 
 Pastafarians interpret the increasing usage of " Happy Holidays " , rather than more traditional greetings ( such as " Merry Christmas " ) , as support for Pastafarianism . In December 2005 , George W. Bush 's White House Christmas greeting cards wished people a happy " holiday season " , leading Henderson to write the President a note of thanks , including a " fish " emblem depicting the Flying Spaghetti Monster for his limousine or plane . Henderson also thanked Walmart for its use of the phrase . 
 = = Books = = 
 = = = The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster = = = 
 In December 2005 Bobby Henderson received a reported US $ 80 @,@ 000 advance from Villard to write The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster . Henderson said he planned to use proceeds from the book to build a pirate ship , with which he would spread the Pastafarian religion . The book was released on March 28 , 2006 , and elaborates on Pastafarian beliefs established in the open letter . Henderson employs satire to present perceived flaws with evolutionary biology and discusses history and lifestyle from a Pastafarian perspective . The gospel urges readers to try Pastafarianism for thirty days , saying , " If you don 't like us , your old religion will most likely take you back " . Henderson states on his website that more than 100 @,@ 000 copies of the book have been sold . 
 Scientific American described the gospel as " an elaborate spoof on Intelligent Design " and " very funny " . In 2006 , it was nominated for the Quill Award in Humor , but was not selected as the winner . Wayne Allen Brenner of The Austin Chronicle characterized the book as " a necessary bit of comic relief in the overly serious battle between science and superstition " . Simon Singh of The Daily Telegraph wrote that the gospel " might be slightly repetitive ... but overall it is a brilliant , provocative , witty and important gem of a book " . 
 Casey Luskin of the Discovery Institute , which advocates intelligent design , labeled the gospel " a mockery of the Christian New Testament " . 
 = = = The Loose Canon = = = 
 In September 2005 , before Henderson had received an advance to write the Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster , a Pastafarian member of the <unk> forums known as <unk> , announced the beginning of a project to collect texts from fellow Pastafarians to compile into the Loose Canon , the Holy Book of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster , essentially analogous to the Bible . The book was completed in 2010 and was made available for download . 
 Some excerpts from The Loose Canon include : 
 I am the Flying Spaghetti Monster . Thou shalt have no other monsters before Me . ( Afterwards is OK ; just use protection . ) The only Monster who deserves capitalization is Me ! Other monsters are false monsters , undeserving of capitalization . 
 " Since you have done a half @-@ ass job , you will receive half an ass ! " The Great Pirate Solomon grabbed his ceremonial scimitar and struck his remaining donkey , cleaving it in two . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = As a cultural phenomenon = = = 
 The Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster now consists of thousands of followers , primarily concentrated on college campuses in North America and Europe . According to the Associated Press , Henderson 's website has become " a kind of cyber @-@ watercooler for opponents of intelligent design " . On it , visitors track meetings of pirate @-@ clad Pastafarians , sell trinkets and bumper stickers , and sample photographs that show " visions " of the Flying Spaghetti Monster . 
 In August 2005 , the Swedish concept designer Niklas Jansson created an adaptation of Michelangelo 's The Creation of Adam , superimposing the Flying Spaghetti Monster over God . This became and remains the Flying Spaghetti Monster 's de facto brand image . The Hunger Artists Theatre Company produced a comedy called The Flying Spaghetti Monster Holiday Pageant in December 2006 , detailing the history of Pastafarianism . The production has spawned a sequel called Flying Spaghetti Monster Holy Mug of Grog , performed in December 2008 . This communal activity attracted the attention of three University of Florida religious scholars , who assembled a panel at the 2007 American Academy of Religion meeting to discuss the Flying Spaghetti Monster . 
 In November 2007 , four talks about the Flying Spaghetti Monster were delivered at the American Academy of Religion 's annual meeting in San Diego . The talks , with titles such as Holy Pasta and Authentic Sauce : The Flying Spaghetti Monster 's Messy Implications for Theorizing Religion , examined the elements necessary for a group to constitute a religion . Speakers inquired whether " an anti @-@ religion like Flying Spaghetti <unk> [ is ] actually a religion " . The talks were based on the paper , Evolutionary Controversy and a Side of Pasta : The Flying Spaghetti Monster and the Subversive Function of Religious Parody , published in the <unk> Journal of Religion and Monsters . The panel garnered an audience of one hundred of the more than 9 @,@ 000 conference attendees , and conference organizers received critical e @-@ mails from Christians offended by it . 
 Since October 2008 , the local chapter of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster has sponsored an annual convention called <unk> on the campus of Missouri State University . Atheists and skeptics give speeches on various topics , and a debate with Christian experts is held . Organizers tout the event as the " largest gathering of atheists in the Midwest " . 
 The Moldovan @-@ born poet , fiction writer , and <unk> Igor <unk> entitled his 2012 poetry book The Flying Spaghetti Monster ( thriller poems ) . 
 On the nonprofit <unk> site , Kiva , the Flying Spaghetti Monster group is in an ongoing competition to top all other " religious congregations " in the number of loans issued via their team . The group 's motto is " Thou shalt share , that none may seek without funding , " an allusion to the Loose Canon which states " Thou shalt share , that none may seek without finding . " As of March 2016 , it has funded $ 2 @,@ 970 @,@ 200 in loans . 
 <unk> <unk> , a siphonophore , has been called " Flying Spaghetti Monster " in reference to the FSM . 
 = = = Use in religious disputes = = = 
 Owing to its popularity and media exposure , the Flying Spaghetti Monster is often used as a modern version of Russell 's teapot . Proponents argue that , since the existence of the invisible and undetectable Flying Spaghetti Monster — similar to other proposed supernatural beings — cannot be falsified , it demonstrates that the burden of proof rests on those who affirm the existence of such beings . Richard Dawkins explains , " The onus is on somebody who says , I want to believe in God , Flying Spaghetti Monster , fairies , or whatever it is . It is not up to us to disprove it . " Furthermore , according to Lance <unk> , an editor of The Journal of Religion and Theater , the Flying Spaghetti Monster is " ultimately ... an argument about the arbitrariness of holding any one view of creation " , since any one view is equally as plausible as the Flying Spaghetti Monster . A similar argument was discussed in the books The God Delusion and The Atheist Delusion . 
 In December 2007 , the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster was credited with spearheading successful efforts in Polk County , Florida , to dissuade the Polk County School Board from adopting new science standards on evolution . The issue was raised after five of the seven board members declared a personal belief in intelligent design . Opponents describing themselves as Pastafarians e @-@ mailed members of the Polk County School Board demanding equal instruction time for the Flying Spaghetti Monster . Board member Margaret Lofton , who supported intelligent design , dismissed the e @-@ mail as ridiculous and insulting , stating , " they 've made us the laughing stock of the world " . Lofton later stated that she had no interest in engaging with the Pastafarians or anyone else seeking to discredit intelligent design . As the controversy developed , scientists expressed opposition to intelligent design . In response to hopes for a new " applied science " campus at the University of South Florida in Lakeland , university vice president Marshall Goodman expressed surprise , stating , " [ intelligent design is ] not science . You can 't even call it pseudo @-@ science . " While unhappy with the outcome , Lofton chose not to resign over the issue . She and the other board members expressed a desire to return to the day @-@ to @-@ day work of running the school district . 
 = = Legal status = = 
 National branches of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster have been striving in many countries to have <unk> become an officially ( legally ) recognized religion , with varying degrees of success . Pastafarianism / <unk> is recognized as a religion in The Netherlands , and New Zealand , where Pastafarian representatives have been authorized to celebrate weddings . 
 A federal court in the US state of Nebraska ruled that Flying Spaghetti Monster is a satirical parody religion , rather than an actual religion , and as a result , Pastafarians are not entitled to religious accommodation under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act : 
 " This is not a question of theology , " the ruling reads in part . " The FSM Gospel is plainly a work of satire , meant to entertain while making a pointed political statement . To read it as religious doctrine would be little different from grounding a ' religious exercise ' on any other work of fiction . " 
 Pastafarians have used their claimed faith as a test case to argue for freedom of religion , and to oppose government discrimination against people who do not follow a recognized religion . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 The Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster operates an ordination mill on their website which enables officiates in jurisdictions where credentials are needed to officiate weddings . Pastafarians say that separation of church and state precludes the government from arbitrarily labelling one denomination religiously valid but another an ordination mill . In November 2014 , Rodney Michael Rogers and Minneapolis @-@ based Atheists for Human Rights sued Washington County , Minnesota under the Fourteenth Amendment equal protection clause and the First Amendment free speech clause , with their attorney claiming discrimination against atheists : " When the statute clearly permits recognition of a marriage celebrant whose religious credentials consist of nothing more than a $ 20 ' ordination ' obtained from the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster ... the requirement is absolutely meaningless in terms of ensuring the qualifications of a marriage celebrant . " A few days prior to a hearing on the matter , Washington County changed its policy to allow Rogers his ability to officiate weddings . This action was done in an effort to deny the court jurisdiction on the underlying claim . On May 13 , 2015 the Federal Court held that the issue had become moot and dismissed the case . Atheists for Human Rights v. County of Washington , MN ( D. Minn . 2015 ) ( “ Court holds case is mooted . ” ) . Text The first legally @-@ recognized Pastafarian wedding occurred in New Zealand on April 16 , 2016 . 
 = = = Free speech = = = 
 In March 2007 , Bryan Killian , a high school student in Buncombe County , North Carolina , was suspended for wearing " pirate regalia " which he said was part of his Pastafarian faith . Killian protested the suspension , saying it violated his First Amendment rights to religious freedom and freedom of expression . " If this is what I believe in , no matter how stupid it might sound , I should be able to express myself however I want to " , he said . 
 In March 2008 , Pastafarians in <unk> , Tennessee , were permitted to place a Flying Spaghetti Monster statue in a free speech zone on the courthouse lawn , and proceeded to do so . The display gained national interest on blogs and online news sites and was even covered by Rolling Stone magazine . It was later removed from the premises , along with all the other long @-@ term statues , as a result of the controversy over the statue . In December 2011 , Pastafarianism was one of the multiple denominations given equal access to placing holiday displays on the Loudoun County courthouse lawn , in Leesburg , Virginia . 
 In 2012 , Tracy McPherson of the Pennsylvanian Pastafarians petitioned the Chester County , Pennsylvania Commissioners to allow representation of the FSM at the county courthouse , equally with a Jewish menorah and a Christian nativity scene . One commissioner stated that either all religions should be allowed or no religion should be represented , but without support from the other commissioners the motion was rejected . Another commissioner stated that this petition garnered more attention than any he had seen before . 
 On September 21 , 2012 , Pastafarian Giorgos <unk> was arrested in Greece on charges of malicious blasphemy and offense of religion for the creation of a satirical Facebook page called " Elder <unk> " , based on a well @-@ known deceased Greek Orthodox monk , Elder <unk> , where his name and face were substituted with <unk> – a local pasta and béchamel sauce dish . The case , which started as a Facebook flame , reached the Greek Parliament and created a strong political reaction to the arrest . 
 In August 2013 , Christian Orthodox religious activists attacked a peaceful rally that Russian Pastafarians had organized , knocking people at the rally to the ground . Police arrested and charged eight of the Pastafarians , one of whom later complained that they were arrested " just for walking " . 
 In February 2014 , union officials at London South Bank University forbade an atheist group to display posters of the Flying Spaghetti Monster at a student orientation conference and later banned the group from the conference , leading to complaints about interference with free speech . The Students ' Union subsequently apologized . 
 In November 2014 , the Church of the FSM obtained city signage in Templin , Germany , announcing the time of Friday 's weekly <unk> ( " pasta mass " ) , alongside signage for various Catholic and Protestant Sunday services . 
 = = = Headgear in identity photos = = = 
 In July 2011 , Austrian <unk> Niko <unk> won the legal right to be shown in his driving license photo wearing a pasta strainer on his head , after three years spent pursuing permission and obtaining an examination certifying that he was psychologically fit to drive . He got the idea after reading that Austrian regulations allow headgear in official photos only when it is worn for religious reasons . 
 In February 2013 , a self @-@ declared Pastafarian was denied the right to wear a spaghetti strainer on his head for his driver 's license photo by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission , which stated that a pasta strainer was not on a list of approved religious headwear . 
 In March 2013 , a Belgian 's identity photos were refused by the local and national administrations because he wore a pasta strainer on his head . 
 In July 2013 , a member of the Czech Pirate Party from Brno in the Czech Republic was given permission to wear a pasta strainer on his head for the photograph on his official ID card . The Brno City Hall spokesman explained , " The application complies with the laws ... where headgear for religious or medical reasons is permitted if it doesn 't hide the face . " 
 In August 2013 , a student at Texas Tech University got approval to wear a pasta strainer on his head in his driver 's license photo . The student , Eddie Castillo , said , " You might think this is some sort of a gag or prank by a college student , but thousands , including myself , see it as a political and religious milestone for all atheists everywhere . " 
 In January 2014 , a member of the Pomfret , New York Town Council wore a colander while taking the oath of office . 
 In June 2014 , a New Zealand man obtained a driver 's license with a photograph of himself wearing a blue spaghetti strainer on his head . This was granted under a law allowing the wearing of religious headgear in official photos . 
 In November 2014 , former porn star Asia Carrera obtained an identity photo with the traditional Pastafarian headgear from a Department of Motor Vehicles office in Hurricane , Utah . The director of Utah 's Driver License Division says that about a dozen Pastafarians have had their state driver 's license photos taken with a similar pasta strainer over the years . 
 In November 2015 , Massachusetts resident Lindsay Miller was allowed to wear a colander on her head in her driver 's license photo after she cited her religious beliefs . Miller ( who resides in Lowell ) said on Friday , November 13 that she " absolutely loves the history and the story " of Pastafarians , whose website says has existed in secrecy for hundreds of years and entered the mainstream in 2005 . Ms. Miller was represented in her quest by The American Humanist Association ’ s <unk> Humanist Legal Center . 
 In January 2016 , Russian Pastafarian Andrew <unk> got a driver 's license with his photo in a colander . 
 Some sources report that the colander in the form of pasta strainer , was recognised by Austrian authorities as a religious headgear of the parody religion , Pastafarianism , in 2011 . This was denied by Austrian authorities , saying that religious motives were not the reason to grant the permission of wearing the headgear in a passport . The Czech Republic recognised this religious headgear in 2013 . 
 Some anti @-@ clerical protesters wore <unk> to Piazza XXIV Maggio square in Milan , Italy , on June 2 , 2012 , in mock obedience to the Flying Spaghetti Monster . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 According to Justin Pope of the Associated Press , 
 Between the lines , the point of the letter was this : there 's no more scientific basis for intelligent design than there is for the idea an omniscient creature made of pasta created the universe . If intelligent design supporters could demand equal time in a science class , why not anyone else ? The only reasonable solution is to put nothing into sciences classes but the best available science . 
 Justin Pope praised the Flying Spaghetti Monster as " a clever and effective argument " . Simon Singh of the Daily Telegraph described the Flying Spaghetti Monster as " a masterstroke , which underlined the absurdity of Intelligent Design " , and applauded Henderson for " <unk> [ ing ] a defence of science and rationality " . Sarah Boxer of the New York Times said that Henderson " has wit on his side " . In addition , the Flying Spaghetti Monster was mentioned in an article footnote of the Harvard Civil Rights @-@ Civil Liberties Law Review as an example of evolution " enter [ ing ] the fray in popular culture " , which the author deemed necessary for evolution to prevail over intelligent design . The abstract of the paper , Evolutionary Controversy and a Side of Pasta : The Flying Spaghetti Monster and the Subversive Function of Religious Parody , describes the Flying Spaghetti Monster as " a potent example of how monstrous humor can be used as a popular tool of carnivalesque subversion " . Its author praised Pastafarianism for its " epistemological humility " . Moreover , Henderson 's website contains numerous endorsements from the scientific community . As Jack Schofield of The Guardian noted , " The joke , of course , is that it 's arguably more rational than Intelligent Design . " 
 Casey Luskin of the Discovery Institute , which promotes intelligent design , contested this , saying , " the problem for their logic is that ID is not an arbitrary explanation , because we have much experience with intelligent agents producing the type of informational complexity we see in nature . " Columnist Jeff Jacoby wrote in The Boston Globe that intelligent design " isn 't primitivism or Bible @-@ thumping or flying spaghetti . It 's science . " This view of science , however , was rejected by the United States National Academy of Sciences . Peter <unk> of Answers in Genesis , a Young Earth Creationist ministry said " Ironically enough , [ Pastafarians ] , in addition to mocking God himself , are lampooning the Intelligent Design Movement for not identifying a specific deity — that is , leaving open the possibility that a spaghetti monster could be the intelligent designer ... Thus , the satire is possible because the Intelligent Design Movement hasn ’ t affiliated with a particular religion , exactly the opposite of what its other critics claim ! " Mark <unk> , a pastor who teaches at the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary , commented , " I 'm happy to say I think FSM hurts the evolutionists ' program since , by mocking the Christian tradition ... it reinforces the correct impression that there is genuine contempt for biblical faith in that camp ... Besides , the parody is lame , and there are few things more encouraging than cheap shots from one 's opponents . " 
 = High Seas Fleet = 
 The High Seas Fleet ( Hochseeflotte ) was the battle fleet of the German Imperial Navy and saw action during the First World War . The formation was created in February 1907 , when the Home Fleet ( Heimatflotte ) was renamed as the High Seas Fleet . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz was the architect of the fleet ; he envisioned a force powerful enough to challenge the Royal Navy 's predominance . Kaiser Wilhelm II , the German Emperor , championed the fleet as the instrument by which he would seize overseas possessions and make Germany a global power . By concentrating a powerful battle fleet in the North Sea while the Royal Navy was required to disperse its forces around the British Empire , Tirpitz believed Germany could achieve a balance of force that could seriously damage British naval hegemony . This was the heart of Tirpitz 's " Risk Theory , " which held that Britain would not challenge Germany if the latter 's fleet posed such a significant threat to its own . 
 The primary component of the Fleet was its battleships , typically organized in eight @-@ ship squadrons , though it also contained various other formations , including the I Scouting Group . At its creation in 1907 , the High Seas Fleet consisted of two squadrons of battleships , and by 1914 , a third squadron had been added . The dreadnought revolution in 1906 greatly affected the composition of the fleet ; the twenty @-@ four pre @-@ dreadnoughts in the fleet were rendered obsolete and required replacement . Enough dreadnoughts for two full squadrons were completed by the outbreak of war in mid 1914 ; the eight most modern pre @-@ dreadnoughts were used to constitute a third squadron . Two additional squadrons of older vessels were mobilized at the onset of hostilities , though by the end of the conflict , these formations were disbanded . 
 The fleet conducted a series of sorties into the North Sea during the war designed to lure out an isolated portion of the numerically superior British Grand Fleet . These operations frequently used the fast battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group to raid the British coast as the bait for the Royal Navy . These operations culminated in the Battle of Jutland , on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , where the High Seas Fleet confronted the whole of the Grand Fleet . The battle was inconclusive , but the British won strategically , as it convinced Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the German fleet commander , that even a highly favorable outcome to a fleet action would not secure German victory in the war . Scheer and other leading admirals therefore advised the Kaiser to order a resumption of the unrestricted submarine warfare campaign . The primary responsibility of the High Seas Fleet in 1917 and 1918 was to secure the German naval bases in the North Sea for U @-@ boat operations . Nevertheless , the fleet continued to conduct sorties into the North Sea and detached units for special operations in the Baltic Sea against the Russian Baltic Fleet . Following the German defeat in November 1918 , the Allies interned the bulk of the High Seas Fleet in Scapa Flow , where it was ultimately scuttled by its crew in June 1919 , days before the belligerents signed the Treaty of Versailles . 
 = = Creation = = 
 In 1898 , Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz became the State Secretary for the Imperial Navy Office ( Reichsmarineamt — RMA ) ; Tirpitz was an ardent supporter of naval expansion . During a speech in support of the First Naval Law on 6 December 1897 , Tirpitz stated that the navy was " a question of survival " for Germany . He also viewed Great Britain , with its powerful Royal Navy , as the primary threat to Germany . In a discussion with the Kaiser during his first month in his post as State Secretary , he stated that " for Germany the most dangerous naval enemy at present is England . " Tirpitz theorized that an attacking fleet would require a 33 percent advantage in strength to achieve victory , and so decided that a 2 : 3 ratio would be required for the German navy . For a final total of 60 German battleships , Britain would be required to build 90 to meet the 2 : 3 ratio envisioned by Tirpitz . 
 The Royal Navy had heretofore adhered to the so @-@ called " two @-@ power standard , " first formulated in the Naval Defence Act of 1889 , which required a larger fleet than those of the next two largest naval powers combined . The crux of Tirpitz 's " risk theory " was that by building a fleet to the 2 : 3 ratio , Germany would be strong enough that even in the event of a British naval victory , the Royal Navy would incur damage so serious as to allow the third @-@ ranked naval power to rise to preeminence . Implicit in Tirpitz 's theory was the assumption that the British would adopt an offensive strategy that would allow the Germans to use mines and submarines to even the numerical odds before fighting a decisive battle between Heligoland and the Thames . Tirpitz in fact believed Germany would emerge victorious from a naval struggle with Britain , as he believed Germany to possess superior ships manned by better @-@ trained crews , more effective tactics , and led by more capable officers . 
 In his first program , Tirpitz envisioned a fleet of nineteen battleships , divided into two eight @-@ ship squadrons , one ship as a flagship , and two in reserve . The squadrons were further divided into four @-@ ship divisions . This would be supported by the eight <unk> and Odin classes of coastal defense ships , six large and eighteen small cruisers , and twelve divisions of torpedo boats , all assigned to the Home Fleet ( Heimatflotte ) . This fleet was secured by the First Naval Law , which passed in the Reichstag on 28 March 1898 . Construction of the fleet was to be completed by 1 April 1904 . Rising international tensions , particularly as a result of the outbreak of the Boer War in South Africa and the Boxer Rebellion in China , allowed Tirpitz to push through an expanded fleet plan in 1900 . The Second Naval Law was passed on 14 June 1900 ; it doubled the size of the fleet to 38 battleships and 20 large and 38 small cruisers . Tirpitz planned an even larger fleet . As early as September 1899 , he had informed the Kaiser that he sought at least 45 battleships , and potentially might secure a third double @-@ squadron , for a total strength of 48 battleships . 
 = = = Naval arms race = = = 
 During the initial period of German naval expansion , Britain did not feel particularly threatened . The Lords of the Admiralty felt the implications of the Second Naval Law were not a significantly more dangerous threat than the fleet set by the First Naval Law ; they believed it was more important to focus on the practical situation rather than speculation on future programs that might easily be reduced or cut entirely . Segments of the British public , however , quickly seized on the perceived threat posed by the German construction programs . Despite their dismissive reaction , the Admiralty resolved to surpass German battleship construction . Admiral John Fisher , who became the First Sea Lord and head of the Admiralty in 1904 , introduced sweeping reforms in large part to counter the growing threat posed by the expanding German fleet . Training programs were modernized , old and obsolete vessels were discarded , and the scattered squadrons of battleships were consolidated into four main fleets , three of which were based in Europe . Britain also made a series of diplomatic arrangements , including an alliance with Japan that allowed a greater concentration of British battleships in the North Sea . 
 Fisher 's reforms caused serious problems for Tirpitz 's plans ; he counted on a dispersal of British naval forces early in a conflict that would allow Germany 's smaller but more concentrated fleet to achieve a local superiority . Tirpitz could also no longer depend on the higher level of training in both the German officer corps and the enlisted ranks , nor the superiority of the more modern and homogenized German squadrons over the heterogeneous British fleet . In 1904 , Britain signed the Entente cordiale with France , Britain 's primary naval rival . The destruction of two Russian fleets during the Russo @-@ Japanese War in 1905 further strengthened Britain 's position , as it removed the second of her two traditional naval rivals . These developments allowed Britain to discard the " two power standard " and focus solely on out @-@ building Germany . In October 1906 , Admiral Fisher stated " our only probable enemy is Germany . Germany keeps her whole Fleet always concentrated within a few hours of England . We must therefore keep a Fleet twice as powerful concentrated within a few hours of Germany . " 
 The most damaging blow to Tirpitz 's plan came with the launch of HMS Dreadnought in February 1906 . The new battleship , armed with a main battery of ten 12 @-@ inch ( 30 cm ) guns , was considerably more powerful than any battleship afloat . Ships capable of battle with Dreadnought would need to be significantly larger than the old pre @-@ dreadnoughts , which increased their cost and necessitated expensive dredging of canals and harbors to accommodate them . The German naval budget was already stretched thin ; without new funding , Tirpitz would have to abandon his challenge to Britain . As a result , Tirpitz went before the Reichstag in May 1906 with a request for additional funding . The First Amendment to the Second Naval Law was passed on 19 May and appropriated funding for the new battleships , as well as for the dredging required by their increased size . 
 The Reichstag passed a second amendment to the Naval Law in March 1908 to provide an additional billion marks to cope with the growing cost of the latest battleships . The law also reduced the service life of all battleships from 25 to 20 years , which allowed Tirpitz to push for the replacement of older vessels earlier . A third and final amendment was passed in May 1912 represented a compromise between Tirpitz and moderates in parliament . The amendment authorized three new battleships and two light cruisers . The amendment called for the High Seas Fleet to be equipped with three squadrons of eight battleships each , one squadron of eight battlecruisers , and eighteen light cruisers . Two 8 @-@ ship squadrons would be placed in reserve , along with two armored and twelve light cruisers . By the outbreak of war in August 1914 , only one eight @-@ ship squadron of dreadnoughts — the I Battle Squadron — had been assembled with the Nassau and Helgoland @-@ class battleships . The second squadron of dreadnoughts — the III Battle Squadron — which included four of the Kaiser @-@ class battleships , was only completed when the four König @-@ class battleships entered service by early 1915 . As a result , the third squadron — the II Battle Squadron remained composed of pre @-@ dreadnoughts through 1916 . 
 Before the 1912 naval law was passed , Britain and Germany attempted to reach a compromise with the Haldane Mission , led by the British War Minister Richard Haldane . The arms reduction mission ended in failure , however , and the 1912 law was announced shortly thereafter . The Germans were aware at as early as 1911 , the Royal Navy had abandoned the idea of a decisive battle with the German fleet , in favor of a distant blockade at the entrances to the North Sea , which the British could easily control due to their geographical position . There emerged the distinct possibility that the German fleet would be unable to force a battle on its own terms , which would render it militarily useless . When the war came in 1914 , the British did in fact adopt this strategy . Coupled with the restrictive orders of the Kaiser , who preferred to keep the fleet intact to be used as a bargaining chip in the peace settlements , the ability of the High Seas Fleet to affect the military situation was markedly reduced . 
 = = Strategy = = 
 The German Navy 's pre @-@ war planning held that the British would be compelled to mount either a direct attack on the German coast to defeat the High Seas Fleet , or to put in place a close blockade . Either course of action would permit the Germans to whittle away at the numerical superiority of the Grand Fleet with submarines and torpedo boats . Once a rough equality of forces could be achieved , the High Seas Fleet would be able to attack and destroy the British fleet . Implicit in Tirpitz 's strategy was the assumption that German vessels were better @-@ designed , had better @-@ trained crews , and would be employed with superior tactics . In addition , Tirpitz assumed that Britain would not be able to concentrate its fleet in the North Sea , owing to the demands of its global empire . At the start of a conflict between the two powers , the Germans would therefore be able to attack the Royal Navy with local superiority . 
 The British , however , did not accommodate Tirpitz 's projections ; from his appointment as the First Sea Lord in 1904 , Fisher began a major reorganization of the Royal Navy . He concentrated British battleship strength in home waters , launched the Dreadnought revolution , and introduced rigorous training for the fleet personnel . In 1912 , the British concluded a joint defense agreement with France that allowed the British to concentrate in the North Sea while the French defended the Mediterranean . Worse still , the British began developing the strategy of the distant blockade of Germany starting in 1904 ; this removed the ability of German light craft to reduce Britain 's superiority in numbers and essentially invalidated German naval planning before the start of World War I. 
 = = Logistics and personnel = = 
 The primary base for the High Seas Fleet in the North Sea was Wilhelmshaven on the western side of the Jade Bight ; the port of Cuxhaven , located on the mouth of the Elbe , was also a major base in the North Sea . The island of Heligoland provided a fortified forward position in the German Bight . Kiel was the most important base in the Baltic , which supported the forward bases at Pillau and Danzig . The Kaiser Wilhelm Canal through Schleswig @-@ Holstein connected the Baltic and North Seas and allowed the German Navy to quickly shift naval forces between the two seas . In peacetime , all ships on active duty in the High Seas Fleet were stationed in Wilhelmshaven , Kiel , or Danzig . Germany possessed only one major overseas base , at Kiautschou in China , where the East Asia Squadron was stationed . 
 Steam ships of the period , which burned coal to fire their boilers , were naturally tied to coaling stations in friendly ports . The German Navy lacked sufficient overseas bases for sustained operations , even for single ships operating as commerce raiders . The Navy experimented with a device to transfer coal from colliers to warships while underway in 1907 , though the practice was not put into general use . Nevertheless , German capital ships had a cruising range of at least 4 @,@ 000 nmi ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) , more than enough to operate in the Atlantic Ocean . 
 In 1897 , the year Tirpitz came to his position as State Secretary of the Navy Office , the Imperial Navy consisted of a total of around 26 @,@ 000 officers , petty officers , and enlisted men of various ranks , branches , and positions . By the outbreak of war in 1914 , this had increased significantly to about 80 @,@ 000 officers , petty officers , and men . Capital ships were typically commanded by a Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) or Korvettenkapitän ( corvette captain ) . Each of these ships typically had a total crew in excess of 1 @,@ 000 officers and men ; the light cruisers that screened for the fleet had crew sizes between 300 and 550 . The fleet torpedo boats had crews of about 80 to 100 officers and men , though some later classes approached 200 . 
 = = History = = 
 In early 1907 , enough battleships — of the Braunschweig and Deutschland classes — had been constructed to allow for the creation of a second full squadron . On 16 February 1907 , Kaiser Wilhelm renamed the Home Fleet the High Seas Fleet . Admiral Prince Heinrich of Prussia , Wilhelm II 's brother , became the first commander of the High Seas Fleet ; his flagship was SMS Deutschland . While in a peace @-@ time footing , the Fleet conducted a routine pattern of training exercises , with individual ships , with squadrons , and with the combined fleet , throughout the year . The entire fleet conducted several cruises into the Atlantic Ocean and the Baltic Sea . Prince Henry was replaced in late 1909 by Vice Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff , who served until April 1913 . Vice Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , who would command the High Seas Fleet in the first months of World War I , took command following the departure of Vice Admiral von Holtzendorff . SMS Friedrich der Grosse replaced Deutschland as the fleet flagship on 2 March 1913 . 
 Despite the rising international tensions following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June , the High Seas Fleet began its summer cruise to Norway on 13 July . During the last peacetime cruise of the Imperial Navy , the fleet conducted drills off Skagen before proceeding to the Norwegian fjords on 25 July . The following day the fleet began to steam back to Germany , as a result of Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia . On the 27th , the entire fleet assembled off Cape Skudenes before returning to port , where the ships remained at a heightened state of readiness . War between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia broke out the following day , and in the span of a week all of the major European powers had joined the conflict . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The High Seas Fleet conducted a number of sweeps and advances into the North Sea . The first occurred on 2 – 3 November 1914 , though no British forces were encountered . Admiral von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , adopted a strategy in which the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group raided British coastal towns to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . The raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 was the first such operation . On the evening of 15 December , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from the Kaiser to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the fleet back toward Germany . 
 Following the loss of SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 , the Kaiser removed Admiral von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February . Admiral Hugo von Pohl replaced him as commander of the fleet . Admiral von Pohl conducted a series of fleet advances in 1915 ; in the first one on 29 – 30 March , the fleet steamed out to the north of Terschelling and returned without incident . Another followed on 17 – 18 April , where the fleet covered a mining operation by the II Scouting Group . Three days later , on 21 – 22 April , the High Seas Fleet advanced towards the Dogger Bank , though again failed to meet any British forces . Another sortie followed on 29 – 30 May , during which the fleet advanced as far as Schiermonnikoog before being forced to turn back by inclement weather . On 10 August , the fleet steamed to the north of Heligoland to cover the return of the auxiliary cruiser Meteor . A month later , on 11 – 12 September , the fleet covered another mine @-@ laying operation off the Swarte Bank . The last operation of the year , conducted on 23 – 24 October , was an advance without result in the direction of Horns Reef . 
 Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer became Commander in chief of the High Seas Fleet on 18 January 1916 when Admiral von Pohl became too ill to continue in that post . Scheer favored a much more aggressive policy than that of his predecessor , and advocated greater usage of U @-@ boats and zeppelins in coordinated attacks on the Grand Fleet ; Scheer received approval from the Kaiser in February 1916 to carry out his intentions . Scheer ordered the fleet on sweeps of the North Sea on 26 March , 2 – 3 April , and 21 – 22 April . The battlecruisers conducted another raid on the English coast on 24 – 25 April , during which the fleet provided distant support . Scheer planned another raid for mid @-@ May , but the battlecruiser Seydlitz had struck a mine during the previous raid and the repair work forced the operation to be pushed back until the end of the month . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Admiral Scheer 's fleet , composed of 16 dreadnoughts , six pre @-@ dreadnoughts , six light cruisers , and 31 torpedo boats departed the Jade early on the morning of 31 May . The fleet sailed in concert with Hipper 's five battlecruisers and supporting cruisers and torpedo boats . The British navy 's Room 40 had intercepted and decrypted German radio traffic containing plans of the operation . The Admiralty ordered the Grand Fleet , totaling some 28 dreadnoughts and 9 battlecruisers , to sortie the night before in order to cut off and destroy the High Seas Fleet . 
 At 16 : 00 UTC , the two battlecruiser forces encountered each other and began a running gun fight south , back towards Scheer 's battle fleet . Upon reaching the High Seas Fleet , Vice Admiral David Beatty 's battlecruisers turned back to the north to lure the Germans towards the rapidly approaching Grand Fleet , under the command of Admiral John Jellicoe . During the run to the north , Scheer 's leading ships engaged the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron . By 18 : 30 , the Grand Fleet had arrived on the scene , and was deployed into a position that would cross Scheer 's " T " from the northeast . To extricate his fleet from this precarious position , Scheer ordered a 16 @-@ point turn to the south @-@ west . At 18 : 55 , Scheer decided to conduct another 16 @-@ point turn to launch an attack on the British fleet . 
 This maneuver again put Scheer in a dangerous position ; Jellicoe had turned his fleet south and again crossed Scheer 's " T. " A third 16 @-@ point turn followed ; Hipper 's mauled battlecruisers charged the British line to cover the retreat . Scheer then ordered the fleet to adopt the night cruising formation , which was completed by 23 : 40 . A series of ferocious engagements between Scheer 's battleships and Jellicoe 's destroyer screen ensued , though the Germans managed to punch their way through the destroyers and make for Horns Reef . The High Seas Fleet reached the Jade between 13 : 00 and 14 : 45 on 1 June ; Scheer ordered the undamaged battleships of the I Battle Squadron to take up defensive positions in the Jade roadstead while the Kaiser @-@ class battleships were to maintain a state of readiness just outside Wilhelmshaven . The High Seas Fleet had sunk more British vessels than the Grand Fleet had sunk German , though Scheer 's leading battleships had taken a terrible hammering . Several capital ships , including SMS König , which had been the first vessel in the line , and most of the battlecruisers , were in drydock for extensive repairs for at least two months . On 1 June , the British had twenty @-@ four capital ships in fighting condition , compared to only ten German warships . 
 = = = = Subsequent operations = = = = 
 By August , enough warships had been repaired to allow Scheer to undertake another fleet operation on 18 – 19 August . Due to the serious damage incurred by Seydlitz and SMS Derfflinger and the loss of SMS Lützow at Jutland , the only battlecruisers available for the operation were SMS Von der Tann and SMS Moltke , which were joined by SMS Markgraf , SMS Grosser Kurfürst , and the new battleship SMS Bayern . Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . Another fleet sortie took place on 18 – 19 October 1916 to attack enemy shipping east of Dogger Bank . Despite being forewarned by signal intelligence , the Grand Fleet did not attempt to intercept . The operation was however cancelled due to poor weather after the cruiser München was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E38 . The fleet was reorganized on 1 December ; the four König @-@ class battleships remained in the III Squadron , along with the newly commissioned Bayern , while the five Kaiser @-@ class ships were transferred to the IV Squadron . In March 1917 the new battleship Baden , built to serve as fleet flagship , entered service ; on the 17th , Scheer hauled down his flag from Friedrich der Grosse and transferred it to Baden . 
 The war , now in its fourth year , was by 1917 taking its toll on the crews of the ships of the High Seas Fleet . Acts of passive resistance , such as the posting of anti @-@ war slogans in the battleships SMS Oldenburg and SMS Posen in January 1917 , began to appear . In June and July , the crews began to conduct more active forms of resistance . These activities included work refusals , hunger strikes , and taking unauthorized leave from their ships . The disruptions came to a head in August , when a series of protests , anti @-@ war speeches , and demonstrations resulted in the arrest of dozens of sailors . Scheer ordered the arrest of over 200 men from the battleship Prinzregent Luitpold , the center of the anti @-@ war activities . A series of courts @-@ martial followed , which resulted in 77 guilty verdicts ; nine men were sentenced to death for their roles , though only two men , Albin <unk> and Max <unk> , were executed . 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Navy High Command ( Admiralstab ) planned an operation , codenamed Operation Albion , to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise its flagship , Moltke , and the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while the IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on <unk> 20 October , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . 
 Admiral Scheer had used light surface forces to attack British convoys to Norway beginning in late 1917 . As a result , the Royal Navy attached a squadron of battleships to protect the convoys , which presented Scheer with the possibility of destroying a detached squadron of the Grand Fleet . The operation called for Hipper 's battlecruisers to attack the convoy and its escorts on 23 April while the battleships of the High Seas Fleet stood by in support . On 22 April , the German fleet assembled in the Schillig Roads outside Wilhelmshaven and departed the following morning . Despite the success in reaching the convoy route undetected , the operation failed due to faulty intelligence . Reports from U @-@ boats indicated to Scheer that the convoys sailed at the start and middle of each week , but a west @-@ bound convoy had left Bergen on Tuesday the 22nd and an east @-@ bound group left Methil , Scotland , on the 24th , a Thursday . As a result , there was no convoy for Hipper to attack . Beatty sortied with a force of 31 battleships and four battlecruisers , but was too late to intercept the retreating Germans . The Germans reached their defensive minefields early on 25 April , though approximately 40 nmi ( 74 km ; 46 mi ) off Heligoland Moltke was torpedoed by the submarine E42 ; she successfully returned to port . 
 = = = Internment at Scapa Flow = = = 
 A final fleet action was planned for the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Grossadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . However , many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . When informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany on November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base of Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and enlisted men on each of the capital ships . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Out of the interned fleet , only one battleship , Baden , three light cruisers , and eighteen destroyers were saved from sinking by the British harbor personnel . The Royal Navy , initially opposed to salvage operations , decided to allow private firms to attempt to raise the vessels for scrapping . Cox and Danks , a company founded by Ernest Cox handled most of the salvage operations , including those of the heaviest vessels raised . After Cox 's withdrawal due to financial losses in the early 1930s , Metal Industries Group , Inc. took over the salvage operation for the remaining ships . Five more capital ships were raised , though three — SMS König , SMS Kronprinz , and SMS Markgraf — were too deep to permit raising . They remain on the bottom of Scapa Flow , along with four light cruisers . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The High Seas Fleet , particularly its wartime impotence and ultimate fate , strongly influenced the later German navies , the Reichsmarine and Kriegsmarine . Former Imperial Navy officers continued to serve in the subsequent institutions , including Admiral Erich Raeder , Hipper 's former chief of staff , who became the commander in chief of the Reichsmarine . Raeder advocated long @-@ range commerce raiding by surface ships , rather than constructing a large surface fleet to challenge the Royal Navy , which he viewed to be a futile endeavor . His initial version of Plan Z , the construction program for the Kriegsmarine in the late 1930s , called for large number of P @-@ class cruisers , long @-@ range light cruisers , and reconnaissance forces for attacking enemy shipping , though he was overruled by Adolf Hitler , who advocated a large fleet of battleships . 
 = Male Unbonding = 
 " Male Unbonding " is the fourth episode of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld to be produced , and aired on June 14 , 1990 as the fourth episode of the first season . 
 In it , Jerry Seinfeld tries to avoid meeting an old childhood friend , Joel Horneck ( Kevin Dunn ) . Jerry 's neighbor , Kramer , conceptualizes " a pizza place where you make your own pie . " The episode was written by Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld , and was the first taped episode directed by Tom Cherones . This was the first episode produced with Elaine Benes ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) as a character . It also was the first episode to use Jonathan Wolff 's title music . This is the only Seinfeld episode whose title does not begin with the definite article " The " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 George tells Jerry that he was out with a girlfriend . They went to see a play , during which he put his hand in his pocket to get some money and accidentally got some dental floss stuck to his hand . George worries that his girlfriend is going to leave him because of it . 
 Jerry has problems with a childhood friend , Joel Horneck , who persists in keeping in touch with him . He does not like Horneck , who does not pay attention to anything that Jerry says . Jerry claims that he feels uncomfortable " breaking up with " Horneck , so George suggests that he should pretend that Horneck is a woman and break up normally . Jerry therefore attempts to break up with Horneck at Monk 's Cafe , but when he does so , Horneck bursts into tears . Deeply uncomfortable , Jerry assures Horneck he didn 't mean it , and agrees to take him to see the New York Knicks , although he was supposed to take George . 
 As George tells Jerry that his girlfriend no longer wants to see him , Jerry tells George that he gave away his ticket to Horneck . George does not go to the game because he does not know Horneck , so Jerry decides to give Horneck both tickets , claiming that he cannot make the game because he is tutoring his nephew . Later , when talking to his ex @-@ girlfriend Elaine , she tries to provide Jerry with a list of excuses to help him avoid Horneck . He later discovers that Horneck took Kramer to the game and that Horneck is in the building . When Horneck meets Jerry and Elaine , Horneck invites them out to another Knicks game . They come up with more unusual excuses in an attempt to avoid going out . However , Horneck then gets out a newspaper and tries to organize a time when they can all meet , weeks in advance . Jerry realizes that no matter what excuses he comes up with , he cannot avoid Horneck . 
 Kramer , working under the name " <unk> Industries " , conceptualizes building " a pizza place where you make your own pizza pie . " Jerry and George try to persuade Kramer to forget the idea , but Kramer is determined to go on with it . Kramer 's pizza parlor idea reappears in later episodes such as " The Puffy Shirt " in season 5 , and " The Couch " in season 6 . 
 = = Production = = 
 This is the first episode that was made after the original pilot , " The Seinfeld Chronicles " . The title of the series was shortened to Seinfeld to avoid confusion with another sitcom called The Marshall Chronicles . 
 This is the only episode that does not have " the " in the title . A decision was made to name all the episodes in this way so that the writers would not waste time trying to think of funny titles and instead make the content of the episode funny . However , this decision was made after the script for " Male Unbonding " was completed . 
 This is the first episode written which stars the character of Elaine . The first version of the script does not include Elaine , despite the fact that one of the conditions given when Seinfeld was given a series was that a female character was included . Originally , the character 's name was Eileen . Louis @-@ Dreyfus claims that she was unhappy with only being given one scene in the first episode in which she appeared , but said that she performed well in the episode . Similarly , other early versions of the script refer to the character of Kramer as " Breckman " . Kevin Dunn , who plays Joel in the episode , auditioned for the role of George Costanza in the original pilot . The episode also stars Anita Wise , who plays a waitress . Wise appeared again in another episode from the first season of Seinfeld titled " The Robbery " . Frank Piazza , a customer at the bank appears in the season 2 episode " The Stranded " . 
 This episode features different title music from the pilot ; this music , composed by Jonathan Wolff , is used throughout the rest of the series . The standup interstitials for this episode were recorded twice . Originally , the set for the interstitials was brightly lit and was designed to look like that of a church basement , but then it was remade to look like a nightclub and the material was performed again . The scene that was set in the bank was originally set in a dry cleaner 's . However , this was moved and some of the material was moved to a later episode called " The Stock Tip " . 
 The episode had an alternative ending , in which Joel borrows a k.d. lang tape from Jerry . Jerry then finally manages to " break up " with Joel . Joel leaves , but then comes back again to tell Jerry that he will bring back the tape . Jerry then refers to Joel as Jason from the Friday the 13th films . " Male Unbonding " was filmed on February 13 @,@ 1990 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When first broadcast on June 14 , 1990 , the episode attracted a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 6 / 24 , meaning that 13 @.@ 6 % of American households watched the episode , and that 24 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . Several reviews at the time compared Seinfeld to It 's Garry Shandling 's Show , in which Garry Shandling , like Seinfeld , plays a fictionalized version of himself . 
 Jonathan Boudreaux writes that of the four season one episodes produced after the pilot , " ' Male Unbonding ' is the strongest . This episode centers on the classic Seinfeld theme of the gang complaining about an outsider 's self @-@ centeredness while conveniently ignoring their own selfish , antisocial behavior . The characters slowly begin to fall into place as George takes great strides toward being the neurotic moron we love , and Kramer becomes more spastic and idiosyncratic . " 
 Colin Jacobson for DVD Movie Guide was also positive , saying , " ' Unbonding ' marks a demonstrable improvement over the pilot . No one will mistake the episode for one of the series ' greats , but at least the characters start to resemble the ones we 'd come to know later . In addition , it tosses out just enough humor to make it enjoyable . " David Sims of A.V. Club gave the episode a B + , saying , " It 's a pretty funny episode – my main criticism is just that at this point , Kramer isn ’ t integrated at all into the stories , rather he just comes by and dispenses weird dialog for a couple minutes . " 
 = Layla El = 
 Layla El Young ( née El ; born 25 June 1977 ) is an English dancer , model , and retired professional wrestler best known for her time in WWE . 
 After attending a performing arts college , El was a dancer for Carnival Cruise Lines , the Miami Heat franchise of the National Basketball Association , and also danced for Kanye West at the MTV Video Music Awards . In 2006 , she was a contestant in the 2006 WWE Diva Search , which she won to earn a contract with the company . 
 Initially appearing on the SmackDown brand , she moved to ECW in January 2007 , where , she formed the Extreme Exposé dance troupe with Kelly Kelly and Brooke Adams . In 2008 , she was drafted to the Raw brand , where she began managing William Regal , and year later , in 2009 , she returned to SmackDown and formed an alliance with Michelle McCool known as LayCool . In May 2010 , Layla won the WWE Women 's Championship for the first time , making her the first British woman to hold the championship . She is also the first Diva Search winner to have won the championship , and the final recognized WWE Women 's Champion as the title was retired in 2010 . In April 2012 , Layla won the WWE Divas Championship upon her return from a year @-@ long absence due to injury , and held the championship until September that year . On July 29 , 2015 , Layla announced her in @-@ ring competition retirement . 
 = = Early life = = 
 El was born and raised in London , England , and is of Moroccan descent . She attended a performing arts college in London . 
 = = Dancing career = = 
 El was a dancer for Carnival Cruise Lines . Afterward she joined the National Basketball Association 's Miami Heat franchise , where she danced for two years beginning in 2004 . As part of the Miami Heat dance troupe , she received a championship ring . During this time , she appeared on @-@ stage with John Legend as one of his backup dancers . She also danced for P. Diddy and Kanye West at the MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Diva Search and early appearances ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 El 's first foray into professional wrestling occurred when her trainer suggested she try out for the $ 250 @,@ 000 WWE Diva Search contest in 2006 . After a casting call , she was selected as one of the finalists . During the contest , she won a week 's worth of immunity from elimination on 14 July episode of SmackDown ! , after winning Sgt. Slaughter 's " Diva Boot Camp " obstacle course . She won another competition , the " Diva Search Talent Show " on 11 August , when she danced dressed as a police officer . El won the Diva Search competition on 16 August . 
 She made her first official WWE appearance at the 2006 SummerSlam pay @-@ per @-@ view in a backstage segment with several other Divas . During the segment , the other women initially taunted and teased her before revealing that " it was all in fun " and part of an " initiation " of sorts . Afterward they dragged her into the showers , fully clothed , where they proceeded to spank her while laughing . The week after SummerSlam , El made her debut as a member of the SmackDown ! brand in an interview with Mike " The Miz " Mizanin . Subsequently , she did not appear on television for almost a month , reappearing on 22 September episode of SmackDown ! and getting into a confrontation with Kristal and Jillian Hall . 
 At October 's No Mercy pay @-@ per @-@ view event , she embarrassed The Miz by tricking him into getting a lap dance from Big Dick Johnson while he was blindfolded and expecting it to be from her as a birthday gift . On 20 October , Layla participated in a dance contest with the other SmackDown ! Divas , and was chosen as the winner by the judges , Nick and Aaron Carter . Despite this , The Miz , who was acting as emcee , declared Kristal the winner . The following week , Layla made her in @-@ ring debut in a Diva 's " Trick @-@ or @-@ Treat " battle royal . The match ended in controversial fashion , when she was pulled from the ring apron by The Miz , allowing Kristal to win . The following week , Layla teamed with Big Vito in a loss to The Miz and Kristal in a mixed tag team match . Continuing to feud with Kristal , Layla had her singles match debut on 1 December episode of SmackDown ! , when she lost to Kristal . In her final match for the SmackDown ! brand , Layla teamed with Ashley to defeat Kristal and Jillian Hall in a tag team match on 22 December . 
 = = = = Extreme Exposé ; managing William Regal ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 The following month , Layla was moved to the ECW brand , debuting on 23 January 2007 . She joined Brooke and Kelly Kelly to form Extreme Exposé . The trio performed a weekly dance segment on ECW , choreographed by Layla , for the next several months . In June 2007 , The Miz was moved to the brand , prompting a storyline in which all three members of Extreme Exposé were attracted to him . When Kelly shifted her attentions towards Balls Mahoney , Layla , Brooke , and Miz openly mocked her , turning Layla and Brooke into villainous characters in the process . On 1 November , Brooke was released from her WWE contract , and Extreme Exposé dissolved as a group , leaving Kelly and Layla to enter an ongoing rivalry with more active in @-@ ring roles . They were on opposite sides of a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match at Survivor Series , which Layla 's team lost . In December , Layla formed an alliance with Victoria , which expanded to include Lena Yada in January 2008 , and the trio continued to feud with Kelly . At WrestleMania XXIV , Layla was a lumberjill for the Divas ' tag team lumberjill match . The following month , Layla was part of the winning team in a six @-@ on @-@ six Divas match at the Backlash pay @-@ per @-@ view . 
 As part of the 2008 Supplemental Draft in late June , Layla was drafted to the Raw brand . On 7 July episode of Raw , Layla made her debut in a tag team match with Jillian Hall , losing to Mickie James and Kelly Kelly , the latter of whom had been revealed as the newest member of the Raw brand earlier that night . She soon entered a storyline with Jamie Noble in which Noble attempted to impress her with his matches , only to be squashed by his opponents . On 1 September , Noble was able to defeat William Regal , which impressed Layla . The following week , however , Layla chose to align herself with Regal , after he defeated Noble in a rematch . On the following episode of Raw , Layla reinforced her decision , telling Noble that she had finally found a worthy man in Regal . Over the next few months , Layla competed only sporadically in matches , spending most of her time managing Regal , and was present at ringside when Regal defeated Santino Marella on 10 November to win the WWE Intercontinental Championship . On 5 April , Layla competed in a Divas battle royal at WrestleMania XXV , but the match was won by Santina Marella . 
 = = = = LayCool and Women 's Champion ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 On 15 April 2009 , Layla was drafted to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft . She began a scripted rivalry with Eve Torres , and lost both a dance contest and an arm wrestling match to Torres , before losing a match to her on the 29 May episode of SmackDown . After Torres defeated Layla again on WWE Superstars on 18 June , the two shook hands . 
 She then formed an alliance with Michelle McCool , later called Team LayCool . Team LayCool began a scripted rivalry with Mickie James in October , making a mockery of her weight and vowing to make her leave SmackDown just after her debut for the brand . At the Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view , McCool 's team lost to James ' team . At TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs , Layla interfered in the WWE Women 's Championship match between McCool and James by helping McCool retain the championship . In January 2010 , at the Royal Rumble , Layla came out in a fatsuit , mocking James prior to the championship match between McCool and James ; however , the mockery backfired , as James attacked Layla and used that as a distraction to quickly defeat McCool to win the championship . On 12 February episode of SmackDown , Layla and McCool defeated James in a handicap match made by Official SmackDown Consultant Vickie Guerrero , who had been accidentally humiliated by James backstage . Guerrero then began managing LayCool , accompanying them to the ring and regularly interfering in their matches . At the Elimination Chamber pay @-@ per @-@ view , Layla and McCool defeated Raw 's Gail Kim and Maryse in an inter @-@ brand Divas tag team match . At WrestleMania XXVI , Layla was on the winning team in a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match . 
 Team LayCool faced the WWE Women 's Champion , Beth Phoenix , in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match on the 14 May episode of SmackDown . Layla pinned Phoenix to win the Women 's Championship for the first time , becoming the first British woman to hold the championship . She is also the first Diva Search winner to have won the championship . Following her win , Team LayCool began calling themselves the co @-@ Women 's Champions . On 1 June , it was announced that LayCool would be mentoring Kaval during the second season of WWE NXT . On 18 July , Layla had her first title defense when she defeated Kelly Kelly at the Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view . On 30 July , SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long informed LayCool that there was only one Women 's Champion , and they had a week to decide who it would be . The following week , LayCool revealed that they had cut the championship belt into two , turning it into a friendship charm and circumventing Long 's orders . In September , Layla and McCool challenged WWE Divas Champion Melina to a championship unification match at Night of Champions . McCool participated in the match and won , with Layla 's help , to unify both championships into the WWE Unified Divas Championship . Layla unofficially became the co @-@ champion , and defended the championship against Melina the following night on Raw . After both members of LayCool had successfully defended the championship against Natalya , they faced her in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match at Survivor Series , which Natalya won to become the new Divas Champion . Following Survivor Series , Natalya and Phoenix formed an alliance to continue the feud with LayCool , and at the TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs pay @-@ per @-@ view in December , LayCool lost to them in the first Diva 's tag team tables match in WWE . LayCool invoked their rematch clause in January 2011 , prompting the scheduling of a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match for the Royal Rumble . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view however , the anonymous Raw General Manager altered the match to a fatal four @-@ way , also involving Eve Torres . Eve went on to pin Layla and become the new Divas Champion . 
 Dissension between Layla and McCool began to show following the loss of the Divas Championship , and the two appeared in a series of vignettes in which they were attending couples therapy . On 22 April episode of SmackDown , McCool attacked Layla during one of their storyline therapy sessions . During the 2011 WWE Draft on 25 April , Layla lost a match to Eve and was attacked afterward by McCool , but was able to fight her off , turning face in the process . On 29 April , the pair faced each other in a match , which ended in a double countout . As a result , the pair faced each other in a no countout , no disqualification , loser leaves WWE match at the Extreme Rules pay @-@ per @-@ view on 1 May , which Layla won , thus forcing McCool to retire from WWE . 
 Layla announced that she had suffered a knee injury at Extreme Rules on SmackDown on 13 May , and was interrupted and attacked by Kharma to write her off television . Later that month , it was confirmed that Layla had legitimately torn both her Anterior cruciate and <unk> collateral ligaments , and required surgery . 
 = = = = Divas Champion ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 Layla made her in @-@ ring return at a Florida Championship Wrestling event on 22 March 2012 . She made her return to the main WWE roster at the Extreme Rules pay @-@ per @-@ view on 29 April , replacing Beth Phoenix , who was not medically cleared to compete , in a match for the WWE Divas Championship . Despite interference from Brie Bella , Layla defeated Nikki Bella to win the WWE Divas Championship for the first time . The following night on Raw , she successfully defended the championship against both Nikki and Brie in a triple threat match , and retained twice against Beth Phoenix at the Over the Limit and No Way Out pay @-@ per @-@ views in May and June respectively . On 20 August episode of Raw , Kaitlyn won a battle royal to become the number one contender to Layla 's Divas Championship . At Night of Champions , Kaitlyn was removed from the championship match following a storyline injury and replaced with Eve Torres . Torres would go on to defeat Layla for the Divas Championship , ending her reign at 140 days . 
 Layla defeated Torres in a non @-@ title match on Superstars to earn a shot at the Divas Championship . She received her title match on 15 October , but was unsuccessful , and failed again to regain the championship in a three @-@ way match at Hell in a Cell that also involved Kaitlyn . On 12 November , on Raw , Layla was defeated by Kaitlyn in a number one contenders match for the championship . On 16 December at the Tables , Ladders & Chairs pay @-@ per @-@ view , Layla competed in a number one contender 's " Santa 's Little Helpers " battle royal to face Torres for the championship , but was unsuccessful in winning the match . 
 = = = = Various storylines and retirement ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 In early 2013 , Layla briefly developed a feud with Tamina Snuka , losing to her in singles matches before defeating her in a tag team match . As part of the feud , Layla allied herself with the new WWE Divas Champion Kaitlyn , and the two began accompanying each other to ringside . On the 2 August episode of SmackDown , Layla turned villainous and stopped Kaitlyn from spearing AJ Lee , costing Kaitlyn both the match and the Divas Championship , after which she left with AJ . In subsequent weeks , the evil Layla defeated Kaitlyn in singles competition and in a tag team match with AJ as her partner . In late 2013 , Layla took a hiatus from WWE due to ongoing personal issues . 
 Layla returned at a non @-@ televised event on 14 March 2014 , and made her television return the following week on an episode of Main Event , where she and Alicia Fox lost to The Funkadactyls ( Naomi and Cameron ) . Layla participated in the Vickie Guerrero Divas Championship Invitational match at WrestleMania XXX , which was won by defending champion AJ Lee . The following week , Layla replaced Summer Rae as Fandango 's dance partner and valet , and quickly became embroiled in a feud with Emma and Santino Marella . In May , Layla appeared on the rebooted WWE NXT , entering a tournament to determine the new NXT Women 's Champion , but lost to Natalya in the first round . Fandango 's former dance partner Summer Rae returned on 19 May , attacking Layla . Competing over Fandango 's affections , Layla and Rae repeatedly attacked each other , prompting a match at Money in the Bank with Fandango as the special guest referee , which Layla won . During a rematch in July on SmackDown , Layla and Rae attacked Fandango , before dancing with each other . Starting at Battleground , the pair formed an alliance and began distracting Fandango during his matches , causing him to lose . In their first match as a team , Layla and Rae , who dubbed themselves " The Slayers " , lost to AJ Lee and Paige on the 18 July episode of SmackDown . The duo won their first match on the 2 September episode of Main Event , where they defeated Rosa Mendes and Natalya . The Slayers were part of Paige 's team at Survivor Series in November , but were both eliminated , and their team lost the match . In January 2015 , Layla underwent surgery for unknown reasons , and the Slayers quietly disbanded . 
 Layla returned on the 14 April episode of Main Event , where she defeated Emma in a singles match . On the 13 June episode of WWE Superstars , Layla lost to Paige in what would be her final televised match . On 29 July , WWE announced that Layla had decided to retire from professional wrestling . 
 = = Modeling career = = 
 El has been featured in the magazines King , Smooth , and was the cover @-@ girl for the first issue of Liquid . She also posed for FHM with the other members of Extreme Exposé . Layla , along with Beth Phoenix and Candice Michelle , appeared in the February 2009 issue of Flex Magazine . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In April 2007 , El and several other WWE Divas appeared in the music video for " Throw It On Me " by Timbaland and The Hives . During the week of 5 November 2007 , she appeared on five episodes of Family Feud with other WWE wrestlers . On 6 February 2008 she appeared on Project Runway with several WWE Divas as part of the week 's challenge . El also appeared on 13 April 2008 episode of Celebrity Fit Club Boot Camp as a trainer . 
 In 2012 , she ranked number 95 in Maxim 's Hot 100 . The next year , El alongside Alicia Fox appeared on the Summerslam episode of Cupcake Wars . El has also made guest <unk> on Total Divas . 
 El appears as a playable character in the video games WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 , WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2011 , WWE ' 12 , WWE ' 13 , WWE 2K14 , and WWE 2K16 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 El has previously lived in Miami , Florida , and Los Angeles , California . El 's mother died in August 2008 at the age of 48 due to breast cancer . El 's mother had battled it three times in two decades . In October 2012 , El appeared in a commercial from the WWE and Susan G. Komen for the Cure to promote awareness for finding a cure for breast cancer . El incorporated infinity symbols on her wrestling attire as a tribute to her mother . 
 El began dating fellow wrestler Richard Young , better known as Ricky Ortiz , in mid – 2014 . On July 28 , 2015 , El announced their engagement , and the two were married on November 27 in Glendale , Arizona . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Bombshell ( Roundhouse kick , sometimes while spinning ) 
 The Facelift ( Diving somersault three @-@ quarter facelock jawbreaker ) – 2010 @-@ 2012 
 The Layout ( Hangman 's neckbreaker ) 
 Signature moves 
 Bodyscissors , sometimes transitioned into a guillotine choke 
 Inverted DDT 
 Flying clothesline 
 Hanging figure @-@ four necklock 
 Headscissors , sometimes transitioned into figure @-@ four 
 Hip attack , to a bent over opponent . 
 Indian deathlock , sometimes transitioned into a pin 
 Infinity ( Bridging <unk> pin , as an arm drag counter ) 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Back , sometimes to an oncoming opponent 
 Low drop , to a seated opponent to the face or the back 
 Reverse roundhouse 
 Side 
 Super 
 Leglock 
 LOL – Lots of Layla ( Double jump springboard reverse crossbody ) 
 Modified crossface , sometimes while trapping the opponents arm 
 Modified surfboard stretch 
 Multiple pinning variations 
 Jackknife 
 Prawn hold 
 Roll @-@ up , sometimes while trapping the leg of the opponent 
 Schoolgirl , sometimes from out of the corner 
 Sunset flip 
 Sleeper hold 
 Snapmare , sometimes followed by a shoot kick or a low dropkick to the opponents face , or back 
 Kneeling facebuster 
 With Michelle McCool 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Double running big boot 
 Leg trap ( Layla ) and big boot ( McCool ) combination 
 Double team signature moves 
 Double forward Russian legsweep 
 Managers 
 Michelle McCool 
 Vickie Guerrero 
 Summer Rae 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Kaitlyn 
 The Miz 
 Jamie Noble 
 William Regal 
 Michelle McCool 
 Fandango 
 Entrance themes 
 " Nasty Girl " by <unk> Malinga , Drew Milligan and Nicole Nicholson ( 2007 @-@ 2009 ) 
 " Not Man Enough for Me " by Jim Johnston ( 2009 – 2012 , 2014 – 2015 ) 
 " Insatiable " performed by Patsy Grime and composed by Jim Johnston ( 2012 – 2013 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked her 6 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2012 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 WWE Divas Championship ( 1 time , 2 unofficially ) 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 1 time , final ) 
 WWE Diva Search ( 2006 ) 
 Slammy Award for Knucklehead Moment of the Year ( 2010 ) – Lay @-@ Cool loses to Mae Young — with Michelle McCool 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Aces and eights ( blackjack ) = 
 Splitting aces and eights is part of blackjack basic strategy . Rules vary across gambling establishments regarding resplitting , doubling , multiple card draws , and the payout for blackjack , and there are conditional strategic responses that depend upon the number of decks used , the frequency of shuffling and dealer 's cards . However , regardless of the various situations , the common strategic wisdom in the blackjack community is to " Always split aces and eights " when dealt either pair as initial cards . This is generally the first rule of any splitting strategy . 
 = = Splitting = = 
 The object of blackjack is for a player to defeat the dealer by obtaining a total as close to 21 as possible without accumulating a total that exceeds this number . In blackjack , the standard rule is that if the player is dealt a pair of identically ranked initial cards , known as a pair , the player is allowed to split them into separate hands and ask for a new second card for each while placing a full initial bet identical to the original wager with each . After placing the wager for the split hands the dealer gives the player an additional card for each split card . The two hands created by splitting are considered independently in competition against the dealer . Splitting allows the gambler to turn a bad hand into one or two hands with a good possibility of winning . It also allows the player to double the bet when the dealer busts . Some rules even allow for resplitting until the player has as many as four hands or allow doubling the bet after a split so that each hand has a bet double the original . The standard rules are that when a bet is doubled on a hand , the player is only allowed to draw one more card for that hand . 
 = = = Aces = = = 
 A pair of aces gives the blackjack player a starting hand value of either a 2 or a soft 12 which is a problematic starting hand in either case . Splitting aces gives a player two chances to hit 21 . Splitting aces is so favorable to the player that most gambling establishments have rules limiting the player 's rights to do so . In most casinos the player is only allowed to draw one card on each split ace . As a general rule , a ten on a split ace ( or vice versa ) is not considered a natural blackjack and does not get any bonus . Prohibiting resplitting and redoubling is also common . Regardless of the payout for blackjack , the rules for resplitting , the rules for doubling , the rules for multiple card draws and the dealer 's cards , one should always split aces . 
 = = = Eights = = = 
 If a player is dealt a pair of eights , the total of 16 is considered a troublesome hand . In fact , the value 16 is said to be the worst hand one can have in blackjack . Since sixteen of the other fifty cards have a value of 10 and four have a value of 11 , there is a strong chance of getting at least an 18 with either or both split cards . A hand totaling 18 or 19 is much stronger than having a 16 . Splitting eights limits one 's losses and improves one 's hand . Probabilistic research of expected value scenarios shows that by splitting eights one can convert a hand that presents an expected loss to two hands that may present an expected profit or a reduced loss , depending on what the dealer is showing . A split pair of eights is expected to win against dealer <unk> of 2 through 7 and to lose less against dealer <unk> of 8 through ace . If a player hits on a pair of eights , he is expected to lose $ 52 for a $ 100 bet . If the player splits the eights , he is expected to lose only $ 43 for a $ 100 bet . 
 = = History = = 
 Blackjack 's " Four Horsemen " ( Roger Baldwin , Wilbert Cantey , Herbert Maisel and James McDermott ) , using adding machines , determined that splitting eights was less costly than playing the pair of eights as a 16 . They were part of a 1950s group that discovered that strategy could reduce the house edge to almost zero in blackjack . Now a typical strategy involves the following sequence of playing decisions : one decides whether to surrender , whether to split , whether to double down , and whether to hit or stand . 
 One of the earliest proponents of the strategy of splitting eights is Ed Thorp , who developed the strategy on an IBM 704 as part of an overall blackjack strategic theory published in Beat the Dealer : A Winning Strategy for the Game of Twenty @-@ One in 1962 . Thorp was the originator of the card counting system for blackjack . 
 = T19 Howitzer Motor Carriage = 
 The T19 Howitzer Motor Carriage ( HMC ) , was a 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) howitzer mounted on a M3 Half @-@ track chassis . It saw service during World War II with the U.S. Army . Its secondary armament consisted of an air @-@ cooled .50 in ( 13 mm ) M2 machine gun for local defense . It was produced by Diamond T between January 1942 and April 1942 . 
 It principally served in the North African Campaign , although some served in the Allied invasion of Sicily and the subsequent Italian Campaign , and even as late as the invasion of southern France in 1944 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The T19 Howitzer Gun Motor Carriage was similar to the M3 Half @-@ track , as it shared the same chassis , engine , suspension , armor , and fuel tank . It was 20 ft 2 in long , 6 ft 5 in wide , 7 ft 8 in high , with a weight of 9 @.@ 54 short tons . The suspension consisted of semi @-@ elliptical longitudinal leaf springs for the wheels and vertical volute springs for the tracks . It was powered by a White 160AX , 147 hp , 386 in3 , six @-@ cylinder gasoline engine with a compression ratio of 6 @.@ 3 : 1 . It was capable of a maximum road speed of 45 mph . The power @-@ to @-@ weight ratio was 14 @.@ 7 hp / ton . 
 The vehicle was operated by a crew of six . Maximum armor was only 0 @.@ 5 inch at the windshield and 0 @.@ 25 inches everywhere else . The armament consisted of one 105 mm M2A1 howitzer ( equipped with eight rounds of ammunition ) with a single .50 caliber ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning machine gun ( equipped with 300 rounds of ammunition ) for local defense . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the autumn of 1941 , when the Armored Force expanded , an urgent need for self @-@ propelled artillery arose . Although a full @-@ track chassis was preferred , the situation required the use of whatever vehicles were immediately available . The M3 Half @-@ track was selected to carry a 105 mm M2A1 howitzer . Although this design had originally been suggested in September 1941 , it had not been taken up . However , the urgency of the requirement resulted in the approval by the Adjutant General and the construction of a prototype was authorized by <unk> <unk> , dated 31 October 1941 ; the new vehicle designated as the 105 mm Howitzer Motor Carriage T19 . 
 As with other American self @-@ propelled guns produced during the early World War II period , the prototype was assembled and tested at the Aberdeen Proving Ground . The M2 recoil mechanism and other parts of the M2 howitzer carriage were used in the vehicle mounting . After several tests , the gun carriage proved fragile on bumpy terrain . The problem was corrected by reinforcing the frame , and redesigning the howitzer mount . <unk> headlights were recommended because of the muzzle blast , although they were not available for early production models . Early models had no shield for the howitzer either , but a foldable shield was added during testing . The gun faced forward , like many other half @-@ track models . The total traverse was 40 degrees and the elevation was from − 5 to + 35 degrees . The armored windshield cover was remounted so it could fold onto the hood . After further testing , it was accepted for production . 
 After the design was accepted , a prototype was shipped to Diamond T as a guide for production . The first production vehicle was delivered to the US Army in January 1942 . A total of 324 <unk> had been made by the time production ended in April 1942 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The T19 HMC was designed as a stopgap measure until better self @-@ propelled artillery pieces were made ; it served in the Tunisia Campaign in North Africa in 1942 – 43 . It was employed mainly in most battalions ' headquarter platoons , and the " cannon companies " of infantry divisions . The T19 was soon replaced in armored divisions by the M7 Priest , a 105 mm howitzer on a fully tracked chassis . 
 It served with only a few units in Sicily and Italy . On one occasion in Sicily , a T19 company ( part of the 16th Infantry Regiment ) halted a German tank attack by destroying six tanks , for the loss of one T19 . That unit was later awarded the Presidential Unit Citation . A few served as late as 1945 in southern France . It was finally declared obsolete in July 1945 . That month , the contractor Brown & McLaughlin converted 90 <unk> into M3A1 Half @-@ tracks . 
 = The Hockey Sweater = 
 The Hockey Sweater ( Le <unk> de hockey in the original French ) is a short story by Canadian author Roch Carrier and translated to English by Sheila Fischman . It was originally published in 1979 under the title " Une abominable feuille d <unk> sur la glace " ( " An abominable maple leaf on the ice " ) . It was adapted into an animated short called The Sweater ( Le <unk> ) by the National Film Board of Canada ( NFB ) in 1980 and illustrated by Sheldon Cohen . 
 The story is based on a real experience Carrier had as a child in Sainte @-@ Justine , Quebec in 1946 as a fan of the Montreal Canadiens hockey team and its star player , Maurice Richard . Carrier and his friends all wear Canadiens ' sweaters with Richard 's number 9 on the back . When his mother orders a new sweater after the old one has worn out , he is mistakenly sent a sweater of Montreal 's bitter rival , the Toronto Maple Leafs , instead . Carrier faces the persecution of his peers and his coach prevents him from playing . 
 The Hockey Sweater is Carrier 's most famous work and is considered an iconic piece of Canadian literature . The story has sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies and has been republished in numerous anthologies . It exemplifies the nation 's passion for hockey , and while it is often considered an allegory of the relationship and tensions that exist between francophones and anglophones , the story is popular throughout the entire nation . A line from the story appears on Canadian five @-@ dollar bills printed between 2001 and 2013 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the aftermath of Quebec 's Quiet Revolution , tensions between francophones within the province and anglophones escalated as a provincial movement , led by the governing Parti Québécois , to separate from Canada reached its peak in the late 1970s . Seeking to explain Quebec 's independence movement , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 's ( CBC ) Toronto affiliate asked Roch Carrier , whose debut novel La Guerre , Yes Sir had been popular among both French and English Canadians , to explain " what does Quebec want ? " 
 Carrier spent several weeks trying to answer the question , ultimately producing what he described as a " flat essay " that was " dull as an editorial in a newspaper " . Three days before his deadline , Carrier informed the CBC that he would not be able to complete the project . He was told that the network had already booked studio time for him and had been promoting his appearance . As he remained unwilling to present his essay , Carrier was asked to write about anything he wanted to fill the time . 
 Considering what to write , Carrier thought of his own childhood . He stated in an interview that he began thinking of " when was it that I felt I was really myself ? And I remember it was when I put on my skates and my Eaton catalogues on my legs , and I stood up , and I was taller than my mom , and I had a stick in my hands , so I was stronger than my brother , and I felt that I was little me . So I started to write about that and it turned into the Hockey Sweater story . " 
 = = Summary = = 
 The Hockey Sweater is based on a real experience Carrier had in 1946 in his home town of Sainte @-@ Justine , Quebec . The story centres on the obsession he and his friends had with the Montreal Canadiens ' organization and their star player , Maurice " The Rocket " Richard . He writes of how they emulated Richard 's style and mannerisms , and on the ice : " we were five Maurice Richards against five other Maurice Richards , throwing themselves on the puck . We were ten players all wearing the uniform of the Montréal Canadiens , all with the same burning enthusiasm . We all wore the famous number 9 on our backs . " 
 His old sweater having worn out , Carrier 's mother seeks to replace it . She writes a letter to Eaton 's in French to order a new sweater from their English @-@ only catalogue . When the package arrives , the young Carrier is horrified to discover the sweater of the rival Toronto Maple Leafs was sent by mistake . He argues with his mother , who refuses to return the sweater for fear of offending " Monsieur Eaton " , an English @-@ speaking fan of Toronto . 
 A humiliated Carrier wears the sweater to the rink where his peers stare at him in his blue sweater . His coach removes him from his usual forward position , holding him back as a reserve on defence . By the third period , he still has not played when one of his team 's defencemen is struck with a stick . Believing his chance had finally come , Carrier jumps onto the ice , only to be given an immediate penalty by the parish priest acting as referee . The priest claims Carrier 's substitution is illegal as there are already five players on the ice . Carrier is so mad that he smashes his stick on the ice in frustration , for which the priest scolds him : " just because you 're wearing a new Toronto Maple Leafs sweater unlike the others , it doesn 't mean you 're going to make the laws around here . " The priest sends Carrier to the church to pray for forgiveness , where Carrier instead asks God to send " a hundred million moths " to eat his Toronto Maple Leafs sweater . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Carrier wrote the story in French , and it first appeared in 1979 under the title " Une abominable feuille d <unk> sur la glace " ( " An abominable maple leaf on the ice " ) in a collection of his works called Les Enfants du <unk> dans la lune ( Children of the Man in the Moon ) . It appeared in an English translation by Sheila Fischman the same year as part of an English collection of Carrier 's work called The Hockey Sweater and other stories . It has since been republished in numerous anthologies of Canadian and hockey literature . 
 A year after publication , the National Film Board of Canada adapted the story into a ten @-@ minute animated short film called The Sweater . It was animated by Sheldon Cohen and voiced by Carrier . The film became one of the National Film Board 's most popular works and has won numerous awards . It was named the Best Animated Film at the 1981 British Academy Film Awards . 
 In 1982 Cohen approached May Cutler , founder of Tundra Books , to create an illustrated children 's book of the story . It was published in 1984 as The Hockey Sweater , and by 2014 had sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies . Following the success of the book , Cutler asked Carrier to write three more stories of his childhood to be illustrated by Cohen , each covering a different sport in a different season . They were published as The Boxing Champion ( 1991 ) , The Longest Home Run ( 1994 ) and The Basketball Player ( 1996 ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The passion Carrier and his friends had for the game of hockey , particularly for the Montreal Canadiens , is the dominant theme of the story . In introducing the film for his video anthology Leonard Maltin 's Animation Favorites from the National Film Board of Canada , American critic Leonard Maltin noted that hockey is " an obsession , a country @-@ wide preoccupation that dominates many lives " , particularly those of children . He argued that The Sweater is one of the National Film Board 's best animated works that combined humour with cultural significance . 
 Of particular emphasis was the children 's fascination with Maurice Richard . Montreal 's star player from 1942 until 1960 , Richard was a prolific goal scorer . In the 1944 – 45 season – one year before the events of The Hockey Sweater – Richard became the first player in National Hockey League history to score 50 goals in a 50 @-@ game season . Richard attended the 1980 premiere of The Sweater in Montreal , and according to Carrier , was moved to tears by the film . Richard also requested copies so that he could show it to his own children . 
 Sheldon Posen , curator of the Canadian Museum of Civilization , noted during the opening of an exhibit dedicated to Richard in 2004 that he had long been an idol in Quebec , but it was Carrier 's story that expanded Richard 's reputation in English Canada and sealed his place as a pan @-@ Canadian hero . Jason Blake , a professor of English at the University of Ljubljana , argued the irony of this in his book Canadian Hockey Literature . He stated that many francophones viewed Richard as a " hero of the people , an athletic freedom fighter against the rest of Canada " . The conflicts Carrier experienced in The Hockey Sweater are sometimes viewed as being an allegory for the relationship and tensions between French and English Canada , as well as the rivalry between the Canadiens and the Maple Leafs . Carrier stated , however , he had no political motivations , and only wished to " tell a good little story " . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The Hockey Sweater has achieved an iconic place in Canadian literature . It is the defining work of Carrier 's career , and while he has lamented the fact that it has so overshadowed his other works , Carrier appreciates what its popularity has given him : " There is almost not one day in my life that there is not something nice that happens because of the story . " 
 As an illustration of the place hockey holds in the Canadian psyche , the Bank of Canada placed a line from the story on the reverse of the 2001 series five @-@ dollar bill , making Carrier the first author to be quoted on a Canadian banknote . The line , appearing in both French and English is : « Les <unk> de mon <unk> <unk> des <unk> longues , longues . Nous <unk> en trois <unk> : l ’ école , l ’ <unk> et la <unk> ; mais la <unk> vie était sur la <unk> . » / " The winters of my childhood were long , long seasons . We lived in three places – the school , the church and the skating rink – but our real life was on the skating rink . " It is accompanied by scenes of children playing outdoors in the winter , centred by one in a Montreal Canadiens ' sweater with Maurice Richard 's number 9 on their back . 
 The illustrated book of The Hockey Sweater was among the children 's books included as official Canadian gifts presented to the Prince of Wales and his family during an official visit in 1991 , for his then nine @-@ year @-@ old son William . Canadian astronaut Robert Thirsk , as part of a personal tradition of honouring others , brought a copy of the story to space when he travelled to the International Space Station in 2009 and later presented the copy to Carrier . Of the story , Thirsk said : " It represents part of Canadian literacy , it represents support of reading and I just wanted to say thank you to Mr. Carrier . " The story has also been set to music by composer Abigail Richardson @-@ Schulte as part of a piece commissioned by the Toronto Symphony , the Calgary Philharmonic and National Arts Centre Orchestras in 2012 . 
 = New York State Route 227 = 
 New York State Route 227 ( NY 227 ) is a state highway in the Finger Lakes region of New York in the United States . The highway extends for 9 @.@ 84 miles ( 15 @.@ 84 km ) in a northeast – southwest direction from an intersection with NY 79 south of the hamlet of Reynoldsville in the town of Hector to a junction with NY 96 in the village of Trumansburg . In between , NY 227 intersects NY 228 in Perry City by the east town line of Hector and passes through the town of Ulysses . Part of NY 227 straddles the Schuyler – Tompkins county line . 
 When NY 227 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it extended from just east of Watkins Glen to Perry City . The route was extended northward to Trumansburg in the early 1940s , replacing part of NY 79 ; however , it was replaced by NY 79 from Watkins Glen to Reynoldsville in the early 1960s . Prior to 1930 , the sections of NY 227 near Reynoldsville and north of Perry City were part of Route 46 , an unsigned legislative route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 227 begins at a fork off NY 79 in the town of Hector . The route bends northward , passing the eastern extremities of Finger Lakes National Forest before turning eastward into the hamlet of Reynoldsville . It serves as the main east @-@ west road through Reynoldsville , remaining two lanes wide as it runs through the small community . After leaving the hamlet , the route keeps its gradual northeastern progression , running parallel with the nearby <unk> Road , which forks off toward NY 228 . Not far from the junction , NY 227 bends eastward for a short distance near a farm , the first in a series of eastward and northeastward turns over the next 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) . It finally heads due east into the hamlet of Perry City , where it passes some houses ahead of the northern terminus of NY 228 . At this intersection , NY 227 turns to the north on NY 228 's right @-@ of @-@ way while NY 227 's alignment continues eastward as County Route 3 ( CR 3 ) , a short 0 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) connector to CR 142 at the nearby Tompkins County line . 
 Continuing north from Perry City , NY 227 straddles the Schuyler – Tompkins county line , with the northbound lane in Tompkins County . After 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , NY 227 turns northeastward , leaving the border and completely entering Tompkins County in the town of Ulysses . Here , directional signage along the route switches from east – west to north – south . The backdrop remains rural for another mile to an intersection with Mayo Road , where the land surrounding the highway begins to become more populated . NY 227 continues its northeastern progression into the village of Trumansburg , initially passing the local golf course and intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 149 ( <unk> Road ) . The area around the road becomes primarily residential , a trend that follows the route to its northern end at a junction with NY 96 ( West Main Street ) in downtown Trumansburg . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1911 , the New York State Legislature created Route 46 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Coopers Plains in Chemung County to Trumansburg in Tompkins County via Watkins Glen . East of Watkins Glen , Route 46 proceeded generally northeastward through Burdett , Reynoldsville and Mecklenburg on its way to Trumansburg . On March 1 , 1921 , the Route 46 designation was reassigned to another highway in Allegany and Steuben counties as part of a partial renumbering of the legislative route system . The 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) segment of pre @-@ 1921 Route 46 that ran alongside Seneca Lake became part of NY 78 c . 1927 ; however , the remainder of old Route 46 between Watkins Glen and Trumansburg went unnumbered until 1930 . 
 NY 78 was replaced by NY 44 ( now NY 414 ) in the vicinity of Watkins Glen as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . At the same time , two parts of the pre @-@ 1921 routing of Route 46 east of Seneca Lake were assigned posted route numbers for the first time . From just northeast of Watkins Glen to Reynoldsville , the old road became part of NY 227 , which initially extended from NY 44 ( now NY 414 ) near Watkins Glen to NY 79 in Perry City . While Route 46 veered southeast from Reynoldsville to serve Mecklenburg , NY 227 proceeded northeast from the former to connect to Perry City . The portion of old Route 46 north of Perry City became part of NY 79 . 
 NY 227 was extended north to Trumansburg in the early 1940s , replacing NY 79 , which was truncated south to its junction with NY 227 in Perry City . NY 79 was rerouted west of Mecklenburg in the early 1960s to end at NY 414 near Watkins Glen . The realignment supplanted NY 227 from Watkins Glen to Reynoldsville and utilized the old Route 46 corridor from there to Mecklenburg . NY 227 was truncated to its junction with NY 79 south of Reynoldsville at this time . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 1899 Sewanee Tigers football team = 
 The 1899 Sewanee Tigers football team represented Sewanee : The University of the South in the 1899 college football season . Sewanee was one of the first college football powers of the South and the 1899 team in particular was very strong . The 1899 Tigers went 12 – 0 , outscoring opponents 322 to 10 , and won the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) title . 
 With just 13 players , the team known as the " Iron Men " had a six @-@ day road trip with five shutout wins over Texas A & M ; Texas ; Tulane ; LSU ; and Ole Miss . Sportswriter Grantland Rice called the group " the most durable football team I ever saw . " The road trip is recalled memorably with the Biblical allusion " ... and on the seventh day they rested . " 
 The 11 extra points against Cumberland by B. U. Sims is still a school record . The offense was led by Diddy Seibels ; the defense by Ormond Simkins . John Heisman 's Auburn team was the only one even to score on Sewanee . 
 = = Before the season = = 
 Despite being from a small Episcopal university in the mountains of Tennessee , the team came to dominate football in the region during the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries . Like several other football powers of yore such as the University of Chicago , Sewanee today emphasizes scholarship over athletics . 
 Sewanee had 7 starters return from the undefeated 1898 team . Before play started , the Sewanee men trained hard for several weeks under coach Suter . With experience and weight , the team was hopeful for an undisputed southern championship . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 Source : 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Sewanee ’ s 1899 season was very successful . From October 21 through December 2 , under the leadership of Coach Herman [ Billy ] Suter and future College Football Hall of Famer captain Henry “ Diddy ” Seibels , the Sewanee team , officially the Tigers but nicknamed the " Iron Men , " played and won twelve games , was unscored upon except for one game , outscored its opponents 322 to 10 , and was champion of the South . Most of their twelve opponents , including Tennessee , Louisiana State , and Texas , are among the all @-@ time powers in college football . 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 Ormond Simkins was the star of the 12 to 0 opening win over the Georgia Bulldogs , netting the first touchdown with a fine line buck of 12 yards through center " amidst thunderous applause " . Rex Kilpatrick scored a second touchdown on a 4 @-@ yard run . 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against Georgia : Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Georgia Tech = = = 
 Sewanee followed the defeat of Georgia with a 32 to 0 victory over Georgia Tech on the following Monday . Sewanee won easily , the first score coming soon after the kickoff on a blocked kick recovered by Quintard Gray . Gray scored the next touchdown on 25 @-@ yard end run . Just fifteen minutes had passed when Diddy Seibels scored the third touchdown . The next three touchdowns were also scored by Seibels , including pretty runs of 35 and 40 yards . The team played its substitutes in the second half . 
 = = = Tennessee = = = 
 In a driving rain at McGee Field , " where each 5 @-@ yard line was a miniature stream " , Sewanee beat the Tennessee Volunteers 46 to 0 . Diddy Seibels led the scoring with three touchdowns . " Touchdown followed touchdown , until Sewanee finally stopped scoring from sheer exhaustion " to quote The Sewanee Purple . 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against Tennessee : Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , K. Smith ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Southwestern Presbyterian = = = 
 Sewanee next defeated Southwestern Presbyterian 54 to 0 . The Sewanee Purple wrote " Never before in the history of football at Sewanee have we piled up such a score against an opponent . " 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against Southwestern Presbyterian : Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Gray ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = The Road trip : 5 shutouts in 6 days = = = 
 The 1899 Iron Men team 's most notable accomplishment was a six @-@ day period from November 9 to 14 which is arguably the greatest road trip in college football history . Manager Luke Lea , after a disagreement with traditional rival Vanderbilt University over gate receipts resulting in the 1899 game being cancelled , sought a way to make up for the lost revenue . In response , Lea put together an improbable schedule of playing five big name opponents in six days . Playing so many games in a short period minimized costs while maximizing revenue . During this road trip , Sewanee outscored its opponents for a combined 91 – 0 , including Texas , Texas A & M , LSU , and Ole Miss . Sewanee obliterated each one , traveling by train for some 2 @,@ 500 miles . This feat , barring fundamental changes in modern @-@ day football , can never be equaled . Contemporary sources called the road trip the most remarkable ever made by an American college team . 
 = = = = Texas = = = = 
 The train carrying the players pulled into Austin on the night of the 8th to face the undefeated Texas Longhorns the following afternoon . Sewanee won 12 to 0 . Sewanee scored five minutes into the first quarter , and a minute before the end of the game , " and the intervening time was devoted to the liveliest battle ever witnessed here " . Diddy Seibels played throughout the game , scoring both touchdowns , despite his head having split open just above his left eye , bleeding profusely . By the end of the game his head was coated with blood . 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against Texas : Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = = Texas A & M = = = = 
 Not 20 hours had passed since the Texas game before the Tigers faced the Texas A & M Aggies . The Tigers won 10 to 0 . Guard Wild Bill Claiborne was blind in one eye , and used his discolored eye for purposes of intimidation : " See this ? I lost it yesterday in Austin . This afternoon I 'm getting a new one ! " Ormond Simkins first ran in a touchdown from the 1 @-@ yard @-@ line near the end of the first half . Quarterback Warbler Wilson got the second touchdown with five seconds left in the game . Texas A & M 's campus paper , the Battalion , reported : ... " ( the Sewanee Tigers ) are unmistakably the champions of the South this year ... " 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against Texas A & M : Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Gray ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = = Tulane = = = = 
 After another 350 @-@ mile overnight train leg , the Tigers beat Tulane in New Orleans 23 to 0 . Rex Kilpatrick scored first . Quintard Gray scored twice more . The lone score of the second half was another , 5 @-@ yard run by Kilpatrick . The game was called early due to darkness . The starting lineup was Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = = LSU = = = = 
 Before the trip to Baton Rouge , the team saw a play , and then toured a sugar plantation owned by John Dalton Shaffer , rather than enjoy the nightlife of New Orleans . One source reported center William H. Poole " drank heavily " on the one day off . Sewanee then defeated LSU 34 to 0 . 
 Diddy Seibels scored first . Sewanee 's next run from scrimmage was then another Seibels touchdown . Rex Kilpatrick had one score , and Sewanee managed three further touchdowns . One account reads " In spite of their long , tiresome trip , the Sewanee men were lively as school boys out for a day off . " 
 = = = = Mississippi = = = = 
 The Tigers arrived in Memphis to play Mississippi on their third pre @-@ game overnight train ride in five days . " Ole Miss " kept the game close . Diddy Seibels scored the first touchdown with fifteen seconds left in the first half , and Kilpatrick scored the second with thirteen to go to the final whistle . The local Commercial Appeal praised the Tigers : " Yesterday 's score against ( Mississippi ) marked the two hundred and fortieth point for which the Tennesseans have scored to nothing for their opponents , during the present season . The trip of the Sewanee eleven , along with record , will probably remain unequaled for generations " . 
 = = = Cumberland = = = 
 Seemingly unfazed by the travel , next week the Tigers crushed the Cumberland Bulldogs 71 to 0 . One account reads : " For five minutes after the beginning of the game Cumberland made some good gains , but the Sewanee defense suddenly grew strong , the ball was secured on downs , and Seibels crossed the line for touchdown seven minutes after play began . " B. U. Sims had a school record 11 extra points , and Ormond Simkins rested instead of playing . 
 The starting lineup was Sims ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Pearce ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Brooks ( fullback ) 
 = = = Auburn : The only points scored = = = 
 Only John Heisman 's Auburn team managed to score on Sewanee 's " Iron Men . " Sewanee won by a narrow margin of 11 to 10 . As a witness to the game , in which the Auburn team ran an early version of the hurry @-@ up offense , and played exceptionally well on defense , sportswriter Fuzzy Woodruff wrote : 
 Under Heisman 's tutelage , Auburn played with a marvelous speed and dash that couldn 't be <unk> and which fairly swept Sewanee off its feet . Only the remarkable punting of Simkins kept the game from being a debacle . 
 I recall vividly one incident of the game , which demonstrates clearly just how surprising was Sewanee 's victory . 
 The Purple was taking time out . They began this early in the game , when their athletes appeared tired and worn whereas Auburn men were full of fight and fire . 
 A Sewanee player was down , his head being bathed ... Suter , the Sewanee coach , and Heisman , the Auburn <unk> , were walking up and down the field together . They approached this boy . The rules were not as rigid then I guess against coaches encroaching on the field of play or conversing with player or anyhow they were not enforced for Suter , evidently as mad as fire , asked the down and out player ' Are you fellows going to be run over like this all afternoon ? ' 
 <unk> , ' said the boy , lifting his tired head from the ground , ' we just can 't stand this stuff . We 've never seen anything like it.' 
 Suter and Heisman turned away . ' Can you beat that ? ' Suter asked the Auburn coach . Heisman didn 't say anything , I guess he thought a great deal . 
 He told me afterwards that he had never felt so sorry for a man on a football field as he had for Suter at that moment . 
 Auburn 's Bivins scored first . Rex Kilpatrick then ran outside of the tackle a 10 @-@ yard touchdown . Arthur Feagin scored to make it 10 to 5 in favor of Auburn . A controversial fumble recovery by Sewanee may have saved the game . Reynolds Tichenor said it was a gift ; the referee awarded Sewanee the ball , but he insisted Auburn recovered it . A double pass play to Warbler Wilson got the ensuing Sewanee touchdown . B. U. Sims made the extra point to edge Auburn . Neither team managed to score in the second half . The delay from the crowd gathering on the field ran the game into darkness . 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against Auburn : Pierce ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Claiborne ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Keyes ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Sims ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Simkins ( fullback ) . 
 = = = North Carolina = = = 
 The season closed with a 5 to 0 victory over the North Carolina Tar Heels and the championship of the south . Sewanee 's defense was strong , and Diddy Seibels 's punting gained 10 yards on each exchange of punts . A single free kick from placement proved the difference . Ormond Simkins had signaled for a fair catch , but North Carolina 's Frank M. Osborne collided with him . Sewanee was awarded fifteen yards and the free kick . The star for the Tar Heels was Herman Koehler . 
 Sewanee 's starting lineup against North Carolina : Simkins ( left end ) , Jones ( left tackle ) , Keyes ( left guard ) , Poole ( center ) , Claiborne ( right guard ) , Bolling ( right tackle ) , Black ( right end ) , Wilson ( quarterback ) , Kilpatrick ( left halfback ) , Seibels ( right halfback ) , Hull ( fullback ) . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 W. A. Lambeth of Virginia in Outing and Coach Suter both posted All @-@ Southern teams . Included on Suter 's All @-@ Southern : Richard Bolling , Wild Bill Claiborne , Deacon Jones , Rex Kilpatrick , William H. Poole , Diddy Seibels , Ormond Simkins , Warbler Wilson . Wilson was also selected All @-@ Southern by Lambeth . B. U. Sims made Lambeth 's team and was a substitute for Suter . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 By the end of the season , eleven of Sewanee 's victories were against SIAA conference rivals , setting the record for the most conference games won in a single season by any team before or since . On College Gameday , November 13 , 1999 , ESPN featured the University of the South with a four @-@ minute segment on the 1899 football team , and CSX Railroad provided a short train ride in Cowan , which was a re @-@ enactment of an early leg of the Sewanee to Texas train ride . 
 Several writers and sports personalities consider this Sewanee team one of the greatest football teams to ever play . Former Penn State coach Joe Paterno once said " While there are some who would swear to the contrary , I did not see the 1899 Sewanee football team play in person . Winning five road games in six days , all by shutout scores , has to be one of the most staggering achievements in the history of the sport . If the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) had been in effect in 1899 , there seems little doubt Sewanee would have played in the title game . And they wouldn ’ t have been done in by any computer ratings . " Tony Barnhart in Southern Fried Football : The History , Passion and Glory of the Great Southern Game listed Sewanee as his number 1 Southern football team of all @-@ time . A 16 @-@ team playoff to determine the best team in college football history with winners decided by fan votes was run by the College Football Hall of Fame , called the " March of the Gridiron Champions . " Sewanee , starting at the lowest seed , won the tournament . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Varsity lettermen = = = 
 = = = = Line = = = = 
 Ralph Peters Black , end 
 Richard E. Bolling , tackle 
 William " Wild Bill " Claiborne , guard 
 John William " Deacon " Jones , tackle 
 Henry S. Keyes , guard 
 Joseph Lee Kirby @-@ Smith , tackle 
 Hugh Miller Thompson " Bunny " Pearce , end 
 William H. Poole , center 
 Bartlet Et Ultimus " The Caboose " Sims , end 
 = = = = Backfield = = = = 
 Charles Quintard Gray , halfback 
 <unk> F. " Rex " Kilpatrick , halfback 
 Henry " Diddy " Seibels , halfback 
 Ormond Simkins , fullback 
 William " Warbler " Wilson , quarterback 
 = = = = Substitutions = = = = 
 Preston S. Brooks , back 
 Harris G. Cope , quarterback 
 Albert T. Davidson 
 Andrew C. Evins 
 Daniel B. Hull , fullback 
 Landon R. Mason 
 Floy H. Parker 
 Herbert E. Smith 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 Head coach : Billy Suter 
 Manager : Luke Lea 
 Trainer : Cal Burrows 
 = = = Scoring leaders = = = 
 The following is an incomplete list of statistics and scores , largely dependent on newspaper summaries . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = STS @-@ 74 = 
 STS @-@ 74 was the fourth mission of the US / Russian Shuttle @-@ Mir Program , and the second docking of the Space Shuttle with Mir . Space Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center launch pad 39A on 12 November 1995 . The mission ended 8 days later with the landing of Atlantis back at Kennedy . It was the second in a series of seven straight missions to the station flown by Atlantis . 
 The shuttle delivered a pair of solar arrays along with the Russian @-@ built Mir Docking Module to allow docking with the station by the space shuttle without moving Mir 's Kristall module . During the three @-@ day docking , the Russian , Canadian , and American crew transferred supplies and equipment between Atlantis and Mir , moved several long @-@ term experiments , and upgraded the station with new equipment , particularly during the installation of the docking module . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = Mission background = = 
 The crew 's preparation for the mission had begun some thirteen months earlier in 1994 , with the crew being trained in the operation of the space shuttle , the mating and docking procedures that would be required as Atlantis approached Mir later in the mission , and the management of the various scientific experiments being carried on the orbiter during the mission . 
 Preparation of Atlantis itself for mission STS @-@ 74 began with the replacement of three thrusters in Atlantis 's right @-@ hand Orbital Maneuvering System pod in bay 2 of the Orbiter Processing Facility on 25 August 1995 . Installation of the three Space Shuttle Main Engines ( <unk> ) on Atlantis was completed on 5 September 1995 , as were <unk> operations on the Russian docking module . 
 On 7 November , engineers determined that there was no additional work needed to verify the solid rocket boosters for flight , following discovery of small cracks in the hold @-@ down posts attached to boosters that had flown earlier that year . Close inspections of the STS @-@ 74 stack determined that no such cracks were present on the boosters to be used for the mission . 
 Pad 39A was cleared on 9 November in preparation for loading of the onboard cryogenic tanks with the cryogenic oxygen and hydrogen reactants that provided electricity through the three onboard fuel cells , and water for the flight as a by @-@ product . 
 The initial launch attempt , scheduled for 11 November 1995 at 7 : 56 am EST ( 12 : 56 UTC ) was postponed due to poor weather at the Transatlantic Abort ( <unk> ) site . The original launch window was 6 min 57 secs and the countdown had begun on schedule . The crew was on board when the postponement was called at the T @-@ minus 5 minute mark at approximately 7 : 51 am EST ( 12 : 51 UTC ) . 
 = = Mission timeline = = 
 = = = 12 November ( launch and flight day 1 ) = = = 
 Following a poll of the mission management team at 7 : 12 am EST in which all stations ( with the exception of the Shuttle Range Officer ) returned a " go for launch " and the eventual clearance of the range for launch at 7 : 20 am EST , Atlantis raced into the sky at the beginning of a 10 @-@ minute , 9 @-@ second launch window following a flawless countdown with no unscheduled holds . The shuttle lifted off the pad at 7 : 30 : 43 am EST ; the main engines were shut down at 7 : 39 am EST . 
 About 43 minutes after launch , a 2 minute and 13 second engine firing changed the shuttle 's path into a 162 nautical mile circular orbit . Once on orbit , the five crew members began configuring Atlantis for on @-@ orbit operations . Atlantis 's payload bay doors were opened about 90 minutes into the flight , followed by a " go " for on @-@ orbit operations . 
 Approximately three hours into the flight , Commander Ken Cameron and Pilot Jim <unk> fired the orbiter 's reaction control thrusters in the first of a series of rendezvous burns that refined Atlantis 's path towards Mir . Shortly after the burn , the first Canadian mission specialist , Chris Hadfield , activated the Russian @-@ built docking module , housed in the shuttle 's payload bay , ready for the docking of the module with Atlantis 's Orbiter Docking System on flight day 2 . 
 = = = 13 November ( flight day 2 ) = = = 
 The five @-@ member crew aboard the space shuttle Atlantis spent the bulk of their first full day in space readying the orbiter and its payloads for the 14 November mating of the Russian docking module to the Orbiter Docking System in advance of the 15 November docking to Mir . Both the module and the docking system were located in Atlantis 's payload bay . 
 Mission specialists Jerry Ross and Bill McArthur inspected the spacesuits they would don should a spacewalk become necessary during the mating or docking operations . Following the space suit inspection , Mission Specialist Chris Hadfield powered up the orbiter 's robot arm in preparation for the next day 's transfer of the docking module over to Atlantis 's docking system . All systems affiliated with the robot arm operated as expected and were ready to support the mating . 
 The crew members also checked out the Advanced Space Vision System , a precise alignment system for the robot arm that was tested on STS @-@ 74 . The <unk> , which was used during the mating operation , consisted of a series of large dots placed on the exterior of the docking module and the docking system . 
 The day 's schedule also included the installation and alignment of the centerline camera in the centre of the Orbiter Docking System . The camera later assisted Commander Ken Cameron in final piloting tasks as Atlantis moved towards and docked with Mir . At 5 : 00 am CST ( 11 : 00 UTC ) on day 2 , Atlantis was about 4 @,@ 000 statute miles behind Mir , and was closing in to the space station at a rate of about 380 statute miles per orbit . 
 Cameron , Hadfield and other available crew members also spent the morning answering questions posed by Canadian reporters located in Montreal and Toronto . Hadfield , a Canadian Space Agency astronaut , was the fourth Canadian astronaut to fly on the shuttle . 
 With all of the systems that were to put the Russian Docking Module in place for a flight day 4 link @-@ up with Mir checked out and ready to go , the STS @-@ 74 crew settled down for 8 hours of sleep that afternoon . 
 = = = 14 November ( flight day 3 ) = = = 
 On flight day 3 , the STS @-@ 74 crew members successfully mated the 15 @-@ foot Russian built docking module with the shuttle 's Orbiter Docking System . No problems were reported during the mating operation . 
 Chris Hadfield , a Canadian Space Agency astronaut and STS @-@ 74 mission specialist , used the shuttle 's robot arm to hoist the docking module out of the aft portion of the payload bay , rotated it to a vertical position , and moved it to within five inches of the Orbiter Docking System . At that point , the shuttle fired its downward steering jets and moved the shuttle toward the docking module . Once the two spacecraft were locked together , the docking ring on the Orbiter Docking System retracted , and a series of hooks and latches were engaged to ensure an airtight seal between the two spacecraft . 
 The mating was confirmed at 1 : 17 am CST , with Atlantis over eastern Europe on its 30th orbit . Shortly after the capture , Commander Ken Cameron expressed the crew 's appreciation for the training that prepared them for the docking module installation . 
 At about 3 : 00 am CST , the crew received a go from ground flight controllers to <unk> the robot arm from the docking module . Shortly after that , crew members raised the orbiter 's cabin pressure from 10 @.@ 2 pounds per square inch to 14 @.@ 7 psi . The cabin 's pressure was lowered in the event that a problem during the mating process necessitated an emergency spacewalk . 
 Crew members also mounted a centerline camera into the top hatch of the docking module . The camera later provided the primary visual cue for Cameron as he maneuvered Atlantis to its docking with Mir on flight day four . 
 By 5 : 00 am EST , Atlantis was trailing Mir by about 1 @,@ 450 statute miles and closing at a rate of about 180 statute miles every orbit . A series of rendezvous jet firings later further refined the closing rate , leading up to a docking with Mir at 06 : 27 : 38 UTC on 15 November . 
 = = = 15 November ( flight day 4 and docking ) = = = 
 Atlantis finally docked to Mir 's Kristall module using the docking module 's top androgynous unit on flight day 4 . The tension was high aboard Atlantis as Cameron maneuvered the shuttle towards Mir using the orbiter 's thrusters . Atlantis docked with Mir at 06 : 27 : 38 UTC following a faultless set of orbital maneuvers . After all the required checks had been completed and the hatches had been opened , the five shuttle astronauts moved into Mir , ready to carry out three days of combined operations with Mir 's resident crew , Russian cosmonauts Yuri Gidzenko and Sergei Avdeyev ( carrying out the Mir EO @-@ 20 expedition ) and ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter ( flying on the Euromir 95 expedition ) . The two crews greeted each other with handshakes and hugs before carrying out a traditional gift exchange , with flowers and chocolates being swapped between the crews . 
 = = = 16 – 19 November ( flight days 5 – 8 ) = = = 
 During the three days of combined shuttle @-@ Mir operations , Atlantis 's crew transferred various items from the shuttle to the space station , including water , supplies , and equipment , along with two new solar arrays ( one Russian and one jointly @-@ developed ) to upgrade Mir . 
 The crew also transferred various experiment samples , equipment for repair and analysis and products manufactured on Mir back to Atlantis for transfer back to Earth , along with the University of California Berkeley Trek Experiment which had been flying on orbit aboard Mir for the previous four years . 
 Meanwhile , flying aboard Atlantis was the GPP payload which consisted of two experiments – the GPP experiment and the <unk> Appendage Structural Dynamics Experiment ( <unk> ) . The payload was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center 's Special <unk> Division . The GPP studied the Earth 's thermosphere , ionosphere and mesosphere energetics and dynamics using broadband spectroscopy . GPP also studied spacecraft interactions with the atmosphere by observing shuttle and Mir glow , shuttle engine firings , water dumps and fuel cell purges . 
 Three <unk> canisters , located throughout the cargo bay , also <unk> recorded structural response data of the Mir solar arrays during the docked phase of the mission . This data was later analyzed on the ground to verify the use of photogrammetric techniques to characterize the structural dynamics of the array , thus demonstrating that this technology would result in cost and risk reduction for the International Space Station . 
 At 08 : 15 : 44 UTC on 18 November , Atlantis undocked from the docking module 's bottom androgynous unit , leaving the docking module permanently attached to the Kristall module , where it provided clearance between the shuttle and Mir 's solar arrays during subsequent dockings . 
 = = = 20 November ( flight day 9 and landing ) = = = 
 Flight day 9 consisted primarily of preparations for landing , and the landing itself . Atlantis 's deorbit burn was performed on orbit 128 at around 11 : 00 am EST ( 16 : 00 UTC ) , leading to a landing at Kennedy Space Center ( KSC ) , Florida , on Runway 33 of the Shuttle Landing Facility . 
 The main landing gear touched down at 12 : 01 : 27 pm EST ( 17 : 01 : 27 UTC ) on 20 November , a mission elapsed time ( MET ) of 8 days 4 hours 30 minutes and 44 seconds . Nose gear touched down at 8 days 4 hours 30 minutes 54 seconds ( 12 : 01 : 37 pm EST – 17 : 01 : 37 UTC ) and Atlantis 's wheels stopped at an MET of 8 days 4 hours 31 minutes 42 seconds ( 12 : 02 : 24 pm EST – 17 : 02 : 24 UTC ) , bringing the 73rd space shuttle mission to a close . 
 A second landing opportunity had been planned in case of bad weather , for a KSC landing at 1 : 37 pm EST with a deorbit burn at 12 : 36 pm on orbit 129 , but it was not required . 
 = Dubh Artach = 
 Dubh Artach ( / <unk> / ; Scottish Gaelic : [ t ̪ uh <unk> ̪ <unk> ] ) is a remote skerry of basalt rock off the west coast of Scotland lying 18 miles ( 29 km ) west of Colonsay and 15 miles ( 24 km ) south @-@ west of the Ross of Mull . 
 A lighthouse designed by Thomas Stevenson with a tower height of 145 feet ( 44 m ) was erected between 1867 and 1872 with a shore station constructed on the isle of Erraid . The rock is subject to extraordinary sea conditions with waves of 92 feet ( 28 m ) or more being encountered by the keepers . Despite these adverse conditions several men served the light for lengthy periods until it was automated in 1971 . 
 Dubh Artach is the official name of the lighthouse , although the skerry itself is also known as Dhu Heartach . Various interpretations have been provided for the original meaning of the Gaelic name , of which " The Black Rock " is the most likely . 
 = = Geology = = 
 In pre @-@ historic times Dhu Heartach was covered by the ice sheets that spread from Scotland out into the Atlantic Ocean beyond the Outer Hebrides . After the last retreat of the ice around 20 @,@ 000 years ago , sea levels were up to 425 feet ( 130 m ) lower than at present . Although the isostatic rise of land makes estimating post @-@ glacial coastlines a complex task , circa 14 @,@ 000 BP it is likely that Dubh Heartach was at the western edge of a large land bridge linking what is now the island of Ireland to Scotland . This land mass included the islands of Jura and Islay and was probably connected to the mainland of Scotland by an isthmus near Loch <unk> , south of Oban . 
 Steadily rising sea levels would then have slowly isolated and finally all but submerged Dhu Heartach , which today is a rounded , dark green mass of basaltic rock called augite , which is 240 feet ( 73 m ) long and 130 feet ( 40 m ) wide , and which rises to 35 feet ( 11 m ) above sea level . Submarine surveys indicate that the rock is at the eastern end of a valley stretching 80 miles ( 130 km ) into the Atlantic , which may " account for the seemingly abnormal seas to which the tower is subjected " . It is an isolated outpost of the Inner Hebrides archipelago . The author Robert Louis Stevenson wrote : 
 An ugly reef is this of the Dhu Heartach ; no pleasant assemblage of shelves , and pools , and creeks , about which a child might play for a whole summer without weariness , like the Bell Rock or the Skerryvore , but one oval nodule of black @-@ trap , sparsely <unk> with an inconspicuous <unk> , and alive in every crevice with a dingy insect between a <unk> and a bug . No other life was there but of sea @-@ birds , and of the sea itself , that here ran like a mill @-@ race , and growled about the outer reef for ever , and ever and again , in the calmest weather , roared and spouted on the rock itself . 
 = = Meaning of the name = = 
 The translation of Dubh Artach is " The Black Rock " , <unk> being a now obsolete Gaelic word for a rock or rocky ground both in Scottish Gaelic and in Irish . The variation between the anglicised forms Dubh Artach and Dhu Heartach is a simple case of false splitting where the final [ h ] of [ t ̪ uh <unk> ̪ <unk> ] in pronunciation seemingly is part of the following word , suggesting * <unk> or <unk> to the untrained ear . 
 Stevenson believed that ' black and dismal ' was a translation of the name , noting that " as usual , in Gaelic , it is not the only one . " <unk> in his 7th @-@ century Life of St Columba poetically calls the rock An Dubh Iar @-@ <unk> , " The Black Stack of the West " . Watson ( 1926 ) suggests the root is Old Irish <unk> meaning " death " , ( which he also believes occurs in Hirta , the main island of the St Kilda archipelago ) , and offers am <unk> @-@ <unk> , meaning " the black deadly one " . The skerry was also known as St. John 's Rock prior to the construction of the lighthouse . 
 = = Planning and construction of the lighthouse = = 
 Between 1800 and 1854 thirty ships were wrecked on the reef ; however , the requirement for a lighthouse was not only to warn seafarers away from Dhu Heartach itself , but also to guide them past the fearsome Torran Rocks , which lie between the Ross of Mull and Colonsay . Originally it was considered to be an impossible site for a light , but the loss of the steamer <unk> with all thirty @-@ three hands on her maiden voyage in 1863 and of an astonishing 24 vessels in the area in a storm on 30 – 31 December 1865 encouraged positive action under pressure from insurers Lloyd 's of London and a Captain Bedford of the Admiralty . The engineering work was supervised by the famous Stevenson family of engineers , the brothers Thomas ( father of Robert Louis ) and David commencing work in 1866 . Thomas noted that " it would be a work of no ordinary magnitude " . 
 The land base for the construction of the light was Erraid near Iona . Fourteen miles distant from Dhu Heartach across open sea , the little island provided a granite quarry and a shore station once the work on the lighthouse was completed . Initial construction on the rock , which began on 25 June 1867 under the supervision of Alan Brebner , required a barrack for the workmen made of iron . Summer gales brought high seas , which resulted in breaking water falling on the roof 77 feet ( 23 m ) above sea level . It held firm , although fourteen men including Brebner were trapped there for five days , and at one point seawater poured in through the trapdoor , swirled around them and exited with their remaining food supplies . Describing a similar occasion , R. L. Stevenson wrote : 
 The men sat high up <unk> in their iron drum , that then resounded with the lashings of the sprays ... It was then that the foreman builder , Mr. Goodwillie , whom I see before me in his rock @-@ habit of indecipherable rags , would get his fiddle down and strike up human minstrelsy amid the music of the storms . 
 Despite these hardships a 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) diameter foundation pit was excavated and by 1869 a solid portion of tower rising 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) above foundation level had been completed . This was no mean feat . On one occasion eleven two @-@ ton stones were dislodged from the third course of stonework and carried off the rock , never to be seen again . Robert Stevenson noted that this destruction occurred at the same height " above the sea as the glass panes in the lantern of Smeaton 's lighthouse " at Eddystone . 
 The solid base weighing 1 @,@ 840 tons rises more than 64 feet ( 20 m ) above the pounding seas , more than twice as high as its nearest British rival of Skerryvore . The blocks , having been shaped and fitted on Erraid , were towed out to the rock in barges by the steamer ‘ <unk> ’ each barge carrying 16 tons . Masonry work was completed in 1871 and the lantern , optical apparatus and fog bell installed the following year , Dubh Artach becoming the first isolated rock light in Britain to use paraffin . The finished tower rises 101 feet ( 31 m ) above the foundation in seventy @-@ seven courses of stonework all told . 
 The total cost of the works undertaken by the Northern Lighthouse Board was £ 65 @,@ 784 , excluding the £ 10 @,@ 300 cost of establishing the shore station on Erraid . However , the extraordinary nature of the work should not be reduced to mere numbers . Stevenson was moved to note that : 
 It would be ungenerous if a great and dangerous work like this were brought unsuccessfully to an end and no praise should be given to such men as Mr Brebner the resident Superintendent , Mr MacGregor the captain of the steamer , Mr Goodwillie the master @-@ builder on the rock and Mr Irvine the landing master . If full justice were to be done , the list should be much longer , but I can only add that out of all the workmen who took their lives in their hand to finish the Dhu Heartach Lighthouse , there were very few who turned <unk> . And this is the common history of all such undertakings . 
 = = Early operations = = 
 Completion of the construction work did not result in an end to the hazards . At low tide the landing stage is forty feet above a boat , yet not completely out of the reach of the swell . Landings other than via the precarious use of dangling ropes from a derrick were most unusual even on calm days . The storm seas could rise to extraordinary heights . In the first year of operation , the copper lightning conductor was wrenched out of its sockets by a storm at a height of 92 feet ( 28 m ) above high water . 
 The first principal keeper was James Ewing who looked after the light for the next eleven years . Despite the exceptionally adverse conditions faced by the keepers , which resulted in them receiving additional payments in kind , Ewing was not the only one who served the light for a decade or more . However , some found the lonely rock and its cramped quarters less to their taste . One had to be prevented from diving into the sea and attempting to swim ashore . 
 = = Later events = = 
 In 1874 the principal keeper reported an incident which suggested that the rock had experienced an earth tremor but the tower stood fast . 
 Robert Louis Stevenson 's connection with the construction of Dubh Artach and its shore station played a significant part in his 1886 novel Kidnapped during which the main character , David Balfour , experiences the dangers of the Torran Rocks and is marooned on Erraid . 
 In 1890 a distinctive red band was painted round the middle section of the tower to distinguish it from Skerryvore , 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the northwest , which was served from the same shore station . 
 A dispute concerning the financing of lighthouses led to an 1898 visit to Dubh Artach of some prominent persons , including the President of the Board of Trade and the Chancellor of the Exchequer , Sir Michael Hicks Beach . 
 The name of the lighthouse was changed in 1964 from <unk> to the present form Dubh Artach . The reasons for this are not clear , although the latter is arguably easier to spell for anglophones . 
 The lighthouse was fully automated in 1971 and the following year a helipad was constructed to enable maintenance work to be undertaken without the need for perilous sea landings . 
 = Travis Jackson = 
 Travis Calvin Jackson ( November 2 , 1903 – July 27 , 1987 ) was an American baseball shortstop . In Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , Jackson played for the New York Giants from 1922 through 1936 , winning the 1933 World Series , and representing the Giants in the MLB All @-@ Star in 1934 . After his retirement as a player , Jackson managed in minor league baseball through to the 1960 season . 
 Jackson was discovered by Kid Elberfeld at a minor league baseball game at the age of 14 . Elberfeld signed Jackson to his first professional contract , and recommended him to John McGraw , manager of the Giants . His exceptional range at shortstop led to the nickname " Stonewall . " Jackson was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1982 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jackson was born in Waldo , Arkansas on November 2 , 1903 . He was the only child of William Jackson , a wholesale grocer , and his wife , Etta , who named their son after William B. Travis , a Lieutenant Colonel who died at the Battle of the Alamo . His father bought him a baseball when he was three years old , and they often played catch together . 
 Jackson 's uncle took him to a game of the Little Rock Travelers , who played minor league baseball in the Class @-@ A Southern Association , when Jackson was 14 years old . At the game , Jackson 's uncle introduced him to Kid Elberfeld , telling Elberfeld that his nephew was a talented baseball player . Elberfeld observed Jackson in an <unk> work out , and asked Jackson to contact him when he was ready to begin his professional career . 
 Jackson attended Ouachita Baptist University in Arkadelphia , Arkansas , where he starred on the college baseball team . He injured his knee in college , and this injury would recur during Jackson 's career . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 Following Jackson 's collegiate career , Elberfeld signed Jackson to his first contract , and he played for Little Rock in 1921 and 1922 . Jackson committed 72 errors during the 1922 season , which he considered the " world record for errors " . 
 Despite this , Elberfeld recommended Jackson to John McGraw , manager of the New York Giants of the National League ( NL ) , who was entitled to a Travelers ' player as he had lent a player to the team in 1922 . McGraw signed Jackson to a contract on June 30 , effective at the end of the Southern Association 's 1922 season . 
 Jackson debuted in MLB with the Giants on September 22 , 1922 , appearing in three games . With Dave Bancroft and Heinie Groh , the Giants starting shortstop and third baseman respectively , sidelined with injuries in during the 1923 season , Jackson drew notice as a fill @-@ in . McGraw was confident enough in Jackson 's abilities to trade Bancroft before the 1924 season , choosing Jackson to be the Giants ' starting shortstop . Though there was doubt that Jackson could adequately replace Bancroft , Jackson played in 151 games during the 1924 season and hit .302 with 11 home runs . The Giants lost the 1924 World Series to the Washington Senators , with Jackson committing a key error in Game 7 , which contributed to Washington 's victory . 
 Jackson was considered one of the best active shortstops in baseball during his career ; he led NL shortstops with a <unk> fielding percentage in 1931 . However , he missed considerable playing time in his career due to injuries and illnesses . Jackson reinjured his knee in 1925 , missed significant time as a result of his knee during the 1926 season , and had surgery for appendicitis during the 1927 season . He missed time with mumps in 1930 and influenza in 1932 , and he continued to battle knee problems , missing much of the 1932 and 1933 seasons . Jackson was said to " at 28 , already [ have ] one foot in the minors " . Despite this , manager Bill Terry said that Jackson would " make or break " the 1933 season . Though Jackson fell behind Blondy Ryan on the team 's depth chart during the season , he returned in the 1933 World Series , which the Giants won over the Senators . 
 Terry stayed with Jackson as the Giants ' starting shortstop for the 1934 season , in which he drove in 101 runs , and was named to appear in the 1934 MLB All @-@ Star Game . He played as a third baseman in his final two seasons , serving as team captain , although he struggled in the 1936 World Series , which the Giants lost to the New York Yankees . After the season , the Giants requested waivers on Jackson , in order to assign him to the minor leagues . 
 Jackson was regarded as one of the premier defensive shortstops in the league . He batted over .300 six times , including a career @-@ high .339 in the 1930 season , and hit 21 home runs in 1929 . He was on four NL pennant @-@ winning teams and one World Series champion ( 1933 ) . Jackson finished his MLB career with 135 home runs and a .291 batting average . 
 = = = Coaching and managing career = = = 
 Jackson signed a three @-@ year contract with the Jersey City Giants of the Class @-@ AA International League after the 1936 season . The team , which the Giants had purchased to become their farm team that offseason , was moved from Albany , New York , with Jackson to serve as player @-@ manager . Jackson 's knees prevented him from appearing in many games with Jersey City as a player , but he remained as the team 's manager until July 1938 , when he was replaced with Hank DeBerry . The Giants brought Jackson back to MLB as a coach for the remaining 18 months on his contract , succeeding Tommy Clarke , who became a scout . 
 Jackson missed the next five baseball seasons as he battled tuberculosis , eventually returning to manage in the Boston Braves / Milwaukee Braves system for the Jackson Senators in the Class @-@ B Southeastern League in 1946 . Jackson returned to the Giants to coach in 1947 and 1948 , receiving his unconditional release following the 1948 season . 
 Returning to the Braves ' minor league system , Jackson managed the Tampa Smokers of the Class @-@ B Florida International League in 1949 , but resigned in July during a losing streak . He managed the Owensboro Oilers of the Class @-@ D Kentucky – Illinois – Tennessee League in 1950 , and began the 1951 season managing the Bluefield Blue @-@ Greys of the Class @-@ D Appalachian League , but was reassigned to the Hartford Chiefs of the Class @-@ A Eastern League when Hartford manager Tommy Holmes was named Braves ' manager . Jackson managed the Appleton Papermakers of the Class @-@ D Wisconsin State League in 1952 and 1953 , Lawton Braves of the Class @-@ D Sooner State League from 1954 through 1957 , Midland Braves of the Class @-@ D Sophomore League in 1958 , Eau Claire Braves of the Class @-@ C Northern League in 1959 , and Davenport Braves of the Class @-@ D Midwest League in 1960 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jackson and his wife , Mary , had two children , Dorothy Fincher and William Travis Jackson , six grandchildren and four great @-@ grandchildren . Jackson died of Alzheimer 's Disease in 1987 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Jackson was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1982 . Despite his record and achievements , defensive standouts were overshadowed by power hitters in Hall of Fame balloting . He was also inducted in the Arkansas Hall of Fame . 
 = The Legend of Korra = 
 The Legend of Korra is an American animated television series that aired on the Nickelodeon television network from 2012 to 2014 . It was created by Bryan Konietzko and Michael Dante DiMartino as a sequel to Avatar : The Last Airbender , which aired from 2005 to 2008 . Animated in a style strongly influenced by anime , the series is set in a fictional universe in which some people can manipulate , or " bend " , the elements of water , earth , fire , or air . Only one person , the " Avatar " , can bend all four elements , and is responsible for maintaining balance in the world . The series follows Avatar Korra , the reincarnation of Aang from the previous series , as she faces political and spiritual unrest in a modernizing world . 
 The main characters are voiced by Janet Varney , Seychelle Gabriel , David Faustino , P. J. Byrne , J. K. Simmons and Mindy Sterling , and supporting voice actors include Aubrey Plaza , John Michael Higgins , Steven Blum , Eva Marie Saint , Henry Rollins , Anne Heche and Zelda Williams . Several people involved in the creation of Avatar : The Last Airbender , including designer Joaquim Dos Santos , writer Tim Hedrick and composers Jeremy Zuckerman and Benjamin Wynn , returned to work on The Legend of Korra . Most animation was done by Studio Mir of South Korea , and some by Studio Pierrot of Japan . The Legend of Korra ran for fifty @-@ two episodes , separated into four seasons ( " books " ) . It is to be continued as a comics series . 
 The Legend of Korra has been a critical success , drawing favorable comparisons with the HBO series Game of Thrones and the work of Hayao Miyazaki . It has been praised by reviewers for its production values and for addressing sociopolitical issues such as social unrest and terrorism , as well as for going beyond the established boundaries of youth entertainment with respect to issues of race , gender , and sexual identity . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 The Legend of Korra was initially conceived as a twelve @-@ episode miniseries . Nickelodeon declined the creators ' pitch for an Avatar : The Last Airbender follow @-@ up animated movie based on what then became the three @-@ part comics The Promise , The Search and The Rift , choosing instead to expand Korra to 26 episodes . The series was expanded further in July 2012 to 52 episodes . These episodes are grouped into four separate seasons ( " Books " ) composed of twelve to fourteen episodes ( " Chapters " ) each , with each season telling a stand @-@ alone story . Beginning with episode 9 of season 3 , new episodes were first distributed through the Internet rather than broadcast . The Legend of Korra concluded with the fourth season . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Legend of Korra is set in the fictional world of Avatar : The Last Airbender , 70 years after the events of that series . The world is separated into four nations : the northern and southern Water Tribes , the Earth Kingdom , the Fire Nation , and the Air Nomads . The distinguishing element of the series is " bending " , the ability of some people to telekinetically manipulate the classical element associated with their nation ( water , earth , fire , or air ) . Bending is carried out by spiritual and physical exercises , portrayed as similar to Chinese martial arts . 
 Only one person , the " Avatar " , can bend all four elements . Cyclically reincarnating among the world 's four nations , the Avatar maintains peace and balance in the world . The Legend of Korra focuses on Avatar Korra , a seventeen @-@ year @-@ old girl from the Southern Water Tribe and the successor of Avatar Aang from The Last Airbender . 
 The first season is mostly set in Republic City , the capital of the United Republic of Nations , a multicultural state that emerged from the Fire Nation colonies in the Earth Kingdom after the end of The Last Airbender . The residents of the metropolis , described as " if Manhattan had happened in Asia " by the series ' creators , are united by their passion for " pro @-@ bending " , a spectator sport in which two teams composed of an <unk> , waterbender , and firebender throw each other out of a ring using bending techniques . The second season is mostly set in the southern polar region , while the third and fourth seasons take place mostly in the Earth Kingdom and , to a lesser degree , in Republic City . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The first season , Book One : Air , sees Korra move to Republic City to learn airbending from Tenzin , Avatar Aang 's son . She enters the pro @-@ bending league , and befriends the brothers Bolin and Mako , as well as Asami Sato , heiress to Future Industries , a leading engineering corporation . The ambitious politician Tarrlok enlists Korra to fight the anti @-@ bender uprising of the " Equalists " , led by the masked Amon , who strips benders of their abilities . Korra and her friends , aided by police chief Lin Beifong and United Forces General Iroh , unmask Amon as a <unk> and Tarrlok 's brother , ending the Equalists ' coup . A spiritual meeting with her predecessor Aang allows Korra to realize her powers and to restore the bending abilities of Amon 's victims . 
 The second season , Book Two : Spirits , begins six months later , with dark spirits terrorizing the seas . Korra turns to her spirit @-@ attuned uncle Unalaq , chief of the Northern Water Tribe , for tutelage , and opens the polar portals to the Spirit World at his direction . Unalaq then seizes power in the Southern Water Tribe by force , starting a civil war in which he is opposed by his brother , Korra 's father , <unk> . Seeking allies against Unalaq , Korra experiences the life of the first Avatar , Wan , who fused his soul with the spirit Raava to imprison her opponent Vaatu . Aided by his twin children Eska and Desna , Unalaq frees Vaatu during the Harmonic Convergence , a <unk> alignment of planets , and unites with him to become a dark Avatar . As Korra fights this figure , her link to the previous Avatars is broken ; but with the help of Tenzin 's daughter Jinora , she defeats Vaatu and Unalaq , and leaves the spirit portals open , allowing a new coexistence of spirits and humans . 
 The third season , Book Three : Change , begins two weeks later with people all over the world discovering airbending powers as a result of the Harmonic Convergence . As Tenzin , Korra , and her friends recruit them to re @-@ establish the extinct Air Nomads , the newly airbending criminal Zaheer escapes his prison , frees his allies Ghazan , Ming @-@ Hua , and P 'Li , and attempts to kidnap the Avatar . This fails thanks to the help of Suyin Beifong , Lin 's previously estranged sister . Zaheer and his team – members of the Red Lotus , an anarchic secret society – kill the Earth Queen , throwing her kingdom into chaos , and try to force Korra 's surrender by taking the Air Nomads hostage , including Suyin 's daughter Opal . In the final confrontation , Zaheer 's comrades are killed and he is captured by the Air Nomads led by Jinora . Two weeks later , a weakened , wheelchair @-@ bound Korra watches as Jinora is anointed an airbending master , and Tenzin <unk> the Air Nomads to service to the world . 
 The final season , Book Four : Balance , is set three years later . Korra slowly recovers from the injuries incurred in the fight with Zaheer , traveling the world alone and haunted by fear . Meanwhile , Suyin 's former head of security , Kuvira , reunites the fractured Earth Kingdom with the <unk> loyal to her , and refuses to release power to the unpopular heir to the throne , Prince Wu . At the head of her new , totalitarian " Earth Empire " , Kuvira seizes Suyin 's city of <unk> and sets her sights on the United Republic , which she claims for her nation . With Toph Beifong 's help , Korra frees herself of the remnants of Zaheer 's poison , but after losing a duel to Kuvira at <unk> , she allows Zaheer to help her overcome her fears and regain her power . When Kuvira attacks Republic City with a giant mecha carrying a spirit @-@ powered superweapon , it takes all the efforts of Korra and her friends , including the inventor Varrick and his assistant Zhu Li , to stop the colossus . Only after Kuvira 's weapon blows open a new portal to the Spirit World , destroying much of the city , does she concede defeat . The series ends with the prospect of democracy for the former Earth Kingdom , and with Korra and Asami leaving together for the Spirit World . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Korra ( Janet Varney ) is the series ' 17 @-@ year @-@ old " headstrong and rebellious " protagonist , and Aang 's reincarnation as the Avatar . Her transformation " from brash warrior to a spiritual being " , according to DiMartino , is a principal theme of the series . The character was inspired by Bryan Konietzko 's " pretty tough " sister , and by female MMA fighters , notably Gina <unk> . 
 The series focuses on Korra and her friends , sometimes called " Team Avatar " : the bending brothers Mako and Bolin and the non @-@ bender Asami . Mako ( David Faustino ) , the older brother , is a firebender described as " dark and brooding " The character was named after Mako Iwamatsu , the voice actor for Iroh in the original series . His younger brother Bolin ( P. J. Byrne ) is an <unk> described as lighthearted , humorous , and " always [ having ] a lady on his arm " . Asami Sato ( Seychelle Gabriel ) , the only non @-@ bender among the leading characters , is the daughter of the wealthy industrialist Hiroshi Sato . 
 The other main characters are the airbending master Tenzin , one of Aang 's grown children ( J. K. Simmons ) , Republic City police chief Lin Beifong ( Mindy Sterling ) , and Korra 's animal friends Naga and Pabu ( both Dee Bradley Baker , the voice of a number of animals including Appa and Momo in the original series ) . Pabu was inspired by Futa , a famous standing Japanese red panda . Tenzin 's family include his wife Pema ( Maria Bamford ) and their children Jinora ( Kiernan Shipka ) , Ikki ( Darcy Rose Byrnes ) , <unk> ( Logan Wells ) , and Rohan . Jinora is calm and an avid reader ; Ikki is described as " fun , crazy , and a fast talker " ; <unk> is hyperactive ; and Rohan is born during the third @-@ to @-@ last episode of Book One . 
 The romantic interests of Korra and her companions are less in the foreground than in Avatar , and feature mainly in the first two seasons . In Book One , Bolin pines for Korra , who is interested in Mako , who dates Asami . By the end of the season , Mako has broken up with Asami and entered a relationship with Korra . This ends around the end of Book Two , during which Bolin suffers from an abusive relationship with the waterbender Eska . In the fourth season , Bolin dates the airbender Opal Beifong , while Asami and Korra become closer friends . The series ' final scene indicates a romantic connection between them . Mike DiMartino wrote that the scene " symbolizes their evolution from being friends to being a couple " . 
 Book One : Air features two main adversaries for Korra : the Equalists ' masked leader Amon ( Steve Blum ) who has the power to remove a person 's bending @-@ powers , and the ambitious , charismatic politician Tarrlok ( Dee Bradley Baker ) , who resorts to increasingly repressive methods against the Equalists . Amon 's lieutenant is voiced by Lance Henriksen , and Asami 's father Hiroshi Sato by Daniel Dae Kim . Sato 's character , the self @-@ made founder of Future Industries , was inspired by Theodore Roosevelt and by the Japanese industrialists Keita Goto and Iwasaki <unk> . Both Amon and Tarrlok are identified as the sons of mob boss Yakone ( Clancy Brown ) . Spencer Garrett joined the cast as the voice for <unk> , the president of the United Republic . Korra is also supported by General Iroh ( Dante Basco , who voiced Zuko in the original series ) , a member of the United Forces who is described as " a swashbuckling hero @-@ type guy " . He is named after Iroh , Zuko 's uncle in the original series . 
 Book Two : Spirits features Tenzin 's and Korra 's families , including Tenzin 's elder siblings Kya ( Lisa Edelstein ) and Bumi ( Richard Riehle ) as well as Korra 's father <unk> ( James Remar ) and mother Senna ( Alex McKenna ) . Tenzin 's mother Katara ( Eva Marie Saint ) , a main character of the Avatar : The Last Airbender series , also made recurring appearances in the season . Book 2 also introduces John Michael Higgins as the corrupt businessman and inventor Varrick , with Stephanie <unk> voicing his assistant Zhu Li , along with Korra 's uncle Unalaq ( Adrian <unk> ) , aided by his twin children Desna ( Aaron <unk> ) and Eska ( Aubrey Plaza ) , and Vaatu ( Jonathan Adams ) , the spirit of disorder . The season also explains the Avatar mythos though the first Avatar Wan ( Steven Yeun ) and Vaatu 's polar opposite Raava ( April Stewart ) . Making a few appearances in Books Two and Three , Greg Baldwin reprises Iroh from the previous series . Set six months after the events of the first season , Book Two : Spirits sees Mako as a police officer , Asami in charge of Future Industries , and Bolin leading a new pro @-@ bending team with little success . 
 The anarchist antagonists introduced in Book Three : Change , the Red Lotus , comprise the new airbender Zaheer ( Henry Rollins ) , the armless waterbender Ming @-@ Hua ( Grey DeLisle , who previously voiced a dark spirit ) , the explosive firebender P 'Li ( Kristy Wu ) , and the <unk> Ghazan ( Peter Giles ) . Supporting characters include the Earth Queen Hou @-@ Ting ( Jayne <unk> ) , the retired Fire Lord Zuko ( Bruce Davison ) , Lin 's half @-@ sister Suyin Beifong ( Anne Heche ) , and her captain of the guards Kuvira ( Zelda Williams ) . New <unk> are also introduced in the season including the young thief Kai ( Skyler <unk> ) and Suyin 's daughter Opal ( Alyson Stoner ) , both of Earth Kingdom origins and the love interests of Jinora and Bolin respectively . Jim Meskimen voices a Republic City merchant and later airbender named Daw , as well as Suyin 's husband , the architect <unk> . 
 The final season , Book Four : Balance , features Kuvira as Korra 's antagonist at the head of an army bent on uniting the Earth Kingdom . The cast is also joined by Sunil Malhotra as Prince Wu , the vain heir to the Earth Kingdom throne , and Todd <unk> as <unk> Jr . , Suyin 's estranged son who is Kuvira 's fiancé and second @-@ in @-@ command . <unk> Sampler voices the aged Toph Beifong , another returning character from Avatar whose young adult version was voiced by Kate Higgins in Books 1 and 3 . April Stewart was cast as Zuko 's daughter , Fire Lord Izumi , in a minor role . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Legend of Korra was co @-@ created and produced by Bryan Konietzko and Michael Dante DiMartino ( together referred to as " <unk> " by fans , in reference to " shipping " naming conventions ) at Nickelodeon Animation Studios in Burbank , California . To illustrate the length of the production process ( about 10 to 12 months per episode ) and the overlap of the various phases , Konietzko wrote in July 2013 that their team was already developing the storyboards for the first episode of Book 4 while the last episodes of Book 2 were not yet finished . 
 Production of the series was announced at the annual Comic @-@ Con in San Diego on July 22 , 2010 . It was originally due for release in October 2011 . Tentatively titled Avatar : Legend of Korra at the time , it was intended to be a twelve @-@ episode mini series set in the same fictional universe as the original show , but seventy years later . In 2011 , the title was changed to The Last Airbender : Legend of Korra , and again in March 2012 to The Legend of Korra . The premiere was eventually delayed to April 14 , 2012 . Animation work was mostly done by the South Korean animation studio Studio Mir . 
 According to animation director Yoo Jae @-@ myung , Nickelodeon was initially reluctant to approve the series and suspended production because , unlike in almost all American animated series , the protagonist was a girl . Conventional wisdom , according to Konietzko , had it that " girls will watch shows about boys , but boys won 't watch shows about girls " . The creators eventually persuaded the channel 's executives to change their mind . Konietzko related that in test screenings , boys said that Korra being a girl did not matter to them : " They just said she was awesome . " 
 The creators wrote all of the episodes of the first season themselves , omitting " filler episodes " to allow for a concise story . Once the series was expanded from its original 12 @-@ episode schedule to 26 and then to 52 , more writers were brought in so that the creators could focus on design work . Joaquim Dos Santos and Ryu Ki @-@ Hyun , who worked on the animation and design of the original series , also became involved with creating The Legend of Korra , as is storyboarder Ian Graham . Jeremy Zuckerman and Benjamin Wynn , who composed the soundtrack for the original series as " The Track Team , " also returned to score The Legend of Korra . 
 The second season , Book Two : Spirits , premiered on September 13 , 2013 and concluded on November 22 , 2013 . It consists of fourteen episodes . Animation work was done by the South Korean animation studio Studio Mir as well as the Japanese animation studio Studio Pierrot . Studio Mir was expected to solely work on Book 2 , but executive director Jae @-@ myung Yoo decided that Studio Mir would animate The Boondocks instead because the animation process was less rigorous . Studio Pierrot was eventually called in to fill the void and animate Book 2 . According to Jae @-@ myung Yoo , Studio Mir was later contacted and re @-@ asked to animate Book 2 . Yoo feared that , if Book 2 failed , Studio Mir and Korean animators would have their reputations tarnished for Studio Pierrot 's failures . Consequently , Studio Mir accepted the offer and worked alongside Studio Pierrot . 
 The third season , Book Three : Change , aired its first three episodes on June 27 , 2014 , soon after some episodes were leaked online . It takes place two weeks after the events of Book Two : Spirits . Episodes nine to thirteen were streamed online , rather than being broadcast as a television program . 
 Book Four : Balance , the final season , was produced in parallel to the previous two seasons . The crew , at one point , worked on approximately 30 episodes at the same time : post @-@ production for season 2 , production for season 3 and pre @-@ production for season 4 . Some production steps , such as color correction and retakes , continued up until the date of the series finale , December 19 , 2014 . Season 4 started online distribution a few months after the third season 's finale on October 3 , 2014 . After Nickelodeon cut the season 's budget by the amount required for one episode , DiMartino and Konietzko decided to include a clip show , which reuses previously produced animation , as episode 8 ( " Remembrances " ) instead of dismissing many of the creative staff . Studio Mir was helped by its companion studio , a subunit called Studio Reve , while working on Book 4 . 
 Concerning the development of the much @-@ discussed final scene intended to show the friends Korra and Asami becoming a romantic couple , Bryan Konietzko explained that at first he and DiMartino did not give the idea much weight , assuming they would not be able to get approval for portraying their relationship . But during the production of the finale they decided to test that assumption , approached the network and found them supportive up to a certain limit . They decided to change the final scene from Korra and Asami only holding hands to also facing each other in a pose referencing the marriage scene a few minutes prior . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 The Legend of Korra was produced mainly as traditional animation , with most frames drawn on paper in South Korea by the animators at Studio Mir and scanned for digital processing . Each episode comprises about 15 @,@ 000 drawings . The series makes occasional use of computer @-@ generated imagery for complex scenes or objects , most noticeably in the animations of the pro @-@ bending arena or the mecha @-@ suits of the later seasons . 
 While The Legend of Korra was produced in the United States and therefore not a work of Japanese animation ( " anime " ) in the strict sense , The Escapist magazine argued that the series is so strongly influenced by anime that it would otherwise easily be classified as such : its protagonists ( a superpowered heroine , her group of talented , supporting friends , a near @-@ impervious villain who wants to reshape the world ) , its themes ( family , friendship , romance , fear , and death ) and the quality of its voice acting as well as the visual style are similar to those of leading anime series such as Fullmetal Alchemist : Brotherhood , Bleach or <unk> . A notable difference from such series is the absence of lengthy opening and ending sequences set to J @-@ pop songs ; to save broadcast time , The Legend of Korra 's openings and endings last only a few seconds . The series mostly abstains from using the visual tropes characteristic of anime , but does occasionally use exaggerated facial expressions to highlight emotions for comic effect . 
 As in Avatar , the series adds to its Asian aesthetic by presenting all text that appears in its fictional world in traditional Chinese characters , without translating it . For example , on the " Wanted " posters seen in season 4 , the names of the protagonists are written as <unk> ( Korra ) , <unk> ( Mako ) and <unk> ( Bolin ) . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Legend of Korra is set to music by Jeremy Zuckerman , who previously wrote the music for Avatar : The Last Airbender with Benjamin Wynn . For The Legend of Korra , Zuckerman is the sole composer while Wynn is the lead sound designer ; the two collaborate with Foley artist Aran <unk> and showrunner Mike DiMartino on the soundscape of the series . Konietzko and DiMartino 's concept for the score was to blend traditional Chinese music with early jazz . On that basis , Zuckerman composed a score combining elements of Dixieland , traditional Chinese music and Western orchestration . It is performed mainly by a string sextet and various Chinese solo instruments , including a <unk> ( flute ) , <unk> ( drums ) , a guqin and a Mongolian <unk> . 
 A soundtrack CD , The Legend of Korra : Original Music from Book One , was published on July 16 , 2013 . Music from Korra and Avatar was also played in concert at the <unk> festival in Málaga , Spain in September 2014 . The series 's soundtrack was nominated as best TV soundtrack for the 2013 <unk> Awards . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 The first season ( Book One : Air ) aired in the United States on Nickelodeon on Saturday mornings between April 14 , 2012 and June 23 , 2012 . It was broadcast in other countries on the local Nickelodeon channels beginning in August 2012 . 
 The second season ( Book Two : Spirits ) began airing on Nickelodeon in the United States on September 13 , 2013 on Friday evenings . The season ended on November 22 , 2013 . 
 The third season ( Book Three : Change ) began airing on Nickelodeon in the United States on June 27 , 2014 , also on Friday evenings , two episodes at a time . The broadcast was announced one week in advance after several episodes of the new season were leaked on the Internet . After the first seven episodes aired to low ratings , Nickelodeon removed the last five episodes from its broadcast schedule . The remainder of the episodes were then distributed online via Amazon , Google Play , Xbox Video and Hulu as well as the Nickelodeon site and apps . The Escapist compared The Legend of Korra to Firefly as " a Friday night genre series with a loyal fan following built up from previous works by the creators that is taken off the air after the network fails to advertise it properly or broadcast episodes in a logical manner . " Series creator Michael DiMartino said that the series ' move to online distribution reflected a " sea change " in the industry : While Korra did not fit in well with Nickelodeon 's other programming , the series did extremely well online , with the season 2 finale having been Nickelodeon 's biggest online event . 
 The fourth season ( Book Four : Balance ) began distribution in the United States on October 3 , 2014 through Nick.com , Amazon Video , iTunes and Hulu . Beginning on November 28 , 2014 , with episode 9 , the fourth season was again broadcast on Fridays on Nicktoons . 
 = = = = Worldwide = = = = 
 The Legend of Korra is broadcast subtitled or dubbed on <unk> channels outside of the U.S. 
 In Germany , the first and second seasons received a German @-@ language broadcast on Nickelodeon Germany . The third and fourth seasons are broadcast in 2015 on the German Nicktoons pay TV channel . In France , only the first season has been broadcast on Nickelodeon France and J @-@ One . A <unk> project to complete the French dub was launched in 2015 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 All episodes of the series have been released through digital download services , DVD and Blu @-@ ray formats . The DVD releases contain extra features such as audio commentary from the creators , cast and crew for some episodes , and the Blu @-@ ray releases contain commentary for additional episodes . 
 The following table indicates the release dates of the DVD and Blu @-@ ray versions of the series : 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The series premiere averaged 4 @.@ 5 million viewers , ranking it as basic cable 's number @-@ one kids ' show and top animated program for the week with total viewers . The Legend of Korra also ranks as the network 's most @-@ watched animated series premiere in three years . 
 Book One : Air drew an average of 3 @.@ 8 million viewers per episode . This was the highest audience total for an animated series in the United States in 2012 . 
 Book Two : Spirits premiered with 2 @.@ 6 million viewers . Suggested explanations for the reduced number of broadcast viewers were : the long period between seasons , a change in time slot ( Friday evening instead of Saturday morning ) , the increased availability of digital download services , and generally reduced ratings for the Nickelodeon channel . 
 Book Three : Change aired on short notice in June 2014 after Spanish @-@ language versions of some episodes were leaked on the Internet . The season premiered with 1 @.@ 5 million viewers . After declining TV ratings in the third season , Nickelodeon stopped airing the series on television and shifted its distribution to online outlets , where the show had proven to be much more successful . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Legend of Korra received widespread critical acclaim for its production values , the quality of its writing , its challenging themes and its transgression of the conventions of youth entertainment . On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the third season has a rating of 100 % positive reviews , based on 5 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 5 / 10 . 
 = = = = Style and production values = = = = 
 David Hinckley of the New York Daily News wrote that the " visually striking " series is " full of little tricks and nuances that only true fans will notice and savor , but nothing prevents civilians from enjoying it as well . " Writing for Vulture , Matt Patches highlighted the second season 's loose , handheld @-@ style cinematography – challenging for an animated series – and the " weird , wonderful " , wildly imagined spirits fought by Korra ; " a Kaiju parade with beasts that mirror velociraptors " . Max Nicholson for IGN described the third season as " easily the show 's most consistent season to date , delivering complex themes , excellent storylines and unmatched production values . " And Oliver Sava , for the A.V. Club , characterized it as a " truly magnificent season of television , delivering loads of character development , world building , socio @-@ political commentary , and heart @-@ racing action , all presented with beautifully smooth animation and impeccable voice acting " . 
 = = = = Writing and themes = = = = 
 Before the first season 's finale , Scott Thill of Wired hailed The Legend of Korra as " the smartest cartoon on TV , " able to address adults ' spiritual and sociopolitical concerns while presenting an " alternately riveting and hilarious ride packed with fantasy naturalism , steampunk grandeur , kinetic conflicts , sci @-@ fi weaponry and self @-@ aware comedy . " In The Atlantic , Julie Beck characterized the series as " some of the highest quality fantasy of our time " , appreciating it for combining nuanced social commentary with Avatar : The Last Airbender 's " warmth , whimsy , and self @-@ referential wit " . Brian Lowry of Variety felt that the series " represents a bit more ambitious storytelling for older kids , and perhaps a few adults with the geek gene . " 
 At TV.com , Noel Kirkpatrick commented favorably on how the second season of " one of television 's best programs " handled the necessary quantity of exposition , and on its introduction of the theme of conflict between spiritualism and secularism . Covering the third season , Scott Thill at Salon described Korra as one of the toughest , most complex female characters on TV , despite being in a cartoon , and considered that the " surreal , lovely sequel " to Avatar " lastingly and accessibly critiques power , gender , extinction , spirit and more — all wrapped up in a kinetic ' toon as lyrical and expansive as anything dreamt up by Hayao Miyazaki or George Lucas " . David Levesley at The Daily Beast recommended the series to those looking for " beautifully shot and well @-@ written fantasy on television " after the end of Game of Thrones 's most recent season , noting that in both series " the fantastical and the outlandish are carefully balanced with human relationships and political intrigue " . 
 Several reviewers noted the sociopolitical issues that , unusually for an animated series on a children 's channel , run through The Legend of Korra . According to Forbes , by telling " some of the darkest , most mature stories " ever animated , The Legend of Korra has created a new genre , " the world 's first animated television drama " . Thill proposed that the Equalists ' cause in season 1 reflected the recent appearance of the Occupy movement , and DiMartino responded that though the series was written before Occupy Wall Street began , he agreed that the show similarly depicted " a large group of people who felt powerless up against a relatively small group of people in power . " Beck wrote that The Legend of Korra used magic to illustrate " the growing pains of a modernizing world seeing the rise of technology and capitalism , and taking halting , jerky steps toward self @-@ governance " , while portraying no side of the conflict as entirely flawless . Alyssa Rosenberg praised the show for examining issues of class in an urban setting , and a guest post in her column argued that the struggle between Korra and Amon 's Equalists reflected some of the ideas of John Rawls ' " luck egalitarianism " , praising the series for tackling moral issues of inequality and redistribution . 
 Writing for The Escapist , Mike Hoffman noted how the series respected its younger viewers by explicitly showing , but also giving emotional weight to the death of major characters , including " one of the most brutal and sudden deaths in children 's television " in the case of P 'Li in season 3 . By portraying Korra 's opponents not as stereotypical villains , but as human beings with understandable motivations corrupted by an excess of zeal , the series trusted in viewers to be able to " resolve the dissonance between understanding someone 's view and disagreeing with their methods " . And , Hoffman wrote , by showing Korra to suffer from " full @-@ on depression " at the end of the third season , and devoting much of the fourth to her recovery , the series helped normalize mental health issues , a theme generally unaddressed in children 's television , which made them less oppressive for the viewers . 
 = = = = Gender , race and sexual identity = = = = 
 Summing up Book Four , Joanna Robinson for Vanity Fair described it as " the most subversive television event of the year " , noting how much of the season and series pushed the boundaries of what is nominally children 's television by " breaking racial , sexual , and political ground " : It featured a brave , strong , brown @-@ skinned female lead character as well as a bevy of diverse female characters of all ages , focused on challenging issues such as weapons of mass destruction , PTSD and fascism , and was infused with an Eastern spirituality based on tenets such as balance and mindfulness . Levesley also highlighted the " many examples of well @-@ written women , predominantly of color " in the series . Oliver Sava at The A.V. Club noted that the series had " consistently delivered captivating female figures " ; he considered it to be first and foremost about women , and about how they relate to each other " as friends , family , and rivals in romance and politics " . 
 Moreover , according to Robinson , the series ' final scene , in which Korra and Asami gaze into each other 's eyes in a shot mirroring the composition of Avatar 's final moments in which Aang and Katara kiss , " changed the face of TV " by going further than any other work of children 's television in depicting same @-@ sex relationships – an assessment shared by reviewers for TV.com , The A.V. Club , USA Today , IGN and Moviepilot . Mike Hoffman , on the other hand , felt that Korra and Asami 's relationship was not intended as particularly subversive , but as something the writers trusted younger viewers , now often familiar with same @-@ sex relationships , to be mature enough to understand . Megan Farokhmanesh of Polygon wrote that by portraying Korra and Asami as bisexual , the series even avoided the error of assuming sexual orientation , as many other TV series did , to be a strict divide between " gay " and " straight " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The first season of The Legend of Korra received numerous accolades . It received two nominations for the 2012 Annie Awards ; Bryan Konietzko , Joaquim Dos Santos , Ryu Ki @-@ Hyun , Kim Il Kwang and Kim Jin Sun were nominated in the category of Best Character Design in an Animated Television Production , and the first two episodes were nominated in the category of Best Animated Television Production for Children . The series was also nominated for the " Outstanding Children 's Program " award from among the 2012 NAACP Image Awards , which " celebrates the accomplishments of people of color " . IGN editors and readers awarded the series the " IGN People 's Choice Award " and the " Best TV Animated Series " award in 2012 , and it was also nominated for " Best TV Series " and " Best TV Hero " for Korra . The series also took second place ( after My Little Pony : Friendship is Magic ) in a TV.com readers ' poll for the " Best Animated Series " of 2012 . The first season also received three Daytime Emmy Award nominations , winning in the category of " Outstanding Casting For an Animated Series or Special . " 
 The second season received fewer awards and total nominations than the first ; it was nominated for three Annie Awards in 2014 , winning in the category of " Outstanding Achievement , Production Design in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production . " It was nominated for two more IGN awards , being nominated for " Best TV Animated Series " and winning the " IGN People 's Choice Award " for the second year in a row . 
 The third and fourth seasons , combined into one entry , were nominated for six IGN awards , winning the " People 's Choice Award " for the third time in a row , as well as " Best TV Animated Series " for the second time , " People 's Choice Award for Best TV Episode " for Korra Alone , and " People 's Choice Award for Best TV Series " for the first time . The third and fourth seasons were nominated for two Annie Awards ; " Best Animated TV / Broadcast Production for Children 's Audience , " and winning " Outstanding Achievement , Storyboarding in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production . " 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 Like its predecessor series , The Legend of Korra has a broad and active fandom , including on social media and at fan conventions . Most fans are young adults , according to The Escapist , but many are children and younger teenagers . 
 According to Merrill Barr writing for Forbes , few series " boast as vocal a fan base as The Legend of Korra " , including such popular series as Game of Thrones and Orphan Black . In January 2015 , after the series ended , the media reported on a fan petition to have Netflix produce a series in the Avatar universe garnering more than 10 @,@ 000 signatures . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 The A.V. Club and io9 noted that the live @-@ action TV series Warrior , for which NBC ordered a pilot in early 2015 , has a premise almost identical to that of The Legend of Korra : It is to be about " a damaged heroine " who " works undercover with physical and spiritual guidance from a mysterious martial arts master to bring down an international crime lord " in a " contemporary multicultural and sometimes magical milieu " . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 The Legend of Korra is to be continued in a comics series written by DiMartino , drawn by Brittney Williams and published by Dark Horse Comics . The three planned volumes are to continue the story immediately after the end of the fourth season , and will focus on Korra and Asami 's relationship . The series 's announcement in July 2015 did not mention a date of publication . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Hardcover art books detailing each season 's creative process have been published by Dark Horse , similar to the art book published about Avatar : The Last Airbender : 
 In July 2013 , Nickelodeon published a free interactive e @-@ book , The Legend of Korra : Enhanced Experience , on iTunes . It contained material such as concept art , character biographies , animatics and storyboards . 
 In March 2013 , <unk> Gallery organized a The Legend of Korra fan art exhibition in Los Angeles with the support of the series 's creators , and later published a documentary video about it . Another art exhibition supported by Nickelodeon to pay tribute to The Legend of Korra and Avatar was held from March 7 to 22 , 2015 at Gallery Nucleus in Alhambra , California . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Book One : Air was adapted as two novels by Erica David , aimed at readers ages twelve and up . The novelizations were published by Random House in 2013 : 
 Revolution ( ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> ) , adapting episodes one to six , published on January 8 , 2013 
 Endgame ( ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> ) , adapting episodes seven to twelve , published on July 23 , 2013 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Activision published two video games based on the series in October 2014 . The first , titled only The Legend of Korra , is a third @-@ person beat ' em up game for Xbox One , Xbox 360 , PlayStation 4 , PlayStation 3 , and PC . Despite the developer Platinum Games 's reputation for action games , the game received mixed reviews . The second game , The Legend of Korra : A New Era Begins , is a turn @-@ based strategy game developed by <unk> Technologies for the Nintendo 3DS . 
 Nickelodeon also makes several Adobe Flash @-@ based browser games based on The Legend of Korra available on their website . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 A 12 @-@ inch figurine of Lin Beifong , among other merchandise , is to be announced at the 2015 San Diego Comic @-@ Con. 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 = = = Web series = = = 
 In 2013 , before the premiere of Book Two : Spirits , Nickelodeon released online three animated short videos titled Republic City Hustle that cover part of the lives of Mako and Bolin as street hustlers before the events of the first season . They are written by Tim Hedrick , one of the writers for Book Two : Spirits , and designed by <unk> Freeman . 
 = = = Possible film = = = 
 In August 2012 , Variety reported that Paramount Animation , a sister company of Nickelodeon , was starting development of several animated movies , with budgets of around US $ 100 million . According to Variety , a possible candidate for one of the films was The Legend of Korra . Series creator Bryan Konietzko later wrote on his blog that no such movie was in development . In July 2013 , he said that he and DiMartino were far too busy working on multiple seasons of the TV series in parallel to consider developing a film adaptation at that time . 
 = Dr. Octagonecologyst = 
 Dr. Octagonecologyst is the debut solo album of American rapper & Ultramagnetic MCs member Kool Keith , who released the album under the alias Dr. Octagon . A shorter version of the album , titled Dr. Octagon , was released on May 7 1996 , on Bulk Recordings in the United States and Mo ' Wax in the United Kingdom . The full album appeared under the title Dr. Octagonecologyst on DreamWorks Records in 1997 . The set was produced by Dan " The Automator " Nakamura and featured the work of turntablist DJ Qbert . KutMasta Kurt provided additional production work . The artwork for Dr. Octagonecologyst was drawn by Brian " Pushead " Schroeder . 
 Dr. Octagonecologyst introduces the character of Dr. Octagon , a homicidal , extraterrestrial , time @-@ traveling gynecologist and surgeon . The album 's distinctive sound crosses genres such as psychedelic music , trip hop , horrorcore , and electronic music . Thornton 's lyrics are often abstract , using surrealism , non @-@ sequiturs , hallucinatory psychedelia , horror and science @-@ fiction imagery , and juvenile humor . The unique sound and lyrics of Dr. Octagonecologyst helped revitalize alternative and underground hip hop , gaining more attention than any contemporary independent hip hop album " in quite a while " . 
 Although it did not sell enough copies to reach the mainstream music charts , the album was well received with positive reviews and recognition . Thornton 's lyrics and Nakamura 's production were highly praised , as was DJ Qbert 's innovative scratching . Dr. Octagonecologyst has since been ranked as one of the best hip hop albums of the 1990s . The character of Dr. Octagon has appeared in multiple works by Thornton , including First Come , First Served ( 1999 ) and Dr. Dooom 2 ( 2008 ) , both of which contain tracks in which Octagon is murdered by Dr. Dooom . 
 In a 2012 interview with Rap Genius , Kool Keith stated that the album sold around 200 @,@ 000 copies without any major promotion or marketing budget . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Ultramagnetic MCs member Keith " Kool Keith " Thornton was seeking a new project after the release of his group 's third album , The Four Horsemen , in 1993 . Keith and producer KutMasta Kurt – who were working on a variety of demos together – recorded two songs called " Dr. Octagon " and " Technical Difficulties " . Thornton mailed the songs to radio stations as well as giving copies to several DJs and record producer Dan " The Automator " Nakamura . This led to Nakamura 's role in producing the album . Dr. Octagonecologyst was recorded in Automator 's studio in the basement of his parents ' San Francisco home . 
 Dr. Octagonecologyst has been praised for its original sound , which has often been attributed to Nakamura . However , Thornton states that he was largely involved with the production of the album . Thornton is quoted as saying " Automator and Kurt are probably receiving more credit than I did , but I was a big musical person behind Octagon . " Nakamura has said he wanted Dr. Octagonecologyst to stand out from other hip hop albums , citing the music of Eric B. & Rakim , Mantronix , and Run @-@ D.M.C. as influences . " Hip @-@ hop was always inventive . Then the ' 90s hit and everyone wants to be Dr. Dre ; no one wants to be their own thing anymore . Everyone now wants to have the Lexus and deal pounds of drugs . We don 't do that . That 's not our lifestyle . You don 't see us coming out with the fur coat . There 's more to music than that , " Nakamura said . The album incorporates use of organic instrumentation and features Moog synthesizer , flute , and string instruments . 
 Dialogue excerpts from pornographic films appear on multiple tracks . On the Bulk Recordings edition of the album , " <unk> " is preceded by an excerpt from the comedy film Cabin Boy . Lily Moayeri of Rolling Stone called the album a " psychedelic hip @-@ hop concept album . " Allmusic reviewer Steve Huey wrote that the album " shed some light on the burgeoning turntablist revival via the scratching fireworks of DJ Q @-@ Bert " and its " futuristic , horror @-@ soundtrack production seemed to bridge the gap between hip @-@ hop and the more electronic @-@ oriented trip @-@ hop " . Steve " Flash " Juon of RapReviews also praised its sound , writing that " Cuts are provided with infinite skill and precision by DJ Q @-@ Bert " and that the DJ Shadow / Automator remix of " Waiting List " is " so good that you could hardly miss the original , if indeed there was one . " An instrumental version of the album was released in 1996 under the title <unk> ( Octagon Beats ) . Kembrew McLeod of Allmusic wrote of the instrumental album , stating " If any other artist released an album such as this it would be considered throwaway trash — something for the hardcore fans . But Dan the Automator 's backing tracks are so fresh and original , it 's actually nice to just hear the beats minus the rhymes . " 
 = = = Lyrical themes and storyline = = = 
 Thornton has been praised for his lyrics , which are often abstract , surreal , and filled with non @-@ sequiturs and juvenile humor . Music critic Chairman Mao wrote that Dr. Octagonecologyst occupies " ... the heretofore @-@ undefined area where hip @-@ hop meets hallucinatory sci @-@ fi and porn . " In the album 's narrative , Dr. Octagon is an extraterrestrial , time @-@ traveling gynecologist and surgeon originally from Jupiter . Dr. Octagon 's history is detailed throughout the album 's songs , skits , and samples . " Real Raw " describes him as having yellow eyes , green skin , and a pink @-@ and @-@ white Afro haircut . " General Hospital , " " A Visit to the <unk> , " and " Elective Surgery " detail a list of services offered by Octagon , who claims to treat chimpanzee acne and <unk> , and relocating saliva glands . Octagon is described as being incompetent , as many of his surgery patients die as he conducts his rounds . Octagon also pretends to be a female gynecologist and often has sex with female patients and nurses . 
 According to Mickey Hess , author of Is Hip Hop Dead ? The Past , Present , and Future of America 's Most @-@ Wanted Music , " The album 's beginning and ending tie together the stories of the fictional character Dr. Octagon and the rap career of Kool Keith Thornton himself : We begin with ' 3000 ' and end with ' 1977 , ' which purports to be an audio recording from an early rap performance by Kool Keith ... announcing a 1977 rap show featuring ... pioneers Grandmaster Flash , Kool Herc , the L Brothers , and the original scratch creator Grand Wizzard Theodore [ sic ] . The message is clear : Kool Keith is a part of hip @-@ hop history , and even as rap moves on to the future , Dr. Octagon does not replace Kool Keith . " 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Earth People , " released in 1995 on Bulk Recordings , was the first single from the album . The 12 @-@ inch single featured the songs " No Awareness ( Lyrical Hydraulics ) " , " Bear Witness ( Q @-@ Bert Gets Biz ) " , and the " Interstellar Time Travel " and " Earth Planet " mixes of " Earth People " . " 3000 " and " Blue Flowers " followed as singles in 1996 . The " 3000 " 12 @-@ inch also featured the " Automator 1 @.@ 2 Remix " , " Bear Witness ( Automator 's Two Turntables and a Razor Blade Re @-@ Edit ) " , and " <unk> 101 " . 
 The " Blue Flowers " 12 @-@ inch single release featured the original and instrumental versions of the song , the " Automator Remix " , and the instrumental version of the remix . The " Blue Flowers " maxi single featured the original vocal and instrumental versions , the vocal and instrumental versions of the " Automator Remix " , the " Flower Bed Mix * 2 " by DJ <unk> , the " Secondary Diagnostic Mix " by Photek , and the DJ Hype remix . A second 12 @-@ inch single of " Blue Flowers " featured vocal and instrumental versions of the " Automator 's Stop Confusing Me Remake " , vocal and instrumental versions of Prince Paul 's " So Beautiful Mix " , the a cappella version of the song , and the track " <unk> " . A second maxi single of " Blue Flowers " featured , in addition to earlier mixes of the song , vocal and instrumental versions of the " Meditation Mix " by KutMasta Kurt . A third 12 @-@ inch single was released featuring remixes by DJ Hype and Photek . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The album was initially released by Bulk Recordings on May 7 , 1996 , under the shorter title Dr. Octagon . Although the album sold relatively well , Nakamura has said it was under @-@ promoted because it was released by an independent label . In both the United States and United Kingdom , the album was issued by Bulk Records on vinyl as a double LP , and on compact disc with bonus tracks , . Separately , it was also issued by Mo ' Wax in the UK as a triple LP , reflecting the track listing of the Bulk Recordings compact disk . " When we did this record we thought of it as an underground joint " , Nakamura said . 
 None of the offers made by major record companies appealed to Nakamura and Thornton until DreamWorks Records offered to release the album nationally . In 1997 , the label released the full album in the US under the extended title Dr. Octagonecologyst , which featured five new songs . In promotion of the album , Thornton toured under the Dr. Octagon name . These performances featured a full live band , an on @-@ stage breakdancer and appearances by <unk> <unk> <unk> . Nakamura has referred to Dr. Octagon as a three @-@ person group rather than an alias of Thornton , and these claims were reported by the press . 
 Dr. Octagonecologyst received largely positive reviews . Although it did not chart , Nakamura said the album sold well , even during its initial underground release . " We didn 't have records in every store . We 'd have 10 copies in Tower and the next day they 'd be sold out , and then we wouldn 't get another copy in for another month . " Robert Christgau gave the album an honorable mention , citing the album 's introduction and the songs " Earth People " and " Wild and Crazy " as highlights , and writing simply " the shock horror ! the shock horror ! the perhaps authentically crazy ! [ sic ] " NME magazine described the album as " ... nineteen strong doses of pure , undiluted hip @-@ hop . " Steve " Flash " Juon of RapReviews wrote that " If you aren 't laughing , you should be bugging . Kool Keith obviously doesn 't care . You should , though , because like every other record Keith has ever been on , it will be hailed ten years from now as a classic . " In his review , Chairman Mao of Rolling Stone wrote " Kool Keith leads and oversees the chaos with a Zappa @-@ esque commitment to decadence . " 
 Alternative Press gave the album a rating of four out of five stars , while The New York Times called it " ... one of the most progressive rap projects to be released in the past year . " JazzTimes magazine lauded Thornton 's lyrics , writing that his " ... oddball excursions reach near @-@ cinematic levels . " Pitchfork Media reviewer James P. Wisdom wrote that " Dr. Octagonecologyst is a fun @-@ house ride in hell . All of the expected norms of G @-@ rap have been violently removed and replaced with a healthy dose of creative perversity . It 's throbbing and wet , snickering at your <unk> , laughing at your conventions . " Additionally , Melody Maker called it " bloody essential " and stated " While commercial American hip hop is slithering into an insipid mire of soulless , identikit <unk> , Dr. Octagon has made an album swathed in character [ ... ] Get yer prescription fixed . " 
 Entertainment Weekly critic David Browne praised the album 's production but disliked Thornton 's lyrics , commenting that " ... the inane , often gruesome raps of Kool Keith , is an appointment worth missing . " Also , The Source awarded Dr. Octagonecologyst 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 mics , and called it a " quality album with the proper ingredients " . 
 Following initial reactions to the album , Dr. Octagonecologyst continued to earn praise from contemporary writers and music critics . In the Virgin Encyclopedia of Popular Music and The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , the album received a rating of four out of five stars . PopMatters columnist Michael Frauenhofer called it " ... a landmark album of dope beats and mind @-@ bending experimental flows . " Steve Huey of Allmusic wrote that the album " ... remains as startling and original as the day it was released . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Allmusic reviewer Steve Huey wrote that Dr. Octagonecologyst " ... attracted more attention than any non @-@ mainstream rap album in quite a while , thanks to its inventive production and Keith 's bizarre , free @-@ associative rhymes . " Huey also states that Dr. Octagonecologyst represented " ... the first truly new , genuine alternative to commercial hip @-@ hop since the Native Tongues ' heyday . It appealed strongly to alternative audiences who 'd grown up with rap music , but simply hadn 't related to it since the rise of gangsta " . Thornton expressed some frustration with the Dr. Octagon nickname , saying , " I just made a record . I was an artist on a project , and I think people <unk> [ sic ] that I was an artist on a project . Octagon wasn 't my life ... I 've done a lot of things that were totally around different things other than Octagon . Are some people just afraid to venture off into my life and see that I do other things which are great ? I think people stuck me with something . " 
 In 1999 , Thornton introduced the character of Dr. Dooom on the album First Come , First Served ( 1999 ) . The album featured a track in which the character murdered Dr. Octagon . In 2002 , Thornton announced The Resurrection of Dr. Octagon , a proposed sequel to Dr. Octagonecologyst that would reintroduce the character . The resulting album , The Return of Dr. Octagon released in 2006 , was largely produced without Thornton 's involvement , based upon three completed vocal tracks and reconstructed outtakes . Thornton later produced Dr. Dooom 2 in response to The Return of Dr. Octagon . 
 In 2006 , Dr. Octagonecologyst was ranked among the 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die by Robert Dimery . 
 In 2011 , DIS magazine released a 32 @-@ minute mixtape , " Octagonecologyst ( Sandra Bernhard Remix ) " by Feminine Itch , which married instrumentals from the album with Sandra Bernhard 's stand @-@ up comedy . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Dr. Octagonecologyst is taken from AcclaimedMusic.net. 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Information taken from liner notes . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Kool Keith — vocals , bass guitar ( tracks 8 , 13 , 14 and 17 ) 
 Dan The Automator — violin , keyboards 
 Andy Boy — banjo , guitar ( track 13 ) 
 Phil Bright — guitar ( track 4 ) , bass guitar ( track 12 ) 
 Curt <unk> — clarinet , flute 
 Gordon <unk> — drums 
 Burt King Kong – organ , piano 
