 DJ Q @-@ Bert — turntables , harp 
 Kelly <unk> — tambourine 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Dan the Automator — producer , mixing , mastering 
 Gordon <unk> — second engineer 
 Pushead — illustrations 
 Mark Senasac — mastering 
 = Wetwired = 
 " Wetwired " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the third season and the 72nd episode overall of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on May 10 , 1996 on Fox . It was written by the show 's visual effect designer Mat Beck , and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 and was viewed by 14 @.@ 48 million people . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a series of murders committed by ordinary citizens angered after seeing illusory images . Scully 's trust in Mulder is put to the ultimate test . 
 " Wetwired " was written by Mat Beck , the show 's visual effects supervisor . Beck drew inspiration from debates about television violence and his desire to explore the effect that television has on people . Actor Steven Williams had scheduling conflicts due to his work on the series L.A. Heat , resulting in the creation of the Plain Clothed Man , who appeared in the episode as an emissary for X. Williams called his scene at the end of the episode with The Smoking Man one of his favorite scenes he performed on the show . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Braddock Heights , Maryland , a man mistakenly kills his wife , believing her , as well as the police who soon arrive , to all be someone else . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is tipped off to the case by the mysterious Plain @-@ Clothed Man , who provides him with a newspaper article discussing the case . Mulder and partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) visit the man , and his doctor , Dr. Stroman , in a psychiatric hospital and are told the man killed five people , believing them to all be the same person . 
 Mulder and Scully visit the murderer 's house , where Mulder sees a repairman working on the cable line . They find hundreds of video tapes of the news . Scully believes all the violence the man watched on TV may have led him to the murders , something Mulder does not believe . That night Scully watches the tapes , seeing if there are any clues to why the man committed murder . She steps outside for a break and sees Mulder in a car talking to the Cigarette Smoking Man . In the morning Scully suspiciously asks Mulder if he moved the car in the night . When Mulder tells her he only went out for a paper earlier , she believes he is lying . The next day a similar murder occurs when a woman thinks she sees her husband in a hammock with another woman ; in reality she has killed her neighbor who was in a hammock with his dog . Mulder sees the same cable repairman near the house , who escapes from him . Climbing up on the telephone pole Mulder finds a device inside the cable box . 
 Mulder brings the device to the Lone Gunmen , who tell him it is emitting some kind of signal . Mulder contacts Scully , who is growing increasingly paranoid . Hearing possible clicks while on the phone with Mulder , she frantically searches her hotel room for monitoring devices . When Mulder knocks at her door , Scully fires her weapon at it and runs off . Mulder believes her to be suffering from paranoid psychosis . The Lone Gunmen believe the device to be some sort of subliminal mind control device . Mulder was not affected due to his color blindness . The police find a body they believe to be that of Scully , but Mulder confirms that it is not her . Mulder is unable to contact Scully 's mother , leading him to go to her home . He finds Scully there , who aims a gun at him . Scully claims Mulder never trusted her and blames him for her abduction and her sister 's murder . Scully 's mother calms her down , and she is hospitalized . 
 Mulder believes that the mind control device turns people 's fears into dementia . Mulder tries to contact Dr. Stroman with no success . He traces Dr. Stroman 's location to an empty hotel room where he finds cigarettes in the ash tray . Using the phone log for the room Mulder tracks Stroman to a house where he spots him meeting with the cable repairman . However , by the time Mulder enters , shots ring out , and Mulder finds both men dead , with X ( Steven Williams ) responsible for their murders . X used a third party to inform Mulder , knowing he had orders to kill the men , but Mulder was not able to piece things together in time . Mulder calls him a coward but X tells Mulder that Mulder needs him . Later , X meets in a car with The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was written by the show 's visual effects supervisor , Mat Beck . Beck drew inspiration from debates about television violence and his desire to explore the effect that television has on people . The initial concept was more complex , which required Beck to study neurology texts . However , as the script progressed , it was simplified . Actor Steven Williams had scheduling conflicts due to his work on the series L.A. Heat , resulting in the creation of the Plain Clothed Man , who appeared in the episode as an emissary for X. Paul Rabwin provided narration for a television show heard in the background during the episode . Dana Scully 's motel room as well as The Lone Gunmen 's office were constructed within a studio soundstage . The episode had late @-@ stage sound problems which resulted in post @-@ production dragging into the day the episode was scheduled to be broadcast . 
 Williams called his scene at the end of the episode with The Smoking Man one of his favorite scenes he performed on the show . Rob Bowman was happy with the final product and said , " I dug the script . I felt it was a good old @-@ fashioned show , and people who didn 't like ' Jose Chung 's From Outer Space ' would like ' Wetwired ' because all the bad boys are back . A good clean steak @-@ and @-@ potatoes type of episode . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Wetwired " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on May 10 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 , with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by a total of 14 @.@ 48 million viewers . The episode later aired on February 6 , 1997 in the United Kingdom on BBC One . 
 The episode received moderately positive reviews from television critics . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a B , noting its similarity to " Blood " but thought that " Anderson gives good unhinged " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club graded it a B + , also noting the similarity to " Blood " but he did " not entirely [ mean it ] as a criticism " . Handlen was a " little disappointed " about the Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week , as the concept was not fully explored . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a positive review and awarded it an 8 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was [ a ] strong psychological episode [ ... ] melded with the conspiracy in a logical and consistent way . Some plot devices are a bit too contrived , but the strengths of the episode outweigh the weaknesses . Two great performances by David and Gillian give the episode the necessary gravitas , and there ’ s enough foreshadowing to make sense of some elements of the season finale . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two compared the episode positively to the earlier second season episode " Blood " and wrote , " [ ' Blood ' ] had a clever premise which didn 't quite translate into an actual plot ; here writer Mat Beck remedies that , very wisely " . Shearman and Pearson , furthermore , praised the ending of the episode , where it is revealed that X 's days " are surely numbered . " Paula Vitaris of Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . She praised Anderson 's acting , calling it " superb " and noting that watching Scully fall victim to insanity is " sickly fascinating " . 
 = California State Route 54 = 
 State Route 54 ( SR 54 ) is a state highway in San Diego , California that connects Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in Chula Vista and National City to the city of El Cajon . The westernmost part of the highway is a freeway , intersecting with I @-@ 5 , I @-@ 805 , and SR 125 ; the part of the highway east of SR 125 is undivided , and portions are maintained by the county . 
 The first section of the freeway opened in 1963 , east of I @-@ 805 . The extension of the freeway west to I @-@ 5 was delayed because a flood channel for the Sweetwater River was built with the extension . While construction started in 1984 , a court stopped the process for a few years , and this portion was not complete until 1992 . The final section of freeway , which was upgraded from an expressway , opened in 2007 , to coincide with the extension of SR 125 south to Otay Mesa . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 54 starts as a six @-@ lane freeway from I @-@ 5 near the mouth of the Sweetwater River in National City . Both directions of the freeway are divided by the river ; eastbound traffic traverses the south bank and westbound traffic traverses the north bank . The two sides join near the junction with I @-@ 805 , and the roadway continues east for several miles through Paradise Hills in San Diego . As the freeway turns north , it merges with SR 125 north and SR 54 exits at Jamacha Boulevard in La Presa . The routing follows Jamacha Boulevard as an undivided highway northeast through Spring Valley until reaching Campo Road , although some maps only sign Jamacha Boulevard as County Route S17 ( CR S17 ) , and the state does not maintain this portion of the route . 
 SR 54 then runs concurrently with SR 94 through the unincorporated but developed area of Rancho San Diego , following Campo Road about one @-@ half mile ( 800 m ) east . SR 54 and CR S17 continue northeast on six @-@ lane Jamacha Road to El Cajon , while Campo Road and SR 94 split off to the southeast . East of Brabham Street , four @-@ lane SR 54 continues to where it currently ends at the El Cajon city limit , though the Jamacha Road street name continues into the city to the route 's previous terminus at the intersection with I @-@ 8 . 
 SR 54 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , but is not part of the National Highway System ( though SR 125 is ) , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . The route has three different names , including Jamacha Road from Campo Road to East Main Street in El Cajon , South Bay Freeway from I @-@ 805 to SR 94 , and the Filipino @-@ American Highway from the western terminus to SR 125 . 
 In 2014 , SR 54 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 21 @,@ 800 at the eastern end of the route , and 131 @,@ 000 between I @-@ 805 and Reo Drive , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . In early 2012 , portions of the interchange with I @-@ 5 were included on the Caltrans District 11 's Spring 2012 Top Ten Congested Segments list . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early construction = = = 
 A road through Jamacha is mentioned in The San Diego Union as early as February 1908 , and was oiled in 1935 from US 80 to Sweetwater Valley and in other places by the Sweetwater River . 
 In 1956 , the routing of what would become the South Bay Freeway had been determined . Three years later , the California State Legislature added Route 280 from near the Sweetwater River to El Cajon to the state highway system . The South Bay Freeway was included in the county 's 1960 – 1961 budget as the most important project . By 1961 , E Street in Chula Vista continued along the Sweetwater River , turning northeast and becoming Sweetwater Road before entering into Lemon Grove . 
 Bidding took place in November 1962 for the part of the freeway from eastern National City and Valley Road to La Presa and Jamacha Road ; it was to loosely parallel Sweetwater Road . This portion of freeway opened on September 27 , 1963 , and the entire project cost $ 2 @.@ 25 million ( about $ 37 million in 2015 dollars ) ; however , although it was a four @-@ lane freeway , it was declared as an expressway since there were at @-@ grade intersections . While the road was originally planned to have eight lanes , only four were constructed due to the additional cost and the lack of funds . Meanwhile , SR 54 was officially designated in the 1964 state highway renumbering . 
 = = = Sweetwater River channel = = = 
 SR 54 was extended west as a freeway to I @-@ 5 from I @-@ 805 at the same time the Sweetwater River flood control channel was constructed ; the state proposed routing the flood channel in between the two roadways of the freeway in 1963 , and it would also delineate the boundary between the cities of Chula Vista and National City . Later that year , the county proposed an extension of the freeway east to US 80 and Third Street in El Cajon . In 1966 , the U.S. Army 's Board of Engineers supported the construction of the flood channel , to protect the surrounding region from flooding ; the integration of SR 54 was included in the proposal . 
 Two years later , county officials expressed concerns over the delay of getting state and federal approval , and considered building the freeway without the flood control component of the project . The county hoped to build both projects at the same time to save $ 4 million ( about $ 48 million in 2015 dollars ) in costs , even though it was estimated to require three years ' worth of legislation to be accomplished in a single year by the county board of supervisors in order to use the Interstate Highway System funding that was set to expire in 1972 . The U.S. Congress gave approval for the project . But later that year , it was announced that the target date for completing the system would be extended from 1972 to 1974 . 
 By 1971 , the projected start of construction had slipped to within three to four years from then ; however , Caltrans had approved the project . In July 1974 , the California Coastal Commission unanimously decided to halt the entire project , since many of the necessary approvals from governmental bodies had not been obtained ; this overrode an exemption granted by the San Diego Coast Regional Commission . Both the mayors of Chula Vista and National City were dismayed at this ; Mayor Kile Morgan of National City stated that " we in the South Bay are getting tired of being kicked around " , referring to other stalled projects such as SR 157 and SR 125 . Meanwhile , the interchange at I @-@ 805 was constructed , with completion scheduled for the next year . A U.S. Fish and Wildlife report predicted that the project would destroy 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) of marshland and harm three bird species that were endangered , among other negative environmental consequences ; the conclusions were disputed by local officials . 
 In 1976 , Caltrans said that SR 54 had not been included in construction plans for the next six years , due to a lack of funding and a shift in priorities to maintenance from the building of new road . The water subcommittee of the U.S. House of Representatives later recommended that the wildlife refuge be put on hold , since the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers had not finished their proposal . Over the next few years , support for the project was expressed by a local citizens ' group , the Chula Vista city council , and the San Diego Chamber of Commerce . 
 By 1980 , funding was the major obstacle for completing the project , which the Army Corps of Engineers was working to resolve . Public concerns about the project were that it was not needed and would be too costly . The Army Corps of Engineers announced in 1981 that the need to do an environmental impact report was holding up the rest of the project , following the Endangered Species Act of 1973 ; the least tern and light @-@ footed clapper rail were considered endangered , and construction would have affected their habitat . The next year , the environmental impact report process began , funded by the Army Corps of Engineers . 
 Construction on the part west of I @-@ 805 and the interchange with I @-@ 5 started in May 1984 , with the construction of a detour for I @-@ 5 ; the Army Corps of Engineers paid for some of the costs , and federal funding related to the Interstate Highway System was also used . That same year , the county agreed to create a wildlife preserve on 188 acres ( 76 ha ) of marshland to resolve the dispute . Meanwhile , the existing part of the South Bay Freeway had become the " most dangerous five @-@ mile stretch of highway in the county " , as declared by local fire chief Orville Moody , due to the high number of traffic accidents . By early 1986 , the extension of the SR 54 freeway to El Cajon was declared a " lower priority " by Caltrans . 
 That year , the Sierra Club filed a lawsuit that halted construction on the project the next year , due to concerns about damage to the least tern and light @-@ footed clapper rail bird populations caused by the construction of a nearby hotel and the effect that the construction of roads to the hotel would have . Chief U.S. District Judge Gordon Thompson stopped the work because the preserve had not been created . It was estimated that the shutdown resulted in the state losing $ 25 @,@ 000 ( about $ 70 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars ) a day , as well as over 185 people being laid off . 
 The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service received 300 acres ( 120 ha ) of land in the Sweetwater Marsh from the Santa Fe Land Company to mitigate the environmental damage , and the lawsuit reached a settlement . Construction resumed in early November 1989 ; the halting of construction meant that the project had to be rebid , and one bridge was partially constructed , resulting in it being known as " the bridge to nowhere " . The eastbound roadway opened to traffic on December 10 , 1990 , at an approximate cost of $ 89 @.@ 3 million ( about $ 196 million in 2015 dollars ) . The westbound roadway was completed in July 1992 . 
 = = = Later developments = = = 
 The expressway portion east of I @-@ 805 to South Worthington Street was upgraded to a freeway in the late 1990s , and a HOV lane opened in each direction , east of I @-@ 805 only . The first part from I @-@ 805 to near Woodman Street was finished in November 1993 . The second part was to begin the construction phase in 1994 ; this was complete by 1998 . The state legislature allowed for the relinquishment of SR 54 from the El Cajon city limit to I @-@ 8 to the City of El Cajon in 1999 , and the transfer took place that year . 
 The remaining expressway portion of SR 54 was replaced by a freeway in two phases in the late 1990s and the 2000s . The first phase corresponded with construction of SR 125 north of Jamacha Boulevard to SR 94 ; construction began in 1996 and was completed in 2003 . The second phase consisted of the construction of the SR 125 toll road and opened on November 19 , 2007 . While California Transportation Ventures owned the franchise on the tolled portion of SR 125 , the interchange with SR 54 was constructed with $ 160 million ( about $ 186 million in 2015 dollars ) of public funding . From 2005 to 2007 , 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 53 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of rock were blasted through in 160 separate explosions to allow for the interchange to be built . The project to convert the HOV lanes to regular mixed traffic lanes was authorized in 2006 . Caltrans determined that the lack of room for law enforcement to pull over those violating the carpool requirements , as well as a missing barrier separating the HOV lanes from regular traffic , made the lanes less effective . As of October 2014 , Caltrans was considering relinquishing the part of SR 54 from the SR 94 junction up to the El Cajon city limits to the County of San Diego . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in San Diego County . 
 = 2006 FA Cup Final = 
 The 2006 FA Cup Final was a football match played between Liverpool and West Ham United on 13 May 2006 at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff . It was the final match of the 2005 – 06 FA Cup , the 125th season of the world 's oldest football knockout competition , the FA Cup . Liverpool were participating in their 13th final , they had previously won six and lost six . West Ham were appearing in their fifth final , they had previously won three and lost once . This was the last final to be held at the Millennium Stadium while Wembley Stadium was rebuilt . Liverpool had won the first final to be held at the Millennium Stadium in 2001 , when they beat Arsenal 2 – 1 . The match has been called The Gerrard Final and is widely regarded as one of the greatest cup finals in the history of the competition . 
 As both teams were in the highest tier of English football , the Premier League , they entered the competition in the third round . Matches up to the semi @-@ final were contested on a one @-@ off basis , with a replay taking place if the match ended in a draw . Liverpool 's matches varied from close affairs to comfortable victories . They beat Manchester United 1 – 0 in the fourth round , while they won 7 – 0 against Birmingham City in the sixth round . The majority of West Ham 's matches were close , with their only match to be decided by more than one goal being their 4 – 2 victory against Blackburn Rovers in the fourth round . 
 Watched by a crowd of 71 @,@ 140 , West Ham took the lead in the first half when Liverpool defender Jamie Carragher scored an own goal , and striker Dean Ashton scored a few minutes later to make it 2 – 0 to West Ham . Liverpool scored , courtesy of Djibril Cissé , to make the score 2 – 1 at half time . They equalised not long after the restart via a Steven Gerrard goal . However , ten minutes later West Ham defender Paul Konchesky gave his team a 3 – 2 lead . With the match in injury time , Gerrard equalised from distance to make the score 3 – 3 and force the game into extra time . The match remained goalless throughout the entirety of extra time and was to be decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out . West Ham missed three of their four penalties while Liverpool converted three of four to win the shoot @-@ out 3 – 1 . 
 The victory meant Liverpool won the FA Cup for the seventh time . They later played against league champions Chelsea in the 2006 FA Community Shield . Given Liverpool had already qualified for Europe via their league position , their UEFA Cup spot was awarded to runners @-@ up West Ham . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool entered the competition in the third round , as one of the twenty teams from the Premier League . They were drawn against Football League Championship side Luton Town , at Luton 's home ground Kenilworth Road . Despite trailing 3 – 1 at the interval , four goals in the second half , including one from behind the halfway line by Xabi Alonso , meant Liverpool recovered to win the match 5 – 3 and progress to the fourth round . There , they were drawn against fellow top division club <unk> . The match held at Portsmouth 's ground , Fratton Park , saw Liverpool take the lead in the first half when captain Steven Gerrard scored a penalty following a handball by Portsmouth defender Dejan Stefanović , and John Arne Riise scored again before half time to make it 2 – 0 . Portsmouth got a goal back through midfielder Sean Davis in the second half , but no more goals were scored and Liverpool won 2 – 1 to go through to the fifth round . 
 Fellow Premier League team Manchester United were the opposition in the fifth round . With the match held at Liverpool 's home ground Anfield , they won 1 – 0 , courtesy of a Peter Crouch goal in the 19th minute . This was the first time in 85 years that Liverpool had defeated United in the FA Cup . Liverpool were drawn against another Premier League team , Birmingham City in the sixth round . Liverpool took the lead in the match held at Birmingham 's home ground St Andrew 's in the first minute when defender Sami Hyypiä headed in , and two more goals in the first half from Crouch saw Liverpool finish the first half with a 3 – 0 lead . Four more goals in the second half from Fernando Morientes , Riise , Djibril Cissé and an own goal from Birmingham defender Olivier <unk> meant Liverpool won 7 – 0 to progress to the semi @-@ final . 
 Chelsea , also of the Premier League , were the opposition in the semi @-@ final . The match was held at a neutral venue Old Trafford , the home ground of Manchester United . Liverpool took the lead in the first half . Chelsea defender John Terry committed a foul on Luis García , which resulted in a Liverpool free kick , from which Riise scored . They extended their lead soon after the start of the second half , when a goal by García from 20 yards ( 18 m ) , after he received the ball from a William Gallas header , gave them a 2 – 0 lead . Chelsea scored late in the half through striker Didier Drogba , but they were unable to achieve an equaliser and Liverpool won the match 2 – 1 to progress to the final . 
 = = = West Ham United = = = 
 West Ham entered the competition in the third round , where they were drawn against Championship team Norwich City . Before the game Norwich 's top scorer , Dean Ashton , was withdrawn from their squad amid speculation that he was about to be sold . Although the sale was denied by manager Nigel Worthington , Ashton joined West Ham soon after for £ 7 @.@ 2 million . The match played at Norwich 's home ground , Carrow Road , saw West Ham take the lead in the sixth minute through midfielder Hayden Mullins , and double it in the second half from striker Bobby Zamora . Norwich found a consolation with a Paul McVeigh penalty , but they lost 2 – 1 and West Ham progressed to the fourth round . Fellow Premier League team Blackburn Rovers were the opposition in the fourth round . West Ham went a goal down in the first minute when David Bentley scored , but they subsequently scored four goals from Teddy Sheringham , Matthew Etherington , Bobby Zamora and an own goal from Zurab <unk> to win the match 4 – 2 and go through to the fifth round . 
 West Ham were again drawn against Premier League opposition in the fifth round , facing Bolton Wanderers away at the Reebok Stadium . It ended in a 0 – 0 draw , necessitating a replay . A Jussi Jääskeläinen own goal in the 10th minute gave West Ham the lead in the replay at their home ground Upton Park . Bolton equalised through striker Kevin Davies and with the score 1 – 1 at full time the match went to extra time . A goal from striker Marlon Harewood in the 96th minute gave West Ham a 2 – 1 victory and meant they progressed to the sixth round . Premier League team Manchester City were the opposition in the sixth round , and West Ham went ahead in the 41st minute when striker Dean Ashton scored . They extended their lead , in the match held at City 's ground , the City of Manchester Stadium , in the 69th minute with Ashton 's second of the match . A goal from Kiki <unk> in the 85th minute for City was not enough to prevent West Ham and they won 2 – 1 to go through to the semi @-@ final . 
 Middlesbrough , also from the Premier League , were the opposition in the semi @-@ final at the neutral venue of Villa Park in Birmingham . Before the game both players and supporters paused to remember the life of West Ham 's recently deceased former manager , John Lyall . The first half saw Middlesbrough dominate , but they were unable to convert any of their chances into goals . They also lost goalkeeper Mark Schwarzer to injury . A long pass by defender Anton Ferdinand was headed down by Ashton to Harewood , whose goal ensured a 1 – 0 victory for West Ham and a place in the final . 
 = = Background = = 
 The match was Liverpool 13th appearance in the final . They had won on six occasions ( 1965 , 1974 , 1986 , 1989 , 1992 , 2001 ) and lost six times ( 1914 , 1950 , 1971 , 1977 , 1988 , 1996 ) . West Ham were appearing in their fifth final , they had previously won three ( 1964 , 1975 , 1980 ) and lost once in the 1923 FA Cup Final . Liverpool had won both the meetings between the teams in the Premier League during the season . A 2 – 0 home victory at the end of October , was followed by a 2 – 1 win at the end of April . The latter match saw Liverpool midfielder Luis García and West Ham defender Hayden Mullins sent off , which meant they would both be suspended for the final . 
 A week before the final , Liverpool played Portsmouth in the 2005 – 06 Premier League – it was their last match before the final , and they won 3 – 1 . The win was Liverpool 's ninth straight in the competition and meant they finished the season in third place . One area of concern was the fitness of midfielder Xabi Alonso , who injured his ankle in the match and was a doubt for the final . They were also without striker Robbie Fowler , who was cup @-@ tied after playing for Manchester City earlier in the competition . Captain Steven Gerrard was determined not to let complacency affect Liverpool ; " We have beaten fantastic sides like Manchester United and Chelsea to get to the final , but it is always on your mind that after going on such a successful run you might not get over that last hurdle . " 
 West Ham 's final game before the final was against Tottenham Hotspur in the Premier League , and a 2 – 1 win meant they finished the season in ninth place . West Ham also had injury concerns ahead of the final , with midfielder Matthew Etherington and striker Dean Ashton both doubts to be fit for the match . However , manager Alan Pardew was optimistic they would be available for selection stating : " You expect everyone to put their life on the line for the final . " Pardew was also optimistic about his teams chances in the final , despite them being considered as the underdogs : We 're up against a technical team who are better than us , Liverpool have got more experience and more international players , too . But everyone also knows that we attack teams and that we 've got a big punch . " 
 The match was originally scheduled to be played on 20 May . However , England manager Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson wanted a four @-@ week break before the start of the 2006 FIFA World Cup , so that if any England players were involved ( Liverpool 's Steven Gerrard , Jamie Carragher and Peter Crouch all later made his squad ) would get a decent rest before the tournament . The final was scheduled to be held at Wembley Stadium , however the stadium had fallen behind in its rebuild and would be completed in time for the final . The final would instead be played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , where it had been held since 2001 . Mike Dean was originally appointed to referee the final , but questions about his impartiality were raised as he resided close to Liverpool . He was replaced by Alan Wiley . 
 In the week before the Final , a block of 1 @,@ 600 tickets in the Liverpool supporters ' seating area was stolen in the postal system . The stadium authorities refused to reissue the tickets on crowd safety grounds , and threatened to eject anyone found sitting in the block from the stadium and possibly prosecute them for receiving stolen goods . Liverpool F.C. arranged for most of the affected fans to receive tickets from an allocation that had been held back for a lottery among their supporters . The day after the final , South Wales Police seized 100 stolen tickets . Three people were arrested after 15 forged tickets were found ahead of the match . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ match = = = 
 Michael Ball sang the national anthem , " God Save the Queen " , on the pitch before the game , with Lesley Garrett singing the traditional cup final hymn , " Abide with Me " . Before the match , both teams received a boost as Ashton and Etherington for West Ham and Alonso for Liverpool were deemed fit enough to start the final . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 West Ham kicked the match off , as both teams lined up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation . West Ham committed the first foul of the match in the first minute as Paul Konchesky brought down Steven Gerrard , but Liverpool were unable to capitalise on the resulting free kick . A few minutes later , West Ham midfielder Yossi Benayoun advanced down the right hand side of the pitch and passed the ball into the penalty area , but Liverpool defender Sami Hyypiä was able to intercept the ball before Ashton or Harewood received it . Harewood had the first shot on goal for West Ham in the 12th minute , but it was deflected out for a corner . 
 Liverpool 's first opportunity came a minute later , after West Ham midfielder Carl Fletcher conceded a free kick for a foul on Gerrard . However , the resulting free kick was hit into the wall of players in front of the West Ham penalty area . A few minutes later , West Ham scored the first goal of the match ; Liverpool midfielder Xabi Alonso gave the ball away to Benayoun , who played it inside to Ashton . Ashton then played a through @-@ ball to Lionel Scaloni on the right flank , before the Argentine 's low cross was put into his own goal by Liverpool defender Jamie Carragher to give West Ham a 1 – 0 lead . Seven minutes later , West Ham extended their lead , when Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina fumbled a shot from Etherington into the path of Ashton , who squeezed the rebound under Reina into the far corner to make it 2 – 0 . Liverpool looked to have reduced the defect in the 30th minute , but Peter Crouch 's shot from a Gerrard free kick was disallowed as Crouch was offside . 
 However , Liverpool did score from their next attack . Gerrard played a ball into the West Ham penalty area , which went over the head of defender Scaloni and was met by striker Djibril Cissé , who scored to make it 2 – 1 . Ashton came close to extending West Ham 's lead in the 37th minute , but his effort went wide of the post after beating goalkeeper Reina . The last chance of the half came in the 44th minute when Liverpool defender Steve Finnan sliced a clearance straight to striker Harewood , however his shot went out for a throw @-@ in . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Liverpool got the second half under way , but it was West Ham who had the first attack of the half . Etherington advanced down the right hand side of the pitch and passed to Harewood , whose shot was saved by Reina , who also saved a subsequent shot from Benayoun . Liverpool had a chance immediately afterwards as Cissé passed to Alonso , but his shot was blocked and went out for a corner . A minute later , Liverpool made the first substitution of the match , as the injured Harry Kewell was replaced by Fernando Morientes . Liverpool equalised in the 54th minute , when Gerrard volleyed home a knock @-@ down header from Crouch . The first yellow card of the match went to Ashton after he fouled Finnan in the 60th minute . Three minutes later , Carragher also received a yellow card for a foul on Ashton . 
 A minute later , West Ham went ahead again ; defender Paul Konchesky received the ball on the left flank , and played a ball into the Liverpool penalty area , only to see it sail over goalkeeper Reina and into the goal . Three minutes later , Liverpool made another substitution , as Alonso went off with an injury to be replaced by defender Jan <unk> . Minutes later , West Ham captain Nigel Reo @-@ Coker had an attempt to score , but his shot went over the Liverpool goal . West Ham subsequently made their first substitution of the match , as Ashton was replaced by fellow striker Bobby Zamora . Liverpool also replaced Crouch with midfielder Dietmar Hamann . 
 West Ham made their second substitution of the match in the 77th minute , as they replaced Fletcher with Christian Dailly . They also changed formation to a 4 – 5 – 1 in an attempt to hang onto their lead . Morientes headed a Cissé pass wide in the last 10 minutes as Liverpool looked to score an equaliser . West Ham made their final substitution of the match in the 85th minute , as striker Teddy Sheringham replaced Etherington . Sheringham 's first involvement in the match was to concede a free kick for handball , which was subsequently put wide by Gerrard . With the match entering injury time , Liverpool played the ball into the West Ham penalty area , where it was cleared but only as far as Gerrard , 35 yards ( 32 m ) from goal ; the Liverpool captain hit the ball on the half @-@ volley and it flew along a low trajectory past goalkeeper Shaka Hislop into the bottom corner of the West Ham goal . West Ham had another chance before full @-@ time , but Konchesky 's shot was saved by Reina . With the scores level at 3 – 3 , the match went into extra time after the referee brought an end to the 90 minutes of play . 
 = = = Extra time = = = 
 Liverpool got the first half of extra time under way , but the start was slow as players suffered with cramp , Carragher in particular . In the 97th minute , Liverpool won a corner , which West Ham cleared to Liverpool defender John Arne Riise on the edge of the penalty area , but his shot went over the crossbar . Liverpool won another corner in the 99th minute , which was cleared by West Ham ; the ball came back into the penalty area and Morientes headed down for Cissé , but he was unable to control the ball . Before the end of the half , Hyypiä had a chance to score after running past Scaloni and Harewood , but his shot went wide of the West Ham goal . 
 Just after the start of the second half of extra time , Liverpool had the first chance . <unk> advanced down the right wing , but his shot went wide of the West Ham goal . West Ham won a corner in the 109th minute , but it came to nothing as Zamora was penalised for a foul on Reina . Players continued to struggle with cramp as Gerrard , Mohamed Sissoko , Finnan and Harewood all went down in quick succession . West Ham won a free kick in the 114th minute , after Zamora was tripped by Hyypiä , but Benayoun 's effort was cleared and almost resulted in a chance for Liverpool , before Morientes was tackled by Anton Ferdinand 6 yards ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) from the West Ham goal . Two minutes from the end , Hamann was booked for a foul on Zamora ; the subsequent free kick was met by Reo @-@ Coker , whose shot was turned onto the post by Reina . The ball rebounded to Harewood , but his shot went wide of the goal . Neither team scored before the end of extra time , and the referee brought the match to an end with the scores level , resulting in a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 = = = Penalty shoot @-@ out = = = 
 The shoot @-@ out took place at the end where the West Ham fans were seated , with Liverpool taking the first penalty . Hamann stepped up first and scored high to the right of Hislop . Zamora took the first penalty for West Ham , but his shot was saved by Reina . Hyypiä took the next penalty for Liverpool , but he also missed , as Hislop saved his shot . Substitute Sheringham took West Ham 's next penalty and scored , his shot beating Reina high to his left to level the shoot @-@ out at 1 – 1 . Liverpool captain Gerrard took their next penalty and scored to make it 2 – 1 , while Konchesky 's shot was saved by Reina . Riise took the next penalty for Liverpool and scored to extend their lead to 3 – 1 . Ferdinand was next and needed to score to keep West Ham in the shoot @-@ out , but his penalty was saved by Reina , which meant Liverpool won the shoot @-@ out 3 – 1 to win the FA Cup for the seventh time . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool 's victory meant they won the FA Cup for the seventh time , the club 's manager Rafael Benítez stated that neither side deserved to lose the match : " It was difficult to say we deserved to win or the other team . It was a magnificent final . We knew that they could score goals but that we could also . We needed to keep going but after 63 games it was really difficult . " Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard also praised West Ham , stating : " West Ham were brilliant , they gave us a really good game but we had a never @-@ say @-@ die attitude and we stuck in there , our best chance was on penalties as we did not have any energy left . " Due to the nature of the comeback , the match has come to be regarded as The Gerrard Final , team mate Peter Crouch summed up the effect Gerrard had on the match : " When the injury @-@ time board went up we thought our chance had gone , but it is always good to have a player like Steven Gerrard in your team . " A BBC Sport poll in May 2015 deemed Gerrard 's goal to be the best in an FA Cup Final from the past 50 years . 
 West Ham manager Alan Pardew described the defeat as hard to take : " It felt like a defeat when the third goal went in . We rallied and had a great chance in extra time . We had to dig in . This was a top team we were playing , but I felt we were going to win . Only a 35 @-@ yard Gerrard <unk> was going to change that . The players have been magnificent – we are proud of the way we played . " Captain Nigel Reo @-@ Coker found defeat hard to take as he felt they had done enough to win the final : " I can 't describe it how I feel at the moment – gutted because I think we deserved to win this game . The players put in a fantastic effort , but it just wasn 't to be for us . It was a marvellous FA Cup final and we gave all we could . I hope everyone was proud – it just wasn 't our day . " 
 Liverpool 's victory set up a Community Shield match against Chelsea , winners of the 2005 – 06 Premier League . As FA Cup winners , Liverpool would have been awarded qualification into the UEFA Cup , but because they had qualified for the UEFA Champions League via their league position , the UEFA Cup place was passed to runners @-@ up , West Ham . 
 = History of Randolph , Tennessee = 
 Randolph is an unincorporated rural community in Tipton County , Tennessee , United States , located on the banks of the Mississippi River . The lands of the Mississippi River Basin were inhabited by Paleo @-@ Indians and later Native American tribes of the Mississippian culture for thousands of years . The Tipton Phase people and the Chickasaw Indian tribe populated the Mississippi River valley near Randolph during the Mississippian period . In 1541 , Spanish explorer Hernando de Soto crossed the Mississippi River at or near Randolph . French explorer Cavelier de La Salle built the first French fortification at or near Randolph on his 1682 canoe expedition of the Mississippi River . 
 European settlers arrived in the area around 1800 . The town of Randolph was founded in the 1820s as one of the earliest European settlements in Tipton County . The location of Randolph , on the second Chickasaw Bluff along the banks of the Mississippi River , just south of the lower mouth of the Hatchie River , provided for an ideal harbor for flatboats and steamboats and made the town an early center of river commerce in West Tennessee . Randolph shipped more cotton annually than Memphis until 1840 . The commercial success of the community also depended on the use of slave labor in the cotton fields surrounding the settlement . In 1827 , the Randolph Post office was established and in 1834 , the first pastor was appointed at Randolph . 
 The fortunes of the community began to decline in the late 1840s due to failed railroad development , an unfavorable mail route and an unsuccessful attempt to move the county seat from Covington to Randolph . An unfinished project to cut a canal from the Hatchie River to the Tennessee River and other factors also contributed to the commercial demise of the town . The first Confederate States Army fort in Tennessee was built at Randolph early in the American Civil War in 1861 , a second fortification at Randolph was constructed later that same year . During the Civil War , the town was burned down twice by Union Army forces , which further promoted the decline of the once flourishing community . 
 In 2008 , Randolph Bluff Historic Park was dedicated . The park is intended to promote the Civil War history of the community and make the unique views of the Mississippi River available to a wider public . Once finished , the park will be part of the Mississippi River Corridor Tennessee , a project to " create a scenic byway that connects historic sites along the Mississippi River " . As of 2008 , Randolph has a population of ca . 200 and consists of about two dozen dwellings . The economy of the rural community is dominated by agriculture with no major industries and businesses present . 
 = = Indian cultures = = 
 From about 10 @,@ 000 BCE , Paleo @-@ Indians and later Archaic @-@ Indians lived as communities of hunter @-@ gatherers in the area that covers the modern day southern United States . Approximately 800 CE to 1600 CE , the Mississippi River Delta was populated by tribes of the Mississippian culture , a mound @-@ building Native American people that had developed in the late Woodland Indian period . The Tipton Phase people were a local expression of the Mississippian culture . They inhabited the region of modern day Tipton County during the time of first contact with Europeans , at the arrival of the de Soto Expedition . By the end of the Mississippian period the land was claimed and populated by the Chickasaw tribe . The exact origins of the Chickasaw are uncertain . Several prehistoric Indian settlements were located in the vicinity of what would later become Randolph . 
 = = European explorers = = 
 = = = Hernando de Soto = = = 
 Hernando de Soto ( c . 1496 – 1542 ) was a Spanish explorer who led the first European expedition deep into the territory of the modern United States and the first European documented to have discovered the Mississippi River . 
 In 1541 , De Soto and 400 men reached the Mississippi River in the area of what is modern Shelby County in southwest Tennessee or DeSoto County in northwest Mississippi . Within four weeks of their arrival , the expedition had built several floats in order to cross the river and continue their expedition westward into what would later become Arkansas territory . There is a documented controversy about the exact location of Hernando de Soto 's crossing over the Mississippi River . A report published in 1874 suggests that " De Soto ( ... ) traveled up to Randolph , and there built boats and crossed the river " . Other <unk> claim that it is " generally believed and ( ... ) probably true " that De Soto crossed the Mississippi River at Memphis . 
 = = = Cavelier de La Salle = = = 
 René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle ( 1643 – 87 ) was a French explorer . In 1682 , La Salle led a canoe expedition to explore the Mississippi River basin . The expedition landed to hunt , when one of their members went missing . The armorer Pierre Prudhomme was assumed captured by Chickasaw Indians . La Salle decided to stay and search for the missing member . La Salle had a stockade built and named it Fort Prudhomme , after their lost man . This was the first structure built by the French in Tennessee . Days later , the missing member found his way back . Prudhomme had lost his way while hunting . The expedition reached the mouth of the Mississippi River on April 6 , 1682 . 
 The exact location of Fort Prudhomme is unknown . Some historians claim that Fort Prudhomme was built on the first Chickasaw Bluff , in modern day Lauderdale County . The Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture suggests that the fort was constructed on the second Chickasaw Bluff near modern day Randolph . Other research mentions the third Chickasaw Bluff as the location of the fort , at the border of modern Tipton and Shelby Counties . Again other sources assume that the fourth Chickasaw Bluff in modern Shelby County at Memphis was the location of Fort Prudhomme . 
 = = European settlement = = 
 Around 1800 , Europeans began settling the land east of the Mississippi River that was inhabited by the Chickasaw Indians for centuries prior to the arrival of Europeans . Chickasaw land in West Tennessee and southwestern Kentucky was ceded in the Jackson Purchase after negotiations in which the United States was represented by General Andrew Jackson and Governor Isaac Shelby , while the Chickasaw were represented by their chiefs and warriors . In 1818 , both sides agreed to the transfer by signing the Treaty of Tuscaloosa . In the treaty , the United States agreed to pay the Chickasaw $ 300 @,@ 000 in return for the right to the land east of the Mississippi River and north of the Mississippi state line . 
 Early European landowners were eager to secure their investment in land in southwest Tennessee . Years before Randolph would be founded , wealthy and influential investors tried to find ways to get a return on their share of land . In 1818 , Judge John Overton wrote to General James Winchester that " We must not let the owners of the property on the Bluffs at the Mississippi above us be beforehand in laying off town — as it might damp the sale of ours " . Overton and Winchester founded Memphis , Tennessee along with Andrew Jackson in 1819 . Overton , Winchester and Jackson were trying to secure investments in property in the Memphis area that they owned and not give the advantage to investors " above " , north of Memphis on the Mississippi River , in Randolph . Andrew Jackson ( 1767 – 1845 ) would become the 7th President of the United States in 1829 . 
 Both Memphis and Randolph are located on one of the four Chickasaw Bluffs , Randolph on the second and Memphis on the fourth . In the early 19th century , the terrain of the Chickasaw Bluffs provided promising locations for a harbor on the Mississippi River for both emerging towns . In 1820 , the area that would become Randolph had an estimated population of 54 . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 Early in the 1820s , landowners and investors John T. Brown and Robert Bedford were the proprietors of the land on the second Chickasaw Bluff that would form Randolph a few years later . Only 40 – 50 miles ( 60 – 80 km ) north of Memphis by water , they described the area as " a good landing for Mississippi River flatboats " . The Hatchie River , joining the Mississippi River just north of the second Chickasaw Bluff , was accessible to steamboats for 60 miles ( 100 km ) upriver to Bolivar , in Hardeman County . Brown and Bedford chose the site on the second Chickasaw Bluff to lay out the plan for Randolph , a promising river town . 
 The Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture gives the date of Randolph 's official establishment as 1823 . Other reports date the foundation to 1827 or 1828 . The founders of Randolph named the community for John Randolph ( 1773 – 1833 ) , a leader in the United States Congress from Virginia and spokesman for the " Old Republican " faction of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party . The Old Republican faction wanted to restrict the federal government 's roles . 
 = = Cotton commerce = = 
 = = = Success = = = 
 Located on the banks of the Mississippi River on the second Chickasaw Bluff , the topology of Randolph provided for an ideal harbor for steamboats and flatboats at all stages of the river . Randolph became the center of steamboat commerce in Tennessee and an important cotton shipping point in the 1830s . The town was an early rival of Memphis over commercial superiority on the Mississippi River . In 1830 , Randolph was the most important shipping point in Tennessee . In the mid @-@ 1830s , Randolph shipped 35 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 bales of cotton on the Mississippi River every year , in 1839 cotton shipments added up to 20 @,@ 000 to 25 @,@ 000 bales . More cotton was shipped from Randolph than from Memphis until 1840 . At the peak of its commercial success , the community was called the " great steamboat depot of West Tennessee " . 
 By 1829 , Randolph had three commission warehouses , six dry goods stores , ten physicians and one tavern ; 20 to 30 families were making their living in the area around Randolph . Early in the 1830s , the town developed quickly . Randolph had a population of approximately 1 @,@ 000 people in 1834 . By that time , the town had four hotels , almost fifty businesses , one of them a distillery , several private schools , and more than ten saloons . " Some time in the thirties " of the 19th century , the first bank was founded in Randolph . 
 In the 1830s , two newspapers were published in Randolph , the Randolph Recorder and the Randolph Whig . The Randolph Recorder was founded in 1834 by F. S. Latham as the first newspaper in Tipton County . The paper continued business until 1836 . The first issue of the Randolph Recorder was published on June 21 , 1834 , and the last publication of the newspaper dates to September 23 , 1836 . The Randolph Whig was established either late in 1836 or early in 1837 and published its first issue on January 6 , 1838 . The Randolph Whig did not last long . Shortly after its establishment , the publication " was soon discontinued " . 
 = = = = Travel routes = = = = 
 A stagecoach line , established in 1833 by James Brown , provided a connection between Randolph and Jackson in Madison County , located about 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Randolph . The stagecoach line offered a convenient alternative for travellers between the two towns and connected the villages along the way twice a week . Heading west from Jackson , the antebellum stage line roughly concurs with modern U.S. Route 70 up to Brownsville and State Route 54 from Brownsville to Covington . From Covington , the stage road coincides with modern State Route 59 ( SR 59 ) to Randolph . SR 59 terminates at Richardsons Landing , 4 miles ( 6 km ) west of Randolph at the Mississippi River . 
 Later in the 1830s , Randolph was connected by a direct route to Memphis in Shelby County , located about 25 miles ( 40 km ) south of Randolph . The road was a segment of a weekly mail line between Jackson and Memphis on which mail was carried on horseback . The route provided a link between the two flourishing towns and connected the settlements on the banks of the Mississippi River in Tipton and Shelby Counties for trade and travel purposes . The exact routing of the mail line between Randolph and Memphis is unknown . 
 = = = = Slavery = = = = 
 A good part of the commercial success of Randolph can be attributed to the use of slaves working the cotton fields of the area for their owners . Slavery was common in the Southern States in the time before and during the Civil War . Landowners who ran plantations on their lands , bought slaves to work their fields , mostly for the cultivation of cotton . Corn , beans and peas were also cultivated . In the Randolph Recorder during the early 1830s , landowners announced public auctions of slaves they owned . For the capture and return of runaway slaves , plantation owners offered monetary incentives between $ 10 and $ 100 . Rewards up to $ 300 were offered for the return of a stolen slave if the thief of the slave could be convicted of the theft . The Tipton County jail also published " jailer 's notices " in the Randolph Recorder to inform owners of a slave of their incarceration . 
 The abolition of slavery was prepared in Abraham Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation of 1862 – 63 . Slavery in the United States was eventually abolished when the 13th Amendment to the Constitution was ratified on December 6 , 1865 . The amendment declared that " Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude ( ... ) shall exist within the United States " . Abraham Lincoln ( 1809 – 65 ) was the 16th President of the United States . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The fortunes of Randolph declined in the later 1840s and the 1850s due to many factors , starting shortly after the establishment of the town . Five years after the settlement was founded , a dispute over the ownership of the land the town was established on , arose over a faulty land title with land owner Ann <unk> from New York . Until 1835 , the pending lawsuit " prevented the growth of population " in and around Randolph . The residents of the community bought back the land their town was founded on for $ 8 @,@ 000 in a settlement . 
 An unfavorable mail line also had an early and lasting influence on the fortunes of the town . When the mail route was established in 1829 , it went from Nashville to Jackson , Bolivar , Somerville , Raleigh and ended in Memphis , but Randolph was left out . Randolph was put at the end of a branch route of the mail line and received mail only once a week . Failed railroad development further contributed to the demise of the town ; and in 1852 , residents of Randolph unsuccessfully tried to move the county seat from Covington to Randolph . The attempt to move the county seat to Randolph was defeated " by a bare majority of voters " . 
 Financial depression and David Crockett 's failed attempt to cut a canal from the Hatchie River to the Tennessee River also were problems that had a negative impact on the future of commercial prosperity in Randolph . Early in the Civil War , in March 1862 , the town of Randolph is described as consisting of " half a dozen or so dilapidated frame houses " . During the Civil War , the town was burned down twice , in September 1862 and again in 1865 , discouraging many residents from re @-@ building residences and businesses a second time . This contributed further to the declining fortunes of the community . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Fort Wright = = = 
 Fort Wright was the first Confederate Army fortification built at Randolph . On January 20 , 1861 , the Memphis Appeal published a pro @-@ secessionist proposal to build a fort at Randolph to defend Memphis from invaders . In a communiqué sent to LeRoy P. Walker , the first Confederate States Secretary of War , Brigadier General Gideon J. Pillow endorsed Randolph on April 26 , 1861 as " the most eligible situation for a battery to protect Memphis " . Within a few days , in late April of that same year , Tennessee Governor Isham G. Harris ordered to establish a camp at Randolph and complete the fortification . About 5 @,@ 000 troops from Tennessee , Arkansas and the Confederate Army were stationed at the location to accomplish the task . It took four months to fortify the bluff at Randolph with earthen defenses and artillery batteries in order to protect the fort from land and naval attacks . By June 1861 , the construction of the fortification was not yet completely finished . However , 50 cannons were reported to be ready at Fort Wright by that time . 
 Nathan Bedford Forrest ( 1821 – 77 ) and Alexander P. Stewart ( 1821 – 1908 ) trained at Fort Wright . Other future leaders in the Army of Tennessee and Forrest 's cavalry received training at Fort Wright . The fort was Tennessee 's first military training camp . Fort Wright was the forwardmost defensive position on the Mississippi River until July 1861 , it was abandoned by the Confederate infantry by 1862 but sporadically occupied by other southern forces during the Civil War . In 2008 , only a powder magazine is left of Fort Wright . 
 = = = Fort Randolph = = = 
 Fort Randolph , the second Confederate stronghold in the area during the Civil War , was constructed only months after Fort Wright , in Fall 1861 . The fortification was situated on the Mississippi River bluffs , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) southwest of Fort Wright . 
 In a dispatch published by the New York Times in March 1862 , Fort Randolph is described as a " rough and incomplete earthwork ( ... ) more than 100 feet above the river " . The position of the fortification allowed a view of the Mississippi River for 6 miles ( 10 km ) , both upstream and downstream . Boats approaching the fort on the river could be detected early from this strong position . Confederate troops at the garrison could prepare for naval attacks on the fort and Union Army supply boats passing on the Mississippi River could be attacked from the elevated position of Fort Randolph without much risk of immediate retaliation . In 2008 , Fort Randolph is no longer in existence . 
 = = = Destruction = = = 
 In 1862 , Union Army Major General William T. Sherman ( 1820 – 91 ) and his troops assumed control of the defeated Confederate stronghold of Memphis and the surrounding areas , including the region of Randolph , located about 25 miles ( 40 km ) north of Memphis by land . While trying to keep the area under Union control , Sherman became increasingly " frustrated by the constant guerrilla activity in his sector " . Confederate guerrillas from the Randolph area weakened the Union forces , raiding their supplies and firing at boats that delivered cargo to the invading forces along the Mississippi River . 
 The Union supply ship Eugene was fired at by Confederate rebels on the Mississippi River at the second Chickasaw Bluff , while carrying supplies to Memphis in September 1862 . Major General Sherman ordered Colonel Charles C. Walcutt of the 46th Ohio Infantry to Randolph . He informed his subordinate officer that " the attack on the Eugene was by a small force of guerrillas from Loosahatchie , who by this time have gone back , and therefore you will find no one at Randolph " ( emphasis in the original ) . Although he could not locate the snipers , Sherman was determined to punish those who helped them , thus sealing the fate of Randolph . Sherman instructed Walcutt to " destroy the place , leaving one house to mark the place " . Union Army soldiers under Colonel Walcutt 's command burned Randolph in retaliation for the guerrilla activities emerging from the area . To his superior officer , Major General Ulysses S. Grant , Sherman reported that he had " given public notice that a repetition [ of guerrilla attacks ] will justify any measures of retaliation , such as loading the boats with guerrilla prisoners where they would receive fire " . In 1869 , Ulysses S. Grant ( 1822 – 85 ) would become the 18th President of the United States and William T. Sherman would become commanding General of the United States Army . 
 The retribution for a military or paramilitary attack , by collective punishment of innocent civilians at Randolph , has been mentioned as an early scene of Sherman 's " terror campaign " or named his " First Campaign of Destruction " in the Southern States . Subsequent Union Army attacks , hostage takings and executions of civilians in other southern communities led by Sherman were intended to break Confederate resistance in the South . Sherman argued that residents in areas of Confederate resistance were " accessories by their presence and inactivity to prevent murders and destruction of property " , thus potentially exposed to retaliation . Union Army actions under Sherman 's command have been criticized as examples of war crimes committed in the United States during the Presidency of Abraham Lincoln . 
 Randolph was burned down a second time by federal soldiers in 1865 . 
 = = Church history = = 
 = = = Randolph United Methodist Church = = = 
 The town of <unk> was established either in 1823 or a few years later , in 1827 or 1828 by early settlers . In 1834 , Reverend Samuel R. Davidson became the first pastor at Randolph . He was appointed by the Tennessee Conference of the United Methodist Church . The Tennessee Conference is an organ of the church focussed on " developing principled Christian leaders for the church " and also appoints leadership roles in the church . After his appointment as a pastor of the community , a congregation formed around Davidson and built a church at Randolph . Almost 20 years after the Civil War had ended , the second church at Randolph was built by the congregation in 1883 . In 1953 , construction of a new church building was completed on the second Chickasaw Bluff . The building was remodeled in 1975 and serves as a place of worship for the Methodist congregation of Randolph as of 2008 . 
 The United Methodist Church at Randolph had 78 pastors as of 1983 . William Clyde Martin ( 1893 – 1984 ) was born in Randolph and grew up in the Methodist community of the town . Martin would later serve as a bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church South , The Methodist Church and the United Methodist Church . He also distinguished himself in military service during World War II in the Pacific as a Methodist pastor . Later in his life he would become President of the Methodist Council of Bishops . Bishop Martin retired in 1964 and died in 1984 . 
 In 2008 , Reverend Thomas M. Yoder and Reverend Ben Rainey are the appointed pastors at the Randolph Methodist community . Randolph United Methodist Church is located at 98 Ballard Slough Road . The worship attendance for the church is reported as 76 members of the congregation on the average . 
 = = = Randolph Assembly of God = = = 
 Randolph Assembly of God is a second place of worship in Randolph , the church was founded in 2001 . In 2008 , the congregation is led by Pastor Larry Rose and Pastor Frank Russell . Randolph Assembly of God is located at 1135 Randolph Road . 
 = = Postal history = = 
 A post office was established at Randolph in 1827 . In 1829 , a mail line was routed between Nashville and Memphis . The route went through Jackson , Bolivar , Somerville , Arlington and Raleigh to deliver mail to the post offices in these towns three times per week . Randolph was left out of the main route and put at the end of a branch route of the mail line . Mail on the branch route to Randolph was delivered only once weekly . On the segment from Bolivar through Somerville , Arlington and Raleigh to Memphis , the mail route roughly coincides with modern day U.S. Route 64 ( Stage Road ) . 
 In the later 1830s , Randolph was connected to Memphis by a direct travel route . The road was part of a mail line that started in Jackson , it was routed through Brownsville , Covington and Randolph and terminated in Memphis . Mail on the route was carried on horseback and delivered to the post offices along the way on a weekly schedule . The southernmost segment of the mail route provided a direct link between Memphis and Randolph and connected the villages on the Mississippi River along the way for travel and trade purposes . The exact course of the mail line segment between Randolph and Memphis is unknown . A fragment of the route bearing the former road name , about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) in length , was in existence until about 2005 . The remaining piece of Old Randolph Road was located about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) north of Mud Island and 800 feet ( 240 m ) east of the Mississippi River , just south of the mouth of the Loosahatchie River at the western terminus of <unk> Avenue in Memphis . In 2010 the remaining fragment of Old Randolph Road is destroyed . The land on which the historic mail route was located is used as an industrial property in 2010 and is owned by the <unk> Dock & Warehouse Company . The property is fenced in and not accessible to the public . 
 The Randolph Post Office was in operation until 1932 . The exact location of the post office at Randolph is unknown . 
 In 2008 , the U.S. ZIP code for Randolph is <unk> ( Burlison , Tennessee ) . The telephone area code is 901 ( Memphis metro area ) . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 Agriculture is the dominant source of income in the area surrounding Randolph , especially the cultivation of cotton . Corn , beans and peas were also cultivated during the last century . After the abolition of slavery in 1865 , sharecropping was the primary means of income for low income families in the area . Mostly for the cultivation of cotton , land would be used by sharecroppers in return for a share of the crop to the landowner . Modern machines such as the cotton picker have made the manual cultivation obsolete over time as they took over the work from the hand laborers . 
 On October 11 , 2008 , the Tennessee Parks and Greenways Foundation , a non @-@ profit organization , dedicated Randolph Bluff Historic Park in a celebration with politicians , conservationists , historians and community members . The 19 acres ( 8 ha ) property on the second Chickasaw Bluff was purchased for $ 378 @,@ 000 . The park is intended to promote the Civil War history of the community and make the unique views of the Mississippi River available to a wider public , additional revenue from tourism is expected for the community . Once Randolph Bluff Historic Park is finished , it will be part of the Mississippi River Corridor Tennessee , a project to " create a scenic byway that connects historic sites along the Mississippi River " , the project also promotes economical development and the preservation of land and wildlife in the Tennessee counties bordering the Mississippi River . 
 In 2008 , Randolph has a population of ca . 200 , and consists of about two dozen dwellings . The economy of the rural community is dominated by agriculture with no major industries and businesses present . 
 = = Historical locations = = 
 Fort Wright ( historical ) was at coordinates 35 @.@ <unk> ° N 89 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Fort Wright ( historical ) ) . 
 Fort Randolph ( historical ) was at coordinates 35 @.@ <unk> ° N 89 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Fort Randolph ( historical ) ) . 
 Old Randolph Cemetery is at coordinates 35 @.@ 523693 ° N 89 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ 523693 ; <unk> ﻿ ( Old Randolph Cemetery ) . 
 Historic Randolph Cemetery is on <unk> Lane at coordinates 35 @.@ 52163 ° N 89 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ 52163 ; <unk> . Graves in the cemetery date from the early 19th century to present day . 
 Old Randolph Road was at coordinates 35 @.@ <unk> ° N 90 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> 
 = Kenny Lofton = 
 Kenneth " Kenny " Lofton ( born May 31 , 1967 ) is a former Major League Baseball ( MLB ) outfielder . Lofton was a six @-@ time All @-@ Star ( 1994 – 1999 ) , four @-@ time Gold Glove Award winner ( 1993 – 1996 ) , and at retirement , was ranked fifteenth among all @-@ time stolen base leaders with 622 . During his career , he played for the Houston Astros , Cleveland Indians ( three different times ) , Atlanta Braves , Chicago White Sox , San Francisco Giants , Pittsburgh Pirates , Chicago Cubs , New York Yankees , Philadelphia Phillies , Los Angeles Dodgers , and Texas Rangers . 
 Lofton attended the University of Arizona on a basketball scholarship . The Wildcats made it to the Final Four in 1988 . He did not join the school 's baseball team until his junior year . 
 Lofton made 11 postseason appearances , including World Series appearances in 1995 and 2002 with the Indians and Giants , respectively . From 2001 to 2007 , Lofton did not spend more than one consecutive season with a team . For his career , the Indians were the only team he played with for longer than one season and the only franchise he played for more than once . Lofton played 9 1 ⁄ 2 seasons with the Indians , helping the organization win six division titles . In 2010 , he was inducted into the Cleveland Indians Hall of Fame . 
 During his professional baseball career , Lofton 's single @-@ season stolen base count led the MLB on three occasions and twice the American League ( AL ) . In 1994 he led the American League in hits . Lofton broke Rickey Henderson 's record of 33 career post @-@ season stolen bases during the 2007 post @-@ season . Of his base running , Frank White said , " Lofton has out @-@ thought a lot of major @-@ league players " and later , " a smart , complete baseball player . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lofton was raised by his widowed grandmother , Rosie Persons , in " the slums " of East Chicago , Indiana . His mother , Annie , had Lofton while she was in high school and he weighed just three pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) at birth . His mother moved to Alabama after she graduated and lost contact with Lofton . Of his father , Lofton said , " We , as a family , don 't even talk about it . " Persons had glaucoma and because of her failing eyesight was unemployed . She refused to go on welfare but did collect Social Security as a result from her husband 's death in 1960 ( of bronchial pneumonia ) . When Lofton made the majors he built a new home in East Chicago for his grandmother and other family members . 
 Lofton attended Washington High School in East Chicago and played on the school 's baseball team as a pitcher and center fielder . He was an all @-@ state basketball player . 
 = = College basketball and baseball = = 
 Lofton accepted a basketball scholarship to play at the University of Arizona . Wildcats head coach Lute Olson said of Lofton , " He 's quick and a great leaper . " At one point Lofton performed a 360 @-@ degree slam dunk for his unsuspecting teammates . For the Wildcats , Lofton was the backup point guard ( to Craig McMillan and Steve Kerr ) on a team that made it to the Final Four of the 1988 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . He was the starting point guard the following year when the Wildcats made it to the Sweet Sixteen . Lofton is one of only two men to play in a college basketball Final Four ( 1988 ) and a MLB World Series . ( The other is fellow East Chicago Washington High School alumnus Tim Stoddard . ) He left as the Wildcats ' leader in career steals ( a record eventually broken ) . " In strength and agility drills , he just killed it . He 's a guy who could have played pro football or basketball or baseball " , said former Wildcats teammate Bruce Fraser . 
 Lofton decided to try out for the Wildcats baseball team during his junior year . He played in just five baseball games and recorded only one official at @-@ bat while at Arizona but his speed and potential were recognized by baseball scouts , including the Houston Astros ' Clark Crist . The Astros later selected Lofton in the 17th round of the 1988 MLB draft . He played minor league baseball during the summer while completing his basketball eligibility at Arizona . The Astros organization asked Lofton to play minor league baseball in the Florida Instructional League but Lofton declined , citing a promise he had made to his grandmother to obtain his degree . 
 Lofton earned a degree in studio production at the University of Arizona while playing minor league baseball for the Houston Astros . He credits his post @-@ MLB success , as owner of <unk> , Inc . , to that education . Lofton is also a member of Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity . 
 = = Minor league career = = 
 Lofton struggled early in his professional baseball career in the Astros farm system . He hit .214 in 48 games as an outfielder for the Auburn Astros of the New York – Penn League but recorded 26 stolen bases in 30 attempts . Lofton returned to Auburn in 1989 and hit .263 with 26 steals in 34 games . He then hit .329 with 14 steals in 22 games for the Asheville Tourists in the South Atlantic League . As his college basketball career came to an end , Lofton was able to concentrate on baseball and he improved rapidly , finishing second in the league in hitting at .331 while adding 62 steals for the Osceola Astros in the Florida State League . He also drew 61 walks and improved defensively ( .974 fielding percentage ) and played in 123 games with Osceola . 
 After spring training in 1991 , he went directly to the Triple @-@ A Tucson Toros of the Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) . His 168 hits led the league . He hit .308 with 30 steals and 52 walks for Tucson with 19 doubles and a team @-@ high 17 triples . The Toros won the PCL championship and Lofton made the league 's All @-@ Star team . On September 14 , 1991 , the Astros promoted Lofton to the majors . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = MLB season debut = = = 
 In his major league debut with the Houston Astros on September 14 , 1991 , he went 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 with a double and scored three runs against the Cincinnati Reds . He hit .203 in 20 games for the remainder of the Astros ' regular season . With Steve Finley already entrenched as Houston 's centerfielder , and aged 26 years , Lofton was traded during the off @-@ season to the Cleveland Indians for catcher Eddie Taubensee and right @-@ handed pitcher Willie Blair . " I know they gave up on me and now I 'm glad they did . One man 's trash is another man 's treasure " , Lofton said of the Astros trading him . 
 = = = Cleveland Indians = = = 
 During his first season with Cleveland , in 1992 , Lofton hit .285 . His 66 stolen bases broke the all @-@ time record for an American League rookie and was the most by a Major League rookie since Vince Coleman stole 110 in 1985 . His season 's stolen base count , which led the AL , also broke a franchise record ( previously set by Miguel <unk> in 1980 ) . Indians first base coach Dave Nelson helped Lofton refine his baserunning technique and helped learn how to be successful with bunting . Lofton finished second ( to the Milwaukee Brewers ' Pat Listach ) in AL Rookie of the Year balloting . After one season with Cleveland , Lofton agreed to a four @-@ year , $ 6 @.@ 3 million contract . The following season , Lofton broke his own Cleveland single @-@ season stolen bases ' record , recording 70 ( which led the MLB ) . Lofton was selected to his first career All @-@ Star Game during the 1994 season . His development and impact in the league led Brewers manager Phil Garner to say , " I remember how raw he was , and I 've never seen anybody develop into that type of player that fast . " Garner , who saw Lofton play in the minors , added , " He went from a guy who could hardly get the ball past the infield to a guy who could hit the ball consistently . He always had good speed , but got lousy jumps and didn 't run the bases well . He has turned into a dominant player . " The regular season was stopped abruptly with the MLB strike , which also led to the cancellation of the World Series . For the season , Lofton again led the AL with 60 stolen bases . His 160 hits on the season were highest in the AL and his .349 batting average would be a career @-@ best . He finished fourth in Most Valuable Player Award ( MVP ) voting . When the strike began in August , the Indians were in second place by one game in the AL Central to the Chicago White Sox . Indians general manager John Hart said of Lofton , " What a representative for our team and our city . He has the opportunity to be a George Brett @-@ type player here , someone who is synonymous with a franchise . " Lofton would join fellow Indians Carlos <unk> , Albert Belle , and Jim Thome to form " the backbone of some Indians teams that were as dominant as any . " 
 In 1995 , Lofton was one of six Indians ' starters who batted .300 or higher ( .310 ) . He also had an MLB @-@ best 13 triples . His 54 stolen bases led the AL for the third consecutive season . The Indians faced the Seattle Mariners in the 1995 ALCS . In the eighth inning of Game Six , Lofton had an infield bunt , stole second base , and scored from second on a passed ball between pitcher Randy Johnson and catcher Dan Wilson . The Indians won the game 4 – 0 . It was described by The New York Times as " the run that demoralized the Mariners . " Fifteen years after Lofton 's crossing of home plate , the Plain Dealer recalled : " Of all the electrifying moments on the Kenny Lofton highlight reel , none captures the essence of the player any better than his 180 @-@ foot dash to glory on October 17 , 1995 . " As a result of winning the game , the Indians had won the ALCS and in so doing , Lofton and the Indians had brought the AL pennant to Cleveland for the first time since the 1954 season . " I 'm glad for the city of Cleveland to be able to experience this , because they haven 't experience this for a long time . The city of Cleveland has grown a lot , and it 's improving , and we tried to do this for the city " , Lofton said . The Indians lost the World Series to the Braves in six games despite finishing the regular season with a major league @-@ best 100 – 44 record in the strike @-@ shortened year . Lofton finished with a .200 batting average and six stolen bases in his first World Series appearance . In 2010 , a few years into his retirement , Lofton stated he felt it was the toughest post @-@ season loss of his 11 career playoff appearances , namely because he felt the umpires had favorable strike zones for Braves pitchers Tom Glavine and Greg Maddux . 
 The following season in 1996 , the Indians again had the best record in baseball ( 99 – 62 ) and Lofton 's stolen base total ( 75 ) led the MLB for the second time in four years . He hit .317 and had a career @-@ high 67 RBIs . The Indians lost in the 1996 ALDS to the Baltimore Orioles in four games . As an impending free agent , it was Lofton 's last season with Cleveland before being traded to near the end of spring training 1997 to the Atlanta Braves of the National League . On trading Lofton , Hart said , " We had to make this trade and based on the fact that Lofton could be a free agent at the end of this season . We went through it with Albert Belle last year , and Albert left and we had nothing in return . We were not prepared to do that again . " Lofton , described as " an emotional and offensive catalyst " with the Indians , appeared in three consecutive All @-@ Star Games ( 1994 – 1996 ) and won four straight Gold Glove Awards ( 1993 – 1996 ) with the Indians . He led the AL in stolen bases for five straight seasons ( 1992 – 1996 ) and set the single @-@ season Indians ' franchise stolen base record ( 75 ) . 
 = = = Atlanta and return to Cleveland = = = 
 The Atlanta Braves ' Marquis Grissom and slugger David Justice were part of a Braves roster that , heading into the 1997 season , was the MLB 's highest @-@ paid . Grissom ( $ 4 @.@ 8 million annual salary ) and Justice ( $ 6 million ) were traded to the Indians in return for Lofton ( $ 4 @.@ 75 million ) and Alan Embree ( $ 206 @,@ 000 ) . " This is a trade of enormous magnitude for two very , very good franchises . We 're talking about franchise @-@ type players " , Hart said . For Lofton , considered " the centerpiece of the Indians ' 1990s revival " , it was a return to the National League . " The trade will be in the back of my mind for a long time , but it 's baseball . It happens to nearly everybody . I 'm [ in Atlanta ] to play every day . It 's all Braves from now on " , Lofton said . By April 19 , the Braves were 13 – 3 and Lofton 's hitting ( <unk> batting average ) had won favor with his new Braves teammates . " If he keeps hitting .400 he 'll fit in just fine " , said Chipper Jones . For the season Lofton 's .333 batting average and 27 stolen bases were team @-@ highs ( his stolen base total was to that point a career @-@ low ) . He was caught stealing 20 times , an MLB @-@ high . Atlanta won the National League East division with a MLB @-@ best 101 – 61 record . The Braves swept the Houston Astros in the 1997 National League Division Series ( NLDS ) , three games to none . In the 1997 National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) , the Braves lost to the Florida Marlins , four games to two ( the Marlins later defeated the Cleveland Indians in the World Series ) . For the NLCS , Lofton batted .185 and was one of three Braves ' players who recorded seven strikeouts in the series . For Lofton , who was eligible for free agency at the end of the season , it was his only season spent with the Braves . 
 Lofton , who was considered the " most sought @-@ after free agent " following the 1997 season , returned to the American League and Cleveland Indians when he signed a three @-@ year , $ 24 million contract . Happy to return to Cleveland , Lofton said , " It 's like I was a ghost for a year . But now I 'm back . " Lofton 's .282 batting average was to that point the lowest of his major league career but his 87 walks were a career @-@ high . He did , however , have his second @-@ highest RBI total ( 64 ) to that point in his career ( 66 ) and doubled his stolen base count ( 54 ) from the previous year ( 27 ) . The Indians won the AL Central with an 89 – 73 record and their match @-@ up against the Boston Red Sox , three games to one , in the 1998 ALDS . In the series against the Red Sox , Lofton 's .375 batting average led the Indians , as did his two stolen bases and six hits . The Indians lost the 1998 ALCS in six games to the New York Yankees , who had won 114 games in the regular season . Lofton tied for third @-@ most number of hits and strikeouts and his 27 at @-@ bats led the Indians . For the 1999 season , Lofton finished with a .301 batting average , the seventh time in eight major league seasons hitting .300 or better . It was , however , the first season with Cleveland he did not record 50 or more stolen bases , finishing the season with 25 . The AL Central @-@ winning Indians ( 97 – 65 ) lost in the 1999 ALDS to the Boston Red Sox , three games to two . The Indians had led in the series two games to none before losing three games in a row and the series . Lofton and Roberto Alomar each had two stolen bases in the series but Lofton recorded just two hits in 16 at @-@ bats . 
 In a September 3 , 2000 12 – 11 win over the Baltimore Orioles , Lofton tied a MLB record previously held by Red Rolfe when he scored in an 18th consecutive game . The winning margin was provided by Lofton 's 13th @-@ inning home run and in the game he tied an Indians ' franchise single @-@ game record with five stolen bases . He finished the 2000 season batting .278 , recording 30 stolen bases and 107 runs ( the sixth time crossing home plate 100 times or more in nine seasons ) . The Indians finished the regular season 90 – 72 and one game out of the wild card . After missing the post @-@ season in 2000 , the Indians returned in 2001 after winning the AL Central with a 91 – 71 regular season record . Before winning the division , however , Lofton scored the game @-@ winning run during an August 5 game against the Seattle Mariners ; the Indians were down by 12 runs , and became just the third team in MLB history to overcome such a deficit , winning 15 – 14 in 11 innings . Indians catcher Eddie Taubensee , who was involved in the trade which sent Lofton from Houston to Cleveland at the beginning of his major league career , caught Lofton after he slid into home plate and jumped with excitement after discovering he had just scored the game @-@ winning run . " I caught him and wasn 't going to let him go " , Taubensee said . Cleveland won that game against Seattle but lost their match @-@ up with the 116 @-@ win Mariners in the 2001 ALDS . He hit 66 RBIs on the regular season ( second @-@ most in his career ) but failed to record 20 stolen bases for the first time in his major league career and batted a career @-@ low .261 . Lofton had been treated for a rib cage problem that had impacted his play before the All @-@ Star break . His second stint with Cleveland lasted through 2001 in which his salary was for $ 8 million in his final contract year with the club . He became a free agent following the conclusion of the season . 
 = = = World Series ring pursuit = = = 
 A free agent in 2002 , Lofton signed a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 025 million contract with the Chicago White Sox . " I looked at the different opportunities that I had and this was a team that won 83 games last year while they were banged up . Cleveland lost four good players from last year 's team , and that 's going to be hard to replace . This was an easy decision " , Lofton said on signing with the White Sox . White Sox general manager Kenny Williams had stated when Lofton was healthy , like he was during the second half of the 2001 season , Chicago had obtained one of the best leadoff hitters in the game . When the White Sox were paired against the Indians in April during a three @-@ game series at Chicago , the Indians were on a 10 @-@ game winning streak and at 11 – 1 , had the best record in the majors . The White Sox ended the streak and for the series , Lofton was 6 @-@ for @-@ 14 with six runs scored . " You can 't say enough about him , his effort , his intensity . He 's been simply amazing " , said White Sox manager Jerry Manuel . Lofton appeared in 93 games with the White Sox and hit .259 with 42 RBIs and 22 stolen bases . On July 28 he was traded to the San Francisco Giants of the National League for minor leaguers Ryan Meaux and Félix Díaz . 
 In the Giants ' match @-@ up with the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2002 NLCS , Lofton delivered a key hit to help the Giants win their first pennant since 1989 . In the ninth inning , Cardinals manager Tony La Russa summoned left @-@ handed reliever Steve Kline to face Lofton , who had already notched two singles in the game . Giants manager Dusty Baker considered bringing a right @-@ handed hitter to pinch @-@ hit for Lofton , but decided against doing so on the advice of his 3 @-@ year @-@ old son . Lofton would hit a first @-@ pitch single to the outfield , scoring David Bell from second base and creating a 2 – 1 Giants victory . After the game , Baker remarked , " I just knew Kenny was focused and I know you can 't keep Kenny down for too long . That 's why we got Kenny over here . He 's a big @-@ game player and he 's been great in the playoffs . " The Giants would hold a five @-@ run lead in the seventh inning of Game Six of the World Series against the Anaheim Angels , but eight outs away from winning the World Series , the Angels rallied to win 6 – 5 . The Angels took Game Seven the following night , and for the second time in his career , Lofton had lost a World Series . 
 The Pittsburgh Pirates signed Lofton to a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 025 million contract to begin the 2003 season . With the Pirates he hit .277 and stole 18 bases in 84 games before being traded to the Chicago Cubs , where he was reunited with manager Dusty Baker . When Lofton joined the Cubs in July , he was joining a team that just one season before had lost 95 games . " With Kenny Lofton we got a quality leadoff man " , said Cubs general manager Jim Hendry . In 56 regular season game appearances with the Cubs , Lofton stole 12 bases and hit .327 . Lofton and the Cubs won the National League Central division ( 88 – 74 ) . With the Cubs ' post @-@ season berth it was just the sixth time since the divisional series format was introduced ( 1969 ) had a team made the postseason after having lost 95 games or more the previous season . Chicago beat the Atlanta Braves three games to none in the 2003 NLDS . Lofton hit .286 in the series and led the Cubs with three stolen bases and 21 at @-@ bats . The Cubs , who were up in the series three games to one , held a three @-@ run lead in the eighth inning of Game Six of the 2003 NLCS . The Florida Marlins scored eight unanswered runs , all in the eighth inning , to win Game Six and won Game Seven the following night to eliminate the Cubs . Lofton 's .323 against the Marlins led the Cubs ' starting line @-@ up , as did his 31 at @-@ bats , and he had the team 's only stolen base of the seven @-@ game series . 
 Lofton was again on the move when on December 23 , 2003 , the New York Yankees signed him to a two @-@ year , $ 6 @.@ 2 million contract . During a Yankees ' road game at Cleveland , Lofton recorded his 2,000th career hit . After Lofton 's single , Indians fans began an ovation in honor of Lofton . " I didn 't know what to expect . I figured I 'd get a few claps . It was touching . I tipped my hat , but they just kept going . If there was a storybook way for me to get it , to get it in Cleveland , it was something to remember . " New York finished the regular season with an AL @-@ best record , 101 – 61 . To begin the post @-@ season , the Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins , three games to one , in the 2004 ALDS . In the 2004 ALCS against the Boston Red Sox , the Yankees had built a 2 – 0 series lead when Lofton stated , " My ultimate goal is for me to try to win a championship . I 'm at a point in my career – I 've been here for 13 years , and gotten close . This is an opportunity for me to have a chance at it again . " Then Yankees would go up in the series three games to none before becoming the first team in MLB history to lose a series after holding a 3 – 0 series . 
 Lofton , who appeared in 83 games with the Yankees , felt manager Joe Torre did not use his skills appropriately . Lofton finished the regular season with a .275 batting average and a career @-@ low seven stolen bases . With the Yankees looking to reshape their roster and the Philadelphia Phillies looking for a player with post @-@ season experience , Lofton was dealt on December 3 , 2004 , which as part of the deal also had the Yankees sending $ 1 @.@ 525 million to Philadelphia and the Phillies giving up reliever Felix Rodríguez . After the trade , Lofton stated , " It 's been very tough . I 'm the kind of guy that likes to be settled down . It 's been very tough the last three or four years . Everyone in New York understood I wanted to play . I just wanted an opportunity to perform and be a part of the team . I didn 't feel as much of a part of the team . " 
 With the Phillies , Lofton hit .335 in 110 appearances , his batting average a team @-@ high . He also recorded 22 stolen bases . The Phillies finished 88 – 74 , two games NL East division winners and one game out of the wild card . Toward the end of his career , Lofton was featured in a DHL Express TV commercial , where the international shipper comically portrayed Lofton 's frequent city changes and subsequent moves . 
 On December 12 , 2006 , the Texas Rangers signed Lofton to a one @-@ year contract . By signing with the Rangers , Lofton tied Todd <unk> for most teams played for by a position player . In 84 games with the Rangers , he hit .303 with 16 doubles . On July 27 , 2007 , Lofton was traded by the Rangers to the Indians in exchange for minor league catcher Max Ramírez . " That 's my biggest thing right now . I 'm trying to get a World Series ring " , Lofton said on joining the Indians for the third time in his career . The Jacobs Field crowd greeted Lofton with a standing ovation during his first at bat for this tour of duty with the Indians . Lofton noted , " I missed being in Cleveland ... I enjoy Cleveland . It 's the city that got me going . " In Game One of the 2007 ALDS against the Yankees , he went 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 with four RBIs and one stolen base , which tied him with Rickey Henderson for the MLB 's all @-@ time postseason stolen bases record ( 33 ) . In Game Two , he went 2 @-@ for @-@ 3 with two walks and scored the winning run in the 11th inning . Then , in Game Three of the 2007 ALCS , the 40 @-@ year @-@ old Lofton hit a two @-@ run home run against the Boston Red Sox ' Daisuke Matsuzaka , becoming the seventh @-@ oldest player to hit a post @-@ season home run . Lofton earned his 34th career postseason stolen base in Game Four of the 2007 ALCS , setting a new MLB record for playoff steals . The Indians , who at one point had a 3 – 1 game lead over the Red Sox , eventually lost the series . Lofton became a free agent at the end of the season but did not sign a contract with a major league team . He expressed interest in playing before the 2009 season . From 2002 to 2007 , Lofton played for eight teams and made it to the postseason with four of them . Joe Torre said , after Lofton had been to the playoffs in 11 of the past 13 seasons and played for 11 clubs in his career , " He bounced around a lot of clubs for a reason : They felt he could help them . He did a hell of a job . " As Rollie Fingers wrote , " On one hand , Lofton could be seen as a catalyst who magically sparked his teams into playoff contention , but others could say that it was simply a case of top playoff contenders repeatedly seeing him as the final piece of their puzzle . " 
 = = = Retirement and Indians Hall of Fame = = = 
 His 622 stolen bases rank him fifteenth all @-@ time . He holds the Indians ' record for stolen bases with 452 . Lofton had tallied a .299 career batting average with 123 home runs , 110 triples , and 1 @,@ 442 runs in 1 @,@ 967 games . He was also a three @-@ time MLB Player of the Week . Lofton played in 95 postseason games . In the playoffs for his career , he hit .247 with seven home runs and 34 RBI . Baseball historian Bill James named Lofton the " fastest player " and " best <unk> " of the 1990s . On January 27 , 2010 , it was announced Lofton was selected as a member of the Cleveland Indians Hall of Fame . He was inducted on August 7 . Lofton was eligible for the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2013 and some have written his career numbers " will likely put him in the conversation of being Hall of Fame worthy . " He did not receive the necessary number of votes to remain on the ballot for 2014 and beyond . In 2015 , Pedro Martínez , one of the most dominant pitchers of Lofton 's era , named Lofton as among the most difficult hitters to pitch against in his career . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 Lofton has his own television production company <unk> , Inc .. In 1997 , he appeared as a guest star on The Wayans Bros. and in 2004 he appeared as a guest star on George Lopez . Lofton co @-@ wrote the song " What If " on Ruben Studdard 's 2006 album Soulful . In 2008 , Lofton qualified for the American Century Celebrity Golf Classic . He played golf in the off @-@ season during his playing days . For the 2011 spring training season , Lofton was hired by the Indians to coach baserunning and outfield work . He is also a post @-@ game color commentator on the Fox Sports West post @-@ game show for the Los Angeles Dodgers . Lofton considers himself a perfectionist . " I love cleaning . I clean up , wash dishes , and make a good bed . I 'm pretty neat . I 'm a perfectionist . People come to my house and they 're like , ' Man , do you actually live here ? ' " 
 = = Hall of Fame candidate = = 
 Lofton only garnered 18 votes in 2013 , which eliminated him from future consideration by the <unk> starting from the next ballot . 
 Notable All Time Rankings : 
 15 . Stolen Bases : 622 
 60 . Runs Scored : 1 @,@ 528 
 80 . WAR for Position Players : 65 @.@ 3 
 = Thunder ( Leona Lewis song ) = 
 " Thunder " is a song by British singer and songwriter Leona Lewis from her fifth studio album , I Am ( 2015 ) . The song was written by Lewis and Toby Gad , who also produced the track . Lyrically , " Thunder " is about finding the strength to pick yourself up after falling on difficult times . Lewis explained that the song is about self @-@ reflection and self @-@ empowerment and finding the ability to look within in order to decide what is best to do next . Def Jam released " Thunder " on 24 July 2015 as the lead single in United States , but it is the third single to be released from the album overall . Remixes by Danny Verde and Tom Swoon were also released . 
 The track garnered a positive response from music critics , many of whom complimented its powerful and anthemic stance and declared it an album highlight . One critic believed the lyrics to be directed at Simon Cowell , Lewis ' former label boss . " Thunder " reached the top thirty on the U.S. Billboard Adult Contemporary and Adult Pop Songs charts , and the top twenty on the Dance Club Songs chart . The song 's accompanying music video shows Lewis in a variety of outdoor spaces as clips of varying weather patterns are intercut . She has performed the track on several U.S. television shows , including Good Morning America , The Late Late Show with James Corden and The Talk . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Thunder " was written by Leona Lewis and Toby Gad , with the latter producing the track , for Lewis ' fifth studio album , I Am ( 2015 ) . It was published by ASCAP and Atlas Music publishings ( on behalf of itself and Gadfly Songs ( ASCAP ) . ) Recorded and mixed by Gad at Kite Music Studios in Los Angeles , Lewis provided all of the vocals for " Thunder " and Gad performed all of the instrumentation and programming . The track 's audio was mastered by Tom Coyne at Sterling Sound studios in New York City , with assistance from Randy Merrill . For the acoustic version of " Thunder " , Lewis ' additional vocals were recorded by Adam Lunn at Wendy House Studios in London . On 30 June 2015 , Lewis released a three @-@ minute teaser video with snippets of the title track , " Ladders , and " Power " . Media site Idolator exclusively premiered the full length version " Thunder " on 16 July . Lewis told Idolator " ' Thunder ' is a song that is so close to my heart . I wrote it about the strength of rising after the fall and I ’ m thankful to be able share it . " In an interview for Next Magazine , Lewis further elucidated upon the songs meaning : " It was like coming from a place where you ’ ve been through a hard situation that has really made you reflect or look deep inside to figure out what it is that you want to do next , " said Lewis . " I had that breakthrough where now I feel strong in what I ’ m doing and strong in my decisions . I ’ m back and I ’ m ready to go for it . ” 
 The third overall single to be released from I Am following " Fire Under My Feet " and the title track , " Thunder " served as the lead single for the album 's release in the United States and was not released in the United Kingdom . It was subsequently released to download digitally in the U.S. on 24 July 2015 . Three days later , it was sent to Hot / Modern / Adult contemporary radio stations across the country . A remix of " Thunder " by Danny Verde was released on 11 September 2015 , while another by Tom Swoon was later released on 25 September . The Danny Verde remix was also released in Australia , France , Germany , New Zealand and the United Kingdom on 28 September . Despite initial claims that " Thunder " would not be released in the UK , it will be added to BBC Radio 2 's C @-@ list playlist on 24 October 2015 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Lyrically , " Thunder " is a ballad about finding the " strength of rising after the fall " and follows the self @-@ empowerment theme of the album . The song begins with the lyrics " First it was heaven , ev <unk> roses and fire , " and she later proclaims " I ’ m coming back with the thunder . " Lewis projects a stance of empowerment as she performs the line " With an empty heart , I am free again " over a " striding " beat accompanied by a piano . Angela Wilson of Vibe described the track as " a celebratory salute to self love " and highlighted the lines “ And I won ’ t wait any longer / When you let me down , I got stronger , " as empowering . Will Hodgkinson of The Times thought that " Thunder " was about her former record label boss and friend Simon Cowell , writing that the lyrics " I won ’ t wait any longer , when you let me down I got stronger , ” was Lewis ' way of saying " Check me out now , you high @-@ waisted <unk> . " The song , in the key of B major , has a tempo of 92 beats per minute . Lewis ' voice spans more than two octaves , from F ♯ 3 to G ♯ 5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine thought that " Thunder " and " Fire Under My Feet " were some of Lewis 's " strongest compositions " to date , and added that they are " sharply crafted and passionate " . Digital Spy writer Lewis Corner thought that while Lewis does not appear to have reinvented her sound , her new sense of passion " leads the tried and tested formula with a hefty charge " . He listed " Thunder " in his top four tracks to download from I Am , along with " Another Love Song , " Power " and " I Got You " . Both Kathy Iandoli and Robbie Daw of Idolator praised " Thunder " : the former described the track as " equally anthemic " as " Fire Under My Feet " while the latter wrote that it is a " soulful , soaring ballad " which , as with many of Lewis ' songs , is difficult not to get immersed in with its strong emotional sentiment . Knoxville News Sentinel writer Chuck Campbell highlighted it as one of the albums many great tracks , writing " Lewis <unk> the rumbling beat of opener ' Thunder ' to announce her return – and she ’ s off from there . " Next Magazine writer Benjamin Lindsay picked " Thunder " as a " standout " song on I Am , along with " Fire Under My Feet " , " The Essence of Me " and " You Knew Me When " . In the United States , " Thunder " peaked at number 29 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart for one week . It peaked at number 25 on the Adult Pop Songs chart and spent seven weeks charting , and number 12 on the Dance Club Songs chart . It has also peaked at number 21 in Hungary , number 98 in the Czech Republic and number 100 in Slovakia . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 During her promotional tour of the U.S. , Lewis performed an acoustic version of " Thunder " for B96 Chicago radio station on 15 July 2015 . On 13 August , she performed a mini set list for iHeartRadio where she was also interviewed . Lewis started with " Bleeding Love " , followed by a cover of Jason Derulo 's single " Want to Want Me " . For her rendition of " Thunder " , the host Kevin Hart bet Lewis $ 5 to add " Leona Lewis " to the beginning of her performance in the style of how Derulo sings his name on his songs . Lewis obliged , and won the bet . The same day , Lewis released the music video for " Thunder " . It shows the singer in various open outdoor spaces as clips of rolling clouds and rays of sunshine are intercut . Vibe writer Angela Wilson described its " simplistic " theme as " the perfect visual for the uplifting track " . On 14 September , Lewis performed " Thunder " live on Good Morning America in New York City as part of their Fall Concert Series . Bianca Gracie of Idolator wrote that Lewis performed the track with " her always @-@ stunning vocals " . On September 21 , the singer sang the track on The Late Late Show with James Corden . Two days later , Lewis appeared on The Talk where she was interviewed about I Am and once again performed " Thunder " . The song was included on her I Am Tour . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 " Thunder " ( Album version ) – 3 : 43 
 " Thunder " ( Acoustic album version ) – 3 : 17 
 " Thunder " ( Danny Verde remix ) – 5 : 55 
 " Thunder " ( Tom Swoon remix ) – 3 : 17 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rebecca Anderson = 
 Rebecca Anderson ( born May 1991 ) is an American beauty pageant titleholder from Oregon City , Oregon . She won a series of local titles beginning in 2011 and was crowned Miss Oregon 2014 . 
 Entering her first pageant at age 19 , Anderson competed successfully in local pageants until , on her fourth attempt , she won the state title in June 2014 . She made appearances across the state and represented Oregon at Miss America 2015 in September 2014 but was not a finalist for the national crown . After completing her year as Miss Oregon , Anderson resumed her academic pursuits . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Anderson is a native of Oregon City , Oregon , and a 2009 graduate of Oregon City High School . While at <unk> , she participated in the drama program for four years and was a member of the school 's dance team for two years . Her father is Ted Anderson , a wholesale nursery operator and licensed tax consultant . As of 2015 , mother Shari Anderson is the elected County Treasurer of Clackamas County , Oregon , an office she has held since 1999 . Anderson has one younger sister , Malea , who is also an occasional pageant competitor . 
 Anderson is a 2013 graduate of Portland State University where she earned a bachelor 's degree in environmental science . In 2014 , in addition to her Miss Oregon duties , Anderson worked part @-@ time as a " cute " clown for an event company . In August 2015 , Anderson moved to North Dakota to begin pursuing a bachelor 's degree in atmospheric science at the University of North Dakota . 
 = = Pageant career = = 
 = = = Early pageants = = = 
 Anderson began entering pageants at age 19 , waiting until she felt was " responsible enough " to hold a pageant title . In early 2011 , Anderson won the Miss Cascade 2011 title . She competed in the 2011 Miss Oregon pageant with the platform " Environmental Sustainability : Education for a Greener World " and a vocal performance of " Feeling Good " from the musical The Roar of the <unk> – The Smell of the Crowd in the talent portion of the competition . She finished in the top ten but was not a Top @-@ 5 finalist for the state title . 
 In early 2012 , Anderson won the Miss Columbia Gorge 2012 title . She competed in the 2012 Miss Oregon pageant with the platform " Environmental Education " and a vocal performance in the talent portion of the competition . She finished in the top ten but was not a Top @-@ 5 finalist for the state crown . 
 In March 2013 , Anderson won the Miss Portland 2013 title . She qualified for the 2013 Miss Oregon pageant as one of 22 entrants , including her younger sister Malea , competing as Miss Clackamas 2013 . Rebecca Anderson competed with a platform of " American Red Cross : Red for Life " and a vocal performance of " Astonishing " from the musical Little Women in the talent portion of the competition . She was named third runner @-@ up to winner Allison Cook . 
 = = = Miss Oregon 2014 = = = 
 On April 26 , 2014 , Anderson was crowned Miss Cascade 2014 . She entered the Miss Oregon pageant in June 2014 as one of 23 qualifiers for the state title . Anderson 's competition talent was a vocal performance of " Let it Go " from the Disney movie Frozen . Her platform was " American Red Cross : Red for Life " . Her on @-@ stage interview question asked whether discrimination was a factor in the gender pay gap in the United States . Anderson agreed but countered that " women need to be more assertive " and strive to close the gap themselves rather than wait for a government @-@ mandated solution . 
 Anderson won the competition on Saturday , June 28 , 2014 , when she received her crown from outgoing Miss Oregon titleholder Allison Cook . She earned more than $ 10 @,@ 000 in scholarship money and other prizes from the state pageant . 
 As Miss Oregon , Anderson 's activities included public appearances across the state of Oregon . Notable appearances included participating in local pageants , welcoming Air National Guard members home to Oregon , and serving as a judge for the Just For Men World Beard and Moustache Championships . Anderson 's reign as Miss Oregon continued until June 27 , 2015 , when she crowned her successor , Ali Wallace , Miss Oregon 2015 . 
 = = = Miss America 2015 contestant = = = 
 Anderson was Oregon 's representative at the Miss America 2015 pageant in Atlantic City , New Jersey , in September 2014 . During the pageant 's " Show Us Your Shoes " parade , Anderson wore a bicycle helmet and her shoes had tiny bicycles on top of the laces to tout Portland , Oregon , as a " bike @-@ friendly " city . She was not a Top @-@ 16 semi @-@ finalist for the national crown . 
 = M @-@ 37 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 37 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The southern terminus is near the border between Kalamazoo and Calhoun counties at exit 92 of Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) southwest of Battle Creek . The northern terminus is at the Mission Point Light on Old Mission Point in Grand Traverse County . In between , the highway connects Battle Creek , Grand Rapids and Traverse City . Motorists will travel through agricultural land , forests , suburbs and large cities along the way . The section of M @-@ 37 on the Old Mission Peninsula was designated what is now a Pure Michigan Scenic Byway in 2008 . 
 Originally named the Muskegon , Grand Traverse and Northport State Road , and later the Newaygo and Northport State Road , today 's modern highway can be traced back to the 19th century and earlier . The southernmost section between Grand Rapids and Battle Creek parallels an early Indian trail . The modern highway was formed by July 1 , 1919 along this segment . By the 1940s , a second section of highway was designated M @-@ 37 , creating a gap between it and the original section . This gap was eliminated in the 1950s , completing the M @-@ 37 corridor in the state . Additional changes to the routing were made through the Grand Rapids area into the 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 37 runs for 221 @.@ 27 miles ( 356 @.@ 10 km ) through the western side of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan connecting Battle Creek , Grand Rapids and Traverse City . Segments of it have been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . Through the Grand Rapids area , M @-@ 37 is on the NHS along Broadmoor and East Beltline avenues north of M @-@ 6 and the concurrency with I @-@ 96 . The second segment on the NHS runs from M @-@ 115 in Mesick to Traverse City . The road has also been designated what is now a Pure Michigan Byway through the Old Mission Peninsula . The trunkline is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . As part of this responsibility , the department tracks the traffic volumes along M @-@ 37 . MDOT uses a metric called average annual daily traffic , which is a calculation of the average traffic level for a segment of roadway on any average day of the year . Along M @-@ 37 , the volume varies from the peak 49 @,@ 173 vehicles on a section of I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 in Grand Rapids to the 718 vehicles at the northern terminus by the Mission Point Light . 
 = = = West Michigan = = = 
 M @-@ 37 starts joined with Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) as the two highway designations run concurrently at exit 92 on I @-@ 94 southwest of Battle Creek . They follow Columbia Avenue to Skyline Drive where the highway passes the western side of the W. K. Kellogg Airport . When the roadway meets M @-@ 96 , BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 37 turns east , joining M @-@ 96 around the north end of the airport to Helmer Road . M @-@ 37 turns north along Helmer Road through suburban residential areas in Springfield and across the Kalamazoo River into Level Park @-@ Oak Park . There the highway intersects M @-@ 89 , passes through more residential areas and exits the Battle Creek metro area . 
 North of Bedford , M @-@ 37 meanders through rural Barry County . The road passes through mixed agricultural and forest lands near several small lakes in the area . On its path to Hastings , the trunkline runs through Dowling and meets the western terminus of M @-@ 79 . The highway follows Hanover Street through the south side of Hastings into downtown , where it turns west on Green Street and north on Broadway Street . At the intersection of Broadway and State streets , M @-@ 37 meets and joins M @-@ 43 . West of Hastings , M @-@ 43 separates and heads south toward Kalamazoo while M @-@ 37 turns northwesterly and runs parallel to the Thornapple River . The highway follows the river west and north to the community of Middleville through mixed farms and forests . 
 In southern Kent County , M @-@ 37 follows Cherry Valley Road through Caledonia . As the highway transitions to Broadmoor Avenue , the landscape also transitions from rural to suburban . North of 76th Street , Broadmoor widens to a four @-@ lane boulevard which passes a campus of Davenport University near the M @-@ 6 freeway on the outskirts of the Grand Rapids area . This section is dominated by light industrial complexes west of the Gerald R. Ford International Airport in the suburb of Kentwood . These complexes change over to retail establishments north of 32nd Street . At 28th Street , Broadmoor Avenue ends , and East Beltline Avenue begins . This same intersection also marks the western terminus of M @-@ 44 , which starts concurrent with M @-@ 37 in Kentwood . These two highway designations follow East Beltline Avenue between the Woodland Mall and the <unk> Mall . North of the malls , M @-@ 37 / M @-@ 44 passes through the campus of Calvin College and along residential areas at the east end of Reeds Lake . The intersection of East <unk> Avenue and Fulton Street is the western terminus for M @-@ 21 , a highway that runs east across the state to Flint . North of this junction , M @-@ 37 / M @-@ 44 meets I @-@ 96 . 
 M @-@ 37 parts East Beltline Avenue and turns west along I @-@ 96 . The freeway runs west and then north around the edge of Grand Rapids . Near 3 Mile Road , I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 runs west again , continuing across the Grand River and meeting the US Highway 131 ( US 131 ) freeway . The next interchange immediately west of US 131 is for Alpine Avenue , which M @-@ 37 follows north . This road runs through a commercial and retail corridor in the communities of Walker and Comstock Park . South of 6 Mile Road , Alpine Avenue widen into a four @-@ lane divided highway . This highway splits from Alpine Avenue north of 8 Mile Road and turns to the northwest as the surroundings transition to rural farmland again . M @-@ 37 transitions back to a two @-@ lane road south of Sparta . The trunkline passes to the west of Kent City and crosses into Muskegon County at Casnovia . Through this area , the highway parallels a line of the Marquette Rail that runs north from Grand Rapids . 
 West of the county line , M @-@ 37 meets and merges with M @-@ 46 along Apple Avenue . The two highways separate at a roundabout junction where M @-@ 37 turns north on Newaygo Road . M @-@ 37 passes Half Moon Lake and through Bailey . In recent years the highway has served as the location of West Michigan ’ s Longest Yard Sale which spans about 75 miles ( 121 km ) of the route starting in the Bailey – Grant area of Newaygo County through northern Lake County . Between | Grant and Newaygo , the farms transition to forest . M @-@ 82 follows M @-@ 37 through downtown and across the Muskegon River . The highway continues north along Evergreen Drive between Emerald , Sylvan and <unk> lakes . This area is where M @-@ 37 crosses into the Manistee National Forest . M @-@ 20 follows M @-@ 37 through downtown White Cloud and over the White River . Further north , the road passes through <unk> and Lilley in the northern end of the county . 
 = = = Northern Michigan = = = 
 As M @-@ 37 crosses into Lake County , the highway crosses the Pere Marquette River . US 10 follows M @-@ 37 through Baldwin . The Marquette Rail line turns westward on the edge of town , and north of Baldwin , the highway forms the dividing line between the Manistee National Forest to the west and the Pere Marquette State Forest to the east . The road crosses the Little Manistee River near Peacock and the Pine River in southwest Wexford County . M @-@ 37 curves to the northeast along the edge of the <unk> Dam Pond near Mesick . M @-@ 37 turns east to follow M @-@ 115 through the community and then returns to a northward course into Sherman and on to Buckley . North of the latter community , the highway crosses into Grand Traverse County . The area around Buckley transitions to agricultural use again . This landscape continues past the M @-@ 113 to the area known as Chums Corners . There , M @-@ 37 merges with US 31 , and the two run through a small unincorporated community that is host to <unk> Park , home of the Traverse City Beach Bums , a minor league baseball team . 
 US 31 / M @-@ 37 enters the south side of Traverse City near the intersection with South Airport Road and the Grand Traverse Mall . As the highway heads towards Grand Traverse Bay and downtown , it passes several car dealerships , an outlet mall and other retailers . After the city limits , the roadway is also given the name Division Street . North of 14th Street , US 31 / M @-@ 37 passes the former Traverse City State Hospital , a Kirkbride Plan former mental asylum . This section of town is mostly residential except for the old state hospital and Munson Medical Center . North of Front Street , Division Street meets Grandview Parkway . This roadway runs along the bay from the northwest carrying M @-@ 22 / M @-@ 72 . When the two streets meet , M @-@ 22 ends , and US 31 / M @-@ 37 and M @-@ 72 merge into a triple concurrency along the bay north of downtown Traverse City . Grandview Parkway passes the Open Space park , the marina , the former Clinch Park Zoo and runs along a narrow piece of land between the Boardman River and the bay . Grandview Parkway ends east of the mouth of the river , and the highway continues along Front Street past the Great Lakes Maritime Academy and the home berth of the TS State of Michigan to Garfield Avenue near the campus of Northwestern Michigan College . M @-@ 37 turns north along Garfield Avenue to Peninsula Drive , leaving US 31 / M @-@ 72 . 
 M @-@ 37 follows Center Road up the middle of the Old Mission Peninsula . This landform divides Grand Traverse Bay into its east and west arms . The highway runs along a ridge at the center of the peninsula offering views of each arm of the bay . This area contains the greatest concentration of cherry trees in the US . These trees are said to " explode in a filigree of creamy pink blossoms in May " by the editors of Reader 's Digest magazine . The area is also famous for its vineyards and wineries . The peninsula 's seven wineries produce award @-@ winning Rieslings , pinot <unk> and <unk> . The first grapes were introduced to the region in 1983 . In the fall , the area is renowned for its colors in addition to the harvest . Besides cherries and grapes , apples are also grown in the area , contributing to the bounty each year . At the tip of the peninsula is the Mission Point Light , a lighthouse that dates back to 1870 . M @-@ 37 ends at a cul @-@ de @-@ sac in front of the building which is located near the 45th Parallel , halfway between the North Pole and the Equator . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The southern section of M @-@ 37 follows the path of an early Indian trail that connected the St. Joseph Trail near Kalamazoo and Battle Creek to the Grand River Trail near present @-@ day Alto . These tails " were narrow and permitted only single @-@ file travel . " In the Grand Rapids area , Alpine Avenue was originally constructed as a plank road . These roads were at least 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide covered with wood planks 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick . 
 A portion of M @-@ 37 follows the route of the Muskegon , Grand Traverse and Northport State Road , which was later renamed the Newaygo and Northport State Road . The road was authorized by the state legislature in 1857 , and it was intended to connect the settlements in Muskegon and Newaygo counties , which at the time were " most northerly on the south side of the ' Big Woods ' " , with the growing settlements around the Grand Traverse Bay . Construction progressed slowly and was only opened through Wexford County in 1863 @.@ and the bridge over the Manistee River in 1864 at what is now Sherman . 
 The Custer Trail , named for General George Armstrong Custer , was created in 1917 along a series of roads between Grand Rapids and Ft . Wayne , Indiana that included the modern M @-@ 37 . Custer commanded the Michigan Cavalry Bridge during the Civil War , and he was wildly popular in the state after the war . The road that bears his name never achieved that level of popularity . By 1930 , the name had already fallen out of use . 
 = = = State highway era = = = 
 The Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) signed M @-@ 37 initially as part of the state trunkline highway system by July 1 , 1919 . This section of highway ran from Battle Creek to Grand Rapids , roughly along the modern routing . By 1929 , the highway was extended north to Peacock in Lake County , replacing the contemporary M @-@ 54 in the process . A group of local leaders formed an organization to lobby for the completion of the highway in 1928 when state efforts to do stalled . The Grand Rapids – Leelanau Association named their roadway the Paradise Trail and promoted it as an alternative to both US 31 and US 131 . They convinced local land owners to donate land to build the road . Backers named the road for the " divine scenic and recreational delights " in the area . 
 An unnumbered section of gravel highway was opened in 1937 west of Cadillac ; the roadway extended south from M @-@ 55 to the Wexford – Lake county line . Later , in 1940 , the MSHD renumbered the north – south leg of M @-@ 42 from Mesick north to Traverse City and Old Mission . As a result , M @-@ 37 was then a discontinuous highway with a gap between M @-@ 63 in Peacock to M @-@ 115 at Mesick . The spur in Wexford County is shown after 1941 as an " earthen " highway , before disappearing from state maps completely in 1945 . A section of M @-@ 37 through Newaygo County was renamed in 1945 for Stevens T. Mason , the first governor of the State of Michigan . At the time , Consumers Power Company recommended that all north – south roads in the county bear the name of a state governor as part of a plan to rename the major roads in the county . The company wanted to simplify directions for their employees looking for customers ' homes in the area . In the middle of 1948 , M @-@ 37 was extended to M @-@ 55 on a gravel highway that followed the previously unnumbered highway in Wexford County and a new roadway in Lake County . As a result , M @-@ 37 still had a gap , but only between M @-@ 55 and M @-@ 115 . 
 M @-@ 37 through the south side of the Grand Rapids area was realigned in late 1949 or early 1950 . After the change , the highway follows Broadmoor Avenue to 28th Street and 28th Street west to its former routing along Kalamazoo Avenue . In 1953 , this routing was shifted further when M @-@ 37 was rerouted to run north on East Beltline Avenue concurrent with US 131 and M @-@ 21 to Cascade Road . There it turned west along Cascade Road and Fulton Street into downtown back to its existing alignment . During that same time frame , the gap in the routing between M @-@ 55 and Mesick was eliminated . The highway was moved to bypass Sparta , Kent City and Casnovia to the southwest in the 1962 . Another change around the same time frame shifted M @-@ 37 's routing through Grand Rapids again . This time , M @-@ 37 was rerouted to follow M @-@ 11 / M @-@ 21 along 28th Street to the US 131 freeway north to I @-@ 96 and back to Alpine Avenue . The final Grand Rapids routing change was made in 1969 when M @-@ 37 was moved to its current course along East Beltline Avenue and I @-@ 96 . This change resulted in a concurrency with the southernmost end of M @-@ 44 that was later removed in 1977 when M @-@ 44 was truncated northward . A proposed new routing near Comstock Park in the 1970s would have removed M @-@ 37 from Alpine Avenue . The new highway , if built , would have run southeastward from the Alpine Avenue split to US 131 near 6 Mile Road . In 2008 , the northernmost 18 miles ( 29 km ) on the Old Mission Peninsula were designated what is now a Pure Michigan Scenic Byway by MDOT . In 2013 , the hairpin curve on a hill north of Mesick was straightened and the hill slightly leveled . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Trouble ( Natalia Kills album ) = 
 Trouble is the second studio album by English recording artist Natalia Kills . It was released on 3 September 2013 by Cherrytree Records through will.i.am Music Group and Interscope . Recording for the album started in early 2012 and took place in Los Angeles and New York . During that time , Kills was accompanied by some producers , including Jeff Bhasker , who served as Trouble 's executive producer . Bhasker handled a multitude of production tasks , including production , instrumentation and songwriting . 
 Kills eschewed the sound and lyrical content of her debut album Perfectionist ( 2011 ) in favour of a heavier atmosphere , driven by strong percussion and electric guitars . The lyrics , largely co @-@ written by Kills and Bhasker , explore the former 's problematic childhood and adolescence . Accompanying the album , its cover art was designed by Kills and symbolizes the album 's main themes . Upon release , music critics commended the album 's cohesion , and perceived an evolution in Kills ' songwriting . 
 The album was announced with the release of a music video for " Controversy " in September 2012 . Three singles were commissioned from Trouble , accompanied by respective music videos — " Problem " and " Saturday Night " preceded the album 's release ; later , a remix of the album 's title track served as its third single . The record failed to chart internationally with the exception of the US Billboard 200 , where it peaked at number 70 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Kills started recording new material approximately a year after the release of her debut studio album Perfectionist . Primarily produced by Martin " Cherry Cherry Boom Boom " Kierszenbaum and Jeff Bhasker , the set was released in March 2011 to mixed critical reception . It yielded three singles which , similarly to its parent album , performed moderately on European charts . During that year and the following , Kills participated in other musical endeavors , most notably collaborating with groups . She provided guest vocals for Far East Movement 's song " 2 Is Better " and guested on " 1974 " by The <unk> . Kills featured on the duo LMFAO 's single " Champagne Showers " , which became a mild success internationally , and collaborated with DJ Tatana on his single " You Can 't Get In My Head ( If You Don 't Get In My Bed ) " . 
 Trouble was primarily recorded in the Enormous Studios , located in Los Angeles . Other songs were finished in the city 's Record Plant and the New York City @-@ based Jungle City Studios . Emile 's Studio served as a secondary recording location for " Watching You " , which was produced and instrumented by its owner , Emile Haynie . Unlike Perfectionist , a limited number of producers was enlisted for Trouble ; Kills worked with the musicians Guillaume Doubet , Glass John , and Haynie for the first time . Bhasker was assigned for executive production and several tasks , including production , instrumentation and programming , as well as post @-@ production processes . He characterised his production on Trouble as " some of his best work " and stated that it possesses " dark angles " . Bhasker recorded background vocals for some tracks , such as " Devils Don 't Fly " and " Problem " . The electric guitar was recorded by Danielle Haim and Jimmy Messer , whereas Haynie played the keyboards . The programming was handled by Doubet , Haynie , and the American producer Mike Will Made It . Messer , Pawel Sek Tyler Sam Johnson and Rob Suchecki served as engineers for select songs of the album . Bhasker and Tony Maserati mixed Trouble and its mastering was controlled by Chris Athens at his eponymous studio . 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to Kills , Trouble represents an integral departure from her debut studio album . Kills described this sound as mixing hip @-@ hop @-@ resembling strong percussion with electric guitar @-@ led instrumentals . Writing for The New Zealand Herald , Paula Yeoman deemed the album 's music as " darker pop " , while finding it resemblant of Lana Del Rey , Lady Gaga and Gwen Stefani 's works . AllMusic 's Matt Collar opined that the overall sound of the record was influenced by the latter , Grimes and Courtney Love . 
 Similarly , the lyricism of Trouble deviates from that of Perfectionist . While the latter explored Kills ' ambitions and perfectionism , the former narrates her upbringing and adolescence , when she left her home and pursued dangerous behavior . Kills stated that she conceptualized the album in order to depict her experiences as a teenager and feelings of " having no control " , as she did not identify with recent , " happy " popular music . She regarded this attempt as difficult , since it involved the confrontation of her past problems ; nonetheless , Kills desired to reflect them in the songs ' lyrics as she felt they had defined her personality . She also stated that " once [ she ] started writing , [ she ] couldn 't stop " and compared the process to a " confession " . 
 " Television " and " Rabbit Hole " contrast their dark , " sinister " lyricism with their uptempo production . The former , described by Romy <unk> from Harper 's Bazaar as a " more alternative " song , opens with the sound of police sirens and its instrumentation progressively introduces electric guitars and percussion with a vocoder effect . The latter contains explicit references to recreational drugs and sexual intercourse while utilizing the metaphor of " falling down a rabbit hole " to falling in love . The pop @-@ styled " Problem " is influenced by rock styles such as garage and pop rock ; the last genre is also incorporated in Trouble 's title track , which finds Kills singing in a raw and " exhausted " voice backed by " arena rock choirs " . 
 " Daddy 's Girl " , which was denoted by Kills as her favorite from the album , places a sample of American music duo Hall & Oates ' single " Rich Girl " over a " thumping beat " . Described as a " love song " , it discusses her mother 's support and " devotion " towards Kills ' father when he was incarcerated . Second single " Saturday Night " employs synthesizers on a new wave @-@ based instrumental . The track was described as autobiographical and discusses growing up in a house where domestic abuse occurs ; Kills also deemed it a song about " feeling OK when everything is not " . The sole ballads found on the album are " Devils Don 't Fly " and " Marlboro Lights " . The main instrument utilized in the latter is piano , while the former displays more instrumentation , including the organ and keyboards . Writing on behalf of MuchMusic , journalist Allison observed Motown influences on " Outta Time " , a melancholic love song . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The announcement of Kills ' second studio album was made with the release of a music video for its first promotional single " Controversy " in mid @-@ September 2012 . During an interview with Glamour , Kills explained that it served as an introductory track to the album " because it 's a verbal collage of things we see on a daily basis that we turn a blind eye to , especially in the Internet age , where you can literally see anything and everything instantly . ( ... ) We all laugh and joke when it 's someone else 's suffering . " The album 's first single , " Problem " , was digitally released by Interscope in mid @-@ March 2013 , followed in June by its music video . In the same month , " Saturday Night " was chosen as Trouble 's second single . It received mostly positive reviews from music critics . 
 Kills attended an after @-@ party for the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards , held on 25 August 2013 in Brooklyn , New York City , where she performed various songs from Trouble . She previously stated she wished her performance to be " remotely accurate " to the sound and packaging of the album . Trouble was officially released on 3 September 2013 as a digital download in the United States and Canada . A CD release proceeded in the US and Canada on 10 and 17 September 2013 . " Outta Time " was released as the album 's second promotional single , free of charge , coinciding with the US release of Trouble . On the same day , a lyric video for the song was released on YouTube . 
 For the US release of Trouble , " Boys Don 't Cry " was premiered on the website of the magazine Glamour . On 18 October 2013 , a remix of the song was available on Cosmopolitan . To promote the album and its singles , Kills was interviewed by a number of magazines and websites , including Billboard , Teen Vogue , Refinery29 , and Playboy . On 9 October 2013 , Kills performed at a Chicago nightclub , and on 31 December 2013 she performed at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel . She also performed an acoustic set for Yahoo ! Music . During a promotional trip in New Zealand , Kills attended the Vodafone New Zealand Music Awards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Matt Collar of AllMusic awarded it a rating of three and a half stars out of five , characterising it as a " pantomime that artists have been trying to pull off ever since Madonna sang about a sexual experience so revelatory it gave her back her virginity " . He also noted that Kills ' personality , although similar to that of Pink and Lady Gaga , was " enough [ ... ] to keep your attention " . Writing in Idolator , Sam Lansky highlighted Bhasker 's production , which he credited with making the album cohesive . Lansky opined that Kills had evolved as a songwriter and given legitimacy and " richness " to Trouble 's songs . So So Gay Magazine praised Trouble as an evolution from her previous album Perfectionist , and stated that Kills " remains largely unknown and underrated ; astonishing considering the quality of her two albums . She ’ s definitely some sort of anti @-@ princess of pop . " 
 On behalf of The New Zealand Herald , Paula Yeoman stated that pop listeners " should pay attention to " the album , to which she gave a rating of three and a half out of five points . Mike Wass of Idolator chose Trouble as his favourite album of 2013 , while David Byrne and Tony Peregrin for Windy City Times said the album was one of 2013 's " excellent efforts " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The record entered the US Billboard 200 at number 70 , becoming her highest @-@ peaking album on the chart . It opened with sales of 6 @,@ 000 copies , almost half of Perfectionist 's total sold copies , and left the chart the following week . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Song credits obtained from the liner notes of Trouble . 
 Notes 
 ^ a denotes a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b denotes an additional producer 
 Sample Credits 
 " Daddy 's Girl " contains elements and excerpts from " Rich Girl " , as performed by Hall & Oates and written by Daryl Hall from the album Bigger than Both of Us . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Trouble . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Church of St Peter , Berende = 
 The Church of St Peter ( Bulgarian : църква „ Свети Петър “ , tsarkva „ Sveti Petar “ ) or Church of Saints Peter and Paul is a small medieval Bulgarian Orthodox church located in the village of Berende in <unk> Municipality , Sofia Province , in westernmost Bulgaria . Most likely constructed and decorated in the 14th century , the Church of St Peter features simple stone architecture but contains a number of remarkable interior frescoes . 
 Though located next to the village 's graveyard and often interpreted as a cemetery church , the Church of St Peter may have been in some way related to the Bulgarian royal court , as a now @-@ lost portrait with a caption most likely referencing Bulgarian tsar Ivan Alexander was once visible on one of its exterior walls . 
 = = History = = 
 The original researchers of the Church of St Peter , Karel Škorpil and Yordan Ivanov , ascribed it to the 13th century owing to a now @-@ lost exterior mural of a person on the west wall of the church , described by one source as an image of a Bulgarian tsar . The image bears the following caption in Middle Bulgarian : “ Ivan Asen , in Christ our God faithful tsar and autocrat [ of all ] <unk> [ <unk> and Greeks ] ” . Škorpil and Ivanov identified the person mentioned in the inscription as Tsar Ivan Asen II of Bulgaria ( r . 1218 – 1241 ) . Beginning in the 1920s and the publications of André Grabar , however , the church and its art have been usually dated to the 14th century based on stylistic and architectural similarities to other works of that period . The formula of the exterior inscription is also considered to be similar to the inscriptions of Tsar Ivan Alexander ( r . 1331 – 1371 ) , who is known to have used the name Ivan Asen on several other occasions . 
 Due to its location , the Church of St Peter is often described as a cemetery church . However , scholar Bistra Nikolova considers it improbable that an ordinary village cemetery church would have an inscription by a Bulgarian tsar . In her opinion , it is more likely that the church was constructed by a noble person related to the court of the Second Bulgarian Empire . 
 The Church of St Peter has been protected as a national antiquity since 1927 . In 1966 , it was listed as an artistic monument of culture of national importance . However , as of 2011 , the frescoes have never during the church 's existence undergone restoration or conservation and remain threatened . In the lowest parts , up to 0 @.@ 5 m ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) from the floor , the murals have been entirely erased by moisture . Moisture and the resulting salts have also damaged other decorated sections of the walls . 
 = = Location and architecture = = 
 The Church of St Peter is 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 feet ) west of the village of Berende , near the banks of the <unk> River . Today , it lies within the old village graveyard . Not far from the church on the way linking it to the village is Mosta ( <unk> , “ The Bridge ” ) , a natural bridge rock formation . 
 The church is a small and simple rectangular single @-@ nave building constructed out of crushed stone ; the walls range in thickness from 85 to 90 cm ( 33 to 35 in ) . It is accessible via an entrance on its west wall . The wooden door is 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high and is topped by a shallow semicircular niche . Apart from that niche , the only other decorative feature of its architecture are the narrow windows placed on the apse and the south wall . The apse is <unk> and attached to the church 's east side . The church features a semicircular vault and its gabled roof is made of stone slates . In terms of length and width , the church measures 5 @.@ 50 m × 4 @.@ 50 m ( 18 @.@ 0 ft × 14 @.@ 8 ft ) . 
 = = Interior and decoration = = 
 The interior of the church houses an original wooden iconostasis in front of the altar . Carved in the second half of the 14th century , the iconostasis has a basic shape . It is constructed of thick beams and wooden boards , on which traces of painting are visible , and has three openings . 
 The entirety of the church 's interior is covered with 14th @-@ century frescoes , which are described as “ particularly remarkable ” in a UNESCO publication . Among the notable mural portraits is that of church patron Saint Peter , whose larger @-@ than @-@ life image adorns the wall next to the iconostasis . Other frescoes include that of Jesus Christ painted to the right of the apse and that of Saint Alexius next to the entrance . The middle reaches of the walls feature images from the Holy Week , with frescoes depicting events from other major holidays above them . The conch of the apse boasts an image of the Mother of God ; portraits of various saints and scenes from the Ascension of Jesus and the Annunciation complete the decoration of the apse . 
 Next to the apse is a mural of Saint Cyril of Alexandria , captioned as “ Saint Cyril the Philosopher ” , the 9th @-@ century missionary to the Slavs . Although the position and iconography of the portrait clearly identify it as an image of Cyril of Alexandria , the caption hints that the local population confused the two saints and Cyril the Philosopher was still well @-@ remembered at the time . Other images painted in the church include these of the Dormition of the Mother of God ( above the entrance ) , the Transfiguration of Jesus ( under the vault ) , John Damascene , Cosmas of Maiuma , Archangel Michael ( south of the entrance ) , Saint Constantine and Saint Helena ( right of the entrance ) . 
 = Sharon Newman = 
 Sharon Newman is a fictional character from The Young and the Restless , an American soap opera on the CBS network , currently portrayed by Sharon Case . Created by William J. Bell as a love interest for Nicholas Newman , the character debuted on March 24 , 1994 . Before Case took over in September 1994 , the character was portrayed briefly by Monica Potter and then by Heidi Mark . When first introduced , Sharon was a young girl from the poor side of town . Nick and Sharon married , had a son named Noah , and later won custody of Cassie , the child a teenaged Sharon had given up for adoption . Their marriage faced a number of problems , including infidelity on both sides . Following Cassie 's death in an automobile accident , Nick cheated on Sharon with Phyllis Summers , resulting in a pregnancy which ended their 11 @-@ year marriage . 
 Despite her second marriage to ( and divorce from ) Jack Abbott , Nick and Sharon had an affair and conceived a third child : Faith . During the pregnancy , Sharon experienced kleptomania . Faith was kidnapped by Adam Newman , Nick 's brother , leading Sharon to believe she had died . When Adam 's crimes were revealed and Faith was returned to Sharon , she remained in love with him ; SoapNet considered the relationship " dark " . Since 2011 , former showrunner Maria Arena Bell and subsequent head writers that followed have significantly changed the character 's direction , receiving negative backlash from critics and audiences . Sharon married her ex @-@ father @-@ in @-@ law Victor Newman , gained control of his company ( Newman Enterprises ) and burned down his ranch — a sequence of events which resulted in her being diagnosed with bipolar disorder . The character was then involved in a DNA test alteration storyline regarding Summer , which was also heavily criticized by critics . 
 Sharon has been characterized as " insecure " and " not your typical romantic lead " by Case . Despite the character 's crimes and faults , she is described as a central heroine and has been called soap opera 's " hottest mess " . The supercouple pairing of Nick and Sharon attracted a large fan following . Case has become popular with viewers and her performance has received praise from critics ( particularly for overcoming heavily panned writing ) , while also earning her several award nominations including winning a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 1999 . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Sharon Newman was created and introduced by William J. Bell , with the character making her first appearance March 24 , 1994 . Sharon Case , who plays Sharon to the present day , is the third actress to play the role . Previously , struggling actress Monica Potter originated the role , but was fired . She confessed years later , " I was fired because I was terrible " . Heidi Mark then briefly took over the role ; both Potter and Mark had a two @-@ month stint . 
 Case , who had previously worked on the soap operas General Hospital and As the World Turns , was cast in August 1994 . She was selected from a group of six other possible recasts after a screen testing with co @-@ star Joshua Morrow , and began airing on September 7 , 1994 . Initially , Case believed she would only be playing the role for a maximum of six months . Of her casting , she stated : " Not only is this my third soap , but I 'm also the third actress to play the role of Sharon Collins . So , if three times is the charm , this should be it . " The actress wanted to " breathe new life " into the role and make it her own . In 2003 , Case was off @-@ screen from February 17 to May 1 , during contract negotiations . These were resolved that April , when she signed a new contract to remain on the show for another four years , until 2007 . Case revealed that while she considered leaving the series , " I would not have been negotiating if I did not want to come back . I 've always had a great story to play . I love the way they write Sharon . It was just a matter of hammering out the deal points . " 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 In March 1995 , Los Angeles Times writer Nancy Reichardt characterized Sharon as " the girl from the wrong side of the tracks " with <unk> Borden of the entertainment news website Daytime Confidential describing her as being kindhearted and a " <unk> " during her early years on the show , noting that she wanted to start her own trends rather than follow other members of the Newman family . Case likened Sharon to a younger Jill Foster Abbott ( Jess Walton ) , telling Soap Opera Weekly that Jill " was kind of like Sharon . She was nice ... no one thought she was a gold digger — at first . " According to the actress , Sharon does " weird things " and panics when stressed , and her mistakes " eat away at her " , as " She doesn 't do well with secrets " . Case also described the character as feeling insecure and unworthy of being in a happy relationship , telling the Star @-@ Banner that " Sharon goes through many emotions in a week " . MSN characterized Sharon as a " bitch " after a storyline in which she took over Newman Enterprises in 2012 . Of the writing for her character , Case said it is indispensable : " They both have to be there . I couldn 't have gotten away with this without those lines " . However , the actress has expressed displeasure with Sharon being paired with " too many men " because it " waters her down " , wanting to incorporate different aspects of Sharon into her performance . Case stated that Sharon , who sees visions of her deceased daughter Cassie ( Camryn Grimes ) , believes that " she is connected to the spiritual world " . Having played many facets of Sharon over the years , Case said : " It ’ s almost like I ’ ve played 15 different characters in my career when I ’ ve only played one . There ’ s never a dull moment " , calling the character an " optimist and a survivor " . 
 = = = Relationship with Nicholas Newman = = = 
 Sharon has been romantically linked to her high @-@ school sweetheart , Nicholas " Nick " Newman ( Joshua Morrow ) , since her debut on the series . As teenagers they dream of eloping , and face their first hurdle when Sharon 's ex @-@ boyfriend Matt Clark ( Eddie Cibrian ) exposes Sharon 's teenage motherhood ( when she gave her baby , fathered by her former boyfriend in Madison , Wisconsin , up for adoption ) . Nick , believing Sharon is a virgin , briefly breaks up with her but they reunite . With Matt behind them , they marry in February 1996 and have their first child — Noah ( Robert Adamson ) — in 1997 , the year Sharon is also reunited with her daughter Cassie ( Camryn Grimes ) . Sharon 's best friend Grace Turner ( Jennifer <unk> ) seduces Nick , triggering another breakup ; Sharon and Nick reunite during a custody battle for Cassie . Of their highly anticipated reunion , head writer Kay Alden noted that during the previous several months " there 's been a lot of stop @-@ and @-@ go and mixed messages " between the couple , but their feelings were definitely clear again ; Morrow felt that Nick loves Cassie as much as he loves Noah . However , Sharon has an affair with Diego <unk> ( Greg Vaughan ) . In May 2005 , 14 @-@ year @-@ old Cassie is killed in a car accident . Nick becomes distant from Sharon , and is unfaithful to her with Phyllis Summers ( Michelle Stafford ) . The marriage ends the following year ; Nick moves on with a pregnant Phyllis , who gives birth to their daughter Summer Newman ( Hunter King ) . 
 Although Sharon also moved on , marrying Jack Abbott ( Peter Bergman ) , Nick and Sharon remain in love . They kiss while Nick , suffering from amnesia , believes they are still married ; Phyllis is jealous of Sharon , insulting her in an article in her magazine Restless Style . In January 2009 , Nick and Sharon reunite in a sexual affair at the Abbott cabin , an event much anticipated by viewers . According to Case , Sharon wanted Nick more than anyone at the time but only if he left Phyllis ; Morrow told TV Guide that although the reunion was " messy " , viewers wanted this for a long time . After another one @-@ night stand Sharon becomes pregnant , briefly lying that Jack is the baby 's father when Summer becomes ill and Phyllis needs Nick . Nick soon finds out , but their daughter Faith is kidnapped at birth by Nick 's brother ( Adam ) and given to Ashley ( Jack 's sister ) . Sharon , believing Faith has died , seduces a guilty Adam . Faith is eventually reunited with her parents , and Adam 's crimes are revealed . Nick and Sharon are briefly engaged that November , but they break up when she sleeps with Adam and their relationship becomes bitter . Although Case and Morrow believe the couple belong together , they are apart for several years ; during which they both believed a reunion wouldn 't happen anytime soon . In late 2013 , the characters begin to grow closer again despite the fact that Sharon secretly switched the paternity test results of Nick 's daughter Summer ; Case stated in an interview that Sharon is in " constant turmoil " regarding her secret , and Morrow stated that he believed a reunion was a possibility given Nick 's vulnerability , saying : " They 've worked things out before — and they could work things out again . There is always a possibility for Nick and Sharon to get back together ! " However , Soaps In Depth wrote : " Yet , with Sharon 's secret haunting her like the glowering ghost of Christmas past , the supercouple 's fans may need a holiday miracle to keep Sharon and Nick 's relationship from exploding ! " 
 = = = Cameron Kirsten = = = 
 In February 2003 , Case temporarily exited the show as a result of lengthy contract negotiations . Instead of having the character depart permanently ( or be killed off ) , executive producer David Shaughnessy chose to have her leave town after issues with her marriage to Nick . While away , Sharon becomes suicidal ; Case explained that Sharon 's life had fallen apart and she left town to commit suicide , drinking herself into " a complete stupor " . Travelling to Denver , she meets ( and has an affair with ) businessman Cameron Kirsten ( Linden Ashby ) , who physically abuses her . In April , Case signed a new contract with the show . Executive producer and head writer at the time John F. Smith said that upon Sharon 's return to Genoa City , she wants to keep where she was a secret . That December , Sharon is horrified when Cameron arrives in town for apparent business with Newman Enterprises . Smith stated that the story with Cameron and Sharon would be one that " builds quickly into a lot of drama " . Explaining their relationship , Ashby revealed that Cameron and Sharon were " kindred spirits " and hooked up , but Cameron becomes abusive , with Ashby calling him " really disturbing " . Cameron blackmails Sharon into meeting him at a motel . When she arrives they have a physical altercation in which Sharon throws a bottle at him to keep him from raping her , " killing " him ( or so she believes ) . Australian magazine TV Soap noted that " sweet , demure " Sharon had become a murderer . After driving around with his body in her car trunk for days , she dumps it in an alley . Sharon 's former friend , Grace , returns to town ; she discovers Cameron alive , and nurses him back to health . Detective Weber ( Sherman Augustus ) is suspicious of Sharon 's involvement in Cameron 's disappearance . Sharon begins " hallucinating " with visions of Cameron 's " ghost " ( which is actually him , alive ) . Case noted that Sharon was getting into deeper trouble by making mistakes " trying to do the right thing " . 
 A scene where Sharon and Nick 's mother Nikki ( Melody Thomas Scott ) were searching the sewers for what they believed was Cameron 's dead body became popular with fans of the show . Scott described the sewer shoot as a " horrific day at work " with " 20 live <unk> rats on the set " , while comparing the unlikely duo of Sharon and Nikki to Lucy and Ethel from I Love Lucy . Cameron eventually reveals himself . He had murdered Sharon 's ex @-@ boyfriend ( and Cassie 's biological father ) Frank Barritt ( Phil Dozois ) , who was visiting town , and hid the body in Sharon 's car trunk . Cameron 's crimes are revealed ; he is jailed , absolving Sharon of wrongdoing . Although Sharon did not actually murder Cameron , Case praised the storyline and called Sharon a heroine . She explained : " Your romantic lead shouldn 't just be a simple romantic lead . Sharon was that for a long time . She was in this love story with Nick and nothing really happened to her . You can only carry that so far . " 
 = = = Cassie 's death = = = 
 In 2005 , good @-@ girl Cassie becomes a rebellious teenager ; Nick and Sharon have a difficult time dealing with her . Cassie has a crush on bad @-@ boy Daniel <unk> ( Michael Graziadei ) , who is dating Lily Winters ( Christel Khalil ) . One night , against her parents ' wishes she sneaks out to a party . In a ploy to impress a drunken Daniel she attempts to drive him home , despite being underage . The car crashes , leaving them with no memory of the accident . Daniel is thought to have been driving , and is blamed for the accident . Cassie becomes hospitalized and escapes to find Daniel to tell him she was driving , but is soon re @-@ admitted . During the May 24 episode , Cassie dies with Nick and Sharon at her side . Grimes said she did not think Cassie would die , but if it was " meant to happen , it 's meant to happen " . The actress found filming her last scenes with Case and Morrow " ridiculously hard " . Case also found taping the scenes devastating : " It was too real for Joshua and me to even go through it . We did it in one take . The scene is still devastating in my mind and Joshua ’ s . It ’ s almost not watchable . If it comes on , I can ’ t get through it " . Daniel is cleared of all charges and Nick and Sharon begin Cassie 's Foundation , a movement to prevent teenage drinking and driving . According to Case , when Sharon loses something in her life it " reminds her and reactivates Cassie ’ s death for her " . After Nick cheats on Sharon following Cassie 's death , Case said it " makes you so fearful that you are going to be alone for the rest of your life ; that no matter what you go out in life to create , it ’ s going to be ruined anyway " . The actress also believed that Sharon lost her identity after Cassie 's death . In 2012 , during a court battle over Newman Enterprises ( the family company ) , Nick stated that Sharon 's mental problems date to Cassie 's death . 
 = = = Subsequent relationships = = = 
 According to Case , Sharon loses her identity after her divorce from Nick , which leads to her beginning a romance with Phyllis 's ex @-@ husband Jack Abbott , played by Peter Bergman . They marry in April 2007 , but divorce two years later as a result of Jack 's dishonesty which severely weakened the marriage . Case praised the pairing for its accurate representation of a " modern marriage " and noted that Sharon could not deal with Jack 's " broken promises again and again " . Years before marrying Jack , Sharon had a brief affair with Brad Carlton ( Don <unk> ) . Case believed that the romance could have been further explored . During a blizzard , Brad visits Sharon at the Abbott cabin and declares his love for her , although she rejects him . Moments later , Brad is killed while saving her son , Noah , from drowning in an icy lake ; he falls through the ice himself . Case stated that Sharon was guilty over Brad 's tragic death . 
 Unlike Nick 's mother Nikki Newman ( Melody Thomas Scott ) , his father Victor Newman ( Eric Braeden ) adored Sharon and maintained a paternal relationship with her over the years . Case described Victor as being Sharon 's hero and a " father figure " . However , their dynamic changes in January 2012 when Victor marries Sharon so that she can protect his assets while he is in jail ; the non @-@ romantic marriage is annulled days later . Several months later , they become romantically involved . Joshua Morrow told Soaps In Depth that he was puzzled as to why Nick had no " legitimate anger " about the relationship , while Braeden was also unhappy with the storyline , stating : " We all have gone through periods of playing something we didn 't really like to play so much , but you do it . " 
 In August 2012 , Victor and Sharon remarry , but he disappears shortly afterwards . Sharon burns their prenuptial agreement , and takes over his company . <unk> , Case felt that the writers could have handled the storyline other ways without having Sharon actually marry Victor . The actress described the relationship as incestuous : " Sometimes controversial storylines can work because you 're bringing attention to a controversial issue that the nation is trying to decide on . But this was not one of those things " , calling it " upsetting to the audience " . The marriage ( which ended after Victor 's return ) was considered an " inside joke " for the actors . Reflecting on the storyline , Case revealed : " I didn ’ t understand how I was going to sell a love story between Sharon and Victor for obvious reasons . What motivated Sharon to fall in love with Victor when she ’ s in love with Adam and Nick ? " 
 Adam Newman ( Michael Muhney ) — who kidnapped Sharon 's newborn baby , Faith , and gave her to Ashley Abbott ( Eileen Davidson ) to avoid being caught in a scheme — bonds with Sharon out of guilt , though falls in love with her and they marry . Muhney told SoapNet that Adam " unequivocally " loves her , explaining " You can argue as much logic as you want about what Adam has done and what he is doing . " Adam 's kidnapping of Faith is revealed ; Sharon remains in love with him , to the chagrin of her family and friends . Case described Sharon 's ability to forgive Adam as " a tough pill to swallow " , while Jamey Giddens of Zap2It described them as " inappropriate , yet red @-@ hot " . After trying to get Adam acquitted for Skye 's ( his ex @-@ wife 's ) murder , Sharon is jailed . Case liked " Shadam " , noting that the relationship " took us all by surprise ... that is what I was referring to with this storyline because of the pace and the vitality that ' Shadam ' has . " While a fugitive , Adam believes Sharon is dead ; however , she sleeps with Sam Gibson ( Sean Patrick Flannery ) . Adam feels betrayed when Sharon returns to Genoa City ; he cons her into a jailhouse wedding , and leaves her heartbroken and angry . 
 To spend time with Faith , Nick forces Sharon to get a restraining order against Adam . The night before the order becomes active , Adam and Sharon make love . Jae ' Jones of Yahoo ! noted that Sharon 's actions would always lead her back to Adam . After Adam is attacked ( losing his vision ) , Sharon brings him back to his mother 's farm in Kansas and they become engaged . After returning to Genoa City , however , she leaves Adam when his additional past crimes come to light . After marrying Chelsea Lawson ( Melissa Claire Egan ) , Adam helps Sharon through an emotional breakdown ( which drove her to burn down Victor 's home ) and covers her tracks so she is not arrested . Sharon and Adam 's attraction drove a wedge between him and Chelsea . Luke Kerr of Zap2it considered Chelsea " out of her league " against Sharon . While Case felt that Nick and Sharon 's history " held more weight " , she said Sharon 's relationship with Adam is " just as deep " . 
 = = = Imprisonment and escape = = = 
 In January 2011 , Sharon is arrested for the murder of Adam 's ex @-@ wife , Skye Newman ( Laura Stone ) , and sinks into a state of depression . She had previously traveled to Hawaii to find Skye , who fell into an active volcano . CBS Soaps In Depth reported that a distraught Sharon might commit suicide . After she is sentenced to life in prison Sharon claims she is ill , going to a bathroom where Adam hid a duffel bag for her escape . She overcomes an officer with chloroform , and escapes through a window . Adam has given her a false identification , a passport and cash . She stops at a gas station , where she dyes her hair brunette and changes into a revealing outfit . ( Case said that although the storyline was fun , she disliked being a brunette . ) Later , Sharon is carjacked and her possessions stolen ; the female carjacker dies after the car crashes . The body is identified as Sharon 's , leaving her family and friends believing she died . Case ( who wanted to do a Mr & Mrs. Smith @-@ type storyline ) said that when Sharon became a fugitive , she had her chance . The actress enjoyed playing the " aggressive " side of Sharon when she attacked the prison guard . 
 After escaping from Genoa City , Sharon then lives under the pseudonym of Sheri Coleman for several months in New Mexico . While there she seduces Sam Gibson ( Sean Patrick Flannery ) , who lets her stay at his farm ; she bonds with the barn animals and a young local girl named Piper . Case said that although she hoped the " recklessness " of her character would continue , she found Sharon 's storyline with Sam , Piper and the animals " really beautiful " . Case hoped the story would take a different route , where she could meet Adam on the run and create a Bonnie and Clyde scenario . 
 Head writer Maria Arena Bell dedicated the 4th of July episode to Sharon , stating that the episode would " shed more light on Sharon and all the factors that caused her to be in this situation , why she 's acted the way she has and why she 's gone into the pit of [ low ] self @-@ esteem . " Case noted that she wanted to show viewers why Sharon is in the place she 's in , as well as examine her life over the years during the episode . Jae ' Jones of Yahoo ! analyzed the storyline in anticipation of Sharon 's homecoming , hoping that Nick , Adam and Noah would not forgive her because of all the " unforgivable things " she has done ( especially her devious move of letting them believe she was dead ) . Jones further said : " Some will say she did what she thought she had to do . Even though it seemed as if it was easy , it 's never that easy to walk away from the people you love " . 
 In July 2011 , Sharon is arrested in New Mexico , and returned to Genoa City to serve her life sentence . Case said that although she was happy to be at the barn because it was " relaxing " , she became restless as an actor and was glad her character was returning home . Sharon 's actions do have repercussions : Nick is immensely angry with her , and Adam dumps her for sleeping with Sam . In November 2011 ( almost a year after the accident at the volcano ) , evidence of Sharon 's innocence surfaces and she is acquitted . 
 = = = Mental health issues = = = 
 In 2009 , Sharon suffers from kleptomania ( an impulse @-@ control disorder ) , causing her to steal items from people and stores . As a result , she is forced to admit herself into a psychiatric hospital while she is pregnant . Case told TV Guide that all the character 's " craziness " made sense ; she welcomed the challenge to decide how functional Sharon appears to viewers and got into debates with directors . Michael Fairman noted that Sharon is " acting so bizarre " . Case said her breakdown was due ( in part ) to Brad Carlton 's death and the breakdown in her marriage to Jack ; each time Sharon mapped out her life , it is " torn to pieces " . Sharon has since experienced periodic kleptomania . 
 In 2012 , after Victor disappears following his wedding to Sharon , she realizes she must be married to Victor for more than eight days to obtain his money . She then burns their prenuptial agreement after Nikki sends her a text from Victor 's phone saying he has left her . Sharon decides to run his company ( Newman Enterprises ) in his absence . Case thought a scene where Sharon crashed a Newman board meeting was fun and different , confessing that she had wanted to play " this version of Sharon for years " . As Victor 's proxy she became CEO of the company , secretly aided by manipulative businessman Tucker McCall ( Stephen Nichols ) . The stock price for Newman drops ( with Tucker secretly buying stock ) . Case hoped the writers wouldn 't go the typical route , where Victor would return and " wreak havoc on everyone " . Sharon was labeled " Newman 's Grim Reaper " by the media of Genoa City , leaving Nick and Victoria to regain the company from her clutches . They demonstrate her history of kleptomania to a court judge , forcing her to return to the psychiatric hospital for an evaluation ( which she passes ) ; she then returns to her position as CEO . Case called Sharon 's return a " fun aspect of the story " . Sharon continued to behave out of character ; when she discovers that Victor is alive , she tells everyone he died after identifying a burnt body which was not his ( Case said that Sharon took advantage of the situation ) . At Victor 's funeral Sharon wears white , nearly marrying Tucker afterwards . Victor then returns , expelling Sharon from his family , home and company . Despite her crimes , Sharon avoids prison . At this point , Aaron <unk> @-@ MacKay of <unk> stated that Sharon was " crazy " . 
 Case said she was unconcerned about the storyline because the writers had a plan to explain Sharon 's behavior . New head writer Josh Griffith told TV Guide that the character would reach a " total mental breakdown " , which would take her to the edge and beyond before being rebuilt . Griffith said the breakdown would help her find salvation , with a " stronger , more together , more evolved Sharon " emerging . Sharon breaks down at the main house of the Newman ranch , burning it down while under the influence of alcohol . Griffith stated that the damage Sharon has done to the Newman family is " physical , professional and emotional " . After seeing a doctor , Sharon is diagnosed with bipolar disorder and begins treatment ; however , she is alarmed after discovering she must take prescribed medication , possibly for the rest of her life . Case was happy with the outcome of the storyline , as were viewers of the show . In January 2013 , she told Soap Opera Uncensored , " When Sharon battled her emotional problems , that also took a lot of work but in a different way . Playing someone who is bipolar is very exhausting but it worked out perfectly and explained all of Sharon ’ s past behavior . I applaud Josh for making that decision because I think it makes the most sense considering her history . " The actress in addition was pleased that she didn 't have to continue justifying Sharon 's questionable actions . 
 In mid @-@ 2013 , the paternity of Summer ( now 18 years old ) is questioned upon the revelation that Nick declared himself her father despite the initial paternity test being corrupt . Nick did this to fill the void left by Cassie 's death . Sharon feels that Summer 's birth and the affair between Nick and Phyllis ruined her destiny with him , so she makes the decision to change the results of another test undertaken by Nick ; which revealed that he was in fact Summer 's father . Following her controversially changing the results , Jack is believed by everyone to be Summer 's father . The storyline received negative complaints from fans of the character . Speaking of the storyline , Case told On @-@ Air On @-@ Soaps that an unstable Sharon was trying to reverse the damage caused by Nick 's affair with Phyllis . Phyllis overhears Sharon confessing to altering the test results ; a fight between the two women in a stairwell results in Phyllis falling down the stairs and slipping into a coma . In a February 2014 " super @-@ secret plot twist " , it was revealed that Victor had hired a Cassie doppelganger to haunt Sharon , who has been known to see visions of her deceased daughter while she was off her bipolar medication . Camryn Grimes ( who is playing the Cassie lookalike ) stated that Victor and Fake Cassie 's " initial plan " was to make Nick believe Sharon was " nuts and seeing ghosts " so that he would not reunite with her . However , " then they find out Sharon has an explosive secret — one Victor can really use " , that being the secret of Summer 's paternity , which Sharon is still hiding as a result of losing her memory due to recent ECT treatment . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Born on June 20 , 1974 , Sharon Collins grew up in Madison , Wisconsin . She lived with her mother , Doris Collins ( Karen Hensel ) , who was confined to a wheelchair after chasing a rebellious Sharon years earlier . Sharon became pregnant by high @-@ school boyfriend Frank Barritt ( Phil Dozois ) , but gave the child up for adoption . 
 In 1994 , 18 @-@ year @-@ old Sharon arrives in Genoa City and begins attending a local high school . She meets Nick Newman ( son of wealthy tycoon Victor Newman ) , who is dating Amy Wilson ( Julianne Morris ) . Nick falls in love with Sharon , despite Sharon 's ex @-@ boyfriend Matt Clark 's ( Eddie Cibrian ) attempts to win her back . Nick and Sharon briefly separate after Matt exposes Sharon 's secret about her motherhood at 16 , but they reunite shortly afterwards . An angry Matt later rapes Sharon in his car , traumatizing her . Nick and Sharon become engaged ; she tells him about the rape , which leads him to avenge Matt . Matt is shot , and Nick is the chief suspect . He is convicted and acquitted several months later , when Amy confesses to the shooting . After Matt leaves town , Nick and Sharon marry ; to hold on to Nick , Sharon stops using birth control and becomes pregnant . Nick complains that he is unready for fatherhood ; Sharon nearly has an abortion , but he stops her . In 1997 , she gives birth to Noah Newman , who nearly dies after his premature birth . While Noah was critically ill Sharon 's best friend ( Grace Turner ) tracks down the child Sharon gave birth to as a teenager ( Cassie ) and brings her to Genoa City , believing Cassie was lessen the pain if Noah died . Noah survives , and Grace decides to raise Cassie as her own ; however , her plans are foiled when Nick and Sharon win custody . Nick had cheated on Sharon with Grace ( which nearly ended his and Sharon 's marriage ) , but the custody battle for Cassie reunited them . 
 In 2001 , Matt ( Rick Hearst ) returns to town after plastic surgery with a false identity , Carter Mills . He rapes Sharon , and his true identity is revealed when he dies after driving off a cliff . Sharon becomes pregnant , with Matt possibly the father of her child . During an argument with Nick Sharon trips and falls , giving birth to a stillborn baby girl . After a paternity test , Nick is revealed to be the baby 's father . Sharon finds solace with the Newman ranch 's handyman Diego <unk> ( Greg Vaughan ) , who had been dating Nick 's sister Victoria , and her infidelity results in a breakup with Nick . Nick later sees Sharon kissing Victor , which leaves Sharon humiliated and depressed . She leaves town and meets Cameron Kirsten ; they begin an affair , and he brutally abuses her . Sharon returns to Genoa after her injuries heal , but is horrified when Cameron comes to town on business with Newman Enterprises . She briefly believes that she killed him , but he is later tracked down and jailed for his crimes . Sharon becomes restless as a housewife , and wants to become a stripper ; Nick gives her a job at spokesperson for <unk> Cosmetics to occupy her . In 2005 , Cassie dies in a car accident after driving without a license . While Sharon is grieving , Nick cheats on her with Phyllis Summers and Sharon has a one @-@ night stand with Victoria 's husband , Brad Carlton . Nick and Sharon divorce , after eleven years of marriage , when Phyllis becomes pregnant with Nick 's baby . 
 Sharon dates Phyllis ' ex , Jack Abbott , and they eventually marry . Phyllis discovers Sharon 's affair with Brad , and blackmails her . During a cliffside photo shoot Phyllis threatens to tell Jack about the affair , triggering a fight . Sharon and her best friend <unk> Winters ( Victoria Rowell ) fall from the cliff , and <unk> dies . Sharon is found apparently dead , but she is revived . Nick is later presumed dead after his plane crashes ; he returns with amnesia ( thinking he is still married to Sharon ) , regains his memory and returns to Phyllis . Jack , Phyllis , Nick and Sharon develop a magazine , Restless Style ; however , clashes among the four drive Jack and Sharon from the company . In October 2008 , Sharon and Nick meet in Paris ; they kiss on a bridge , and Phyllis sees them . Sharon divorces Jack because his dishonesty ; she and Nick make love at the Abbott cabin . Confused , Sharon spirals out of control ; she develops kleptomania and has a brief affair with Jack 's brother , Billy ( Billy Miller ) . Sharon becomes pregnant ; Nick goes back and forth between her and Phyllis , choosing Phyllis when Sharon lies about Jack being the father of the child . After being arrested for larceny a second time , Sharon checks herself into Fairview sanitarium ( a psychiatric hospital ) when her kleptomania becomes uncontrollable . She gives birth to a baby girl , Faith , who is stolen by Adam Newman ( Nick 's brother ) and given to Jack 's sister Ashley ( Eileen Davidson ) after he caused her miscarriage and hysterical pregnancy . Believing her baby is dead , Sharon grows close to Adam ( who bonds with her out of guilt ) . Sharon and Adam are married , but when the truth about Faith is revealed the marriage ends . Several months later , Sharon shoots Adam when he tries to visit her at the Abbott cabin ( mistaking him for a burglar ) ; he survives . Nick and Sharon briefly reunite , but break up again when she cheats on him with Adam ( who follows her to New Orleans ) . 
 Adam is convicted for the murder of his ex @-@ wife , Skye Newman ( Laura Stone ) . Sharon tries to help him , but is arrested for murder after finding Skye in Hawaii ( where Skye fell into a volcano ) . After escaping and returning ( after several months of being thought dead ) , Sharon is acquitted . She then dedicates herself to Victor , who is in jail protecting Nikki from a murder charge . Victor marries Sharon platonically to protect his assets , although the marriage is annulled two weeks later . Adam is believed to be permanently blind after an attack by Patty Williams , and Sharon helps him recover . They reunite , but more of his past schemes are revealed . After another nervous breakdown and a diagnosis of bipolar disorder ( which made her remarry Victor and take over Newman Enterprises ) , Sharon is re @-@ hired at Newman as vice president for research and development . Adam is shot saving Victor 's life ; before slipping into a coma he asks Sharon , his closest friend , to run Newman Enterprises . Sharon again becomes CEO of the company , angering the Newman 's . She leaves the company upon Victor 's return to run the company with Adam . Victor forces Adam , who is engaging in a sexual relationship with Sharon , to stop seeing her . 
 In 2013 , it is revealed that the test conducted to determine Summer 's paternity was inconclusive , which Nick kept a secret . Sharon , who now wants Nick back , tampers with the test results , allowing everyone to believe Jack is Summer 's father . Phyllis hears Sharon confessing to this at Cassie 's gave , resulting in an altercation between the two and ending with Phyllis falling down a flight of stairs , and into a coma . Noah discovers that Sharon is off her medication , attributing to her erratic behavior . Sharon realizes that she needs help , and soon begins taking new medication . She is hired by <unk> Cosmetics to mentor younger models . Sharon later undergoes electroconvulsive therapy ( ECT ) to stop experiencing visions of Cassie ; which in reality is a Cassie lookalike named Mariah Copeland ( Camryn Grimes ) hired by Victor to haunt her . After the ECT , Sharon loses her memories of switching Summer 's paternity results and witnessing Phyllis fall . By this point , Nick and Sharon have resumed their romantic relationship . After Victor 's <unk> of Sharon is exposed , Sharon becomes drawn to Mariah ; inviting her to live with her family and having Nick hire her for a job at his club . Sharon throws Mariah out after realizing that Mariah has been trying to seduce Nick away from her . Simultaneously , Nick does some investigating and discovers that Mariah is Cassie 's twin sister , and Sharon had no knowledge of giving birth to twins . Soon , Nick and Sharon are engaged ; but their wedding is interrupted by a now awakened Phyllis ( Gina <unk> ) , who walks in and collapses . Later , Phyllis makes Sharon remember switching the test , and her engagement to Nick ends . A furious Nick sues Sharon for full custody of Faith and wins . 
 In early 2015 , Sharon is framed and arrested for the murders of Austin Travers ( Matthew Atkinson ) and Noah 's fiancée Courtney Sloane ( Kelli Goss ) , but acquitted due to lack of evidence . During this period , Dylan McAvoy ( Steve Burton ) becomes her confidant and the two start a romantic relationship . Sharon becomes pregnant with Dylan 's child but suffers a miscarriage , and attempts to conceive again rather than tell him . After skipping her medication once again , Sharon returns to Fairview for treatment . There , she is drugged by Dr. Anderson ( Elizabeth <unk> ) into experiencing a false pregnancy . Sharon believes she has given birth to a son , who she names Sullivan " Sully " McAvoy . In actuality , Dr. Anderson is Sandra Allen , a woman seeking revenge on Nick for a diving accident during their high school years which left her paralyzed . Dr. Anderson had kidnapped what was believed to be Nick 's baby with Sage Newman ( Kelly Sullivan ) , Christian , and presented him to Sharon as her own . After leaving Fairview , Sharon marries Dylan before Christmas 2015 . In early 2016 , following Dr. Anderson 's murder , both Sharon and Sage discover the truth about Sully being Christian . After Sage is killed in a car accident , Sharon continues raising Christian as her own , telling nobody aside from Mariah the truth . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Despite her crimes and faults , Global TV describes Sharon as a central heroine who has endured many challenges to get to where she is . In an early observation of the character , Kathleen Sloan of the Toronto Star noted that Sharon 's " angelic demeanor " could mask a " devil in disguise " . Tommy Garrett of Canyon News describes Sharon as an " ever @-@ suffering heroine , who can 't find a break in life " , stating that she has " faced it all " . In 2009 , Luke Kerr of Daytime Confidential noted that all of Sharon 's love interests — including Jack , Brad and Nicholas — " seem to think " that she is " the perfect woman " . Jamey Giddens ( also from Daytime Confidential ) described her as soap operas ' " hottest mess " . 
 During Maria Arena Bell 's tenure as executive producer and head writer , the character 's storyline underwent a change in creative direction , inciting unfavorable reviews . Bell had promised to make the character into a " stronger woman " , but Jillian Bowe of Daytime Confidential criticized Bell for not living up to her pledge : " Has transforming Sharon into a promiscuous , recovering kleptomaniac , who never considers what her sexual choices will mean for her children , really made her stronger in [ Bell ] ' s eyes ? " She also contended that the beloved character was being " utterly assassinated , via one ill @-@ conceived storyline and / or romance after another " . Michael Logan of TV Guide noted that the character turned from heroine to a " psycho slut @-@ nut " when she 's " not channeling Joan Crawford in the Pepsi board room . " Another writer from Daytime Confidential praised Case for giving " one wonky storyline after another " her best efforts in a character that was " once beloved " but had been " royally assassinated " . A September 2012 scene ( in which Sharon wore white to husband Victor 's funeral ) was described by co @-@ star Joshua Morrow as " one of the best and funniest scenes " in the show 's history . Tommy Garrett of Canyon News wrote , " Maria Bell knows that consummate actress Sharon Case plays the consummate heroine Sharon Newman with aplomb . " By the end of 2012 , Aaron <unk> @-@ MacKay of <unk> compared the " tortured soul " of Sharon to the character Nicole Walker on Days of Our Lives , writing : " Who had it worse this year , Sharon or Nicole ? " 
 Following the character 's diagnosis with bipolar disorder , her switching Summer 's paternity test was heavily criticized by critics , who felt that the character still had not been repaired . About.com listed the paternity twist as one of the worst storylines of 2013 on the soap opera . Sara Bibel of Xfinity slammed Josh Griffith 's writing , stating that he " undid all his great work rehabilitating the character of Sharon " in a " character @-@ destroying " storyline . Garrett ( writing for Highlight Hollywood this time ) , who has noted Case as " the show 's best actress " , was livid with Jill Farren Phelps , the executive producer of The Young and the Restless , claiming Sharon to be the latest in a line of " strong female characters , or popular female actors " to be destroyed by Phelps . Garrett strongly opposed to Sharon being turned into a villain " with no good reason " , and labeled Phelps a female misogynist . Soap Opera Digest listed the character of Sharon as the " Most Ruined " soap opera character in both 2012 and 2013 , while in turn praising the performance of Case . In December 2014 , Daytime Confidential described Sharon as one of the most " drastically damaged " characters in the history of the soap opera genre , and wrote , " You name it , one head writer or another has had her do it . <unk> . Three baby daddies . Bipolar disorder . It was almost like a reward was passed out in the Y & R writing room anytime anyone came up with something more awful to have Sharon do . " 
 The relationship between Sharon and Nick relationship is popular with viewers , and they are considered a prominent soap @-@ opera supercouple . The pair are known by the portmanteau " <unk> " in social media . Kim Potts of The Huffington Post ranked Nick and Sharon 16th on a list of " Greatest Soap Opera <unk> " . Potts observed that although they have not become " enduring love " , a reunion is " always a possibility " . SoapNet reported that with their anticipated reunion in February 2009 , the show gained an average of 447 @,@ 000 viewers , boosting the show to nearly 5 @.@ 7 million viewers and a 4 @.@ 0 household rating . Sharon 's romance with Adam has also gained a fan following , and they are known as " Shadam " in social media . The couple are perceived as " showing us the many shades of love . In this case , mostly dark " , according to SoapNet . The show gained 115 @,@ 000 viewers after their reunion in December 2010 . In 2012 , Sharon 's romance with Victor was the source of disapproval from actors , critics and viewers . Of the relationship , journalist Michael Fairman said it " hasn ’ t worked out or caught fire through the writing , or with the fans watching on @-@ screen ! " Several cast members expressed negative opinions about the relationship , including Case , Braeden , Morrow , and Muhney . Daytime Confidential placed Sharon and Victor atop its " Worst Soap Opera Couples " list for that year . 
 Case has received a number of honors for her portrayal of Sharon , including Daytime Emmy Award nominations in 1996 and 1997 for Outstanding Younger Actress . At the Soap Opera Digest Awards in 1998 , she won the Hottest Female Star award . In 1999 she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , her first nomination in that category ; she was nominated for the same category in 2000 and 2004 . At the 2003 Soap Opera Digest Awards , Case received an Outstanding Supporting Actress nomination . That year , she won an Australian TV Soap Golden Boomerang Award for Younger Female Star . Cassie 's 2005 death storyline ( with parents Sharon and Nicholas coping afterwards ) earned the show a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series Writing Team . The death of Cassie Newman is rated number 41 on <unk> ' list of " 100 Most Memorable Moments In Soap History " . Dan J. Kroll of Soap Central noted that it had " widely been expected " that Morrow and Case would receive nominations for Outstanding Leading Actress and Actor at the 33rd Daytime Emmy Awards ; however , they were not . Despite this , Grimes was nominated for the Outstanding Younger Actress award . 
 In January 2011 , a Daytime Emmy Awards " final push " by Canyon News suggested that Case 's performance needed more Emmy attention . Soap Opera Digest praised Phyllis finding the evidence that freed Sharon from prison in 2011 , writing : " The twist that <unk> hijacked the glory from both Adam and estranged sister Avery was downright delicious — and made Sharon beholden her worst enemy . The cherry on top ? Sharon giving Adam an overdue verbal beatdown . Justice has finally been served . " Case 's performance in 2012 , described as a " whirlwind year " , was met with critical acclaim due to writing by Bell ( which , in turn , was criticized ) . On @-@ Air On @-@ Soaps commented , " Surviving probably one of the worst on @-@ screen character assassinations in soap opera history , which virtually left viewers wondering , what the heck are the writers doing to the integrity of Sharon Newman , the once befallen heroine of Genoa City ? , Case rebounded by making her performances noteworthy , no matter what the creative teams decided to do to her character . " This led Soap Opera Uncensored to name her Entertainer of the Year in January 2013 . In December 2015 , Soap Opera Digest praised her portrayal of the character 's " emotional roller coaster " and remarked , " Sharon Case has a knack for bringing emotional depth and reality to even the most outrageously soapy situations " . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Sharon Newman is featured on the cover of the book You Know Your Life is a Soap Opera If ... ( 2007 ) by author Gerry Waggett . In November 2014 , the character appeared in a comedic skit on the HBO television program Last Week Tonight with John Oliver . 
 = Greek ironclad Hydra = 
 Hydra ( Greek : <unk> ) was an ironclad warship of the Greek Navy , named for Hydra , one of the Saronic Gulf islands which played a key role in the war at sea during the Greek War of Independence . The lead ship of her class of ironclads , she was ordered in 1885 in response to a crisis in the Balkans and Ottoman naval expansion . The ship was launched in 1889 and delivered to Greece by 1892 . She was armed with a main battery of three 10 @.@ 8 in ( 270 mm ) guns and five 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) guns , and had a top speed of 17 kn ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 Hydra and her sisters saw heavy service with the Greek Navy . They participated in the Greco – Turkish War in 1897 until the Great Powers intervened and prevented the Greek Navy from capitalizing on their superiority over the Ottoman Navy . Hydra saw action in the First Balkan War at the Naval Battle of Elli and was present at the Naval Battle of Lemnos , but was too slow to actively engage the Ottoman forces . She did not see action during World War I , and was reduced to a gunnery training ship after the end of the war . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1929 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In 1885 , Greece ordered three new ironclads of the Hydra class . Hydra was ordered from the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire shipyard in St. Nazaire , France during the premiership of Charilaos Trikoupis . The ship , named for the island of Hydra , was launched in 1889 , and by 1892 , she and her sister @-@ ships Spetsai and Psara were delivered to the Greek fleet . The ship was 334 feet 8 inches ( 102 @.@ 01 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 51 ft 10 in ( 15 @.@ 80 m ) and a mean draft of 18 ft ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) . She displaced 4 @,@ 808 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 732 long tons ; 5 @,@ 300 short tons ) as built . She was powered by a pair of steam engines of unknown type ; they were rated at 6 @,@ 700 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 000 kW ) and provided a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 500 t ( 490 long tons ; 550 short tons ) . 
 Hydra 's main battery consisted of three 10 @.@ 8 in ( 270 mm ) guns . Two guns were mounted forward in barbettes on either side of the forward superstructure ; these were L / 34 guns . The third gun , a L / 28 gun , was placed in a turret aft . The secondary battery consisted of four 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) L / 36 guns in casemates were mounted below the forward main battery , and a fifth 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch gun was placed on the centerline on the same deck as the main battery . A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included four 3 @.@ 4 in ( 86 mm ) L / 22 guns , four 3 @-@ pounder guns , four 1 @-@ pounder guns , and six 1 @-@ pounder revolver cannons . The ship was also armed with three 14 in ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes . The ship was armored with a mix of Creusot and compound steel . The main belt was 12 in ( 300 mm ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The ship saw limited action in the Greco – Turkish War in 1897 , as the Royal Hellenic Navy was unable to make use of its superiority over the Ottoman Navy . The Ottoman Navy had remained in port during the conflict , but a major naval intervention of the Great Powers prevented the Greeks from capitalizing on their superiority . In 1897 – 1900 , Hydra and her sister @-@ ships were partially rearmed ; Hydra was modified at the La Seyne shipyard . Their small @-@ caliber guns were replaced with one 3 @.@ 9 in ( 99 mm ) gun forward , eight 9 @-@ pounder guns , four 3 @-@ pounders , and ten 1 @-@ pounder revolver cannon . One of the 14 @-@ inch torpedo tubes was replaced with a 15 in ( 380 mm ) weapon . In 1908 – 1910 , the old 5 @.@ 9 in guns were replaced with new , longer L / 45 models . 
 The Balkan League , of which Greece was a member , declared war on the Ottoman Empire in October 1912 . Two months later , the Ottoman fleet attacked the Greek navy , in an attempt to disrupt the naval blockade surrounding the Dardanelles . The Ottoman fleet , which included Turgut Reis , Barbaros Hayreddin , two outdated ironclad battleships , nine destroyers and six torpedo boats , sortied from the Dardanelles at 9 : 30 . The smaller ships remained at the mouth of the straits while the battleships sailed north , remaining near to the coast . The Greek flotilla , which included the armored cruiser Georgios Averof and Hydra and her sisters , had been sailing from the island of Imbros to the patrol line outside the straits . When the Ottomans were sighted , the Greeks altered course to the northeast , in order to block the advance of their opponents . In the ensuing Naval Battle of Elli , the Ottoman ships opened fire first , at 9 : 50 , from a range of about 15 @,@ 000 yards ; the Greeks returned fire ten minutes later , by which time the range had decreased significantly to 8 @,@ 500 yards . At 10 : 04 , the Ottoman ships completed a 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed their course , and steamed for the safety of the straits in a disorganized withdrawal . Within an hour , the routed Ottoman ships had withdrawn into the Dardanelles . 
 The Naval Battle of Lemnos resulted from an Ottoman plan to lure the faster Georgios Averof away from the Dardanelles . The protected cruiser Hamidiye evaded the Greek blockade and broke out into the Aegean sea ; the assumption was that the Greeks would dispatch Georgios Averof to hunt down Hamidiye . Despite the threat to Greek lines of communication posed by the cruiser , the Greek commander refused to detach Georgios Averof from her position . Georgios Averof appeared approximately 12 miles from Lemnos ; when the powerful Greek ship was spotted , the Ottomans turned to retreat with Georgios Averof in pursuit . She scored several hits on the fleeing Ottoman ships before breaking off the chase . Hydra and her sisters were too slow to keep up with Georgios Averof , and played no part in the engagement . 
 By 1914 , Hydra had been withdrawn from active duty to serve as a gunnery training ship . At the outbreak of World War I in at the end of July 1914 , Greece 's pro @-@ German monarch , Constantine I , decided to remain neutral . The Entente powers landed troops in Salonika in 1915 , which was a source of tension between France and Greece . In October 1916 , Hydra and a pair of torpedo boats defected to the Venizelist faction in the National Schism . Ultimately , the French seized the Greek Navy on 19 October ; the heavy units of the Greek fleet were disarmed and placed in reserve for the remainder of the war . Hydra was decommissioned in 1918 and stricken from the naval register the next year . She was to be sold for scrapping in 1921 , but instead returned to her role as a naval artillery school from 1922 until 1929 when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = Battle of Sio = 
 The Battle of Sio , fought between December 1943 and March 1944 , was the break @-@ out and pursuit phase of General Douglas MacArthur 's Huon Peninsula campaign , part of the New Guinea campaign of World War II . 
 After the defeat of the Japanese in the Battle of Sattelberg , Australian Army forces broke through the Japanese positions around Finschhafen . Constant pressure from US Navy PT boats , Australian land forces and Allied aircraft brought the Japanese logistical system to the brink of collapse , resulting in disease , malnutrition and privation for the Japanese soldiers . Meanwhile , the Allied supply system grappled with the problems of terrain and climate , particularly inclement weather and rough monsoonal seas that hampered and occasionally prevented delivery of supplies by sea . 
 Australian and Papuan troops advanced along the coast of the Huon Peninsula , using infantry , tanks , and air strikes against the Japanese positions , which were generally sited at creek crossings in the jungle . The advancing infantry kept strictly within range of the supporting artillery , which was liberally employed in the early stages of the operation . Using tactics that exploited the firepower of Australian artillery and armour , the Australian and Papuan troops inflicted heavy and disproportionate casualties on the Japanese as they advanced , ultimately linking up with the American forces at Saidor . Hundreds of Japanese soldiers were killed ; thousands more died from disease , malnutrition , exhaustion and suicide . The Allies failed to seize the opportunity to completely destroy the Japanese forces . 
 During the advance , Australian troops captured Japanese cryptographic materials . This had an important effect on the subsequent course of the war against Japan in the South West Pacific , as it permitted codebreakers in Australia and the United States to read Japanese Army messages on a much greater scale than previously . 
 = = Background = = 
 General Douglas MacArthur 's Operation Cartwheel began with spectacular victories in the landing at Lae and the landing at Nadzab but then faltered in the face of inclement weather , unfavourable terrain , and — above all — tenacious and aggressive Japanese opposition on land and in the air . The initiative passed to Major General Hatazō Adachi 's Eighteenth Army which launched a series of counter @-@ attacks against Major General George Wootten 's 9th Division in the Battle of Finschhafen . At the Battle of Sattelberg , Wootten finally inflicted a crushing defeat on Adachi . 
 Although beaten , the Japanese did not leave the area . Lieutenant General Shigeru Katagiri , the commander of the Japanese 20th Division , ordered the 80th Infantry Regiment to hold the Wareo area to protect the withdrawal of the 79th Infantry Regiment and other units . The 2nd Battalion , 238th Infantry Regiment was to act as a rearguard on the coast . Lieutenant General Frank Berryman , the commander of Australian II Corps , now urged Wootten to commence a coastal advance to cut the Japanese supply lines and force Adachi to retreat from the Huon Peninsula if he were not already doing so . Wootten took a more cautious approach . The Battle of Wareo proved that the Japanese intended to defend the area . After a fierce fight , Wootten managed to drive the Japanese from the high ground around Sattelberg and Gusika . In early December , Adachi ordered all his troops to withdraw to Sio . Wareo was captured by the Australians on 8 December and the last Japanese rearguards left the area on 15 December . Meanwhile , Berryman 's coastal advance had commenced on 5 December . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Offensive against the Japanese supply system = = = 
 Early in October 1943 , a special staff was established at II Corps Headquarters to study the Japanese supply system . It did not include an officer with experience in maintaining a large force over a native carrier line , and therefore took time to realise that the Japanese force could not be maintained over an inland track , as was first assumed . Operations soon confirmed that the Japanese were dependent on a coastal supply line . During the Battle of Sattelberg , the Allies set out to cut this supply line . A three @-@ pronged approach was taken : 
 Collecting centres for native foodstuffs and tracks leading from the coast were bombed by the US Fifth Air Force . This reduced food stocks available to the Japanese , and also drove away the native carriers that the Japanese depended on to carry their supplies up from the coast . 
 PT boats of Task Group 70 @.@ 1 attempted to interdict barge traffic along the coast by night , while Fifth Air Force fighters conducted sweeps for barges by day . 
 The land forces attempted to physically cut the Japanese supply lines . The 9th Division captured Pabu , thereby cutting the most convenient inland track , while the landing at Long Island occupied an important barge staging area . 
 By December , the pitiful condition of Japanese prisoners confirmed for the Australians that " the Japanese logistic system was in the final stages of breakdown " . Between 9 and 13 December , PT boats sank 23 barges , most of them south of Sio . On 7 January , the PT boats also attacked a submarine . No less than twelve barges were destroyed on the night of 8 January , one of which was loaded with ammunition and another with around 70 troops . On 9 January , PT boats attacked a group of six barges , which attempted to fight back . One barge was seen to sink . Another patrol engaged eight barges and destroyed two . A third patrol found six barges on a beach and destroyed them . Then on 10 January , three PT boats sank three troop @-@ carrying barges , taking one Japanese prisoner . The same night , two barges were also sunk north of Sio Island . When General Berryman saw Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid , the commander of the Allied Naval Forces , on 14 December , he made a point of congratulating him on the work his PT boats were doing . 
 Lieutenant General Tsutomu <unk> , Chief of Staff of the Japanese Eighteenth Army recalled : 
 At this time the air at 20th Division <unk> was one of fatigue . The troops , short of food and ammunition , were searching for vegetables left in the native gardens around them and were so hungry they were eating banana and pawpaw roots . Since these abandoned gardens were right in the front line or inside the enemy 's positions , the troops penetrated the enemy positions to obtain vegetables . And they fought exposed to the enemy shells , committing their bodies to trenches in which the rain of days after days had accumulated . 
 So the fact that 20th Division was not able to fulfil the idea of its activities were not 20th Division 's fault , but ours . With this poverty of supply it made no difference how brave they were ; it was a case of " An army marches on its stomach " . 
 <unk> , as an emergency measure , the Army began to use auxiliary fishing boats from Hansa for transport round the coast of New Guinea ; from Hansa , via Karka , <unk> , Long [ Island ... ] the transport began and so a direct supply line to Sio was established . 
 This daring transport was conspicuously successful and brought great rejoicing to the officers and men of 20th Division . It was amazing the courageous deeds these fishing fleets did in the skilful hands of the shipping engineers . With no training , no equipment the captains and crews of these fishing boats braved the front line of the fighting and all the dangerous places , saying , " We are immortal . Bring on your arrows or your guns . " When attacked by enemy aircraft , they bravely engaged them and miraculously shot them down . However , this secret transport did not long remain hidden from enemy eyes . With the passage of time they were spotted , and their bases were demolished by bombing and the transport unfortunately ceased . 
 = = = Tactics and logistics = = = 
 The main Australian advance was by infantry @-@ tank @-@ engineer teams moving along the coastal tracks . Japanese positions were generally sited at creek crossings in the jungle . The advancing infantry kept strictly within range of the supporting artillery , except for short periods during the latter stages of the operation when Japanese opposition was negligible and the difficulty of moving the artillery forward quickly was too great . A secondary outflanking movement was made inland , over the higher ground , which was usually coral cliffs covered by kunai grass and rising as high as 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) . Since the Japanese intent was to delay rather than fight to the death , a threat to their escape route usually prompted a withdrawal . When this did not occur , the position was reduced by a combination of manoeuvre and tank , mortar , and artillery fire . During the early part of the advance , 4 @,@ 700 rounds were fired in one day ; but during the entire 5th Division advance from Sio to Saidor , only 30 rounds were fired . The advance was made in a series of bounds , the objective of which was usually to secure sheltered beachheads . 
 Allied supply was entirely by sea . Amphibian scouts from the US 532nd Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment ( EBSR ) of the US 2nd Engineer Special Brigade , wearing Australian uniforms , advanced with the infantry and reconnoitred beaches from the landward side as they were secured . If a beach looked suitable , a second reconnaissance was made from the sea . Once a beach was selected , a shore party was brought in by landing craft to set up an administrative area . Engineers improved the coastal track to enable supplies to units moving along it to be brought up by jeeps but supplies for units moving inland over the high ground had to be brought by native carriers . Artillery guns were brought forward over the tracks , or else were moved by Landing Craft Mechanised ( LCMs ) of the 532nd EBSR . Tanks normally moved along the tracks but used LCMs to bypass obstacles . As the advance continued , new beachheads were opened up while rearward ones were closed . The advance was halted on occasion to allow for the guns to be brought forward or sufficient supplies to be accumulated at the forward beachhead . 
 The major problem was the weather . The monsoon caused rough seas that precluded the use of the small Landing Craft , Vehicle , Personnel ( LCVPs ) and restricted the operations of the larger LCMs . Because of the extremely rough seas — the most difficult that the 532nd EBSR had ever encountered — most supply missions were by night when tidal conditions were most favourable . Wootten insisted that at least seven days ' supplies be available in forward areas in case the weather prevented the LCMs from running . II Corps made available two trawlers , manned by the 1st Water Transport Group , to deliver rations . The Australian Army also moved supplies by DUKWs . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Fortification Point = = = 
 Wootten designated Brigadier C. R. V. Edgar 's 4th Infantry Brigade , a Militia formation , for the initial phase of the coastal advance , reserving his veteran Australian Imperial Force brigades for the Battle of Wareo . The brigade consisted of the 22nd and 29th / 46th Infantry Battalions from Victoria and the 37th / 52nd Infantry Battalion from Tasmania . Each battalion was allotted a team of advisors from the 9th Division . Under Edgar 's command was C Squadron , 1st Tank Battalion , with seven Matilda tanks , 9th Platoon , C Company , Papuan Infantry Battalion , and detachments from the 532nd EBSR , Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit ( ANGAU ) , Australian Army Service Corps ( <unk> ) and Australian Army Medical Corps ( <unk> ) . In support were the sappers of the 2 / 7th Field Company and the 24 25 @-@ pounders of the 2 / 6th Field Regiment . In case Edgar got into trouble , the 20th Infantry Brigade was in reserve , on six hours notice . 
 To support the advance , a beach maintenance area was prepared at a beach at the mouth of the Kalueng River , which involved removing underwater and landward obstacles . So that the tanks and jeeps could immediately support the advance , a bridge was required over the Kalueng River . A preliminary operation by the 22nd Infantry Battalion on 3 December 1943 secured a crossing area and a log bridge was constructed . The operation jumped off on 5 December , with the 29th / 46th Infantry Battalion passing through the bridgehead established by the 22nd . It soon came under sporadic enemy fire , and a tank was disabled by a land mine . In the face of mounting opposition , the advance was halted near the lagoon . It resumed the next day , and the Japanese withdrew after an artillery bombardment , their orders being " while avoiding any decisive engagement " to " carry out successful resistance to try to delay the enemy advance " . This became the pattern , with the Japanese preferring to withdraw rather than suffer heavy casualties . On 10 December , Edgar brought all three of his battalions into the line and by 14 December they were closing in on Lakona , a key position on the 20th Division 's retreat route . 
 The tanks had difficulty keeping up with the advance . One obstacle was mines . On the first day , the 2 / 7th Field Company lifted fourteen mines but a tractor broke a track running over a mine . On 7 December , two more tanks were damaged by mines , one beyond repair . The sappers then cut a new track which they <unk> . To support the attack on Lakona , the tanks had to cross a creek with steep coral banks , swollen by a torrential downpour . While efforts were made to bring up a compressor , tanks fired into banks and holes were packed with explosives and detonated . On the evening of 16 December , the infantry were joined by five Matilda tanks , and overran the Japanese positions . They counted 47 Japanese dead ; and killed another 17 in mopping @-@ up operations the next day . On 20 December , aided by four Matilda tanks and 750 rounds from the 25 @-@ pounders , the 4th Infantry Brigade occupied the Fortification Point area . Between 5 and 20 December , the 4th Infantry Brigade reported 65 killed and 136 wounded . Japanese casualties were 420 killed and 136 found dead , victims of disease , malnutrition and suicide . Only six Japanese prisoners were taken . 
 = = = Sio = = = 
 On 21 December 1943 , the 20th Infantry Brigade passed through the 4th Infantry Brigade and initiated the second stage of the pursuit . Generals Blamey , Berryman and Wootten visited the acting brigade commander , Lieutenant Colonel N. W. Simpson , and emphasised that the brigade was to minimise casualties where possible by employing artillery and tanks . That afternoon , the lead company of the 2 / 13th Infantry Battalion reached Hubika . The battalion diarist recorded : 
 Hubika Creek was an indescribable scene . Naked enemy dead everywhere . Evidently used as a dressing station . Forty dead in one small cave . None had been buried . The area was foul and nauseating . 
 A halt was called for Christmas while supplies were brought up . Units had a rest day . Most dined on turkey , ham , roast potatoes and Christmas pudding , and Christmas services were held . General Blamey insisted that Christmas fare be available to all units , and extraordinary efforts were made to carry out his directive . In one instance , a Piper Cub of No. 4 Squadron RAAF dropped Christmas fare to a Papuan Company on a long range patrol . The advance resumed on 27 December , preceded by air strikes by 18 B @-@ 25 Mitchell and 12 Boston bombers . The 2 / 15th Infantry Battalion and tanks of A Squadron , 1st Tank Battalion took the lead on 31 December ; they reached <unk> on 2 January 1944 . This had a sheltered beach which served as a maintenance area . That day , the American landing at Saidor placed a large force across the Japanese escape route . 
 Before moving over the mountains , the 20th Division headquarters elected to destroy its cryptographic materials rather than carry them . As the wet weather made burning them page by page a slow and difficult process , and a fire might attract the attention of the Allied Air Forces , someone decided to simply bury them in a steel trunk in a stream bed . An Australian sapper checking the stream bed for booby traps with a metal detector discovered it , and it was dug up in the belief that it was a mine . An intelligence officer recognised the contents as code books and soon it was on its way to the Central Bureau in Brisbane . There , the pages were carefully dried out and photographed . On 4 February 1944 , Central Bureau codebreakers decrypted a thirteen @-@ part message that laid out the decisions reached at a conference of high @-@ ranking Japanese officers . Copies of the material were quickly sent to Arlington Hall . In January 1944 , Arlington Hall had decrypted 1 @,@ 846 Japanese army messages . In March 1944 , with the Sio code books in hand , it decrypted 36 @,@ 000 messages . 
 On 11 January a platoon of the 2 / 17th Infantry Battalion replaced a rope ladder , and after climbing it and two wooden ladders reached an area atop a cliff which had once been a Japanese headquarters . It would have been a formidable position if defended , but it was not . The main body of the battalion followed the next day . The <unk> River was crossed in small boats left behind by the Japanese on 13 January and it entered Nambariwa , where one prisoner was taken , six Japanese were shot , and nine found dead . On 15 January , Sio was taken . The Sio @-@ Nambariwa area was found to have been the principal Japanese supply area , and a large number of fuel , supply , and stores dumps were found . During the advance from Fortification Point to Sio , 303 Japanese had been killed or found dead , and 22 captured . The 20th Infantry Brigade had lost 3 killed and 13 wounded , but 958 had been evacuated sick , mostly with malaria , and an epidemic of dengue had also taken its toll . Large quantities of Japanese equipment had been captured , including six 75 mm guns , three 37 mm guns and three 20 mm guns . 
 = = = Saidor = = = 
 At 1800 on 20 January 1944 , the headquarters of Major General A. H. Ramsay 's 5th Division , which had come up from Lae , replaced that of the 9th Division . At the same time the 8th Infantry Brigade replaced the 20th . The 8th Infantry Brigade , which had spent much of the war on garrison duty in Western Australia , began departing Cairns on 10 January . The original intention had been for it to go to Lae to relieve the 29th Infantry Brigade , which had fought in the Salamaua @-@ Lae campaign , but in December it was decided to ship it directly to Finschhafen . The brigade contained three infantry battalions , the 4th , 30th and 35th , all from New South Wales . It also still had the support of the 2 / 12th Field Regiment , 532nd EBSR , and A Company , Papuan Infantry Battalion . The brigade suffered its first casualties on the night of 21 / 22 January in a friendly fire incident , which was a common occurrence with units inexperienced in jungle warfare . Two Australians were killed and two wounded by their own comrades . 
 On 22 January a native reported seeing seven Japanese in the hills south west of Sio and a patrol was sent out under Corporal Bengari to investigate . On arriving in the vicinity on 24 January , a local reported that another 22 Japanese had arrived . The next morning , Bengari and his five companions ambushed the Japanese and killed them all before they could fire a shot . Wirraway and Boomerang aircraft of No. 4 Squadron RAAF scouted ahead of the advance . Its aerial reconnaissance work let the Australians and Papuans know where opposition could be expected , thereby speeding up the advance . The pilots noted Japanese parachutes , signs that the Japanese were receiving supplies by air . On 4 February , the Australians were also forced onto air supply , as swollen rivers washed out a number of bridges . 
 Each day the Papuans killed 12 to 15 Japanese , but not until 8 February was the Japanese rearguard encountered at Weber Point and a formal attack made . Five Japanese were killed . In all , 53 Japanese were killed and four captured that day . Two Australians were wounded . The next day another 61 Japanese were killed and 9 captured , this time without any Australian casualties . On 10 February , the 30th Infantry Battalion encountered two American soldiers at <unk> , thereby linking up with the American force at Saidor . 
 The 8th Infantry Brigade now began to mop up the area . On 18 February , the 35th Infantry Battalion attacked a Japanese force near <unk> , killing 40 . Finding a force of about 100 Japanese at nearby <unk> , they attacked , killing another 52 Japanese for the loss of one man wounded , while the Papuans on their flanks killed another 51 , of whom 43 were accounted for by Corporal Bengari and two other Papuans . The next day , the Papuans found and killed another 39 Japanese in the vicinity . At <unk> , the Australians and Papuans also found evidence that the Japanese had resorted to cannibalism . In the period of 20 January – 1 March 1944 , 734 Japanese were killed , 1 @,@ 775 found dead and 48 were captured . Australian casualties came to four killed and six wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Both sides managed to accomplish their objectives ; the Japanese withdrew , while the Australians exacted a terrible toll . The balance of losses was overwhelmingly against the Japanese , both in terms of men and equipment . It seems that only about 4 @,@ 300 of the 7 @,@ 000 troops under the command of the Japanese 20th Division who had originally been forward of Sio survived the withdrawal , and many of them were rendered ineffective through wounds , sickness , malnutrition and exhaustion . The opportunity to destroy the Japanese 51st Division was not seized . These troops lived to fight the Americans at the Battle of Driniumor River later in the year , and the Australians in the Aitape – Wewak campaign in 1945 . On the other hand , the new base at Finschhafen was no longer threatened by the Japanese , and became an important staging point for the Western New Guinea campaign . The capture of the Japanese ciphers at Sio allowed General MacArthur to carry out Operations Reckless and Persecution with a plan based upon sound intelligence rather than just his own intuition . 
 = Lord Howe Island = 
 Lord Howe Island ( / <unk> / , local / <unk> / ; formerly Lord Howe 's Island ) is an irregularly crescent @-@ shaped volcanic remnant in the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand , 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) directly east of mainland Port Macquarie , and about 900 kilometres ( 560 mi ) south @-@ west of Norfolk Island . It is about 10 km long and between 2 @.@ 0 km and 0 @.@ 3 km wide with an area of 14 @.@ 55 km2 , though just 3 @.@ 98 km2 of that comprises the low @-@ lying developed part of the island . Along the west coast there is a sandy semi @-@ enclosed sheltered coral reef lagoon . Most of the population lives in the north , while the south is dominated by forested hills rising to the highest point on the island , Mount Gower ( 875 m or 2 @,@ 871 ft ) . The Lord Howe Island Group comprises 28 islands , islets and rocks . Apart from Lord Howe Island itself the most notable of these is the volcanic and uninhabited Ball 's Pyramid about 23 kilometres ( 14 mi ) to the south @-@ east of Howe . To the north lies the Admiralty Group , a cluster of seven small uninhabited islands . 
 The first reported sighting of Lord Howe Island took place on 17 February 1788 , when Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball , commander of the Armed Tender HMS Supply was en route from Botany Bay to found a penal settlement on Norfolk Island . On the return journey Ball sent a party ashore on Lord Howe Island to claim it as a British possession . It subsequently became a provisioning port for the whaling industry , and was permanently settled in June 1834 . When whaling declined , the 1880s saw the beginning of the worldwide export of the endemic kentia palms , which remains a key component of the Island 's economy . The other continuing industry , tourism , began after World War II ended in 1945 . 
 The Lord Howe Island Group is part of the state of New South Wales and for legal purposes is regarded as an unincorporated area administered by the Lord Howe Island Board which reports to the New South Wales Minister for Environment and Heritage . The island 's standard time zone is UTC + 10 : 30 , or UTC + 11 when daylight saving time applies . The currency is the Australian dollar . Commuter airlines provide flights to Sydney , Brisbane , and Port Macquarie . 
 UNESCO records the Lord Howe Island Group as a World Heritage Site of global natural significance . Most of the island is virtually untouched forest , with many of the plants and animals found nowhere else in the world . Other natural attractions include the diversity of the landscapes , the variety of upper mantle and oceanic basalts , the world 's southernmost barrier coral reef , nesting seabirds , and the rich historical and cultural heritage . The Lord Howe Island Act of 1981 established a " Permanent Park Preserve " ( covering about 70 per cent of the island ) . The surrounding waters are a protected region designated the Lord Howe Island Marine Park . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1788 – 1834 : First European visits = = = 
 It appears that , prior to European discovery and settlement , Lord Howe Island was uninhabited , and unknown to Polynesian peoples of the South Pacific . The first reported European sighting of Lord Howe Island was on 17 February 1788 by Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball , commander of the Armed Tender HMS Supply ( the oldest and smallest of the First Fleet ships ) , which was on its way from Botany Bay with a cargo of nine male and six female convicts to found a penal settlement on Norfolk Island . On the return journey of 13 March 1788 Ball observed Ball 's Pyramid and sent a party ashore on Lord Howe Island to claim it as a British possession . Numerous turtles and tame birds were captured and returned to Sydney . Ball named Mount Lidgbird and Balls Pyramid after himself and the main island after Richard Howe , First Earl Howe , who was First Lord of the Admiralty at the time . 
 Many names on the island date from this time , and also from May of the same year when the island was visited by four ships of the First Fleet , HMS Supply , Charlotte , Lady Penrhyn and Scarborough when much of the plant and animal life was first recorded in the journals and diaries of visitors like David Blackburn , Master of the Supply , and Arthur Bowes Smyth , surgeon of the Lady Penrhyn . <unk> sketches of native birds including the Lord Howe woodhen ( Gallirallus sylvestris ) , white gallinule ( Porphyrio albus ) , and Lord Howe pigeon ( Columba vitiensis <unk> ) , were made by artists including George Raper and John Hunter . As the latter two birds were soon hunted to extinction these paintings are their only remaining pictorial record . Over the next three years the Supply returned to the island several times in search of turtles and the island was also visited by ships of the Second and Third Fleets . Between 1789 and 1791 the Pacific whale industry was born with British and American whaling ships chasing sperm whales ( Physeter macrocephalus ) along the equator to the Gilbert and Ellice archipelago , then south into Australian and New Zealand waters . The American fleet numbered 675 ships and Lord Howe was located in a region known as the Middle Ground noted for sperm whales ( Physeter macrocephalus ) and southern right whales ( Eubalaena australis ) . 
 The island was subsequently visited by many government and whaling ships sailing between New South Wales and Norfolk Island and across the Pacific , including many from the American whaling fleet , so its reputation as a provisioning port preceded settlement , some ships leaving goats and pigs on the island as food for future visitors . Between July and October 1791 the Third Fleet ships arrived at Sydney and within days the <unk> was being reconstructed for a future in the lucrative whaling industry . Whale oil was to become New Holland 's ( Australia ) most profitable export until the 1830s , and it was the whaling industry that shaped Lord Howe Island 's early history . 
 = = = 1834 – 1841 : Settlement = = = 
 Permanent settlement on Lord Howe was established in June 1834 when the British whaling barque Caroline , sailing from New Zealand and commanded by Captain John <unk> , landed at what is now known as Blinky Beach . They left three men , George Ashdown , James Bishop and ( unknown ) Chapman , who were employed by a Sydney whaling firm to establish a supply station . The men were initially to provide meat by fishing and by raising pigs and goats from feral stock . They landed with ( or acquired from a visiting ship ) their Maori wives and two Maori boys . Huts were built in an area now known as Old Settlement which had a supply of fresh water , and a garden was established west of Blinky Beach . 
 This was a cashless society ; the settlers bartered their stores of water , wood , vegetables , meat , fish and bird feathers for clothes , tea , sugar , tools , tobacco and other commodities not available on the island – but it was the whalers ’ valuation that had to be accepted . These first settlers eventually left the island when they were bought out for £ 350 in September 1841 by businessmen Owen Poole and Richard Dawson ( later joined by John Foulis ) whose employees and others then settled on the island . 
 = = = 1842 – 1860 : Trading provisions = = = 
 The new business was advertised and ships trading between Sydney and the New Hebrides ( Vanuatu ) would also put into the island . Rover 's Bride , a small cutter , became the first regular trading vessel . Between 1839 and 1859 between five and twelve ships made landfall each year , occasionally closer to 20 with seven or eight at a time laying off the reef . In 1842 and 1844 the first children were born on the island . Then in 1847 Poole , Dawson and Foulis , bitter at failing to obtain a land lease from the New South Wales Government , abandoned the settlement although three of their employees remained . One family , the Andrews , after finding some onions on the beach in 1848 , cultivated them as the " Lord Howe red onion " which was popular in the Southern Hemisphere for about 30 years until the crop was attacked by smut disease . 
 In 1849 there were just 11 people living on the island but it was not long before the island farms expanded . In the 1850s gold was discovered on mainland Australia where crews would abandon their ships , preferring to dig for gold than to risk a life at sea . As a consequence many vessels avoided the mainland and Lord Howe Island experienced an increasing trade which peaked between 1855 and 1857 . In 1851 about 16 people were living on the island . Vegetable crops now included potatoes , carrots , maize , pumpkin , taro , watermelon – even grapes , <unk> and coffee . Between 1851 and 1853 there were several aborted proposals by the NSW Government to establish a penal settlement on the island . 
 From 1851 to 1854 Henry Denham captain of HMS Herald , which was on a scientific expedition to the southwest Pacific ( 1852 – 1856 ) , completed the island 's first hydrographic survey . On board were three Scottish biologists , William Milne ( a gardener @-@ botanist from the Edinburgh Botanic Garden ) , John Macgillivray ( naturalist ) who collected fish and plant specimens , and Assistant Surgeon and zoologist Denis Macdonald . Together these men established much basic information on the geology , flora and fauna of the island . 
 In about 1853 a further three settlers arrived on the American whaling barque Belle , captained by Ichabod Handy . As well as George Campbell ( who died in 1856 ) and Jack Brian ( who left the island in 1854 ) , the third , Nathan Thompson , brought three women ( called Botanga , <unk> , and a girl named Bogue ) from the Gilbert Islands . When his first wife Botanga died he then married Bogue . Thompson was the first resident to build a substantial house in the 1860s from mainland cedar washed up on the beach . Most of the residents with island ancestors have blood relations or are connected by marriage to Thompson and his second wife Bogue . 
 In 1855 the island was officially designated as part of New South Wales by the Constitution Act . 
 = = = 1861 – 1890 : Scientific expeditions = = = 
 From the early 1860s whaling declined rapidly with the increasing use of petroleum , the onset of the Californian goldrush , and the American Civil War – with unfortunate consequences for the island . To explore alternative means of income Thompson , in 1867 , purchased the Sylph which was the first local vessel to trade with Sydney ( mainly pigs and onions ) . It anchored in deep water at what is now Sylph 's Hole off Old Settlement Beach , but was eventually tragically lost at sea in 1873 which added to the woes of the island at this time . 
 In 1869 the island was visited by a magistrate P. Cloete aboard the Thetis investigating a possible murder . He was accompanied by Charles Moore , Director of the Botanic Gardens , Sydney and his assistant , William Carron who forwarded plant specimens to Ferdinand Mueller at the botanic gardens in Melbourne who , by 1875 , had catalogued and published 195 species . Also on the ship was William Fitzgerald a surveyor and Mr Masters from the Australian Museum . Together they surveyed the island with the findings published in 1870 when the population was listed as 35 people , their 13 houses built of split palm battens thatched on the roof and sides with palm leaves . At about this time there began a downturn of trade with the demise of the whaling industry and sometimes six or twelve months passed without a vessel calling . With the provisions rotting in the storehouses the older families lost interest in market gardening . 
 From 1860 to 1872 forty @-@ three ships had collected provisions , but from 1873 to 1887 there were fewer than a dozen . This prompted some activity from the mainland . In 1876 a government report on the island was submitted by surveyor William Fitzgerald based on a visit in the same year . He suggested that coffee be grown but the kentia palm was already catching world attention . In 1878 the island was declared a Forest Reserve and Captain Richard Armstrong became the first resident government administrator . He encouraged schools , tree @-@ planting and the palm trade , dynamited the north passage to the lagoon , and built roads . He also managed to upset the residents , and parliamentarian John Wilson was sent from the mainland in April 1882 to investigate the situation . With Wilson was a team of scientists that included H. Wilkinson from the Mines Department , W. Condor from the Survey Department , J. Duff from the Sydney Botanical Gardens and A. Morton from the Australian Museum . J. Sharkey from the Government Printing Office took the earliest known photographs of the Island and its residents . A full account of the island appeared in the report from this visit , published as " Lord Howe Island 1882 " , which recommended that Armstrong be replaced . Meanwhile , the population had increased considerably and included 29 children ; the report recommended that a schoolmaster be appointed . This study sealed a lasting relationship with three scientific organisations , the Australian Museum , Sydney Royal Botanic Gardens and Kew Royal Botanic Gardens . 
 = = = 1890 – 1999 = = = 
 In 1883 the company Burns Philp started a regular shipping service and the number of tourists gradually increased . By 1932 , with the regular tourist run of SS Morinda , tourism became the second biggest source of external income after palm sales to Europe . Morinda was replaced by Makambo in 1932 , and she in turn by other vessels . The service continues into the present day with the fortnightly Island Trader service from Port Macquarie . 
 The palm trade began in the 1880s when the lowland kentia palm ( Howea forsteriana ) was first exported to Britain , Europe and America but the trade was only placed on a firm financial footing when the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery was formed in 1906 ( see below ) . 
 The first plane to appear on the island was in 1931 when Francis Chichester alighted on the lagoon in a Gipsy Moth converted into a floatplane . It was damaged there in an overnight storm but repaired with the assistance of islanders and then took off successfully nine weeks later for a flight to Sydney . After World War II , in 1947 , tourists arrived on Catalina and then four @-@ engined Sandringham flying boats of Ansett Flying Boat Services operating out of Rose Bay , Sydney , and landing on the lagoon , the journey taking about 3 @.@ 5 hours . When the Lord Howe Island Airport was completed in 1974 , the seaplanes were eventually replaced with Qantaslink twin @-@ engined turbo @-@ prop Dash 8 @-@ 200 aircraft . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In 2002 , the Royal Navy destroyer HMS Nottingham struck Wolf Rock , a reef at Lord Howe Island , and almost sank . In recent times tourism has increased and the government of New South Wales has been increasingly involved with issues of conservation . 
 On 17 October 2011 , a supply ship , M / V Island Trader with twenty tons of fuel ran aground in the lagoon . The ship refloated at high tide with no loss of crew or cargo . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As at the 2011 census , the resident population was 360 people and the number of tourists was not allowed to exceed 400 . Early settlers were European and American whalers and many of their offspring have remained on the island for more than six generations . Residents are now involved with the kentia palm industry , tourism , retail , some fishing and farming . In 1876 it was observed that on Sundays although there was a suspension of games and labour , there were no religious services . Nowadays , in an area known locally as ' Church Paddock ' , there are Anglican , Catholic and Adventist churches , the religious affiliations on the island being 30 % Anglican , 22 % no religion , 18 % Catholic and 12 % Seventh Day Adventist . There is about an equal division of the sexes with 47 % of the population in the age group 25 – 54 and 92 % holding Australian citizenship . 
 = = Governance and land tenure = = 
 Official control of Lord Howe Island lay initially with the British Crown until it passed to New South Wales in 1855 , although until at least 1876 the islanders lived in " a relatively harmonious and self @-@ regulating community " . In 1878 Richard Armstrong was appointed administrator when the NSW Parliament declared the island a Forest Reserve . But as a result of ill feeling , and an enquiry , he was eventually removed from office on 31 May 1882 ( he returned later that year though to view the transit of Venus from present @-@ day Transit Hill ) . After his removal the island was administered by four successive magistrates until 1913 when a Sydney @-@ based Board was formed until 1948 when a resident superintendent was appointed . In 1913 the three @-@ man Lord Howe Island Board of Control was established , mostly to regulate the palm seed industry , but also administering the affairs of the island from Sydney until the present Lord Howe Island Board was set up in 1954 . 
 The Lord Howe Island Board is a NSW Statutory Authority established under the Lord Howe Island Act , 1953 , to administer the island as part of the state of New South Wales . It reports directly to the state 's Minister for Environment and Heritage , and is responsible for the care , control and management of the island . Its duties include : the protection of World Heritage values ; the control of development ; the administration of Crown Land , including the island 's protected area ; provision of community services and infrastructure ; and regulating sustainable tourism . In 1981 the Lord Howe Island Amendment Act gave islanders the administrative power of three members on a five @-@ member Board . The Board also manages the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery which , together with tourism , provides the island 's only sources of external income . Under an amendment bill in 2004 the Board now comprises seven members , four of whom are elected from the islander community , thus giving about 350 permanent residents a high level of autonomy . The remaining three members are appointed by the Minister to represent the interests of business , tourism and conservation . The full Board meets on the island every three months while the day @-@ to @-@ day affairs of the island are managed by the Board 's administration , with a permanent staff that had increased to 22 people by 1988 . 
 Land tenure has been an issue since first settlement as island residents repeatedly requested freehold title or an absolute gift of cultivated land . Original settlers were squatters . The granting of a 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) lease to Richard Armstrong in 1878 drew complaints and a few short @-@ term leases ( <unk> <unk> ) were granted . In 1913 , with the appointment of a Board of Control , permissive occupancies were revoked and the Board itself given permissive occupancy of the island . Then the Lord Howe Island Act of 1953 made all land the property of the Crown . Direct descendants of islanders with permissive occupancies in 1913 were granted perpetual leases on blocks of up to 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) for residential purposes . Short @-@ term special leases were granted for larger areas used for agriculture , so in 1955 , 55 perpetual leases and 43 special leases were granted . The 1981 amendment to the act extended political and land rights to all residents of 10 years or more . There remains an active debate concerning the proportion of residents with tenure and the degree of influence on the Board of resident islanders in relation to long @-@ term planning for visitors , and issues relating to the environment , amenity and global heritage . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Trading vegetables , meat , fish and other perishables with visiting ships ceased in the 1870s when the whaling industry collapsed . With such a small population , Lord Howe Island 's economy is now extremely simple with external income derived from only two significant sources : tourism and the overseas sale of kentia palm seeds and seedlings . 
 = = = Kentia palm industry = = = 
 The first exporter of palm seeds was Ned King , a mountain guide for the Fitzgerald surveys of 1869 and 1876 , who sent seed to the Sydney Botanic Gardens . Overseas trade began in the 1880s when it was found that one of the four palms endemic to the island , kentia palm ( Howea forsteriana ) , which grows naturally in the lowlands , was ideally suited to the fashionable conservatories of the well @-@ to @-@ do in Britain , Europe and the United States , but the assistance of mainland magistrate Frank Farnell was needed to put the business on a sound commercial footing when in 1906 he became Director of a company , the Lord Howe Island Kentia Palm Nursery , whose shareholders included 21 islanders and a Sydney @-@ based seed company . However , the formation of the Lord Howe Island Board of Control was needed in 1913 to resolve outstanding issues . 
 The native kentia palm ( known locally as the thatch palm as it was used to thatch the houses of the early settlers ) is now the most popular decorative palm in the world . The mild climate of the island has evolved a palm which can tolerate low light , a dry atmosphere and <unk> temperatures – ideal for indoor conditions . Up to the 1980s the palms were only sold as seed but from then onwards only as high quality seedlings . The nursery received certification in 1997 for its high quality management complying with the requirements of Australian Standard AS / <unk> ISO 9002 . 
 Seed is gathered from natural forest and plantations , most collectors being descendants of the original settlers . Seed is then germinated in soil @-@ less media and sealed from the atmosphere to prevent contamination . After testing they are picked , washed ( bare @-@ rooted ) , sanitised and certified then packed and sealed into insulated containers for export . They grow both indoors and out and are popular for hotels and motels world @-@ wide . Nursery profits are returned to enhance the island ecosystem . The nursery plans to expand the business to include the curly palm and other native plants of special interest . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Lord Howe Island is known for its geology , birds , plants , and marine life . Popular tourist activities include scuba diving , birdwatching , snorkelling , surfing , kayaking , and fishing . To relieve pressure on the small island environment only 400 tourists are permitted at any one time . The island is reached by plane from Sydney or Brisbane in less than two hours . The Permanent Park Preserve declared in 1981 has similar management guidelines to a National Park . 
 = = = = Facilities = = = = 
 With fewer than 800 people on the island at any time , facilities are limited ; they include a bakery , butcher , general store , liquor store , restaurants , post office , museum and information centre , a police officer , a ranger , and an ATM at the bowling club . Stores are shipped to the island fortnightly by the Island Trader from Port Macquarie . There is a small four @-@ bed hospital and dispensary . A small botanic garden displays labelled local plants in its grounds . Diesel @-@ generated power is 240 V AC , as on the mainland . There is no public transport or mobile phone coverage , but there are public telephones , fax facilities and internet access as well as a local radio station and newsletter , The Signal . 
 Tourist accommodation ranges from luxury lodges to apartments and villa units . The currency is the Australian dollar and there are two banks . There are no camping facilities on the island and remote @-@ area camping is not permitted . To protect the fragile environment of Balls Pyramid ( which carries the last remaining wild population of the endangered Howe Island stick insect ) , recreational climbing there is prohibited . No pets are allowed without permission from the Board . Islanders use tanked rainwater , supplemented by bore water for showers and washing clothes . 
 = = = = Activities = = = = 
 As distances to sites of interest are short , cycling is the main means of transport on the island . Tourist activities include golf ( 9 @-@ hole ) , lawn bowls , tennis , fishing ( including deep @-@ sea game fishing ) , yachting , windsurfing , kite surfing , kayaking , and boat trips ( including glass @-@ bottom tours of the lagoon ) . Swimming , snorkelling and scuba diving are also popular in the lagoon , as well as off Tenth of June Island , a small rocky outcrop in the Admiralty group where an underwater plateau drops 36 metres to reveal extensive <unk> and black corals growing on the vertical walls . Other diving sites are found off Ball 's Pyramid , 26 km away , where there are trenches , caves and volcanic drop @-@ offs . 
 Bushwalking , natural history tours , talks , and guided walks take place along the many tracks , the most challenging being the eight @-@ hour guided hike to the top of Mount Gower . There are 11 beaches and hand @-@ feeding the metre @-@ long kingfish ( Seriola <unk> ) and large wrasse at Ned 's Beach is very popular . Walking tracks cover the island with difficulty graded from 1 – 5 , they include – in the north : Transit Hill 2 hours return , 2 km ; Clear Place , 1 – 2 hours return ; Stevens Reserve ; North Bay , 4 hours return , 4 km ; Mount Eliza ; Old Gulch , 20 minutes return , 300 m ; Malabar Hill and <unk> Lookout , 3 hours , or 5 hours return , 7 km and – in the south : Goat House Cave , 5 hours return , 6 km ; Mount Gower , 8 hours return , 14 km ; Rocky Run and Boat Harbour ; Intermediate Hill , 45 minutes return , 1 km ; Little Island , 40 minutes return , 3 km . Recreational climbers must obtain permission from the Lord Howe Island Board . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Lord Howe Island is an irregularly crescent @-@ shaped volcanic remnant in the southwest Pacific Ocean . Lying in the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand the island is 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) east of mainland Port Macquarie , 702 kilometres ( 436 mi ) northeast of Sydney , and about 772 kilometres ( 480 mi ) from Norfolk Island to its northeast . The island is about 10 km long and between 2 @.@ 0 km and 0 @.@ 3 km wide with an area of 14 @.@ 55 km2 . Along the west coast there is a semi @-@ enclosed sheltered coral reef lagoon with white sand , the most accessible of the island 's eleven beaches . Both the north and south sections of the island are high ground of relatively untouched forest , in the south comprising two volcanic mountains , Mount Lidgbird ( 777 m or 2 @,@ 549 ft ) and Mount Gower which , rising to 875 m ( 2 @,@ 871 ft ) , is the highest point on the island . The two mountains are separated by the saddle at the head of Erskine Valley . In the north , where most of the population live , high points are Malabar ( 209 m or 686 ft ) and Mount Eliza ( 147 m or 482 ft ) . Between these two uplands is an area of cleared lowland with some farming , the airstrip , and housing . The Lord Howe Island Group of islands comprises 28 islands , islets and rocks . Apart from Lord Howe Island itself the most notable of these is the pointed rocky islet Ball 's Pyramid , a 551 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 1 @,@ 808 ft ) eroded volcano about 23 km to the south @-@ east , which is uninhabited but bird @-@ colonised . It contains the only known wild population of the Lord Howe Island stick insect , formerly thought to be extinct . To the north there is the Admiralty Group , a cluster of seven small uninhabited islands . Just off the east coast is 4 @.@ 5 ha Mutton Bird Island , and in the lagoon is 3 ha Blackburn ( Rabbit ) Island . 
 = = = Geological origins = = = 
 Lord Howe Island is the highly eroded remains of a 7 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old shield volcano , the product of eruptions that lasted for about a half @-@ million years . It is one of a chain of islands that occur on the western rim of an undersea shelf , the Lord Howe Rise , which is 3000 km long and 300 km wide extending from New Zealand to the west of New Caledonia and consisting of continental rocks that separated from the Australian plate 60 to 80 million years ago to form a new crust in the deep Tasman Basin . The shelf is part of Zealandia , a microcontinent nearly half the size of Australia that gradually submerged after breaking away from the Gondwanan supercontinent . The Lord Howe seamount chain is defined by coral @-@ capped guyots stretching to the north of the island for 1000 km ( 600 mi ) and including the Middleton 220 kilometres ( 140 mi ) and Elizabeth ( 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) away ) reefs of the Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs Marine National Park Reserve . This chain of nine volcanic peaks was probably produced by the northward movement of the Indo @-@ Australian Plate over a stationary hotspot so the oldest guyots were the first formed and most northerly as the plate moved northward at a rate of 6 cm per year ( see plate tectonics ) . 
 = = = Basalts and calcarenite = = = 
 Two periods of volcanic activity produced the major features of the island . The first about 6 @.@ 9 million years ago produced the northern and central hills while the younger and highly eroded Mount Gower and Mount Lidgbird were produced about 6 @.@ 3 million years ago by successive basalt ( an extrusive igneous rock ) lava flows that once filled a large volcanic caldera ( crater ) and can now be seen as horizontal basalt strata on mountain cliffs ( at Malabar and Mount Gower ) occasionally interspersed with dikes ( vertical lava intrusions ) . Geological pyroclastic remnants of volcanic eruption can be seen on 15 ha Roach Island ( where the oldest rocks occur ) and Boat Harbour as tuff ( ash ) , breccia ( with angular blocks ) , and agglomerate ( rounded ' bombs ' ) . Offshore on the Lord Howe Rise water depths reach 2000 m falling to 4000 m to the west of the rise . From the dimensions of the rock on which the island stands it has been calculated that the island has eroded to one fortieth of its original size . 
 Rocks and land at the foot of these mountains is calcarenite , a coral sand , blown inland during the Pleistocene between 130 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 years ago and cemented into stratified layers by water percolation . In this rock are fossils of bird bones and eggs , land and marine snails and the extinct endemic horned turtle ( <unk> <unk> ) now thought to be an ancient relictual non @-@ swimming tortoise with relatives in South America . The crescent of the island protects a coral reef and lagoon , the barrier reef , at 31 ° S , is the most southerly in the world . Beach sands , rather than consisting of quartz grains derived from granite , as on the mainland , are made of fragments of shell , coral and coralline algae , together with basalt grains , and basaltic minerals like black diopside , and green olivine . The lowland consists of alluvial soils . 
 The island continues to erode rapidly and is expected to be fully submerged within 200 @,@ 000 years taking an appearance akin to the Middleton and Elizabeth Reefs . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Lord Howe Island has a subtropical climate . Under the Köppen climate classification , Lord Howe Island has a Humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) . 
 In general the summers are mild or warm with rainfall erratic but occasionally heavy while in winter it is cool with rainfall more or less uniform . There is a gradual transition from summer to winter conditions and vice versa . Winds are frequent and salt @-@ laden being moderate easterlies in the summer and fresh to strong westerlies in the winter . July is the windiest month , and the winter months are subject to frequent gales and strong winds . The island has 67 @.@ 8 clear days , annually . 
 Storms and occasional cyclones also affect the island . Rainfall records are maintained in the north where rainfall is less than in the frequently cloud – shrouded mountains of the south . There can be wide variation in rainfall from year to year . July and August are the coldest months with average minimum temperatures of about 13 ° C and no frost . Average maximum temperatures range from between 17 ° C and 20 ° C in the winter to between 24 ° C and 27 ° C in the summer . The humidity averages in the 60 % to 70 % range year round becoming more noticeable on warmer summer days than in the cooler winter months . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 = = = Plants = = = 
 Lord Howe Island is a distinct terrestrial ecoregion known as the Lord Howe Island subtropical forests . It is part of the Australasia ecozone and shares many biotic affinities with Australia , New Guinea , and New Caledonia . Almost half of the island 's native plants are endemic and many of the island 's unique plants grow on or around the mountain summits where the height has allowed the development of a true cloud forest and many different microhabitats from sealevel to the summits . One of the best known is Howea , an endemic genus of palms ( Arecaceae ) that are commonly known as kentia palms and make handsome houseplants . Annual exports provide a revenue of over A $ 2 million , providing the only major industry on the island apart from tourism . 
 = = = = Origin = = = = 
 In geological terms at 7 million years old Lord Howe Island is relatively young and was never part of any continent , its flora and fauna colonising the island from across the sea , carried by wind , water or birds , possibly assisted at a geological time when other islands were exposed , enabling island hopping . Nevertheless , it is far enough away and has had sufficient time to evolve endemic species . The high degree of endemism is emphasised by the presence of five endemic genera : Negria , Lordhowea , Howea , Lepidorrhachis , and Hedyscepe . Island plants are similar to those of Norfolk Island , the two islands sharing some endemic species , for example , the critically endangered species of creeping vine Calystegia affinis . The combined flora of these two islands is more closely related to that of New Zealand and New Caledonia than to that of Australia . There is also a small but clear link with the plants of Vanuatu . The closest mainland affinities are with the vegetation of subtropical south @-@ eastern Queensland . A link with Gondwanaland is indicated by the presence of endemic species like the wedding lily ( <unk> <unk> ) whose only living relatives occur in South Africa . 
 The flora of the island is relatively untouched with a large number of rare plants , 44 % being endemic to the island . With a diversity of conditions ranging from valleys , to ridges , plains and misty mountain tops there is habitat for a wide range of plant communities which have been comprehensively analysed and mapped . There are 57 species of fern of which 25 are endemic : they are most abundant in the moist environments of the southern island , especially the higher parts of Mount Gower , perhaps the most apparent being the four endemic tree ferns in the genus Cyathea that occur on the southern mountains . 
 = = = = Communities and special plants = = = = 
 Plant communities have been classified into nine categories : lowland subtropical rainforest , <unk> rainforest , cloud @-@ forest and scrub , lowland swamp forest , mangrove scrub and seagrass , coastal scrub and cliff vegetation , inland scrub and <unk> , offshore island vegetation , shoreline and beach vegetation , and disturbed vegetation . 
 Several plants are immediately evident to the visitor . Banyan ( Ficus macrophylla subsp. <unk> ) is a remarkable tree with a buttressed trunk and pendulous aerial roots : it can be seen on the track to Clear Place and near Ned 's Beach . Pandanus tree ( Pandanus forsteri ) has spectacular teepee @-@ like prop roots and pineapple @-@ like fruits that are orange @-@ red when mature , the tough leaves being used for basketry . It occurs in damp areas like creek beds and fine specimens can be seen along the Boat Harbour track . There are ten species of orchid on the island , the most noticeable being the bush orchid ( Dendrobium macropus subsp. <unk> ) on lowland trees and rocks , bearing cream flowers from August to September . Other prominent flowering plants in the summer include , on the mountain slopes , the whiskery red flowers of mountain rose ( Metrosideros <unk> and Metrosideros <unk> ) , the massed small yellow flowers of <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , orange plump flowers of pumpkin tree ( Negria <unk> ) , and white spikes of Fitzgerald tree ( Dracophyllum <unk> ) . The kava bush has large , aromatic , heart @-@ shaped leaves . After heavy rain the endemic glowing mushrooms Mycena <unk> and Omphalotus nidiformis can be found in the palm forests . 
 It is the palms that are the signature plants of the island as the kentia and curly palms especially dominate the landscape in many places , the kentia being of special economic importance . All four species are endemic to the island , often occurring in dense pure stands , the one that has proved such a world @-@ wide success as an indoor plant being the kentia or thatch palm ( Howea forsteriana ) . This is a lowland palm with drooping leaflets and seed branches in ' hands ' of 3 – 5 while the curly palm ( Howea <unk> ) , which occurs on slightly higher ground , has upwardly directed leaflets and solitary ' hands ' . Natural hybrids between these species occur on the island and there is a mature specimen of one growing in the island nursery . On the mountain sides higher than about 350 m there is the big mountain palm ( Hedyscepe <unk> ) ; it has large golf @-@ ball @-@ sized fruits while the little mountain palm ( Lepidorrhachis <unk> ) has marble @-@ sized fruits and is only found on the mountain summits . 
 = = = = = Images of native flora = = = = = 
 = = = Animals = = = 
 There are no snakes , no venomous or stinging insects , animals or plants , and no dangerous daytime sharks off the beaches . 
 = = = = Birds = = = = 
 A total of 202 different birds have been recorded on the island . Eighteen species of land birds breed on the island and there are many more migratory species that occur on the island and its adjacent islets , many tame enough that it is possible for humans to get quite close . The island has been identified by BirdLife International as an Endemic Bird Area , and the Permanent Park Preserve as an Important Bird Area , because it supports the entire population of Lord Howe <unk> , most of the breeding population of providence petrels , over 1 % of the world population of another five seabird species , and the whole populations of three endemic subspecies . 
 Fourteen species of seabirds breed on the island . Red @-@ tailed tropicbirds can be seen in large numbers circling the Malabar cliffs where they perform acrobatic courting rituals . Between August and May thousands of flesh @-@ footed and wedge @-@ tailed shearwaters return to the island at dusk each day . From the Little Island Track between March and November one of the world 's rarest birds , the providence petrel also performs courtship displays during winter breeding and it is extremely tame . The island was its only breeding location for many years after the breeding colony on Norfolk Island was exterminated in the late 19th century ; though a small population persists on the adjacent Phillip Island . The Kermadec petrel was discovered breeding on Mount Gower in 1914 by ornithologist Roy Bell while collecting specimens for Gregory Mathews and the black @-@ winged petrel was only confirmed as a breeder in 1971 ; its numbers have increased following the elimination of feral cats from the island . 
 The flesh @-@ footed shearwater , which breeds in large numbers on the main island in spring @-@ autumn , used to have its chicks harvested for food by the islanders . The wedge @-@ tailed and little shearwaters breed on the main island and surrounding islets ; though only a small number of the latter species can be found on the main island . Breeding white @-@ bellied storm petrels were another discovery by Roy Bell . Masked boobies are the largest seabirds breeding on Lord Howe and can be seen nesting and gliding along the sea cliffs at Mutton Bird Point all year round . Sooty terns can be seen on the main island at Ned 's and Middle Beaches , North Bay , and Blinkey Beach ; the most numerous of the island 's breeding seabirds , their eggs were formerly harvested for food . Common and black noddies build nests in trees and bushes , while white terns lay their single eggs precariously in a slight depression on a tree branch , and grey <unk> lay their eggs in cliff hollows . 
 Three endemic passerine subspecies are the Lord Howe golden whistler , Lord Howe silvereye and Lord Howe currawong . The iconic endemic rail , the flightless Lord Howe woodhen , is the only surviving member of its genus : its ancestors could fly but with no predators and plenty of food on the island this ability was lost . This made it easy prey for islanders and feral animals and by the 1970s the population was less than 30 birds . From 1978 to 1984 feral animals were removed and birds raised in captivity to be successfully reintroduced to the wild . The population is now relatively safe and stable . 
 = = = = Mammals , reptiles and amphibians = = = = 
 Only one native mammal remains on the islands , the large forest bat . The endemic Lord Howe long @-@ eared bat is known only from a skull and is now presumed extinct , possibly the result of the introduction of ship rats . 
 Two terrestrial reptiles are native to the island group : the Lord Howe Island skink and the Lord Howe Island gecko . Both are rare on the main island but more common on smaller islands offshore . The garden skink and the bleating tree frog have been accidentally introduced from the Australian mainland . 
 = = = = Invertebrates = = = = 
 The Lord Howe Island stick insect disappeared from the main island soon after the introduction of rats in 1918 . In 2001 a tiny population was discovered in a single Melaleuca <unk> shrub on the slopes of Ball 's Pyramid , has been successfully bred in captivity , and is nearing re @-@ introduction to the main island . The Lord Howe stag beetle is a colourful endemic beetle seen during summer months . Another endemic invertebrate , the Lord Howe flax snail ( or Lord Howe <unk> ) , has also been affected by the introduction of rats . Once common , the species is now endangered and a captive breeding program is under way to save the snail from extinction . 
 = = = = Marine life = = = = 
 Marine environments are near @-@ pristine with a mixtures of temperate , subtropical and tropical species derived from cool @-@ temperate ocean currents in the winter and the warm East Australian Current , which flows from the Great Barrier Reef , in summer . Of the 490 fish species recorded 13 are endemic and 60 % are tropical . The main angling fish are yellowtail kingfish and New Zealand bluefish while game fish include marlin , tuna and giant kingfish called " greenbacks " . Over 80 species of coral occur in the reefs surrounding the islands . Australian underwater photographer Neville Coleman has photographed various nudibranchs at Lord Howe Island . 
 Various species of cetaceans inhabit or migrate through the waters in vicinity , however very little about their biology in the area is known due to lack of studies and sighting efforts caused from locational conditions . Bottlenose dolphin is the most commonly observed and is the only species confirmed to be seasonal or yearly residents while some other dolphin species have also been observed . Humpback whales are the only of large whales showing slow but steady recoveries as their numbers annually migrating the island of Lord Howe are much smaller than that of those migrating along Australian continent . 
 Historically , migratory whales such as blue , fin , sei were very abundant in the island waters , but were severely reduced in numbers to near @-@ extinction by commercial and illegal hunts including the mass illegal hunts by Soviet Union and Japan in 1960s to 1970s . Southern right and sperm were most severely hunted among these , hence the area was called the Middle Ground by whalers . It is likely that these two were once seasonal residents around the island where right whales prefer sheltered , very shallow bays while sperm whales mainly inhabit deep waters . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 About 10 percent of Lord Howe Island 's forests have been cleared for agriculture , and another 20 percent has been disturbed , mostly by domestic cattle and feral sheep , goats and pigs . As a result , 70 % of the island remains relatively untouched with a variety of plants and animals , many of which are endemic , some of which are rare or threatened . Two species of plants , nine terrestrial birds , one bat and at least four invertebrates have become extinct since 1778 . Endemism at the generic level includes the palms Howea , Hedyscepe and Lepidorrhachis , a woody daisy Lordhowea , the tree Negria , the leech <unk> <unk> , three annelid worm genera ( <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) , an isopod shrimp <unk> , a hemipteran bug <unk> and a cricket <unk> . 
 The Lord Howe Island Board instigated an extensive biological and environmental survey ( published in 1974 ) , which has guided the island conservation program . In 1981 , the Lord Howe Island Amendment Act proclaimed a ' Permanent Park Preserve ' over the north and south ends of the island . Administration of the preserve was outlined in a management plan for the sustainable development of the island prepared by the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service , which has a ranger stationed on the island . The Island was cited under the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1982 . 
 Offshore environmental assets are protected by the Lord Howe Island Marine Park . This consists of a State Marine Park managed by the Marine Parks Authority of New South Wales in the waters out to 3 nautical miles around the island and including Ball 's Pyramid . It also includes a Commonwealth Marine Park extending from 3 to 12 nautical miles out and managed by the federal Department of the Environment and Heritage . In total the Marine Park covers about 3 @,@ 005 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 160 sq mi ) . 
 = = = = Feral animals and plants = = = = 
 Pigs and goats were released on the island as potential food in the early 1800s , the goats destroying shrubs and grasses used as nesting sites and the pigs eating eggs and chicks and disturbing the land by nuzzling for food . Several birds have become extinct on the island since the arrival of humans . The first round of extinctions included the Lord Howe swamphen or white gallinule , white @-@ throated pigeon , red @-@ crowned parakeet and the Tasman booby , which were eliminated by visitors and settlers during the nineteenth century either from overhunting for food or protection of crops . Black rats were released from provisioning whaling ships in the 1840s and mice from Norfolk Island in 1860 . In 1918 the black rat was accidentally introduced with the shipwreck of the SS Makambo which ran aground at Ned 's Beach . This triggered a second wave of extinctions , including the vinous @-@ tinted thrush , robust white @-@ eye , Lord Howe starling , Lord Howe fantail and the Lord Howe gerygone as well as the destruction of the native phasmid and decimation of palm fruits . Bounties were offered for rat and pig tails and ' ratting ' became a popular pursuit . Subsequent poisoning programs have kept populations low . The Lord Howe <unk> may have become extinct through predation by , or competition with , the Tasmanian masked owls which were introduced in the 1920s in a failed attempt to control the rat population . Stray dogs are also a threat as they could harm the native wood hen and other birds . 
 Invasive plants such as Crofton weed and Formosa lily occur in inaccessible areas and probably cannot be eradicated but others are currently being managed . In 1995 the first action was taken to control the spread of introduced plants of the island , chiefly ground asparagus and bridal creeper , but also cherry guava , Madeira vine , Cotoneaster , <unk> and <unk> . This has been followed by weeding tours and the formation of the Friends of Lord Howe Island group in 2000 . Programs have also been started to remove weeds from private properties and revegetate some formerly cultivated areas . An Environmental Unit was created by the Board and it includes a Flora Management Officer and a permanent Weed Officer . Weeds have been mapped and an eradication program is in place , supported by improved education and quarantine procedures . 
 Despite the large number of introduced species that harm Lord Howe 's native flora and fauna , feral pigs and cats were eradicated by the early 2000s . The goat population has been reduced to just a few animals , and there are ongoing efforts to control rodents and introduced plants . In July 2012 it was announced by the Australian federal Environment Minister Tony Burke and the New South Wales Environment Minister Robyn Parker that the Australian and NSW Governments would each contribute 50 % of the estimated A $ 9 million cost of implementing a rodent eradication plan for the island , using aerial deployment of poison baits . The plan was put to a local vote and is considered controversial . A recovery program has restored the Lord Howe woodhen numbers from only 20 in 1970 to about 200 in 2000 , which is close to carrying capacity . 
 = = = = Climate change = = = = 
 According to an analysis by Tim Flannery , the ecosystem of Lord Howe Island is threatened by climate change and global warming , with the reefs at risk from rises in water temperature . The Great Barrier Reef is specifically identified as being at risk to the effects of global warming on Australia , and the same analysis applies to the reefs of Lord Howe Island . Cool climate flora and fauna are at risk from rises in temperature , because there is limited scope for migration to higher altitudes .. The first international conference on global artificial photosynthesis as a climate change solution occurred at Lord Howe island in 2011 , the papers being published by the Australian Journal of Chemistry . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Improbable Rendezvous , a novel by Tom Ferry , 2013 ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Virus , a 1999 sci @-@ fi horror film : the titular computer virus sets a course for Lord Howe Island to seize a British intelligence facility from which it can control the world 's military . 
 = The Witness ( 2016 video game ) = 
 The Witness is a 3D puzzle video game developed and published by Thekla , Inc . The Witness was released for Microsoft Windows and PlayStation 4 on January 26 , 2016 , with an iOS port , among versions for other platforms , scheduled for a later date . Inspired by Myst , the game involves the exploration of an open world island filled with natural and man @-@ made structures . The player progresses by solving puzzles , which are based on interactions with mazes presented on panels around the island or hidden within the environment . The player will have to determine the rules of each puzzle from visual clues and audio recordings scattered around the island . 
 Jonathan Blow , the game 's lead creator and director , desired to create a game around non @-@ verbal communication , wanting players to learn from observation and to come to epiphanies in finding solutions and leading to a greater sense of involvement and accomplishment with each success . The game includes around 650 puzzles , though the player is not required to solve them all to finish the game . 
 Originally announced in 2009 , The Witness had a lengthy development period . Blow started work on the title in 2008 after a short break from releasing Braid . The financial success of Braid allowed him to hire a larger team , up to fifteen at its peak , to develop the title without sacrificing his vision of the final product . The team developed their own game engine to allow them greater freedom in designing the game 's visual style . Artists and building and landscape architects were retained to design the structures on the island , for a realistic feel without <unk> their visual representation . This required a protracted development process , and the game 's release was delayed over the next five years . Original plans for release on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 were abandoned because the game engine became too demanding . Blow opted to develop the console version for the PlayStation 4 , claiming that Sony was more open towards independent developers . 
 The Witness received widespread acclaim from critics , who praised the difficult , but surmountable puzzles and the game 's art and setting . Within a week of release , the game sold about as many copies as Braid had done within a year of its release , and nearly recouped all of Thekla 's development costs . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Witness is a puzzle adventure game , experienced in the first @-@ person view . The player , as an unnamed character , explores an island with numerous structures and natural formations . The island is roughly divided into eleven sections , arranged around a mountain that represents the ultimate goal for the player . Within each section is a gold box that must be reached to activate it , requiring the player to complete a sequence of puzzles within that section to reach it . Once activated , a turret emerges from the box and shines a light towards the top of the mountain , indicating that section is complete . The player needs to activate some of the boxes in the game to be able to access the inside of the mountain and ultimately reach the game 's final goal , though additional puzzles can be discovered if all eleven turrets are activated . There are additional optional puzzles scattered around the island . One optional set of puzzles , accessible after entering the mountain and colloquially referred to as " The Challenge " , is a time @-@ based test to complete about a dozen algorithmically @-@ generated mazes within seven minutes , set to music from Edvard Grieg 's " <unk> 's Dance " and " In the Hall of the Mountain King " . The final game has more than 650 puzzles , which Jonathan Blow estimates will take the average player about 80 hours to solve . The puzzles include one that Blow believed that less than 1 % of the players would be able to solve . 
 All puzzles are based on a mechanic of tracing a path through a maze @-@ like route from a starting point , represented as a circle , to a goal point , represented as a line segment with a rounded end , without crossing one 's path . The goal of these puzzles is not always to simply complete the maze but to find the right path that completes the puzzle correctly . Mazes may have several starting points and goals ; the player may have to find the right starting point that can complete the maze , or they may have to figure out how to reach a specific end point to trigger an event in the surrounding environment such as moving a platform . The puzzles include a symbolic language that denotes the mechanics for that maze . For example , puzzles that present mazes with black and white squares in the spaces between traceable paths require the player to find a path through the maze that separates these squares by color . Other puzzles require the player to use the environment to determine how to solve the puzzle , such as studying a nearby tree with branches that mimic the puzzle , or by observing symbols on nearby floors and walls that align with the puzzle 's configuration . The puzzles within each island section are based on common mechanic , often with a sequence of puzzles appearing early in each section that are designed to help the player identify and understand the mechanic and meaning of the symbols . Later puzzles combine two or more different mechanics into the same puzzle using the consistent symbolic language . 
 Most puzzles are located on recognizable eye @-@ level panels scattered around the island , often connected with power cables that light up once a puzzle is solved and guiding the player to the next puzzle . Some puzzles these panels incorporate the game 's architecture , such as one puzzle that requires the player to view background elements through a semi @-@ transparent puzzle panel to determine the solution . There are also non @-@ obvious puzzles built into the environment itself , requiring the player to find the correct vantage point to complete the puzzle . At any time , the player can engage the maze @-@ drawing mode , which is marked by a white border on screen . While in this mode , the player 's avatar is prevented from moving and instead allows the player to use their controls to trace the path through a presented maze . The mode ends once the player solves the puzzle or cancels the mode . Normally , this mode is activated in front of a panel , moving the player 's view directly to the panel to solve it , but it can also be activated at any other time to engage those puzzles that are based on vantage points . Nearly all puzzles provide immediate feedback if they have been solved correctly or not through sound effects or visual indication . 
 Puzzles in a given section of the island are presented in a non @-@ linear fashion , and with the open world nature of the game , the player may encounter puzzle panels that they have yet to learn the symbolic language for . As such , players are not required to finish a puzzle once they start , and can leave and wander to any other area to solve the puzzles there , potentially gaining insight on the new symbolic language or inspiration for difficult solutions . Blow has stated that there is more to the game than these mazes , in response to concerns from players ; to Blow , " the point is the magic that happens in the player 's mind when he understands the subtle things that the mazes are saying - because the mazes aren 't just puzzles , they are lines of communication that aggregate , become more complex and eventually say surprising things " . 
 Throughout the island are stations with audio recordings that provide insightful quotes for the player , from people such as Buddha , B.F. Skinner , and William Kingdon Clifford . Voice actors for these logs include Ashley Johnson , Phil LaMarr , Matthew Waterson , and Terra Deva . The player can also encounter a theater where short video clips , such as from James Burke 's Connections series or the ending of Andrei Tarkovsky 's Nostalghia , can be viewed . A number of visual illusions based on depth perception from the player 's position can be found in the game 's environment , such as two seemingly @-@ disparate humanoid figures at different parts of the island that appear to be holding hands when viewed from the right position and angle . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The Witness was envisioned after Jonathan Blow released Braid . After seeing the title become a success in 2008 , Blow took time off from " serious development " , and instead spent time to prototype new game concepts , spending a few months on each . The concept that proved to be the basis for The Witness was the one prototype that Blow considered to be " very ambitious and challenging " . He considered it risky as it would include the development of a 3D gameplay engine , and feared that he would " fall back to square one " , this being his state of living before the success of Braid , should it fail . Despite the challenges , Blow continued to go forward with The Witness , as it was also the most compelling of the prototypes he had crafted . Direct development work on the title began in late 2008 . 
 The game concept itself is based on an earlier title that Blow had envisioned but never completed . In this unfinished title , there was a side gameplay aspect that has a " magic moment " , according to Blow , that would have made the title exciting . The Witness 's gameplay is based on distilling out this " magic moment " from the previous concept game , and wrapping it within its own game and story . Blow has compared this moment to a spoiler for a movie , and thus has avoided disclosure of the mechanic or other aspects of the game . The maze panel idea bore out from an earlier idea that Blow had around 2002 for a game involving wizards which the player would cast spells through mouse gestures , a popular element of video games at the time , with the ability to modify the effect of the spells by slight alterations of specific gestures ; elements of The Witness 's story borrow from this game concept . 
 One goal of the The Witness was to demonstrate video games as an art form , " exploring the different flavors of non @-@ verbal communication that games can have , which I think is important to understanding games as a medium " , according to Blow . The game 's name The Witness is derived from core gameplay aspect of making the player perceptive of the surroundings to discover meaning and solutions to the puzzles without verbal communication , a similar approach taken by Myst ( 1993 ) . Blow attributes much of The Witness 's design to Myst , a game that got him into video game development . One aspect of Myst that Blow desired to correct was the nature of " pixel hunting " in some of its puzzles ; the player would have to click on various parts of the virtual machinery without knowing what the end result was until sometime later in the puzzle . Within The Witness , Blow created a unifying mechanic for all the puzzles to avoid this confusion , using the maze panels as this mechanic . While the interaction mechanics are the same for all these mazes , the rules and behavior described by the game 's symbolic language that limit or result from the interactions form the core of the puzzles in the game . The island was divided into sections so that all the information the player needed to understand the specific behavior of puzzles in that section would be in one general location , a means to " [ cut ] down a lot of ambiguity that used to exist in adventure games " . Puzzles within the game were designed to be meaningful within the context of the game , rather than to be simply a puzzle to be solved , and further aimed to be different from any other puzzle within the game . 
 Part of the game 's concept is a balance between puzzle @-@ solving and perception , giving the player the freedom to explore The Witness 's world and creating a non @-@ linear approach to gameplay . Two of the first puzzles Blow had created involved " clues in objects that populate the world " , which led him to recognize he needed to create a world to support these puzzles . This would form a dichotomy between exploration and puzzle solving , which " made a lot of sense " to Blow . Blow created the island as open world , so that players can leave puzzles they are stuck at and work at other ones , as to avoid punishing the player for not being able to solve a key puzzle , a common issue with other adventure games according to Blow . Blow wanted puzzles to be clearly presented in the open and without any red herrings , an approach he had taken with Braid . Exploration is encouraged through the game 's narrative , which are told by audio logs the player can find on the unpopulated island ; through these , Blow attempted to create a " feeling of loneliness in a beautiful space " for the player . Because these logs can be found in any order , Blow hopes that each player may have a different perception of the narrative depending on how they have approached the game . Initially , these audio logs were to be more story @-@ driven , but Blow opted later to change these out for more obfuscated and obtuse information , similar to the text elements used in Braid , as to avoid directly relating out the story of the game for the player and let them think about what the narrative means instead . Blow 's team designed the narrative that those that solve more of the puzzles will gain more of a concrete understanding of the story . 
 Due to the nebulous nature of the story in The Witness , Blow designed the game to avoid simply " rewarding the player " through enticing or forcing the player to proceed through fixed actions simply to gain some achievement . Instead , the game was designed to give the player the option to explore and learn about the world he created for the game , and to come to epiphanies on the puzzles on their own . Blow designed to use as few achievements as required by the chosen consoles , seeing these as simply means to reward the player . Blow also states his concerns on other pop @-@ up messages that could occur on the consoles or computer versions , as he considers The Witness a " subtle kind of game " with quiet ambient audio that these pop @-@ ups detract from . 
 Blow acknowledged that The Witness was an intellectually difficult game , intentionally not developed for a mass audience . He considers his approach " anti @-@ Nintendo " , providing few to no additional instructions to the player in contrast with typical Nintendo games . In contrast to most games developed at the time that Blow considered " treat [ ed ] [ their players ] as the lowest common denominator " , he wanted the audience for The Witness to be for the player that " is inquisitive and likes to be treated as an intelligent person " . He compared the approach he took with The Witness to that of Thomas Pynchon 's Gravity 's Rainbow , as the novel " isn ’ t holding your hand the whole way through to make sure you understood every paragraph " , and believed he could do the same within a video game . The game 's timed challenge featuring randomly generated puzzles was purposely designed to be difficult , according to Blow , intended to be " about testing how deeply a player has internalized the rules to the puzzles and how quickly they can react to new configurations " . 
 = = = Funding and development = = = 
 The Witness was announced in 2009 following the release of Jonathan Blow 's previous game , Braid . At the time , Blow had no firm plans for release or publication of the game , and had allocated a budget of about $ 800 @,@ 000 for the game . 
 Blow created the Thekla , Inc. team for the development and publication of The Witness . Since December 2009 , Blow was working remotely with two additional full @-@ time roles , one a 3D artist , and another as a technical programmer . By 2015 , Blow stated there were about eight full @-@ time members on his team , though had had ten to eleven people involved around 2011 , and as many as fifteen at its peak . The Witness incorporates other artists and programmer 's contributions in smaller roles , such as David Hellman , who had previously worked with Blow on Braid 's art design and worked on conceptualizing the design of The Witness . Other contributors include Eric Urquhart , who has provided 3 @-@ D concept artwork for the game , and Ignacio Castaño , who has developed a rendering system for the game 's illumination and visual effects . Blow gives much credit to <unk> <unk> , a freshly @-@ graduated graphic artist he hired around 2011 , for transforming the original sparse imagery of the island to the more vivid scenery that was included in the final game . By diversifying work on the game , Blow has been able to focus more of his time on the core game design , allowing his team to implement his vision , in contrast to the development of Braid where he also had to program much of the game himself . 
 The Witness took seven years to complete . Blow attributes this long period to the expansion of the game 's scope as he and his team continued to work on it . He opted against time and cost @-@ saving solutions that would have affected his ambition for the game , such as condensing the game 's scope or using an off @-@ the @-@ shelf game engine . Instead , he used revenues from sales of Braid , totaling around $ 4 million as of April 2014 , into development costs . Blow had to seek out additional capital in February 2015 having exhausted the Braid revenues , but believed that regardless of the costs of extra development time , the debt would be justified in the long run . Final development costs were estimated at just under $ 6 million . While Blow considers The Witness as an indie game due to the lack of funding or support from a major publisher , he also feels the scope of the project by time and cost to be closer to that of what a AAA studio would produce , and represents a new type of game development in the industry . 
 The Witness uses its own engine developed by Blow and his team , which took a significant portion of the development time . Blow was insistent on using his own game engine instead of an existing solution such as Unity , as he would be able to fully control every element of a game engine that he created himself . As a compact game world compared to open @-@ world games , the whole of the island of The Witness was treated as one zone , simplifying the gameplay and engine development . This presented a secondary challenge to the team as to concurrently work on the project , they needed to find a means to allow multiple developers to edit areas without resorting to using locking on their version control system as well as being able to work without being connected to a central server . Blow and his team developed an unconventional means of serializing the game world into text files that would have revision control while at the same time making it easy for individuals to discover conflicting edits . They also converted the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ some entities in the game world into their own individual files for tracking to further reduce conflict between edits . Other features of this system including using defined control points for terrain elements to automatically recalculate seamless connections between them within the game 's rendering engine , and a built @-@ in world editor within the game engine to easily access existing serialized elements and create new ones . 
 The development team had incorporated support for upcoming virtual reality ( VR ) hardware within The Witness , following a November 2013 meeting between Blow and two Valve Corporation developers demonstrating their upcoming SteamVR technology , which Blow found to help enhance the player 's ability to explore the island . Though the technical support for VR is present in the released game , The Witness was not designed to take advantage of virtual reality , as many of the puzzles could be " cheated " if the head movement could be separated from the body movement , according to programmer Andrew Smith . 
 = = = Design , art , and sound = = = 
 The design and layout of the island in The Witness has been nearly consistent since the start of the game 's development , with the team working on populating the world with specific puzzles , and detailing the landscape and other art assets . Sam Machkovech , a writer for Ars Technica that had played a demo of the game in 2012 and again in 2015 , noted that the island had remained familiar between these two sessions . One aspect of the design of the game world is the use of power cables running across the island , connecting puzzle panels to the mechanics they control . Blow found these to help in the initial parts of the game to provide " extreme clarity " of where the player was to go next , but discovered that this also the made the game too much of a grind of repeating the same pattern . Over the course of development , the power cable aspects were still kept , but the designers changed up how easy they were to trace across the landscape as a means to guide the player towards potential objectives . 
 The island has been structured to provide a fair mix of puzzle solving , exploration , and narrative elements while avoiding a " paradox of choice " by giving the player too much freedom and not knowing where to go next . According to artist Luis Antonio , one of the first things that Blow wanted the player to see was the mountain to make them aware as this being their ultimate goal . The game initially started the player in an abandoned bunker converted to living space , but as it was originally arranged , the player would exit the bunker not facing the mountain . Though they attempted to move and rotate the bunker space around to meet Blow 's goal , it was ultimately scrapped in favor of a simpler space with interior elements that fit with other portions of the game , and which the player would climb out into the external environment with the mountain in full view . This introductory area was also meant to serve as the game 's tutorial , helping players to understand fundamental mechanics of one must switch between solving puzzles and exploring the environment to find others , and Thekla spent a great detail of time fine @-@ tuning the details to be clear without verbal explanation . The team 's artists worked to support Blow 's objective of guiding the player by using contrasts of color and of natural and man @-@ made structures to highlight areas that the player would be drawn towards . Blow wanted the game 's art to start off with bright colors and high saturation , to present a type of optimism to the player , while later settings in the game would become less bright . He also wanted to make sure all elements of the game world stood out to avoid visual noise within the game that may have interfered with puzzle solving . To accomplish this , he and his team often had to review the game as if they were a new player to it , and identify what elements they were visually drawn to ; this would often identify features of the island they had incorporated early on but were no longer appropriate for the final game . 
 The art style was influenced by a simplification approach , eliminating enough details but keeping overall shapes to make objects clearly recognizable . According to Antonio , they took inspiration for simplification from real @-@ world photography , artwork , and from the environments of the games Journey , Team Fortress 2 , and Mirror 's Edge . They still wanted to ensure that a player would be able to recognize an area of the island they were in based on the visual appearance , such as by the types of trees around them , and assured there was enough distinction while simplifying the assets to make this possible . Blow 's team was also able to engage with <unk> Design Studio , a real @-@ world architecture firm , and Fletcher Studio , a landscape architecture team , to help develop the environments for The Witness . According to <unk> 's founder , Deanna Van Buren , they developed the various manmade and cultivated areas based on the concept of three different civilization periods , with later civilizations building on the structures from earlier ones and repurposing these structures as needed . Their studios helped to bring design principles to the main development team , allowing them to then extrapolate their own ideas for the final game . Blow said that the guidance and advice of the architects helped to craft the island in a way that " feels more immersive just because the details are in place , and your brain kind of picks up on it " . Blow gives an example of how many of the buildings on the island are in various states of deterioration , but were designed as fully detailed and complete structures and purposely worn down to create the ruined look ; the resulting structures retain logically @-@ consistent details , such as the remains of wooden support posts for rotted @-@ away stairways in a castle , that aid in immersion for the player . 
 The final game shipped with very little music , instead relying on the ambient sounds of the environment which was developed by Wabi Sabi Sound . Blow felt that the addition of music was a " layer of stuff that works against the game " . The ambient sound effects were made more difficult to include as the island the game takes place on lacks any other animal @-@ based lifeform , making the player aware how alone they are while on the island . Most of the ambient sounds were recorded by Andrew Lackey of Wabi Sabi Sound , capturing them while walking around Angel Island in the San Francisco Bay . Lackey layered the various sound effects as to enable many different variations depending on the player 's location on the island while also providing seamless transition from one environment to the next . 
 = = = Marketing and release = = = 
 The game was quietly revealed to the public by Blow at the 2010 Penny Arcade Expo with the help of independent developers Chris Hecker and Andy Schatz , who were sharing booth space for demonstrations of their own games , <unk> and Monaco : What 's Yours Is Mine ; the two provided a table for demonstrating The Witness without any signs or other markings . Blow wanted to keep the demonstration subtle and a surprise and to see players ' reactions without the pressure of other players waiting in line to also try the game . Blow himself was present at the Expo but kept his distance from the demonstration table . The fact that The Witness was playable at the Expo was only fully revealed after the Expo by both Blow and Stephen Totilo of Kotaku , who saw and played the game but did not mention its presence until later . Players who tried the game at PAX or saw footage of it from the Kotaku article afterwards became concerned that The Witness would simply be a series of mazes to solve . Blow reiterated that there is more to the game than mazes , and that he encountered similar problems when trying to promote Braid , in that seeing videos of portions of the game does not serve to demonstrate " what happens in the player 's mind during the puzzle @-@ solving process " . 
 At the time of the 2010 reveal , Blow had anticipated to release The Witness on Microsoft Windows and iOS devices , and on an unspecified set of consoles , including possibly the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . Later that year , Blow restated his stance , and felt that there would be no console release on initial release , considering the amount of additional programming time and limitations of the console platforms . In November 2011 , Blow was able to hire two more programmers , and had rethought the release for consoles ; while he could not commit to a console release initially , the additional labor would help make it possible to have one console version ready at the time of the game 's launch , with the version for other consoles to be made available at a later time . As the game 's development progressed and it 's engine become more complex , Blow opted to forgo the development of seventh generation console versions , citing their " relatively low system specs " . 
 Around 2012 , development of The Witness for the next @-@ generation of consoles with improved hardware capabilities became a possibility , and Blow and his team started looking at this opportunity . They had discounted the Wii U , again citing low specs , and decided to choose between the PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One platform . At the time of this decision , Sony was able to provide hardware information and development kits . Sony has also sought out independent developers like Blow to learn about the upcoming PlayStation 4 in preparation for its launch , while Microsoft had not yet released firm specifications for their console . Blow opted to go with the PlayStation platform ; this decision was also aided by representatives from Sony that were interested in bringing the game to their system , and a larger trend of Sony to bring more downloadable and independently @-@ developed games to their next console in contrast to Microsoft 's tighter controls . Blow affirmed that there was no monetary deal involved with this decision . Blow also later acknowledged that he has had difficulties working with Microsoft in the past , and had previously explained several of the issues he had to go through with Microsoft to release his earlier game , Braid . The Witness had been planned as a launch @-@ window title for the PlayStation 4 in 2013 , a time @-@ limited console exclusive . The Windows and iOS versions , at this point , were planned to be released alongside the PlayStation 4 version , barring any development delays that Blow and his team encountered . Other console versions would come later , if they opted to develop for them . 
 The Witness remained in development , missing the planned 2013 release while Blow and his team continued to improve and fine @-@ tune the game . In September 2015 , Blow announced that the game 's release was set for January 26 , 2016 , simultaneously for PlayStation 4 and Microsoft Windows , with the iOS version to follow shortly thereafter . Though the ESRB rated the title for the Xbox One just prior to the game 's release , Blow clarified that they presently have no plans for release on that platform , only acquiring the ESRB rating for that console platform at the same time as the other confirmed versions to avoid having to redo this step prior to release in the future . About a week before its release , Blow announced that the game would be priced at $ 40 , an amount he said " fairly reflective of what the game is " . The value was met with some criticism as a high price for an indie game . Game journalists believe the price is justified given the estimated 100 @-@ hour playtime Blow has stated , as well as comparing it to a similar puzzle game , The Talos Principle ( 2014 ) , that was also released for the same price . To help promote the game , the development team created three " long screenshot " videos , inspired by the experimental film Koyaanisqatsi , that slowly panned across the island and its features without additional commentary . 
 Blow stated that they had been in discussions with publishers for a physical release of the game , but opted to not do that step initially , citing the additional time that would have been needed for the manufacturing and distribution processes . However , with the game completed and released digitally , they are looking to potential retail versions . 
 Following release , some players reported getting motion sickness due a combination of the narrow field of view used by the game and the bobbing of the player 's viewpoint simulating motions during walking . Blow stated they are working on a patch to allow players to adjust their field of view , disable the head bobbing , and enable faster movement options . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Witness received critical acclaim on release . It currently holds an aggregated Metacritic score of 87 / 100 for Microsoft Windows based on 20 reviews , and 87 / 100 for PlayStation 4 based on 82 reviews . 
 <unk> Rad of IGN awarded the game a perfect score of 10 / 10 , calling it a masterpiece and stating that it is " [ a ] beautiful , powerful , and cleverly designed puzzle game with a wealth of mysteries to unravel . " Brenna Hillier from VG247 praised the game 's use of a first @-@ person perspective to present what otherwise could have been a simple series of puzzle boards , and was impressed by the steep learning curve that the puzzles presented , " impossible , incomprehensible puzzles melt into simple exercises after you ’ ve visited nearby locations " . Aaron Riccio of Slant Magazine found that there was a " jarring shift " once the player reached the puzzles inside the mountain , with puzzles that relied more on obfuscation in a more clinical environment , contrasting with the rest of the island . 
 Jake Muncy of Wired , though impressed with the game , noted that the lack of any narrative or gameplay guidance could cause " players to bounce off [ the game ] entirely " . Further , on completing the game , Muncy believed that though Blow had compared his game to the novel Gravity 's Rainbow , it failed to create a vivid living setting in the island in contrast to the novel as to make it an engaging work . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer praised the game 's puzzles for providing numerous " eureka " moments to the player and considered the title as the video game analog of the Goldberg Variations , but felt that the narrative atop the puzzles was " self @-@ involved and wilfully obscure " , and believed that it could have been omitted , as Blow and his team " needn 't have tried to make a puzzle out of art when he had already , so beautifully and so successfully , made art out of puzzles " . Justin McElroy of Polygon gave the game an 8 / 10 rating , describing it as " uplifting but frustrating " ; he criticized the length of time involved in solving certain puzzles while expressing concern that less @-@ patient players would take shortcuts . " That will naturally lead to more cheating . It will snowball . " Bob Mackey of US Gamer was more critical of the game , giving it 2 of 5 stars . Though initially praising its visuals and setting , Mackey found the puzzles to be very difficult and " there 's simply too much going on to give me the proper feedback about what I 'm getting wrong " , suggesting that " Blow was maybe a little too close to his work " . 
 Several theories have been proposed as to the meaning of the story in The Witness . In attempting to analyzing the meaning of the game , David Roberts of GamesRadar felt that The Witness was about the nature of epiphanies within the scope of epistemology , the theory of knowledge . Roberts stated that as one proceeds through the puzzles in the game , the player begins to recognize other elements of the island setting as puzzles , and to obtain the game 's credit sequence ( the " true ending " as stated by Roberts ) , the player solves such an environmental puzzle built into one of the first puzzles they would encounter on the island : " the end of your journey becomes the beginning , and the beginning leads to the end - the very cycle of epiphany " . 
 Within a week of release , Blow stated that sales of The Witness had nearly outsold what Braid had done during its first year of release . He later specified that first week sales were over 100 @,@ 000 copies with gross revenues over $ 5 million , on track to break even with development costs , with which Thekla will start considering porting the game to other platforms , potentially including iOS , Android , OS X , and Xbox One . During this time , Blow observed that the Windows version of The Witness was one of the top downloads through illegal BitTorrent sites , comparable to what he had seen for Braid . He had opted to forgo strong digital rights management for the title , as he believes " people should have the freedom to own things " , but has said he may change his mind and software piracy controls " might happen on the next game " . 
 = 1997 – 98 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 1997 – 98 season was the 100th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . Managed by Arsène Wenger in his first full season , the club ended the campaign winning the league championship for the first time in seven years . At Wembley Stadium , Arsenal beat Newcastle United 2 – 0 in the 1998 FA Cup Final to win the competition and complete a domestic double – the second in the club 's history and the first since 1970 – 71 . Arsenal exited the Football League Cup in the semi @-@ finals to Chelsea and lost on aggregate score to PAOK in the UEFA Cup first round . 
 In the transfer window , Arsenal purchased several players , including midfielders Marc Overmars and Emmanuel Petit and goalkeeper Alex Manninger ; English midfielder Paul Merson departed to join Middlesbrough . Arsenal began the league season relatively well , but a run of three defeats in four matches between November and December 1997 left the team in sixth position before Christmas , and seemingly out of championship contention . Although they were 12 points behind reigning champions Manchester United at the end of February , a winning streak of nine matches ensured Arsenal won the championship with a 4 – 0 win over Everton on 3 May 1998 . 
 In recognition of the team 's achievement , Wenger was awarded the Carling Manager of the Year award and striker Dennis Bergkamp was given the accolade of PFA Players ' Player of the Year by his fellow peers and FWA Footballer of the Year by football writers . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1996 – 97 season , Arsenal contested in the Premier League . The club , having dismissed manager Bruce Rioch before the beginning of the league season , appointed French manager Arsène Wenger , in a contract worth £ 2 million . Arsenal led the league table for much of November , but defeat to Nottingham Forest on 21 December 1996 concurred with no wins in December . Two draws and defeats in February moved Arsenal into fourth position ; a previous defeat to Liverpool at home a month earlier left Wenger ruling the club out of the title race . On the final day of the season , Arsenal beat Derby County 3 – 1 at the Baseball Ground , finishing third on goal difference . The team , thus , qualified for the UEFA Cup , missing out on UEFA Champions League qualification to second place Newcastle United . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 The major departure of the 1997 – 98 season for Arsenal was midfielder Paul Merson , who joined Middlesbrough in a £ 4 @.@ 5 million deal , replacing Juninho . Wenger said of the move , " You are never happy to lose a player of his calibre but it is a good deal for him and for the club " . Middlesbrough intended to sign David Platt , but a move never came to fruition , as talks broke down between both parties . Defender Matthew Rose and goalkeeper Lee Harper joined Queens Park Rangers for a combined fee of £ 750 @,@ 000 . 
 Arriving first during the summer was English defender Matthew Upson from Luton Town . French midfielders Emmanuel Petit and Gilles Grimandi joined from AS Monaco , where they were <unk> to Wenger . Marc Overmars , a midfielder from Ajax was recruited in a £ 7 million deal and spoke of his delight at joining Arsenal in his press conference : " I like English football because there is more space . With my speed and quality I think it will be good for me here . " Deals for midfielders Luís Boa Morte and Alberto Mendez , striker Christopher Wreh and goalkeeper Alex Manninger were also finalised before August . 
 = = = = In = = = = 
 = = = = Out = = = = 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 Key 
 = = Premier League = = 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal 's league campaign started on 9 August 1997 , with an away fixture at Leeds United . The match ended in a 1 – 1 draw ; Ian Wright scored his first goal of the season , before a mix up in defence meant Leeds striker Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink equalised for the home team . Two days later , at home to Coventry City , Wright scored both goals in Arsenal 's 2 – 0 win , leaving the striker one goal away from equalling Cliff Bastin 's club goalscoring record . Two goals from Dennis Bergkamp and a debut goal by midfielder Marc Overmars , the following week helped Arsenal to win at Southampton . In spite of Bergkamp scoring a hat @-@ trick against Leicester City , Arsenal drew the match 3 – 3 , having conceded a third in the sixth minute of stoppage time . A further draw at home to rivals Tottenham Hotpsur , for whom defender Sol Campbell particularly impressed , meant Arsenal ended August in fifth position . 
 Wright scored his 179th goal for Arsenal against Bolton Wanderers and broke the club goalscoring record in a 4 – 1 win at Highbury . Manager Arsène Wenger praised the striker 's achievement , adding " He is fantastic for the timing of his movement . It is so intelligent when he has not got the ball . " Arsenal faced Chelsea at Stamford Bridge on 21 September 1997 ; at 2 – 2 , a late goal by left back Nigel Winterburn from 25 yards ended the home team 's resistance , who went down to ten men after Frank Leboeuf was sent off . September ended with a third consecutive win , against West Ham United . Goals from Bergkamp , Wright and Overmars helped Arsenal move to the top of the league table , one point above champions Manchester United . October began with a 5 – 0 win at home to promoted Barnsley , but two goalless draws – first at Crystal Palace and then to Aston Villa meant Manchester United moved a point ahead of Arsenal . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 Arsenal 's first fixture of November was against Derby County at the newly built Pride Park Stadium . They were awarded a penalty kick in the first half after Patrick Vieira was fouled by Lee Carsley ; Wright hit the penalty , which ricocheted off the goal crossbar . Two goals by Paulo Wanchope and a late strike by Dean Sturridge condemned Arsenal to their first defeat of the league season . Arsenal played Manchester United on 9 November 1997 and needed a win to stay one point behind the league leaders . Wenger admitted in his pre @-@ match comments that a second successive defeat would make it " difficult " for them to catch Manchester United , but not " impossible " . Striker Nicolas Anelka , standing in for Bergkamp , scored his first goal for Arsenal and Vieira added a second , leaving goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel rattled . Although Teddy Sheringham scored twice for Manchester United to level the score , midfielder David Platt headed into the far corner with seven minutes left of the match to score the winner for Arsenal . Wenger said of the win : " This result is good for the English game because it will stimulate interest in the Premier League " and opposing manager Alex Ferguson half agreed : " A one @-@ horse race is not good for the game . " Arsenal failed to capitalise on the result , losing to Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool , in a period where the team were depleted due to injuries . 
 A goal from Wright against Newcastle United , his first in seven matches , was enough to earn victory away at St James ' Park . Arsenal lost 1 – 3 to Blackburn Rovers the following week , denting their chances of closing the gap on leaders Manchester United . The match was overshadowed by Wright being booed off by supporters because of his performance , who responded by appearing " at the window of the east stand clad in vest and underpants haranguing the crowd . " Arsenal began the Christmas period with a fixture against Wimbledon ; the game was abandoned by referee Dermot Gallagher due to floodlight failure and rescheduled for a later date . On Boxing Day , an own goal by Steve Walsh helped Arsenal beat Leicester City 2 – 1 at Highbury . A draw at Tottenham Hotspur , who were welcoming the return of Jürgen Klinsmann left Arsenal in sixth at the end of the calendar year , 12 points behind Manchester United . 
 In the first league match of 1998 , Overmars scored twice to earn Arsenal a win against Leeds United . A week later the team drew 2 – 2 at Coventry City , losing more ground at the top of the table . January came to a conclusion with a 3 – 0 victory over Southampton , with all three goals scored in the space of seven minutes . A further two wins in February , at home to Chelsea and Crystal Palace , moved Arsenal into second place , nine points behind Manchester United , albeit having played two games less . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Arsenal dropped two points against West Ham United on 2 March 1998 , after a goalless draw at Upton Park . The following match , they closed the gap to six points , after Manchester United could also only manage to draw against West Ham but dropped to third position . A goal from Christopher Wreh in the rescheduled match at Wimbledon was enough to move Arsenal into second and set up a title clash between themselves and Manchester United on 14 March 1998 . The result moreover reopened betting after Manchester bookmaker Fred Done decided to pay out on punters who backed Manchester United . After numerous attempts to break the deadlock in the match , Arsenal scored with 15 minutes left of the match ; Overmars latched onto a header by Anelka and managed to flick the ball beyond the goalkeeper . When asked which team was in the best position going into the final games of the season , Wenger told Sky Sports that United had a " small advantage " over the rest ; Ferguson however warned that it would be " inevitable " for Arsenal to drop points . Two 1 – 0 wins , first at home to Sheffield Wednesday and then Bolton Wanderers meant Arsenal kept an eighth successive clean sheet , a new league record . 
 Arsenal beat Newcastle United 3 – 1 to move within four points of Manchester United in early April . The return of Bergkamp from a three @-@ match suspension helped Arsenal to <unk> Blackburn Rovers ; the team scored three goals in the space of the opening 14 minutes . Manchester United 's failure to beat Newcastle United meant Arsenal went top of the league table after beating Wimbledon by five goals to nil . Victory against Barnsley and four days later at home against Derby County meant Arsenal needed one more win become league champions , regardless of Manchester United 's results . Although Bergkamp was ruled out for the remainder of the season having sustained an injury against Derby , Arsenal eased to a 4 – 0 win against Everton – the last goal scored by club captain Tony Adams to become the first club other than Manchester United or Blackburn Rovers to win the Premier League . A run of ten straight victories – a new record , was set , and Wenger became the first non @-@ British manager to lead a team to win the league championship . Arsenal lost their final two matches of the league season , choosing to rest players for the upcoming FA Cup Final . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals <unk> Chelsea qualified for the Cup Winners ' Cup as defending champions and were the League Cup winners . ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round , receiving a bye as a Premier League club . Their opening match was a goalless draw against First Division club Port Vale at home , meaning the game was replayed at Vale Park , eleven days later . In the replay , Arsenal won 4 – 3 on a penalty shoot @-@ out , having drawn 1 – 1 in extra time . In the fourth round , Arsenal played Middlesbrough at the Riverside Stadium . Overmars scored the opening goal inside 68 seconds for the visitors and Parlour added a second to give Arsenal a commanding lead , going into the interval . Although Paul Merson scored in the second half for Middlesbrough , Arsenal did enough to progress into the fifth round . A 0 – 0 draw at home against Crystal Palace meant Arsenal needed to play a fifth round replay at Selhurst Park on 25 February 1998 . Goals from Anelka and Bergkamp ensured victory for an understrength Arsenal team . Against West Ham United in the quarter @-@ finals , Arsenal conceded the first goal when Frank Lampard 's corner kick was converted into the goal net by Stuart Pearce , through a first @-@ time shot . Although Bergkamp scored a penalty to equalise , Arsenal had to settle for a replay , staged at Upton Park , where it ended 4 – 3 on penalties after another draw . A goal by Wreh against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the semi @-@ finals meant Arsenal reached their 13th FA Cup final . 
 On 16 May 1998 , Arsenal contested the 1998 FA Cup Final against Newcastle United . Without first choice striker Bergkamp , Wenger partnered Anelka with Wreh , leaving Wright on the substitutes bench . Arsenal scored in the 23rd minute ; Overmars sprinted onto a pass from Petit , and used his pace to get past Alessandro Pistone and toe @-@ poke the ball between goalkeeper Shay Given 's legs . Anelka scored in the second half , from a pass by Parlour to settle the match . In his post @-@ match interview , Wenger praised the " remarkable " Overmars : " [ It is ] even more so when you realise that he has scored so many goals in important games that we needed to win . " 
 = = League Cup = = 
 Together , with the other clubs playing in European football , Arsenal entered the Football League Cup in the third round , where they were drawn at home to First Division club Birmingham City . The tie ended 1 – 1 after normal time ; goals from Luís Boa Morte , Platt and Alberto Mendez helped Arsenal win 4 – 1 in extra time . They needed extra time the following round to beat Coventry City , and in the fifth round , beat West Ham United 2 – 1 at Upton Park . Arsenal exited the competition in the semi @-@ finals , losing 4 – 3 on aggregate to Chelsea . 
 = = UEFA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the UEFA Cup first round , having finished third in the league the previous season . They were drawn to play PAOK , a Greek club noted for hooligan problems . In the first leg , Arsenal lost 1 – 0 at the <unk> Stadium , with midfielder Kostas <unk> scoring the winner . Although Bergkamp levelled the game on aggregate score , 22 minutes into the second leg , a late goal scored by Zisis <unk> meant Arsenal did not progress past the first round for the second successive season . Wenger later commented that he was not too unhappy about the team 's exit , by saying " To be honest , the only European competition that really interests me is the Champions ' League " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In recognition of the team 's achievement , Wenger was awarded the Carling Manager of the Year award , saying he was " very proud and honoured " after collecting the prize . Bergkamp was given the accolade of PFA Players ' Player of the Year by his fellow peers and FWA Footballer of the Year by football writers . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
