 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with name struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Source : 
 = Robert Cade = 
 James Robert Cade ( September 26 , 1927 – November 27 , 2007 ) was an American physician , university professor , research scientist and inventor . Cade , a native of Texas , earned his bachelor and medical degrees at the University of Texas , and became a professor of medicine and nephrology at the University of Florida . Although Cade engaged in many areas of medical research , he is most widely remembered as the leader of the research team that formulated the sports drink Gatorade . Gatorade would have significant medical applications for treating dehydration in patients , and has generated over $ 150 million in royalties for the university . 
 In his later years , Cade became a prominent philanthropist , donating significant sums to charities affiliated with the Lutheran Church , creating scholarships and donating freely to the University of Florida and other colleges and universities , and endowing his own charitable foundations . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Robert Cade was born in San Antonio , Texas on September 26 , 1927 . He was a fourth @-@ generation Texan . Cade took an early interest in athletics , and ran the mile in four minutes , twenty seconds at Brackenridge High School , a very respectable time for a high school athlete in the early 1940s . He graduated from Brackenridge High School in May 1945 , and served in the U.S. Navy as a pharmacist 's mate during the last months of World War II through 1948 . After being discharged from the navy , he enrolled in the University of Texas . He completed four years of undergraduate coursework in two calendar years , and graduated with his bachelor 's degree in 1950 . In 1953 , he married Mary Strasburger , a nurse from Dallas , Texas , whom he had met while he was in medical school . After graduating with his doctor of medicine degree from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School in Dallas in 1954 , Cade completed his internship at the Saint Louis City Hospital in Saint Louis , Missouri and did his residency at Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas . He also served fellowships at his alma mater , Southwestern Medical School , and Cornell University Medical College in New York City . In 1961 , Cade joined the faculty of the University of Florida College of Medicine in Gainesville , Florida , as an assistant professor of internal medicine in its renal division . 
 = = Invention of Gatorade = = 
 In 1965 , Cade was approached by Dewayne Douglas , an assistant coach for the Florida Gators football team , about the extreme dehydration faced by Gator football players practicing in the high temperatures and humidity of the Deep South in late summer and early fall . Douglas questioned Cade why his football players did not urinate during practice and games . Cade learned from anecdotal evidence that football players were losing water through perspiration and failing to replace fluid during practice and games . Cade 's research team discovered that football players were losing up to 18 pounds ( 8 @.@ 2 kilograms ) during the three hours of a college football game , and that ninety to ninety @-@ five percent of that loss was water . A player 's plasma volume could decrease as much as seven percent and blood volume by five percent , and sodium and chloride were excreted in the sweat . 
 During 1965 and 1966 , Cade , together with his team of research doctors Dana Shires , James Free , and Alejandro M. de Quesada , conducted a series of trial @-@ and @-@ error experiments with his glucose @-@ and @-@ electrolytes rehydration drink on members of the Gators football team of coach Ray Graves , first with members of the freshman squad , and after initially promising results , with starting members of the varsity team . " It didn 't taste like Gatorade , " Cade said in a 1988 interview with Florida Trend magazine . In fact , according to Cade , when Gators lineman Larry Gagner first tried it , he spat it out and strongly suggested that the original experimental formula tasted more like bodily waste . Dana Shires remembered that " it sort of tasted like toilet bowl cleaner . " To make it more palatable , at the suggestion of Cade 's wife , the researchers added lemon juice and <unk> to the original formula of water , salt , sodium citrate , fructose and <unk> phosphate . 
 Cade appeared in " The Legend of Gatorade " television commercials narrated by long @-@ time college football announcer Keith Jackson in 2005 , during which Cade declared , " Naturally , we called our stuff Gatorade . " However , the rehydration drink was first known as " Cade 's Ade " and " Cade 's Cola " to the Florida Gators football team , and only later became known as " Gatorade . " The drink received its first real test in the Gators ' 1965 game against the LSU Tigers football team ; the Tigers faded in the 102 ° F ( 39 ° C ) heat of the second half and the Gators did not . Coach Graves was convinced , and asked Cade to produce enough of his potion for all Gator games . Gatorade achieved national prominence as a result of the Gators ' first Orange Bowl title over the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets in January 1967 . The Gators reinforced their reputation as a " second @-@ half team " and came from behind to defeat the Yellow Jackets 27 – 10 . Afterward , Georgia Tech head coach Bobby Dodd told reporters : " We didn 't have Gatorade ; that made the difference . " 
 Cade patented the formula and offered all the rights to the drink to the University of Florida in exchange for the university 's backing of the production and marketing of the drink , but the university turned down his proposal . He initially obtained bank financing and began to produce " Gatorade " through his own business , but later entered into a contract with Stokely @-@ Van Camp , Inc. to produce and sell the drink . When sales royalties reached $ 200 @,@ 000 , the university took notice . The Florida Board of Regents , prompted by the U.S. Department of Health , Education and Welfare , which had provided Cade with a small grant for his research , asked for the patent rights . Cade refused . The Board of Regents , acting on behalf of the university , then brought suit against Cade for a share of the profits , arguing that the university 's facilities , employees and students were instrumental in the development of the product . After thirty @-@ one months of legal wrangling , Cade and the university negotiated a settlement of their dispute in 1972 , and the Board of Regents and the university settled for a twenty percent share of the royalties . Cade , and his investors in the Gatorade Trust , retained eighty percent . In the aftermath of the settlement , Cade and the university resolved their differences amicably , and expanded their professional relationships — of the first $ 70 @,@ 500 in Gatorade royalties received by the university , the university reinvested $ 30 @,@ 000 in kidney research by Cade 's renal department and another $ 12 @,@ 000 in Cade 's other research projects . Cade , for his part , created multiple scholarships and contributed generously to the university from his own royalties over the following years . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Through 2007 , the University of Florida has realized over $ 150 million from its share of the Gatorade royalties . Cade and his associates ' share of the royalties is undisclosed , the majority of their rights having been sold to Stokely @-@ Van Camp . After the settlement , Cade continued to work for the university , and the college of medicine named him professor emeritus of nephrology upon his retirement in 2004 . In April 2007 , several months before his death , the University Athletic Association inducted Cade into the University of Florida Athletic Hall of Fame as an " honorary letter winner . " 
 Gatorade , now owned by PepsiCo , is today sold in some eighty countries and over fifty various flavors . In contrast to the forty @-@ three dollars that Cade and his team spent to make the first experimental batch of Gatorade in 1965 , Gatorade prompted the evolution of a multibillion @-@ dollar sports drink industry in the years that followed ; as of 2007 , over seven billion bottles of Gatorade were being sold annually in the United States . While he was surprised by its commercial success as a sports drink , Cade took greater pride in Gatorade 's use in hospitals , in post @-@ operative recovery and to treat diarrhea @-@ related dehydration in infants and young children . Cade 's other research included hypertension , exercise physiology , autism , schizophrenia and kidney disease . His research into carbo @-@ loading substantiated the early claims of Swedish researchers , and he also invented a hydraulic football helmet that substantially reduced the risk of concussion to football players . 
 Cade was an active , lifelong member of the Lutheran church , and he was recognized by the church with its Wittenberg Award in 1991 . He gave generously to many Lutheran colleges and organizations . In their later years , Cade and his wife established the Gloria Dei Foundation , an organization that makes grants to aid the " poor and underserved . " 
 Cade was a talented violinist who sometimes played with local symphony orchestras . Cade acquired collections of more than thirty violins and more than sixty vintage Studebaker automobiles . He and his wife continued to live in the same Gainesville house that they owned before the financial success of Gatorade . On November 27 , 2007 , Cade died of kidney failure , at the age of 80 , in Gainesville . He was survived by his wife Mary , their six children , twenty grandchildren and eight great @-@ grandchildren . 
 The Cade Museum Foundation , established in 2004 and chaired by Cade 's daughter , Phoebe Cade Miles , announced in 2010 that it had begun raising funds to construct a new building for the Cade Museum for Innovation and Invention in Gainesville , with a groundbreaking planned for 2015 . 
 On September 26 , 2013 , Florida Governor Rick Scott posthumously honored Cade as a " Great Floridian " during a ceremony at the Cade Museum . The award honors those people who made " major contributions to the progress and welfare " of Florida . 
 = Albert , Prince Consort = 
 Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ( Francis Albert Augustus Charles Emmanuel ; later the Prince Consort ; 26 August 1819 – 14 December 1861 ) was the husband of Queen Victoria . 
 He was born in the Saxon duchy of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld to a family connected to many of Europe 's ruling monarchs . At the age of twenty he married his first cousin , Queen Victoria , with whom he would ultimately have nine children . Initially , Albert felt constrained by his position as consort , which did not confer any power or duties upon him . Over time he lent his support to many public causes , such as educational reform and the worldwide abolition of slavery , and took on the responsibilities of running the Queen 's household , estates and office . He was heavily involved with the organisation of the Great Exhibition of 1851 , which was a resounding success . 
 As the Queen depended more and more on his help and guidance , Albert aided in the development of Britain 's constitutional monarchy by persuading his wife to show less partisanship in her dealings with Parliament — although he actively disagreed with the interventionist foreign policy pursued during Lord Palmerston 's tenure as Foreign Secretary . 
 He died at the relatively young age of forty @-@ two , plunging the Queen into a deep mourning that lasted for the rest of her life . Upon Queen Victoria 's death in 1901 , their eldest son , Edward VII , succeeded as the first British monarch of the House of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , named after the ducal house to which Albert belonged . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Albert was born at Schloss Rosenau , near Coburg , Germany , the second son of Ernest III , Duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld , and his first wife , Louise of Saxe @-@ Gotha @-@ Altenburg . Albert 's future wife , Victoria , was born earlier in the same year with the assistance of the same midwife . Albert was baptised into the Lutheran Evangelical Church on 19 September 1819 in the Marble Hall at Schloss Rosenau with water taken from the local river , the <unk> . His godparents were his paternal grandmother , the Dowager Duchess of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld ; his maternal grandfather , the Duke of Saxe @-@ Gotha @-@ Altenburg ; the Emperor of Austria ; the Duke of Teschen ; and Emanuel , Count of <unk> @-@ Pouilly . In 1825 , Albert 's great @-@ uncle , Frederick IV , Duke of Saxe @-@ Gotha @-@ Altenburg , died . His death led to a re @-@ arrangement of the Saxon duchies the following year and Albert 's father became the first reigning duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha . 
 Albert and his elder brother , Ernest , spent their youth in a close companionship marred by their parents ' turbulent marriage and eventual separation and divorce . After their mother was exiled from court in 1824 , she married her lover , Alexander von Hanstein , Count of <unk> and <unk> . She presumably never saw her children again , and died of cancer at the age of thirty in 1831 . The following year , their father married his own niece , his sons ' cousin Princess Antoinette Marie of Württemberg ; the marriage was not close , however , and Antoinette Marie had little — if any — impact on her stepchildren 's lives . 
 The brothers were educated privately at home by Christoph <unk> and later studied in Brussels , where Adolphe <unk> was one of their tutors . Like many other German princes , Albert attended the University of Bonn as a young adult . He studied law , political economy , philosophy , and art history . He played music and excelled in gymnastics , especially fencing and riding . His teachers in Bonn included the philosopher Fichte and the poet Schlegel . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 By 1836 the idea of marriage between Albert and his cousin , Victoria , had arisen in the mind of their ambitious uncle Leopold , who had been King of the Belgians since 1831 . At this time , Victoria was the heiress presumptive to the British throne . Her father , Edward Augustus , Duke of Kent , the fourth son of King George III , had died when she was a baby , and her elderly uncle , King William IV , had no legitimate children . Her mother the Duchess of Kent , was the sister of both Albert 's father — the Duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha — and King Leopold . Leopold arranged for his sister , Victoria 's mother , to invite the Duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha and his two sons to visit her in May 1836 , with the purpose of meeting Victoria . William IV , however , disapproved of any match with the Coburgs , and instead favoured the suit of Prince Alexander , second son of the Prince of Orange . Victoria was well aware of the various matrimonial plans and critically appraised a parade of eligible princes . She wrote , " [ Albert ] is extremely handsome ; his hair is about the same colour as mine ; his eyes are large and blue , and he has a beautiful nose and a very sweet mouth with fine teeth ; but the charm of his countenance is his expression , which is most delightful . " Alexander , on the other hand , she described as " very plain " . 
 Victoria wrote to her uncle Leopold to thank him " for the prospect of great happiness you have contributed to give me , in the person of dear Albert ... He possesses every quality that could be desired to render me perfectly happy . " Although the parties did not undertake a formal engagement , both the family and their retainers widely assumed that the match would take place . 
 Victoria came to the throne aged just eighteen on 20 June 1837 . Her letters of the time show interest in Albert 's education for the role he would have to play , although she resisted attempts to rush her into marriage . In the winter of 1838 – 39 , the prince visited Italy , accompanied by the Coburg family 's confidential adviser , Baron Stockmar . 
 Albert returned to the United Kingdom with Ernest in October 1839 to visit the Queen , with the object of settling the marriage . Albert and Victoria felt mutual affection and the Queen proposed to him on 15 October 1839 . Victoria 's intention to marry was declared formally to the Privy Council on 23 November , and the couple married on 10 February 1840 at the Chapel Royal , St James 's Palace . Just before the marriage , Albert was naturalised by Act of Parliament , and granted the style of Royal Highness by an Order in Council . 
 Initially Albert was not popular with the British public ; he was perceived to be from an impoverished and undistinguished minor state , barely larger than a small English county . The British Prime Minister , Lord Melbourne , advised the Queen against granting her husband the title of " King Consort " . Parliament even refused to make Albert a peer — partly because of anti @-@ German sentiment and a desire to exclude Albert from any political role . Albert 's religious views provided a small amount of controversy when the marriage was debated in Parliament : although as a member of the Lutheran Evangelical Church Albert was a Protestant , the non @-@ Episcopal nature of his church was considered <unk> . More concerning however , was that some of Albert 's family were Roman Catholic . Melbourne led a minority government and the opposition took advantage of the marriage to weaken his position further . They opposed the ennoblement of Albert and granted him a smaller annuity than previous consorts , £ 30 @,@ 000 instead of the usual £ 50 @,@ 000 . Albert claimed that he had no need of a British peerage ; he wrote , " It would almost be a step downwards , for as a Duke of Saxony , I feel myself much higher than a Duke of York or Kent " . For the next seventeen years , Albert was formally titled " HRH Prince Albert " until , on 25 June 1857 , Victoria formally granted him the title Prince Consort . 
 = = Consort of the Queen = = 
 The position in which the prince was placed by his marriage , while one of distinction , also offered considerable difficulties ; in Albert 's own words , " I am very happy and contented ; but the difficulty in filling my place with the proper dignity is that I am only the husband , not the master in the house . " The Queen 's household was run by her former governess , Baroness Lehzen . Albert referred to her as the " House Dragon " , and manoeuvred to dislodge the Baroness from her position . 
 Within two months of the marriage , Victoria was pregnant . Albert started to take on public roles ; he became President of the Society for the Extinction of Slavery ( slavery had already been abolished throughout the British Empire , but was still lawful in places such as the United States and the colonies of France ) ; and helped Victoria privately with her government paperwork . In June 1840 , while on a public carriage ride , Albert and the pregnant Victoria were shot at by Edward Oxford , who was later judged insane . Neither Albert nor Victoria was hurt and Albert was praised in the newspapers for his courage and coolness during the attack . Albert was gaining public support as well as political influence , which showed itself practically when , in August , Parliament passed the Regency Act 1840 to designate him regent in the event of Victoria 's death before their child reached the age of majority . Their first child , Victoria , named after her mother , was born in November . Eight other children would follow over the next seventeen years . All nine children survived to adulthood , a fact which biographer Hermione Hobhouse credited to Albert 's " enlightened influence " on the healthy running of the nursery . In early 1841 , he successfully removed the nursery from Lehzen 's pervasive control , and in September 1842 , Lehzen left Britain permanently — much to Albert 's relief . 
 After the 1841 general election , Melbourne was replaced as Prime Minister by Sir Robert Peel , who appointed Albert as chairman of the Royal Commission in charge of redecorating the new Palace of Westminster . The Palace had burned down seven years before , and was being rebuilt . As a patron and purchaser of pictures and sculpture , the commission was set up to promote the fine arts in Britain . The commission 's work was slow , and the architect , Charles Barry , took many decisions out of the commissioners ' hands by decorating rooms with ornate furnishings that were treated as part of the architecture . Albert was more successful as a private patron and collector . Among his notable purchases were early German and Italian paintings — such as Lucas Cranach the Elder 's Apollo and Diana and Fra Angelico 's St Peter Martyr — and contemporary pieces from Franz Xaver Winterhalter and Edwin Landseer . Ludwig Gruner , of Dresden , assisted Albert in buying pictures of the highest quality . 
 Albert and Victoria were shot at again on both 29 and 30 May 1842 , but were unhurt . The culprit , John Francis , was detained and condemned to death , although he was later reprieved . Some of their early unpopularity came about because of their stiffness and adherence to protocol in public , though in private the couple were more easy @-@ going . In early 1844 , Victoria and Albert were apart for the first time since their marriage when he returned to Coburg on the death of his father . 
 By 1844 , Albert had managed to modernise the royal finances and , through various economies , had sufficient capital to purchase Osborne House on the Isle of Wight as a private residence for their growing family . Over the next few years a house modelled in the style of an Italianate villa was built to the designs of Albert and Thomas Cubitt . Albert laid out the grounds , and improved the estate and farm . Albert managed and improved the other royal estates ; his model farm at Windsor was admired by his biographers , and under his stewardship the revenues of the Duchy of Cornwall — the hereditary property of the Prince of Wales — steadily increased . 
 Unlike many landowners who approved of child labour and opposed Peel 's repeal of the Corn Laws , Albert supported moves to raise working ages and free up trade . In 1846 , Albert was rebuked by Lord George Bentinck when he attended the debate on the Corn Laws in the House of Commons to give tacit support to Peel . During Peel 's premiership , Albert 's authority behind , or beside , the throne became more apparent . He had access to all the Queen 's papers , was drafting her correspondence and was present when she met her ministers , or even saw them alone in her absence . The clerk of the Privy Council , Charles Greville , wrote of him : " He is King to all intents and purposes . " 
 = = Reformer and innovator = = 
 In 1847 , Albert was elected Chancellor of the University of Cambridge after a close contest with the Earl of Powis , who was killed accidentally by his own son during a pheasant shoot the following year . Albert used his position as Chancellor to campaign successfully for reformed and more modern university curricula , expanding the subjects taught beyond the traditional mathematics and classics to include modern history and the natural sciences . 
 That summer , Victoria and Albert spent a rainy holiday in the west of Scotland at Loch Laggan , but heard from their doctor , Sir James Clark , that his son had enjoyed dry , sunny days farther east at Balmoral Castle . The tenant of Balmoral , Sir Robert Gordon , died suddenly in early October , and Albert began negotiations to take over the lease from the owner , the Earl Fife . In May the following year , Albert leased Balmoral , which he had never visited , and in September 1848 he , his wife and the older children went there for the first time . They came to relish the privacy it afforded . 
 Revolutions spread throughout Europe in 1848 as the result of a widespread economic crisis . Throughout the year , Victoria and Albert complained about Foreign Secretary Palmerston 's independent foreign policy , which they believed destabilised foreign European powers further . Albert was concerned for many of his royal relatives , a number of whom were deposed . He and Victoria , who gave birth to their daughter Louise during that year , spent some time away from London in the relative safety of Osborne . Although there were sporadic demonstrations in England , no effective revolutionary action took place , and Albert even gained public acclaim when he expressed paternalistic , yet well @-@ meaning and philanthropic , views . In a speech to the Society for the Improvement of the Condition of the Labouring Classes , of which he was President , he expressed his " sympathy and interest for that class of our community who have most of the toil and fewest of the enjoyments of this world " . It was the " duty of those who , under the blessings of Divine Providence , enjoy station , wealth , and education " to assist those less fortunate than themselves . 
 A man of progressive and relatively liberal ideas , Albert not only led reforms in university education , welfare , the royal finances and slavery , he had a special interest in applying science and art to the manufacturing industry . The Great Exhibition of 1851 arose from the annual exhibitions of the Society of Arts , of which Albert was President from 1843 , and owed most of its success to his efforts to promote it . Albert served as president of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 , and had to fight for every stage of the project . In the House of Lords , Lord Brougham fulminated against the proposal to hold the exhibition in Hyde Park . Opponents of the exhibition prophesied that foreign rogues and revolutionists would overrun England , subvert the morals of the people , and destroy their faith . Albert thought such talk absurd and quietly persevered , trusting always that British manufacturing would benefit from exposure to the best products of foreign countries . 
 The Queen opened the exhibition in a specially designed and built glass building known as the Crystal Palace on 1 May 1851 . It proved a colossal success . A surplus of £ 180 @,@ 000 was used to purchase land in South Kensington on which to establish educational and cultural institutions — including the Natural History Museum , Science Museum , Imperial College London and what would later be named the Royal Albert Hall and the Victoria and Albert Museum . The area was referred to as " Albertopolis " by sceptics . 
 = = Family and public life ( 1852 – 1859 ) = = 
 In 1852 , a timely legacy from eccentric miser John Camden Neild made it possible for Albert to obtain the freehold of Balmoral , and as usual he embarked on an extensive program of improvements . The same year , he was appointed to several of the offices left vacant by the death of the Duke of Wellington , including the mastership of Trinity House and the colonelcy of the Grenadier Guards . With Wellington out of the picture , Albert was able to propose and campaign for modernisation of the army , which was long overdue . Thinking that the military was unready for war , and that Christian rule was preferable to Islamic rule , Albert counselled a diplomatic solution to conflict between the Russian and Ottoman empires . Palmerston was more bellicose , and favoured a policy that would prevent further Russian expansion . Palmerston was manoeuvred out of the cabinet in December 1853 , but at about the same time a Russian fleet attacked the Ottoman fleet at anchor at Sinop . The London press depicted the attack as a criminal massacre , and Palmerston 's popularity surged as Albert 's fell . Within two weeks , Palmerston was re @-@ appointed as a minister . As public outrage at the Russian action continued , false rumours circulated that Albert had been arrested for treason and was being held prisoner in the Tower of London . 
 By March 1854 , Britain and Russia were embroiled in the Crimean War . Albert devised a master @-@ plan for winning the war by laying siege to Sevastopol while starving Russia economically , which became the Allied strategy after the Tsar decided to fight a purely defensive war . Early British optimism soon faded as the press reported that British troops were ill @-@ equipped and mismanaged by aged generals using out @-@ of @-@ date tactics and strategy . The conflict dragged on as the Russians were as poorly prepared as their opponents . The Prime Minister , Lord Aberdeen , resigned and Palmerston succeeded him . A negotiated settlement eventually put an end to the war with the Treaty of Paris . During the war , Albert arranged to marry his fourteen @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Victoria , to Prince Frederick William of Prussia , though Albert delayed the marriage until Victoria was seventeen . Albert hoped that his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law would be a liberalising influence in the enlarging Prussian state . 
 Albert involved himself in promoting many public educational institutions . Chiefly at meetings in connection with these he spoke of the need for better schooling . A collection of his speeches was published in 1857 . Recognised as a supporter of education and technological progress , he was invited to speak at scientific meetings , such as the memorable address he delivered as president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science when it met at Aberdeen in 1859 . His espousal of science met with clerical opposition ; his and Palmerston 's recommendation of a knighthood for Charles Darwin , after the publication of On the Origin of Species , was firmly opposed by the Bishop of Oxford and ultimately rejected . 
 Albert continued to devote himself to the education of his family and the management of the royal household . His children 's governess , Lady Lyttelton , thought him unusually kind and patient , and described him joining in family games with enthusiasm . He felt keenly the departure of his eldest daughter for Prussia when she married her fiancé at the beginning of 1858 , and was disappointed that his eldest son , the Prince of Wales , did not respond well to the intense educational programme that Albert had designed for him . At the age of seven , the Prince of Wales was expected to take six hours of instruction , including an hour of German and an hour of French every day . When the Prince of Wales failed at his lessons , Albert caned him . Corporal punishment was common at the time , and was not thought unduly harsh . Albert 's biographer Roger Fulford wrote that the relationships between the family members were " friendly , affectionate and normal ... there is no evidence either in the Royal Archives or in the printed authorities to justify the belief that the relations between the Prince and his eldest son were other than deeply affectionate . " Philip Magnus wrote in his biography of Albert 's eldest son that Albert " tried to treat his children as equals ; and they were able to penetrate his stiffness and reserve because they realised instinctively not only that he loved them but that he enjoyed and needed their company . " 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 Albert was seriously ill with stomach cramps in August 1859 . During a trip to Coburg in the autumn of 1860 he was driving alone in a carriage drawn by four horses that suddenly bolted . As the horses continued to gallop toward a stationary wagon waiting at a railway crossing , Albert jumped for his life from the carriage . One of the horses was killed in the collision , and Albert was badly shaken , though his only physical injuries were cuts and bruises . He told his brother and eldest daughter that he sensed his time had come . 
 In March 1861 , Victoria 's mother and Albert 's aunt , the Duchess of Kent , died and Victoria was grief @-@ stricken ; Albert took on most of the Queen 's duties , despite being ill himself with chronic stomach trouble . The last public event he presided over was the opening of the Royal Horticultural Gardens on 5 June 1861 . In August , Victoria and Albert visited the Curragh Camp , Ireland , where the Prince of Wales was doing army service . At the Curragh , the Prince of Wales was introduced , by his fellow officers , to Nellie Clifden , an Irish actress . 
 By November , Victoria and Albert had returned to Windsor , and the Prince of Wales had returned to Cambridge , where he was a student . Two of Albert 's cousins , King Pedro V and Prince Ferdinand of Portugal , died of typhoid fever . On top of this news , Albert was informed that gossip was spreading in gentlemen 's clubs and the foreign press that the Prince of Wales was still involved with Nellie Clifden . Albert and Victoria were horrified by their son 's indiscretion , and feared blackmail , scandal or pregnancy . Although Albert was ill and at a low ebb , he travelled to Cambridge to see the Prince of Wales on 25 November to discuss his son 's indiscreet affair . In his final weeks Albert suffered from pains in his back and legs . 
 When the Trent Affair — the forcible removal of Confederate envoys from a British ship by Union forces during the American Civil War — threatened war between the United States and Britain , Albert was gravely ill , but intervened to soften the British diplomatic response . On 9 December , one of Albert 's doctors , William Jenner , diagnosed typhoid fever . Albert died at 10 : 50 p.m. on 14 December 1861 in the Blue Room at Windsor Castle , in the presence of the Queen and five of their nine children . The contemporary diagnosis was typhoid fever , but modern writers have pointed out that Albert was ill for at least two years before his death , which may indicate that a chronic disease , such as Crohn 's disease , renal failure , or abdominal cancer , was the cause of death . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Queen 's grief was overwhelming , and the tepid feelings the public had felt previously for Albert were replaced by sympathy . Victoria wore black in mourning for the rest of her long life , and Albert 's rooms in all his houses were kept as they had been , even with hot water brought in the morning , and linen and towels changed daily . Such practices were not uncommon in the houses of the very rich . Victoria withdrew from public life and her seclusion eroded some of Albert 's work in attempting to re @-@ model the monarchy as a national institution setting a moral , if not political , example . Albert is credited with introducing the principle that the British royal family should remain above politics . Before his marriage to Victoria , she supported the Whigs ; for example , early in her reign Victoria managed to thwart the formation of a Tory government by Sir Robert Peel by refusing to accept substitutions which Peel wanted to make among her ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . 
 Albert 's body was temporarily entombed in St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , until a year after his death his remains were deposited at Frogmore Mausoleum , which remained incomplete until 1871 . The sarcophagus , in which both he and the Queen were eventually laid , was carved from the largest block of granite that had ever been quarried in Britain . Despite Albert 's request that no effigies of him should be raised , many public monuments were erected all over the country , and across the British Empire . The most notable are the Royal Albert Hall and the Albert Memorial in London . The plethora of memorials erected to Albert became so great that Charles Dickens told a friend that he sought an " inaccessible cave " to escape from them . 
 All manner of objects are named after Prince Albert , from Lake Albert in Africa to the city of Prince Albert , Saskatchewan , to the Albert Medal presented by the Royal Society of Arts . Four regiments of the British Army were named after him : 11th ( Prince Albert 's Own ) Hussars ; Prince Albert 's Light Infantry ; Prince Albert 's Own Leicestershire Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry , and The Prince Consort 's Own Rifle Brigade . He and Queen Victoria showed a keen interest in the establishment and development of Aldershot in Hampshire as a garrison town in the 1850s . They had a wooden Royal Pavilion built there in which they would often stay when attending reviews of the army . Albert established and endowed the Prince Consort 's Library at Aldershot , which still exists today . 
 Biographies published after his death were typically heavy on eulogy . Theodore Martin 's five @-@ volume magnum opus was authorised and supervised by Queen Victoria , and her influence shows in its pages . Nevertheless , it is an accurate and exhaustive account . Lytton Strachey 's Queen Victoria ( 1921 ) was more critical , but it was discredited in part by mid @-@ twentieth @-@ century biographers such as Hector Bolitho and Roger Fulford , who ( unlike Strachey ) had access to Victoria 's journal and letters . Popular myths about Prince Albert — such as the claim that he introduced Christmas trees to Britain — are dismissed by scholars . Recent biographers , such as Stanley Weintraub , portray Albert as a figure in a tragic romance , who died too soon and was mourned by his lover for a lifetime . In the 2009 movie The Young Victoria , Albert , played by Rupert Friend , is made into a heroic character ; in the fictionalised depiction of the 1840 shooting , he is struck by a bullet — something that did not happen in real life . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 26 August 1819 – 12 November 1826 : His Serene Highness Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld , Duke of Saxony 
 12 November 1826 – 6 February 1840 : His Serene Highness Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , Duke of Saxony 
 6 February 1840 – 25 June 1857 : His Royal Highness Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , Duke of Saxony 
 25 June 1857 – 14 December 1861 : His Royal Highness The Prince Consort 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 British Empire 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 16 December 1839 
 KT : Knight of the Thistle 
 KP : Knight of St Patrick 
 GMB : Great Master of the Order of the Bath 
 <unk> : Knight Companion of the Star of India 
 GCMG : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George 
 Foreign 
 Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece , 27 April 1841 
 Knight of the Elephant , 10 January 1843 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 Upon his marriage to Queen Victoria in 1840 , Prince Albert was granted his own personal coat of arms , which was the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom differenced with a three @-@ point label bearing a red cross in the centre , quartered with the arms of Saxony . The blazon is written as : " Quarterly , 1st and 4th , the Royal Arms , with overall a label of three points Argent charged on the centre with cross Gules ; 2nd and 3rd , Barry of ten Or and Sable , a crown of rue in bend Vert " . The Prince 's peculiar arms was a " singular example of quartering differenced arms , [ which ] is not in accordance with the rules of Heraldry , and is in itself an heraldic contradiction . " Prior to his marriage he used the arms of his father , undifferenced , following German practice . 
 On his <unk> as a Knight of the Garter his coat of arms is ensigned by a royal crown and shows the six crests of the House of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ; these are from left to right : 1 . " A bull 's head <unk> Gules armed and ringed Argent , crowned Or , the rim chequy Gules and Argent " for Mark . 2 . " Out of a coronet Or , two buffalo 's horns Argent , attached to the outer edge of each five branches <unk> each with three linden leaves Vert " for Thuringia . 3 . " Out of a coronet Or , a pyramidal chapeau charged with the arms of Saxony ensigned by a plume of peacock 's feathers Proper out of a coronet also Or " for Saxony . 4 . " A bearded man in profile couped below the shoulders clothed paly Argent and Gules , the pointed coronet similarly paly terminating in a plume of three peacock 's feathers " for Meissen . 5 . " A demi griffin displayed Or , winged Sable , collared and langued Gules " for Jülich . 6 . " Out of a coronet Or , a panache of peacock 's feathers Proper " for Berg . 
 The supporters were the crowned lion of England and the unicorn of Scotland ( as in the Royal Arms ) charged on the shoulder with a label as in the arms . Albert 's personal motto is the German Treu und Fest ( Loyal and Sure ) . This motto was also used by Prince Albert 's Own or the 11th Hussars . 
 All of Albert 's male @-@ line descendants were entitled to bear an inescutcheon of the arms of Saxony at the centre of their respective coat of arms . The inescutcheon was placed , as Charles Boutell writes , as an " escutcheon of pretence [ that ] does not appear to be in accordance with either the spirit or the practical usage of true historical Heraldry " . However , in 1917 , during the First World War , King George V abandoned heraldic references to the royal family 's German heritage , and the Saxon shield was removed . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Prince Albert 's 42 grandchildren included four reigning monarchs : King George V of the United Kingdom ; Wilhelm II , German Emperor ; Ernest Louis , Grand Duke of Hesse ; and Charles Edward , Duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , and five consorts of monarchs : Queens Maud of Norway , Sophia of Greece , Victoria Eugenie of Spain , Marie of Romania , and Tsarina Alexandra of Russia . Albert 's many descendants include royalty and nobility throughout Europe . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Northern Area Command ( RAAF ) = 
 Northern Area Command was one of several geographically based commands raised by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . It was formed in May 1941 , and covered the whole of northern Australia and Papua . Headquartered at Townsville , Queensland , Northern Area Command was primarily responsible for air defence , aerial reconnaissance and protection of the sea lanes within its boundaries . In January 1942 , following the outbreak of the Pacific War , it was divided into North @-@ Western and North @-@ Eastern Area Commands , to counter Japanese threats to northern Australia and Papua , respectively . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to World War II , the Royal Australian Air Force was small enough for all its elements to be directly controlled by RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne . After war broke out , the RAAF began to decentralise its command structure , commensurate with expected increases in manpower and units . Between March 1940 and May 1941 , it divided Australia and Papua into four geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control zones : Central Area , Southern Area , Western Area , and Northern Area . The roles of these area commands were air defence , protection of adjacent sea lanes , and aerial reconnaissance . Each was led by an Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) responsible for the administration and operations of air bases and units within his boundary . 
 Northern Area Command , headquartered in Townsville , Queensland , was formed on 8 May 1941 under the leadership of Air Commodore Frank Lukis . The command controlled units in northern New South Wales , Queensland , the Northern Territory , and Papua . Lukis was thus responsible for air defence along the entire north coast of Australia . The main air base in the Northern Territory , RAAF Station Darwin , was augmented by eight satellite bases in the region . Between June and November 1941 , Northern Area took the lead in tracking Japanese pearl luggers , whose increased presence off north @-@ western Australia was regarded as " significant " by intelligence services . Central Area was disbanded in August and its responsibilities divided between Northern Area , Southern Area , and the newly formed No. 2 ( Training ) Group . 
 By December 1941 , Lukis ' frontline strength in the Northern Territory consisted of No. 2 Squadron ( flying Lockheed Hudsons ) , No. 12 Squadron ( CAC Wirraways ) , and No. 13 Squadron ( Hudsons ) , based at RAAF Station Darwin . When the Pacific War broke out , Nos. 2 and 13 Squadrons deployed forces to advanced operational bases at Koepang , <unk> and <unk> in the Dutch East Indies . Nos. 11 and 20 Squadrons ( flying PBY Catalinas ) were based at Port Moresby in Papua , and No. 24 Squadron ( Hudsons and Wirraways ) at Rabaul in New Britain . Northern Area Command was instructed to " strike at Japanese bases or shipping wherever possible " ; " obtain such warning as is possible of any attempted southward movements by the Japanese " ; " keep open the shipping routes through the Coral , Arafura and Timor Seas " ; and " deny enemy access to Rabaul and to the Territories of New Guinea , Papua and the Mainland of Australia " . Nos. 2 , 11 , 13 , 20 and 24 Squadrons engaged in reconnaissance , maritime patrol and sporadic bombing missions against Japanese targets in the Dutch East Indies and Torres Strait . Short of modern fighters and sufficient numbers of bombers , however , the RAAF units were , in the words of the official history of Australia in the war , " virtually powerless " to either attack or defend against Japanese forces building up in the region . 
 On 15 January 1942 , Northern Area was split into North @-@ Western Area and North @-@ Eastern Area , to counter distinct Japanese threats to Ambon and Darwin in the former case , and Rabaul and Port Moresby in the latter . Lukis remained at Townsville as AOC of the new North @-@ Eastern Area Command . North @-@ Western Area Command was headquartered at Darwin , Northern Territory ; its inaugural AOC was Air Commodore Douglas Wilson . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the end of the war , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , proposed reducing the five extant mainland area commands ( North @-@ Western , North @-@ Eastern , Eastern , Southern , and Western Areas ) to three . One of these would have been Northern Area , covering Queensland and the Northern Territory . The Australian Government rejected the plan and the wartime area command boundaries essentially remained in place until supplanted in 1953 – 54 by a functional command @-@ and @-@ control system made up of Home ( operational ) , Training , and Maintenance Commands . 
 = MoneyBart = 
 " MoneyBart " ( also referred to as " MoneyBART " ) is the third episode of The Simpsons ' twenty @-@ second season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 10 , 2010 . In this episode , Lisa coaches Bart 's Little League baseball team to a record winning streak by using her book smarts in statistics and probability . However , when Bart questions Lisa ’ s coaching tactics and accuses her of taking the fun out of baseball , Lisa benches him from the championship game . 
 The episode was written by Tim Long and directed by Nancy Kruse . It features an opening sequence and couch gag written by British graffiti artist and political activist Banksy , who stated he had been " inspired by reports that Simpsons characters are animated in Seoul , South Korea " . 
 The episode was watched in a total of 6 @.@ 74 million households , the ratings decreasing from the previous episode . Critical reception was generally favorable , with praises towards the story and jokes but criticism towards the episode 's use of baseball @-@ themed celebrity cameos . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A visit by Dahlia Brinkley , the only Springfield Elementary graduate ever to enter an Ivy League college , gives Lisa a severe inferiority complex because she is involved in very few extracurricular activities . When Ned Flanders resigns as coach of Bart 's Little League team , the Springfield Isotots , Lisa seizes the chance to extend her résumé and takes the position . Since she knows nothing about baseball , she seeks advice from the patrons of Moe 's Tavern , who direct her to Professor Frink and his scientific colleagues . She learns about sabermetrics from them and uses this science to organize the Isotots ' strategy ; as a result , their record quickly improves and they rise in the league standings . However , Bart eventually rebels against her management , saying that she has taken all the fun out of the game , and hits a home run despite her orders to let the pitcher walk him . The Isotots win the game , but Lisa throws Bart off the team for his insubordination . 
 The dismissal raises tension at the Simpson household , with Homer and Marge siding with Lisa and Bart , respectively . Homer believes that Lisa needs to do what is good to the team , while Marge thinks she should reconsider , since the family comes first . Under Lisa 's leadership , the team advances to the championship against Capital City . On the day of the game , Marge takes Bart to an amusement park ; while they ride the roller coaster , Lisa calls Bart to beg for his help , but he brushes her off . Mike Scioscia , manager of the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim , pops up in the seats behind Marge and Bart and tells him that the best players listen to their managers , pointing out his three World Series wins — two as player , one as manager . Marge takes Bart to the game , which is now in its last inning with the Isotots down 11 @-@ 10 . Bart puts aside his differences with Lisa and offers to pinch @-@ run from first base , then ignores her signs and steals both second and third . As he begins to steal home , Lisa realizes the odds are vastly against him , then decides to ignore the numbers and cheer him on anyway . He is tagged out at the plate , costing the Isotots their championship bid , but Lisa thanks him for helping her learn to love baseball as a game , and the team cheers them for resolving their differences . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Tim Long , his second writing credit of the season after " Elementary School Musical " , and was directed by Nancy Kruse , her first directing credit of the season . This marks the second appearance of Mike Scioscia on The Simpsons . His first appearance on the show was in the season 3 episode Homer at the Bat in 1992 , which is referenced in the episode . Baseball sabermetrician Bill James also makes a guest appearance in a talking picture on a wiki , being used as a reference when Professor Frink points out to Lisa that " baseball is a game played by the dextrous but only understood by the <unk> . " 
 = = = Opening sequence = = = 
 Approximately the first half @-@ minute of the opening sequence remains the same , with a few oddities : the word " Banksy " is sprayed onto a number of walls and other public spaces ; Krusty 's billboard advertises that he now performs at funerals ( first seen on " Take My Life , Please " , but this had " Banksy " on it ) . The chalkboard gag ( " I must not write all over the walls " ) is written all over the classroom walls , clock , door , and floor . 
 After the Simpsons arrive at home , the camera cuts to a shot of them on the couch , then zooms out to show this as a picture hanging on the wall of a fictional overseas Asian animation and merchandise sweatshop . The animation color quickly becomes drab and gray , and the music turns dramatic à la Schindler 's List . A large group of tired and sickly artists draw animation cels for The Simpsons among piles of human bones and toxic waste , and a female artist hands a barefoot child employee an animation cel , which he washes in a vat of <unk> fluid . 
 The camera tracks down to a lower floor on the building , where small kittens are thrown into a woodchipper @-@ type machine to provide the filling for Bart Simpson plush dolls . The toys are then placed into a cart pulled by a sad panda which is driven by a man with a whip . A man shipping boxes with The Simpsons logo on the side uses the tongue from a severed dolphin head to fasten shut the packages . Another employee uses the horn of a sickly unicorn to smash the holes in the center of The Simpsons DVDs . The shot zooms out to reveal that sweatshop is contained within a grim version of the 20th Century Fox logo , surrounded by barbed wire , searchlights , and a watchtower . 
 = = = = Creation = = = = 
 British graffiti artist and political activist Banksy is credited with creating the opening titles and couch gag for this episode , in what amounted to the first time that an artist has been invited to storyboard the show . Executive producer Al Jean first took note of Banksy after seeing his 2010 film Exit Through the Gift Shop . According to Jean , " The concept in my mind was , ' What if this graffiti artist came in and tagged our main titles ? ' " Simpsons casting director Bonnie Pietila was able to contact the artist through the film 's producers , and asked if he would be interested in writing a main title for the show . Jean said Banksy " sent back boards for pretty much what you saw . " Series creator Matt Groening gave the idea his blessing , and helped try to make the sequence as close to Banksy 's original storyboards as possible . Fox 's standards and practices department demanded some changes , and Jean agreed to them " for taste " ; Jean said that " 95 percent of it is just the way he [ Banksy ] wanted , " but declined to say what was in the censored 5 % , only saying that the original version was " even a little sadder . " In January 2011 , Banksy published the original storyboard on his website . It appears that a poster of Rupert Murdoch could be the 5 % that was left out of the final cut . 
 The Simpsons is storyboarded at Film Roman , a company based in California . The storyboards , voice tracks and coloring instructions are then sent to AKOM , a company in Seoul , South Korea . According to Nelson Shin , the founder of AKOM , they received the storyboard for the sequence in August 2010 . Believing the sequence to be " excessive and offending " he pushed for some of the darker jokes to be removed . He was successful , though " not nearly as much as he had pushed for . " For example , in the storyboards , the workers were wearing conical Asian hats , but these were removed . 
 Banksy told The Guardian that his opening sequence was influenced by The Simpsons long @-@ running use of animation studios in Seoul , South Korea . The newspaper also reported that the creation of the sequence " is said to have been one of the most closely guarded secrets in US television – comparable to the concealment of Banksy 's own identity . " 
 BBC News reported that " According to [ Banksy ] , his storyboard led to delays , disputes over broadcast standards and a threatened walk out by the animation department . " However , Al Jean disputed this , saying " [ The animation department ] didn 't walk out . Obviously they didn 't . We 've depicted the conditions in a fanciful light before . " Commenting on hiring Banksy to create the titles , Jean joked , " This is what you get when you outsource . " Although conceding to the fact that The Simpsons is largely animated in South Korea , Jean went on to state that the scenes shown in titles are " very fanciful , far @-@ fetched . None of the things he depicts are true . That statement should be self @-@ evident , but I will emphatically state it . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title is a play on the Michael M. Lewis book Moneyball , which examines the 2002 Oakland Athletics ' use of sabermetrics to build a competitive baseball team ; the book would be made into an Oscar nominated film in 2011 , the year after this episode aired . Moe laments his decision to advertise his drink specials in Scientific American magazine , which led to Frink and company coming in . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on October 10 , 2010 , " MoneyBart " was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 74 million viewers , according to the Nielsen Media Research , receiving a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 8 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , beating The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! in the demographic and total viewers and ranking third in its timeslot . The episode received a 29 % drop in the demographic from the previous episode , " Loan @-@ a Lisa " . 
 The episode received favorable reviews . Brad Trechak of the TV Squad said of the episode : " In the end , the episode was really good at the beginning and the ending , but the middle kind of dragged . " Eric <unk> of TV Fanatic criticized the Mike Scioscia cameo , although he said that " [ w ] hile this week 's installment will never replace our favorite Simpsons baseball episode , " Homer at the Bat , " there [ was ] certainly plenty of great jokes and a strong enough story with heart to keep us entertained . " Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club compared the episode favorably to " Lisa on Ice " although he also criticized the Scioscia cameo , calling it " awkward " . In conclusion he gave the episode an A- , the best grade of the night . 
 The opening sequence received a generally mixed response . Nelson Shin , the founder of AKOM , the Korean company that animates The Simpsons , said that he and his staff did protest being asked to animate the sequence . Shin said that the sequence suggests that animators work in sweatshops , but they actually work in " high @-@ tech workshops " . He added , " Most of the content was about degrading people from Korea , China , Mexico and Vietnam . If Banksy wants to criticize these things ... I suggest that he learn more about it first . " 
 Colby Hall of Mediaite called the sequence " a jaw @-@ dropping critique of global corporate licensing , worker exploitation and over @-@ the @-@ top dreariness of how western media companies ( in this case , 20th Century Fox ) takes advantage of outsourced labor in developing countries . " Melissa Bell of The Washington Post felt Banksy 's titles had helped revive The Simpsons ' " edge " , but after " the jarring opening , the show went back to its regular routine of guest cameos , self @-@ referential jokes and tangential story lines . " Marlow Riley of MTV wrote " as satire , [ the opening is ] a bit over @-@ the @-@ top . What is shocking is that Fox ran Banksy 's ballsy critique of outsourcing , The Simpsons , and the standards and human rights conditions that people in first world nations accept . It 's uncomfortable and dark , and not what 's expected from the modern Simpsons , which mainly consists of ' Homer hurts himself ' jokes . " 
 = Portland Aerial Tram = 
 The Portland Aerial Tram or OHSU Tram is an aerial tramway in Portland , Oregon , carrying commuters between the city 's South Waterfront district and the main Oregon Health & Science University ( OHSU ) campus , located in the Marquam Hill neighborhood . It is one of only two commuter aerial tramways in the United States , the other being New York City 's Roosevelt Island Tramway . The tram travels a horizontal distance of 3 @,@ 300 feet ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) and a vertical distance of 500 feet ( 150 m ) in a ride that lasts three minutes . 
 The tram was jointly funded by OHSU , the City of Portland , and by South Waterfront property owners , with most of the funding coming from OHSU . It is owned by the city and operated by OHSU . While most passengers are affiliated with OHSU , it is open to the public and operated as part of Portland 's public transportation network that includes the Portland Streetcar , MAX Light Rail , and TriMet buses . After opening in December 2006 , the tram carried its one millionth passenger on October 17 , 2007 and its ten millionth rider on January 8 , 2014 . A round @-@ trip ticket costs $ 4 @.@ 50 but are free for OHSU patients and certain visitors ; OHSU employees and students ride free by showing their ID badges . 
 The tram cost $ 57 million to build — a nearly fourfold increase over initial cost estimates , which was one of several sources of controversy concerning the project . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Route = = = 
 The tram consists of two stations and a single intermediate tower . Two tram cars operate in a <unk> mode on parallel track ropes and are pulled in unison by a haul rope which is driven by an engine at the lower terminal ; when one car is at the upper terminal , the other is at the lower terminal , and vice versa . The lower station is located beside an OHSU facility in the South Waterfront neighborhood , adjacent to a stop on the Portland Streetcar line , which connects the South Waterfront neighborhood with downtown Portland . The upper station is located adjacent to OHSU Hospital , on the university 's Marquam Hill campus . The two stations are exactly east and west of each other separated by a horizontal distance of 3 @,@ 300 feet ( 5 / 8 mi , 1 km ) and a vertical distance of 500 feet ( 150 m ) . The maximum vertical clearance between the tram and the ground is 175 feet ( 53 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 The tram route crosses over Interstate 5 as well as major thoroughfares such as Barbur Boulevard , Oregon Route 10 ( Naito Parkway ) , and Oregon Route 43 ( Macadam Avenue ) . The intermediate tower is located east of Interstate 5 close to the South Waterfront station . As a result of this configuration , much of the journey is significantly elevated above the ground , making the tram easily visible for some distance , and providing tram riders with good views of the eastern metropolitan area and the Cascade Mountains of Oregon and Washington . The alternative to riding the tram is via public roadways which require a 1 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 1 @-@ km ) route with numerous stoplights and intersections . This route includes a short stretch of busy U.S. Route 26 , as well as twisty Sam Jackson Park Road which ascends the side of the Tualatin Mountains to the hospital campus . 
 = = = Structures and cabling = = = 
 The lower ( South Waterfront ) station houses the tram 's engines in a reinforced concrete basement and also has ticketing facilities and the control room . 
 The upper station is a freestanding steel and concrete tower 140 feet above grade and houses the tram 's counterweight . It is structurally separate from nearby OHSU Hospital and connects to the hospital 's ninth floor via a <unk> over SW Campus Drive , which winds through the middle of the University . Structural separation between the tram and the hospital is necessary to avoid vibrations from tram machinery interfering with delicate microsurgery performed in the hospital . 
 The 197 @-@ foot ( 60 m ) intermediate tower allows the tram to gain elevation quickly once leaving the lower station to provide adequate clearance over Interstate 5 . The tower is 22 feet wide and 20 feet long at its base ( 6 @.@ 7 m by 6 m ) , 8 feet by 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m by 2 @.@ 4 m ) at its narrowest point — nearly two @-@ thirds up the tower — and 32 feet by 8 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m by <unk> ) at the top . It rests on a pier cap 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) thick supported by 35 piers . The tower was fabricated in nearby Vancouver , Washington , and barged in three pieces up the Willamette River . 
 Nearly 1 @,@ 250 tons of steel and 450 tons of concrete are in the two platforms and the intermediate tower ; the lateral loads on the upper platform range from 500 @,@ 000 to 800 @,@ 000 pounds ( 2 @.@ 2 million to 3 @.@ 6 million newtons ) of force . 
 Each tram car travels on a pair of 2 inch ( 49 mm ) steel track ropes , totaling four cables . The track ropes combined are tensioned at over one million pounds ( 4 @.@ 4 million newtons ) . A fifth cable — the haul rope — is a continuous loop which winds around the drive <unk> at the lower station , connects to one car , winds through a <unk> <unk> at the upper station , then to the other car , before joining itself . The haul rope length is over 7000 feet ( 2100 m ) . 
 = = = Cars = = = 
 The tram cars each weigh approximately 12 tons , with cabin dimensions of 25 feet by 11 feet ( 7 @.@ 5 m by 3 @.@ 3 m ) . Each car has a capacity of over 13 tons and there is sufficient room in the cabin for 78 passengers and one operator . The tram cars were built by Gangloff Switzerland in Bern and were shaped and painted to look like the architectural firm 's vision of " bubbles floating through the sky " . The surface of the cabins reflects and refracts light , minimizing their visual impact to the neighborhood underneath . The north and south cars are named Jean and Walt , respectively , after Jean Richardson , the first female engineering graduate from Oregon State University , and Walt Reynolds , the first African @-@ American to graduate from OHSU , then known as the University of Oregon Medical School . 
 = = = Drive and safety systems = = = 
 The tram is propelled by three independent drive systems . The primary drive is a 450 kilowatt ( 600 hp ) variable @-@ frequency electric motor . Two hydrostatic diesel engines are also part of the design : one is a standby drive , permitting operation during a power outage ; the other is an emergency evacuation drive . A 40 @-@ ton counterweight offsets the weight of the cars . The tram is capable of operating at speeds up to 22 miles per hour ( 35 km per hour ) . 
 In addition to the redundant drive system , the tram has numerous other design features intended to ensure the safety of passengers and persons on the ground under its route . Communications systems permit the tram car operators to communicate with the control room . Automatic supervisory and control systems monitor the condition of the ropes and the drive systems . The tram was designed to safely operate in the earthquake @-@ prone Pacific Northwest , with a structural design exceeding U.S earthquake standards , and operate in sustained winds of up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . 
 = = = Operational information = = = 
 The tram operates from Monday through Friday from 5 : 30 AM to 9 : 30 PM and on Saturdays from 9 : 00 AM to 5 : 00 PM , Pacific Time . The tram is closed on Sundays and major holidays , except afternoon summer Sunday service is available . The fare is $ 4 @.@ 50 per round trip , collected when traveling from South Waterfront to Marquam Hill . The tram is free for OHSU employees , students , patients , and visitors . An annual pass is available for $ 100 . Tri @-@ Met , C @-@ Tran , and Portland Streetcar passes are honored . A ride on the tram normally lasts three minutes . 
 Transportation officials originally estimated the tram would carry over 1 @,@ 500 people a day , a figure that was expected to rise to 5 @,@ 500 by 2030 . Those initial estimates proved to be conservative : the tram attracted one million riders in its first 10 ½ months of operation , and has averaged 3 @,@ 370 riders daily on an annualized basis as of January 8 , 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 In late 2001 , OHSU purchased property in the South Waterfront ( then known as North Macadam ) area , with plans to expand there . After studying several ways , including shuttle buses , gondola lifts , tunnels , and even <unk> , to connect OHSU 's primary campus on Marquam Hill with this area of planned expansion , the university sought city support of an aerial tram . 
 = = = Planning and design = = = 
 In early 2002 , Portland Aerial Transportation , Inc . ( PATI ) was formed as a non @-@ profit board . One of its first public actions was to request the Portland Bureau of Transportation ( at the time known as the Portland Office of Transportation , and abbreviated as <unk> ) to undertake an independent analysis of the connectivity options considered earlier by the university and its development supporters . In May 2002 , the city council accepted PDOT 's process proposal and also accepted PATI as the project sponsor . PDOT 's assessment led to the same conclusion OHSU had reached earlier : an aerial tram was the preferred approach . PDOT also recommended a second tram linking the Marquam Hill area with a nearby transit center on SW Barbur Boulevard . In July 2002 , the city council accepted PDOT 's recommendations and asked PDOT and PATI to proceed to the design phase , including a design competition . Both were also asked to work with residents of the affected neighborhoods to identify ways to mitigate the tram 's impact and identify other desired neighborhood improvements which should accompany the project . One of the results of that process was the Gibbs Street Pedestrian Bridge , which was completed mid @-@ 2012 . 
 The design competition started out by identifying four firms which would participate in the contest . The competition officially began in January 2003 , with firms from New York City , Amsterdam , and Los Angeles / Zurich as finalists . The winner , Los Angeles / Zurich @-@ based Angélil / Graham / <unk> / Scholl , was announced on March 26 , 2003 . In November , PATI chose Doppelmayr <unk> to design , fabricate and install the tram . The first public review of the project 's status was November 2003 . 
 = = = Construction and opening = = = 
 Construction began in August 2005 , with work on both platforms and the intermediate tower occurring through the summer of that year . The bulk of the construction occurred in 2006 . Installation of the engines and other equipment occurred during the spring and early summer of 2006 , which was followed by installation of the cables during the late summer and early fall . 
 On October 29 , 2006 , the tram 's two cars arrived from Switzerland after a week @-@ long delay . An inaugural run of the tram was conducted on November 9 , 2006 . Four tram construction workers were the first to test ride the tram while harnessed to the roof and suspending arm . Testing on the tram continued through November . The tram opened to OHSU employees on December 15 , 2006 . The tram opened to the public on January 27 , 2007 . 
 = = Funding and cost overruns = = 
 The project suffered significant cost overruns during its construction . Final cost was nearly four times the initial estimate , a development that nearly led to the tram 's cancellation mid @-@ construction . Operating costs are nearly twice original projections . When the city approved the tram project , it was understood that OHSU would pay for most of it . While the taxpayer share has grown , OHSU paid for 85 % of the total cost of the tram though it is operated as public transit facility . 
 = = = Initial estimates and funding = = = 
 The initial budget for the tram , published in November 2002 , was $ 15 @.@ 5 million , excluding " soft costs " such as project management and architect 's fees . Funding sources for the $ 15 @.@ 5 million include a direct $ 4 million cash contribution from OHSU , $ 9 @.@ 5 from local improvement districts set up to fund tram construction , of which OHSU 's share is $ 4 @.@ 8 million , and $ 2 million from the city of Portland , via the Portland Development Commission . Other property owners in the South Waterfront Local Improvement District pay the remaining $ 3 @.@ 7 million . 
 In April 2004 , the second public review was held to present project recommendations prior to a May review by the city council . The costs by then were estimated to be $ 28 @.@ 5 million , including soft costs . The city 's share at that time was $ 3 @.@ 5 million . In April 2005 , the price was readjusted again to $ 40 million with a construction delay of six months . Higher steel costs , weakening US dollars , and engineering modifications were blamed . By October , The Oregonian reported that steel costs had led to bids pushing the project 's price ( with contingency funds ) to $ 45 million . The increased cost was expected to be met through South Waterfront urban renewal contributions which would have otherwise been spent on streets and parks . 
 = = = Review of the project = = = 
 In January 2006 , Portland city commissioner Sam Adams , who inherited the city 's oversight of the project , undertook several actions in response to spiraling costs . The executive director of PATI was ousted , and a month @-@ long independent audit and risk assessment was undertaken ; its results were published February 1 , 2006 . By this point , construction was over one third completed . 
 The audit revealed that OHSU managers knew as early as 2003 that the tram would cost well in excess of the original $ 15 @.@ 5 million figure , partially due to a change in location of the upper terminal to accommodate planned hospital construction , but had withheld that information from city leaders . This resulted in harsh public criticism of OHSU management , with city commissioner Randy Leonard accusing the university leadership of an " outrageous shell game ... all at the expense of taxpayers " . As a result , the city of Portland threatened to withdraw funding from the tram mid @-@ construction , which would probably have scuttled the project . OHSU protested vigorously , threatening a lawsuit should the tram be canceled , and claimed the city was responsible for making up any budget shortfall . Negotiations between the city , OHSU , and the contractors ensued , with a revised funding plan and budget being agreed upon in April 2006 , by a 3 @-@ 2 vote of the city council . This revised funding plan required concessions from all parties involved , and called for a final budget of $ 57 million , with contributions from the city at $ 8 @.@ 5 million , or nearly 15 % of the overall budget . This final budget was met . 
 = = = Operating costs = = = 
 The tram 's operating costs are also higher than expected . Originally , it was expected to cost $ 915 @,@ 000 annually , but is now expected to be $ 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 . As a result , the fare — originally estimated at $ 1 @.@ 70 — is set at $ 4 @.@ 50 , about the same as an all day ticket on Tri @-@ Met ( $ 5 @.@ 00 ) . The fare is waived for OHSU employees , students , patients , and visitors , and those with transit passes on Tri @-@ Met , C @-@ Tran express passes ( for routes going to Downtown Portland from Vancouver ) or the Portland Streetcar . Operating costs are divided between the city and OHSU in proportion to the ridership . ( If 85 % of passengers are OHSU @-@ related , OHSU pays 85 % of the operating cost . ) 
 = = Community response = = 
 Even prior to the cost increases which plagued the design and construction of the tram , the project has been subject to criticism from the public . Many residents in the neighborhoods under the tram 's route object to the tram 's presence . The cost increases themselves , and the perceived machinations of public officials , have been controversial . Some consider the project an unworthy use of public funds at any price , either due to a lack of benefit for those not associated with OHSU , or due to opposition to such projects in general . 
 = = = Objections from underlying neighborhoods = = = 
 Many residents of the Corbett @-@ Terwilliger and Lair Hill neighborhoods , over which the tram passes , were concerned the cars would be an invasion of privacy and lead to lower property values . Initially , residents were promised that overhead power lines would be buried as part of the project , but as cost overruns mounted , this plan was scrapped . Neighborhood opponents of the tram have cited other reasons for opposing the tram 's construction , including the fact that the North Corbett neighborhood is a historic district listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Some residents filed a lawsuit against the city and OHSU , claiming that they own the " airspace " above their properties . The city later offered to purchase homes directly under the tram route at fair market value . 
 Even after its completion , the tram remains unpopular with some living underneath its route . In April 2007 , homeowner Justin Auld , living under the tram route , placed a sign on his roof stating " FUCK THE <unk> " in large block letters . The sign is not visible from the street , only from the air . Officials had looked into whether or not the sign violated any laws . The publicity surrounding the sign prompted city officials to quietly negotiate with the homeowner , and the sign has since been moved and the expletive covered . 
 = = = Concerns over the cost = = = 
 Both OHSU and the city of Portland have taken much public criticism for ballooning development costs . Local television station KATU questioned the relative price of the Portland tram compared to a new tram at Jackson Hole Mountain Resort , which was built by the same company , and ( as of 2007 ) was projected to carry 28 percent more passengers three and a half times the distance and eight times the height , but costing only $ 25 million . 
 The tram 's supporters , however , claimed that many of the increases are justified , or due to circumstances beyond the developers ' control . The auditor 's report , commissioned in 2006 , complimented the tram as " a dramatic , one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind facility that will become a Portland landmark , " and noted that the design was difficult to construct , requiring the tall , thin , complex tower and the tall , heavily loaded upper terminal to be built within very tight tolerances . 
 Special risks cited include : 
 an extremely restricted site for construction of the upper terminal 
 combining complex , European mechanical / electrical systems with sophisticated U.S. steel structure and infrastructure presented technical challenges and risks from conflicts between the two business cultures and management procedures 
 the need to install tramway cables over an interstate highway and state highways 
 In addition , it has been claimed that the re @-@ planning delayed the tram 's completion . One of the designers of the tram noted that " if we added up all the times we went back to try to save money , we probably lost a year . Maybe we saved $ 2 million , but what did we lose ? If we had an extra year , that would have meant a lot . " 
 = = = Concerns over corporate welfare = = = 
 Some critics cite the tram as an example of corporate welfare for OHSU with limited public benefit . A 2001 study done by OHSU prior to the tram 's being designed projected that the tram would have 4 @,@ 700 riders per day by 2030 , with less than one fifth ( 850 ) of those being non @-@ OHSU users . While the lower station has easy public access , access to the upper station requires navigating through the OHSU hospital . The Cascade Policy Institute , a local libertarian research group , criticized the project for being " railroaded through the political process by small groups of private interests " , and expressed doubt that tram construction would lead to new jobs . 
 Others argue that while the issues of increasing public costs are real , the importance of continued growth of OHSU for the city 's economy must be factored in as well . Not only is it the largest employer in the city , but OHSU is an important and effective vehicle to attract both federal funding , totaling more than 168 million dollars for 2005 , and a highly skilled workforce to the area . The growth in the current campus on the Marquam Hill is limited by access roads and parking , an expansion of which would likely cause more dramatic harm to the surrounding communities . 
 = = = Architectural and visual impacts = = = 
 The tram has been praised for its visual impact . Critic Jeff Jahn of <unk> called the tram " the most significant new piece of architecture to be added to Portland since Michael Graves ' Portland Building in 1980 " . The tram has also won several architectural awards , including the American Institute of Architects ' Los Angeles chapter ’ s 2006 NEXT Honor Award , and the 2007 Presidential Award of Excellence from the American Institute of Steel Construction . 
 According to city commissioner Adams , a cheaper alternative which would have changed the tower 's designs to a lattice style used in electrical transmission towers , was not considered because the result would look like an " ugly ski lift at a bad ski resort " and leave the city with what Adams called an " ugly postcard " that could last 100 years . Critics of the tram have also expressed concern over the tram 's spoiling views for the homeowners from the city 's West Hills , particularly from Gibbs Street , under the tram . 
 = Mrs. California = 
 " Mrs. California " is the ninth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 161st episode overall . " Mrs. California " aired on NBC in the United States on December 1 , 2011 . The episode was written by consulting producer Dan Greaney , marking his first writing credit for the series , and was directed by Charlie Grandy . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Robert California ( James Spader ) brings his wife ( Maura Tierney ) into the office for a job , and tells Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) behind her back not to give her one . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) opens a gym in the building and tries to get Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) to join it . 
 Tierney was brought in to play the role of California 's wife because showrunner Paul Lieberstein stated that he was " a big fan of hers " . " Mrs. California " received mixed responses from television critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode received 5 @.@ 74 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , staying even with the ratings from the previous episode , " Gettysburg " . The episode also ranked at first in its time slot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Andy ( Ed Helms ) is having a meeting with Jim ( John Krasinski ) in his office , Robert California ( James Spader ) appears at the window and frantically says that his wife Susan ( Maura Tierney ) is looking for a job in the office , and that Andy must not give her one . When Susan arrives , Andy <unk> tells her that they have no openings , but Robert insists that they have a look around before coming to any conclusions . Susan looks at the different departments , and decides on accounting . Andy again claims the office is already fully staffed , but Robert insists that he give her a job , even pressuring Andy by reminding him of his power as CEO . Confused by Robert 's mixed messages , Andy relents and gives her a job , but Robert later calls Andy on the phone to berate him for hiring Susan . Andy asks everyone in the office to treat her poorly to drive her out , which makes everyone uncomfortable as they like her , but end up doing so nevertheless . When Susan notices their behavior , she complains to Robert , who asks Andy to discuss the issues with Susan in the conference room and leaves . Susan eventually realizes it was Robert 's idea to drive her away . When they call Robert out , he vehemently denies it . Andy tells them Jim also heard him say he didn 't want her working at the office , which Jim overhears , prompting him to flee the office . Robert orders security to close the gate , preventing him from leaving . Jim then runs all over the building , but Andy and Robert find him and take him back to the office . After trying unsuccessfully to deflect their questions about what Robert told Andy , Jim blurts out that he is baffled at Robert 's attitude , since Jim enjoys working in the same place as his wife Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and misses her while she is on maternity leave . Andy and Jim leave the conference room and after a short while , Robert and Susan leave . In the parking lot , Andy apologizes to Susan and after brief small talk , Susan asks Andy out on a date , leaving him surprised . 
 Meanwhile , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) opens a gym in the building , which intrigues Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) , who 's been looking to lose weight . However , Dwight 's gym is only filled with his farming equipment as exercising equipment . Darryl says he needs actual equipment , which Dwight finally gets , but sees that Darryl is barely using it . Dwight asks more employees to join to help motivate Darryl to exercise harder . During a bench @-@ press , Dwight refuses to spot Darryl unless he says his motivation to work out . Darryl finally says it 's to impress the new female warehouse worker Val . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mrs. California " was written by consulting producer Dan Greaney , his first writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff in the eighth season . Greaney had previously worked with executive producer Greg Daniels on The Simpsons . It was directed by co @-@ executive producer and frequent Office writer Charlie Grandy , the first episode he has directed for the series after previously directing The Podcast webisodes . " Mrs California " features a guest appearance from Maura Tierney played Robert California 's wife , Susan California . Showrunner Paul Lieberstein stated that he was " a big fan of hers " and said he was excited for her guest appearance . The episode also marks the third appearance of Lindsey Broad who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She is currently set to appear in a recurring role for the season . Due to Jenna Fischer 's actual pregnancy Pam did not appear in the episode . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include more office workers joining Dwight 's gym , Andy and Jim trying to get out of Mr. and Mrs. California 's difficulties , and more scenes of Jim running away . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Ryan mentions his desire to found the " Dream for a Wish Foundation , " a play on the actual Make @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation . During Dwight and <unk> 's gym scenes , Dwight attempts to get Darryl to stretch his pelvic bowl by telling him that The Fonz did it to become cool . Later , Darryl sardonically corrects Dwight by telling him that the pronunciation for LeBron James is actually " <unk> <unk> . " Near the end of the episode , Darryl admits that he is attempting to impress Val from the warehouse , but Dwight believes he is talking about male actor Val Kilmer . 
 In addition , several films are mentioned or alluded to . Erin makes a reference to the 2006 film The Devil Wears Prada . Darryl comments that Dwight 's gym looks like " a scene out of Saw V. " Finally , Andy mentions that he " was watching a movie , and a bunch of apes took over San Francisco . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on December 2 , 2011 , " Mrs. California " was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 74 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode stayed even with the ratings from the previous episode , " Gettysburg " . Despite this , the episode ranked first in its timeslot , beating Bones which received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , CMA Country Christmas which received a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 6 % share , a rerun of Person of Interest which received a 1 @.@ 6 rating / 4 % share and a rerun of The Secret Circle which received a 0 @.@ 4 rating / 1 % share , although the former three shows received more total viewers . Added with DVR viewers , who viewed the episode within three days of the original broadcast , the episode received a 4 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , adding a 1 @.@ 3 rating to the original viewership . For the week of November 28 – December 4 , 2011 , " Mrs. California " placed nineteenth in the ratings among all prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Mrs. California " received mixed responses from critics . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt said the episode had the possibility of being a great episode of The Office , but that it didn 't live up to that possibility . He suggested that the writers could tell jokes , but couldn 't successfully " break a story anymore " . He also called the subplot a mixed bag for featuring Dwight as a caricature of his former self , but complimented the character development for Darryl which started in " Lotto " . He gave the episodes a C + . Hannah Lawrence of Hollywood.com called the episode a large improvement over " Gettysburg " and also called it possibly her " favorite episode of the season so far " . Chris Plante of New York called Robert California the worst part of The Office and said that he kept Andy from being more of a lead character for the series . TV Guide writer Bruce Fretts criticized the episode for under using guest star Maura Tierney . He also said that the episode suffered without former series star Steve Carell to serve as the comic foil . IGN writer Cindy White said the episode didn 't feel like The Office and called it " the exact opposite " . Despite this , she went on to compliment Susan asking Andy on a date and the pairing of Darryl and Val as a couple , saying that the latter had possibilities . She ultimately gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . Joseph Kratzer from What Culture ? gave the episode three out of five stars and wrote , " I ’ m going to go out on a bit of a limb here and say that while “ Mrs. California ” was of course not a return to form for The Office , it was a good example of how the series might define itself in this new Michael @-@ less era . " M. Giant of Television without Pity gave the episode a B + . After viewing " Mrs. California , " Washington Post writer Hank Stuever named The Office one of the ten best TV shows of 2011 and said that the episode proved the series could still deliver cringe humor without Carell . Multiple critics complimented the cold open to the episode . 
 = Snow White ( 2001 film ) = 
 Snow White : The Fairest of Them All , is a 2001 American @-@ Canadian @-@ German fantasy adventure television film co @-@ written and directed by Caroline Thompson and produced by Hallmark Entertainment . The film was first released theatrically in Europe , and subsequently aired in the United States on ABC as part of their series on The Wonderful World of Disney on March 17 , 2002 . 
 Based upon the traditional Snow White folktale first recorded in 1812 by German folklorists , the Brothers Grimm , the film deviates from earlier interpretations of the story in several respects . Set in a fantasy kingdom , it tells the story of Princess Snow White ( Kristin Kreuk ) , and the attempts of the Evil Queen Elspeth , Snow White 's evil stepmother ( Miranda Richardson ) , to eliminate her . Trying to escape the Queen Elspeth 's machinations , Snow White flees to the forest , where she befriends Sunday ( Michael J. Anderson ) , the leader of the seven dwarves , and together they plot the monarch 's overthrow . 
 Reviews were mixed , with Miranda Richardson 's performance coming in for particular praise , but Kristin Kreuk 's coming under criticism for being too bland . The film would subsequently be released on DVD . 
 = = Plot = = 
 John and Josephine deeply wish to have a child and when she is born with skin as white as snow , lips as red as blood , and hair as black as ebony , they name her Snow White . However , Josephine , Snow White 's mother , dies in childbirth , leaving John alone with their child . In the winter , John struggles to find food for his daughter , Snow White , when he sheds a tear over a frozen lake and frees a creature known as the Green @-@ Eyed One . As thanks for freeing him , Green @-@ Eyed One offers John three wishes . For John 's wishes , he asks for nourishment for his daughter , a kingdom to raise his family , and a queen for a new wife , as the creature cannot raise the dead . 
 John 's wishes come true , though he is unaware that the Green @-@ Eyed One owes Elspeth , his hideous spellcasting sister , who is an old and ugly crone , a wish of her own . In order to fulfill her ambitions , the Green @-@ Eyed One transforms Elspeth into a beautiful and young woman who will marry John and become his queen , second and new wife , and Snow White 's stepmother . The creature also provides Elspeth with a magical mirror that allows her to see others unseen and to deceive John . As years pass , Elspeth forms a good relationship with her stepdaughter , Snow White , who becomes a beautiful princess 16 years later . However , Elspeth is vain and keeps a room full of magical mirrors which assure her each day that she is the fairest of them all whenever she asks . 
 When Prince Alfred arrives in the kingdom and falls in love with Snow White , Elspeth is furious to discover that images of Snow White are appearing in her mirrors , which means that her stepdaughter is the fairest of them all . Driven with jealousy , Elspeth orders Hector , a hunter , to take the Princess into the forest and kill her , and then return with Snow White 's heart for her to consume . In the meantime , Elspeth transforms Alfred into a bear . Unable to kill Snow White , Hector presents Elspeth with the heart of a wild boar instead . When she learns the truth , Elspeth kills Hector , imprisons John in her mirrors , and stifles Snow White with an enchanted ribbon . 
 Snow White is saved by seven dwarfs , each named after the days of the week and possessing the power to transform into a rainbow to move from one place to another ( but are only capable if all seven dwarfs are present ) . The eldest is Sunday , who is a victim of one of Elspeth 's spells that has left half of him as a garden gnome . The dwarfs allow Snow White to care for their home , though the dwarf Wednesday is initially suspicious . When Elspeth learns that Snow White is still alive , she prepares a poisoned apple and transforms into Josephine , Snow White 's deceased mother , with the magic mirror the Green @-@ Eyed One gave her . Aided by Monday , who is turned into a garden gnome afterward , Elspeth , disguised as Josephine , finds her and convinces her to eat the enchanted and poisoned apple , which seemingly kills Snow White . 
 With her task finished , Elspeth tries to resume her beautiful guise with the mirror . But instead , the magic mirror returns her to her true form , even more loathsome than before , as punishment from The Green @-@ Eyed One for killing her stepdaughter . Snow White , a sweet and innocent human being . The dwarfs , unable to save Snow White , place her in a coffin of ice and leave her near Monday 's statue . When she receives a kiss of true love from Prince Alfred , in his bear form , she is revived . The spells on Alfred , Sunday , and Monday break , and Elspeth 's mirrors shatter , freeing John . Elspeth gets tackled and killed by gnomes , who have been freed from their enchantments . Freed from Elspeth , the Green @-@ Eyed One is able to go his way . Snow White and Alfred live happily ever after while the dwarfs decide to move on to find Sleeping Beauty . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Miranda Richardson as The Evil Queen Elspeth , Snow White 's evil stepmother 
 Kristin Kreuk as Snow White 
 Karin Konoval as Elspeth 's Old Crone form 
 Tom Irwin as King John , Snow White 's father 
 Vera Farmiga as Josephine , Snow White 's mother 
 Tyron <unk> as Prince Alfred 
 Clancy Brown as the Green @-@ Eyed One , the <unk> of Wishes 
 Michael <unk> as Monday , the red dwarf 
 Mark J. Trombino as Tuesday , the orange dwarf 
 Vincent Schiavelli as Wednesday , the yellow dwarf 
 Penny Blake as Thursday , the green dwarf 
 Martin Klebba as Friday , the blue dwarf 
 Warwick Davis as Saturday , the indigo dwarf 
 Michael J. Anderson as Sunday , the violet dwarf 
 José Zúñiga as Hector , the Huntsman 
 = = Development = = 
 In order to write the script , Caroline Thompson went back to the original written account of Snow White , published by the Brothers Grimm in 1812 . She came to the decision that the folktale was about the " fear of change " , as two women , Snow White and her stepmother , came to adjust with the changes that they were facing in life . Noting that the original 19th century folk tales were far " darker " in content than most 20th century adaptations , such as Walt Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) , she sought to utilise some of these dark elements in her adaptation . The idea for the Green @-@ Eyed One was introduced by co @-@ writer Julie Hickson ; Thompson noted that he was a " genuinely moral being " who tried to help people , comparing him to the genius of the peace found in Late Medieval literature . 
 Upon reading the script , Kristin Kreuk noted that she had been " entranced " , believing that the main message that audiences would take away from the film was that of not judging an individual 's personality based upon their physical appearances . Richardson thought that Caroline Thompson 's adaptation was " much more in keeping " with the ethos of the Grimm tale than subsequent adaptations due to its " darker " nature . Praising Miranda Richardson as being perfect for the role of the Evil Queen , Snow White 's evil stepmother , named Queen Elspeth in this version , Caroline Thompson asserted that she had been " a blast to work with . " Caroline Thompson noted that she cast the actors to play the dwarves according to their own individual personalities ; she remarked that Warwick Davis was a " phenomenal actor " while Penny Blake was " so funny " and Michael J. Anderson was a " genius . " Together , she thought that they brought an " array of talents " to the production . Michael J. Anderson himself claimed that he identified with his character , the " philosopher of the group " , and really enjoyed playing the role . Commenting on his character of Wednesday , Vincent Schiavelli noted that he was miserable because " he really thinks that he 's a dwarf " even though he isn 't . 
 Caroline Thompson would also praise her " magnificent collaborators " in costume and set design . The set designer noted that they constructed a castle that they felt was best described as " Viking art nouveau . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was released theatrically in Europe and the Middle East in 2001 , and debuted in the United States on March 17 , 2002 , when it was broadcast as part of ABC 's The Wonderful World of Disney series . Both Region 1 and Region 2 DVDs of the film were released . Reviewing the Artisan DVD release for the Combustible Celluloid website , Jeffrey M. Anderson praised its " gorgeous full @-@ screen transfer " , featurette , and cast @-@ and @-@ crew biographies , but highlighted that it contained no director 's commentary track . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Laura Fries reviewed the film for Variety , describing it as a " unique and lavish production that certainly warrants attention " but warning that it would be inappropriate for young children . Asserting that ABC had made a " big mistake " by airing it as a part of their Wonderful World of Disney series , she thought that it was " often nightmarish " , harking back to the original Grimm version more than the better @-@ known Disney adaptation ; in particular , she singled out the " evil queen / witch " and " satanic messenger who grants wishes . " However , she praised David Brisbin 's set design , remarking that he had created a kingdom which was " equal parts gingerbread baroque and David Lynch " and that Caroline Thompson " clearly relishes " in this universe . Noting that the " magnificently villainous performance " from Miranda Richardson " virtually steals the show " from the " doe @-@ eyed " Kristin Kreuk , she believes that the latter does " little to upgrade " the image of Snow White as the most victimized of fairytale characters . 
 Writing for The New York Times , Hal Erickson praised the film for mixing its " more frightening aspects " with " slapstick comedy and awesome special effects . " Jeffrey M. Anderson reviewed Snow White for the Combustible Celluloid website , awarding it three stars out of four . Remarking that Thompson " completely eradicates " the Disney interpretation of the folktale , he praised her directorial debut , noting the influence of Tim Burton but claiming that she offers " a more universal sweetness " than he does . He notes that while remaining accessible to children , the film still " drinks more deeply of the story 's dark elements " . David Parkinson of Radio Times awarded Snow White two stars out of five , praising Miranda Richardson 's performance and comparing it to that of Sigourney Weaver in Snow White : A Tale of Terror . He also acclaimed the casting of Vincent Schiavelli as the tall dwarf , but in contrast , he criticised Kristin Kreuk 's " inanimate performance " , seeing her as a " dull heroine . " M.S. Mason of the Christian Science Monitor said : " Beautiful young Kristin Kreuk makes a lovely Snow White " although felt that the film was only " passable family fare " . 
 = The Incredible Melting Man = 
 The Incredible Melting Man is a 1977 American science fiction horror film about an astronaut whose body begins to melt after he is exposed to radiation during a space flight to Saturn , driving him to commit murders and consume human flesh to survive . Written and directed by William Sachs ( with scenes added and reshot during post @-@ production by the producers without Sachs ' participation ) , the film starred Alex Rebar as the main character , alongside Burr DeBenning as a scientist trying to help him and Myron Healey as a United States Air Force general seeking to capture him . While writing and shooting , Sachs was influenced by The Night of the Living Dead . With the changes by the producers , the final film has been described as a remake of First Man into Space ( 1959 ) , which in turn was directly influenced by The Quatermass Xperiment - even though Sachs hadn 't seen those films . 
 The screenplay was originally intended as a parody of horror films , but comedic scenes were edited out during production and new horror scenes added . Sachs claims that the producers decided during shooting that a straight horror film would be more financially successful , and that the film suffered as a result . The Incredible Melting Man was produced by American International Pictures , which also handled the theatrical distribution . The film includes several homages to science fiction and horror films of the 1950s . Makeup artist Rick Baker provided the gory makeup effects for the film . He originally created four distinct stages of makeup design so that the main character would appear to gradually melt , but the stages were ultimately cut from the final film . 
 The film was commercially successful , but received largely negative reviews , although even critical reviews complimented Baker 's make @-@ up effects . According to the director , many scenes re @-@ shot and changed by the producers are problematic due to their inferior acting . The Incredible Melting Man was featured in the comedy It Came from Hollywood ( 1982 ) and inspired the makeup effects for a scene in the science fiction @-@ action film RoboCop ( 1987 ) . It was also featured in a season 7 episode of the comedy television series Mystery Science Theater 3000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a space flight to Saturn , three astronauts are exposed to a blast of radiation which kills two of them and seriously injures the third , Steve West ( Rebar ) . He is next shown unconscious in a hospital back on Earth , with bandages covering his face ; his physician , Dr. Loring ( Lisle Wilson ) , cannot explain what is happening to West or how he survived the blast . After the doctor leaves , West awakens and is horrified to find the flesh on his face and hands melting away . Hysterical , he attacks and kills a nurse ( Bonnie Inch ) , then escapes the hospital in a panic . Loring and Dr. Theodore " Ted " Nelson ( DeBenning ) , a scientist and friend of West , discover that the nurse 's corpse is emitting feeble radiation , and realize West 's body has become radioactive . Nelson believes West has gone insane , and concludes he must consume human flesh in order to slow the melting . Nelson calls General Michael Perry ( Healey ) , a United States Air Force officer familiar with West 's accident , and the general agrees to help Nelson find him . 
 West attacks and kills a fisherman in a wood , then encounters and frightens a little girl ( Julie Drazen ) there , but she escapes unharmed . Nelson tracks West by following his radiation trail with a geiger counter , but only finds his detached ear stuck to a tree branch . Perry arrives by plane , and is picked up by Nelson ; shortly thereafter , they visit the crime scene where the fisherman 's body was found . Sheriff Neil Blake ( Michael <unk> ) suspects that Nelson knows something , but Nelson tells the sheriff nothing because Perry earlier told him information about West is classified . Later that night , Nelson returns home to his pregnant wife Judy ( Ann Sweeny ) , who tells him that her elderly mother Helen ( Dorothy Love ) and Helen 's boyfriend Harold ( Edwin Max ) are coming over for dinner . On their way , however , Helen and Harold are attacked by West in their car , and he kills them both . 
 When Blake finds the bodies , he calls Nelson , who comes out to identify them . After Blake angrily demands an explanation , Nelson reluctantly reveals West 's condition . Nelson believes West is somehow getting stronger the more his body decomposes . Back at Nelson 's house , West attacks and kills Perry , although Judy is not harmed . Nelson and Blake arrive just as West escapes . West then stumbles upon the home of a married couple ( played by Jonathan Demme and Janus Blythe ) . West kills the man and attacks his wife , but she drives him away after chopping his arm off with a kitchen knife . Blake receives a call about the attack and takes Nelson with him to investigate . They follow West to a giant power plant , and then up several flights of outside stairways . 
 Blake tries to shoot West with a shotgun , but the blasts do not stop West , who throws the sheriff over the railing into power lines , killing him . West hits Nelson and knocks him over the railing , leaving the doctor hanging on the side . Nelson appeals to West , reminding him that they were friends , and West decides to pull Nelson to safety . Two armed security guards then arrive and , in a panic , fatally shoot Nelson as he tries to protect West . An infuriated West kills the security guards and stumbles away . After collapsing against the side of a building , he slowly melts completely away . The next morning , a janitor finds his gory remains and casually mops them into a garbage can . The film ends with a radio news report about another astronaut team being sent to Saturn . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The Incredible Melting Man was written and directed by filmmaker William Sachs . The idea for the film came to him when his mother , working in the office of a spray paint company , showed him " gooey stuff " which was used as a basis for spray paint and jokingly suggested that he should do a film featuring that material . During writing , Sachs was influenced by The Night of the Living Dead and wanted to give the film a 1950s horror film feeling . The final film , with its structure changed by the producers in post @-@ production , has been described by some sources – including the film magazine Cinefantastique and the 1995 book Cult Science Fiction Films – as a remake of First Man into Space ( 1959 ) , another film about an astronaut who becomes a monster after an accident in space . Science fiction film historian Gene Wright suggested that the final film was heavily influenced by The Quatermass Xperiment ( 1955 ) , a British horror film about an astronaut who begins mutating into an alien organism after a spaceflight . Sachs , however , had not seen those films and his original screenplay had a very different structure . He wrote The Incredible Melting Man originally as a parody of horror films . According to Michael Adams , a film reviewer who interviewed Sachs , this is why the film mixes horror with comedic moments , such as when Steve West 's detached ear gets stuck on a tree , and when a janitor sweeps West 's melted body into a garbage can at the end of the film . Adams claims that this explains several comedic lines of dialogue otherwise inconsistent with the rest of the film , including one moment when homeless men notice the melting West and say to each other , " You think we 've got trouble , look at that dude " . In Sachs ' original version , the film opened with the wide @-@ angle shot of the nurse running through the hallway ( which wouldn 't have been in slow motion , unlike the final film , where the producers played it back slowed down ) . Only later would viewers have gradually learned the background of the melting man . All the scenes showing the astronauts in space and the lead character in the hospital were re @-@ shot during post @-@ production without influence by the director , and Sachs criticized both the acting in those scenes and how they restructure the film . There are logical problems in the final film due to the re @-@ shot scenes ; it is never fully explained how West 's spacecraft returned to Earth from Saturn when West himself was so seriously injured and the other two members of his crew were both killed . 
 Welch D. Everman , author of Cult Science Fiction Films , pointed to several homages in the movie to science fiction and horror films of the 1950s . The title itself is a reference to the Jack Arnold film The Incredible Shrinking Man ( 1957 ) , and the final scene when a radio report advertises another trip to Saturn , thus hinting that another accident could occur , was a common device in 1950s horror films . One difference , noted by Everman , is that in the 1950s films , government cover @-@ ups and secret agendas were often ascribed to the good of the general public , whereas The Incredible Melting Man , like many late 1970s films of its genre , suggested otherwise . Variety described the script , in addition to its horror elements , as " a human story attempting to leave a moral message as to whether society or the horrible creature it is chasing is really the most destructive " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Alex Rebar starred as Steve West in one of only a handful of film appearances throughout his acting career . Burr DeBenning played Dr. Ted Nelson , and General Michael Perry was portrayed by Myron Healey , who was , Everman notes , often cast as a villain in 1950s science fiction films . Film director Jonathan Demme played the small role of Matt Winters , one of West 's victims . <unk> Smith , best known for her appearances in B movies and exploitation films , appeared in The Incredible Melting Man as a model who finds one of West 's victims while trying to avoid a photographer seeking to take explicit photos of her . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Producer Max Rosenberg , best known for his horror and supernatural films , provided the financing for The Incredible Melting Man . Samuel W. <unk> was the film 's producer , and American International Pictures served as both the production company and the distributor . According to Sachs , the producers decided during shooting that a straight horror film would be more financially successful than a parody , so many of the comedic scenes were edited out and new horror scenes were shot and added to the film . Sachs said he felt the film was taken away from him , and that it suffered as a result because the producers tried to make it both a comedy and horror film , thus failing at both . Sachs said of the decision , " How can a serious horror movie end with the monster being shoveled into a garbage can ? " 
 Makeup artist Baker provided the special makeup effects for The Incredible Melting Man , which included the gradual melting of Steve West . Rebar wore facial appliances that simulated melting flesh , and his hands and feet were fitted with liquid substances that dropped off as he walked , creating the appearance that West 's body was falling apart . During one scene , a murdered fisherman 's severed head falls down a waterfall and smashes on the rocks below . To create the effect , Baker used a gelatin head with a wax skull and fake blood inside , which burst out upon impact . 
 Baker created four distinct stages of make @-@ up design so West would appear to gradually melt as time passed . However , after the film went through two separate stages of editing , these make @-@ up stages were ultimately eliminated from the final cut , and the character looks generally the same throughout the film . Richard Meyers , author of The World of Fantasy Films , said actor Rebar was impatient and uncooperative with the extensive make @-@ up sessions required for the effects , and thus did not wear all of the facial appliances Baker designed . This , Meyers said , may have been an additional factor in the lack of make @-@ up effect stages in the final film . The way that Sachs shot the film , it did not include any scenes with West before he sustained the radiation poisoning that caused his body to melt . Such scenes were , however , re @-@ shot later by the producers without Sachs ' participation . 
 Harry Woolman worked on the special effects along with Baker , and Willy Curtis worked as the film 's cinematographer . Some scenes included photography errors , including one in which light shines through a kitchen window from outside even though it is supposed to be nighttime . Michel Levesque provided art direction , and the musical score was composed by London Philharmonic Orchestra conductor Arlon Ober . 
 During post @-@ production , as the producers decided to change the film into a more serious horror film , they filmed numerous scenes for that purpose without the participation of the director . Among those scenes is the entire prologue of the astronauts in space and West waking up in a hospital ( which are the only scenes in which Rebar 's face is seen without make @-@ up ) . Additionally , the film was extensively re @-@ edited by the producers . Sachs criticized the acting in those re @-@ shot scenes , as well as the change of tone they bring into the film along with the re @-@ editing by the producers . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The distribution of The Incredible Melting Man was handled by American International Pictures , with the involvement of film producer and distributor Irwin Yablans , who specialized primarily in B movies and low @-@ budget horror films . A trailer released for the film attempted to build tension by not revealing the monster right away . Instead , it showed portions of the scene immediately before the nurse is murdered , in which she runs down a hallway screaming and then crashes through a glass window trying to escape from West , who is only shown towards the end of the trailer . In some advertisements , the monster from the film was described as " the first NEW horror creature " . As a promotional gimmick , candles were made and sold to advertise the film . 
 One poster for the film included the statement : " Rick Baker , the new master of special effects , who brought you the magic of The Exorcist and gave you the wonder of King Kong , now brings you his greatest creation , The Incredible Melting Man " . Although Baker assisted with the effects in The Exorcist ( 1973 ) , Dick Smith was the make @-@ up artist who primarily worked on that film , not Baker . Exorcist director William Friedkin was so angry about the poster that , upon seeing it on an associate 's wall , he tore it down and ripped it to pieces . Baker , who did not know about the poster in advance , was horrified by the publicity campaign and publicly apologized for it , claiming : " Dick wanted some help so I first went out to do some work on the dummy whose head turns around 360 degrees . I really didn 't do anything creative , I just did labor " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Incredible Melting Man is a singular theatrical experience that truly lives up to its crazed , pulpy title . Originally intended as an homage to the great “ atomic age ” horrors of the Fifties , William Sachs ’ s clever satire was recut by its original distributor to cash in on the horror craze . 
 The Incredible Melting Man <unk> largely negative reviews , and has ranked among the Bottom 100 list of films on the Internet Movie Database , although there have also been very favorable reviews . The New York Post attested to Sachs ' " simple mastery of the medium " . Tom Buckley of The New York Times described it as poorly written and directed , calling it one of many poor summer films released " to fill the need of drive @-@ in operators for something cheap to put on the screen for the kids in the cars to ignore or laugh at " . The Globe and Mail writer Robert Martin praised Baker 's make @-@ up effects and said director Sachs did an efficient job building tension . However , Martin strongly criticized the script and the acting , claiming " logic and character are jettisoned in favor of suspense and horror " , and said the film 's positive elements were not strong enough to outweigh the negatives . John Foyston of The Oregonian strongly condemned the film as gratuitously gory with thin , <unk> characters . He declared it worse than the horror film Manos : The Hands of Fate ( 1966 ) , which is widely considered one of the worst films ever made . Rick <unk> , a film professor at the Meadows School of the Arts who wrote a book about horror films , said there was " little to recommend " about The Incredible Melting Man besides Baker 's make @-@ up effects . Richard Meyers , a novelist who also wrote about science @-@ fiction films , called the film muddled and dull : " Although the movie didn 't have to be a sage examination of outer space diseases , it should at least have been exciting " . Meyers complimented Baker 's visual effects , but said his work was undermined by poor filming and actor Rebar 's impatience with the make @-@ up effects . 
 A 1985 review in the book The Motion Picture Guide said , " The film tries to balance horror against morality but ends up shaky at best " . The review described the special effects as " all right , but not nearly as gruesome as the film pretends they are " . In a review written shortly after the film was released , Variety wrote that the film " more often than not succeeds in telling a story and sustaining audience interest " , and that the script included not only horrors , but also a human story with a moral message about society . However , the review also called the dialogue " trite " , described some scenes as " technically incorrect " , and said the film disappointed by lingering on the ordinary characters rather the monster . Gene Wright , who wrote a book about science fiction films , said the film " attempts to blend pathos with awesome horror , but can 't resist going for the gut with a surfeit of gore " . Blockbuster Inc . ' s Guide to Movies and Videos gave the film 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 , and described the it as " unexciting and contrived , though Rick Baker 's gross @-@ out makeup is undeniably effective " . In The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Movies , Phil Hardy described it as a better @-@ than @-@ average but " spotty " film , and said director William Sachs injected a sense of " grisly humor " into it . However , Hardy said the central concept inspired more laughter than terror , and called the special effects " only routine " . 
 Some reviews were more positive . Welch D. Everman , author of Cult Science Fiction Films , compared the relationship between West and Nelson to that of Victor Frankenstein and his monster in Mary Shelly 's novel Frankenstein ( 1818 ) . Everman wrote , " This is the kind of movie we 've come to expect from AIP — cheaply made , nasty , and lots of fun " . John W. Bowen of the Belleville Intelligencer said he enjoyed the " camp " style of the film , adding , " It 's both inexplicable and sad this brain @-@ damaged yet fiercely determined little drive @-@ in bottom feeder never garnered more than a tiny cult following over the years " . A 1978 critique in The Review of the News said , " Films like The Incredible Melting Man are not made to be good ; they are made to be scary . For anyone looking to raise goosebumps on their flesh , this one is sufficient to give you your money 's worth " . " Matt Maiellaro , co @-@ creator of the Cartoon Network series Aqua Teen Hunger Force , said the film inspired him to start making films himself , adding , " When I was eight , I watched The Incredible Melting Man and knew that horror movies were going to be big religion in my life " . Z movie director Tim Ritter said he was partially inspired to enter show business by watching a trailer for The Incredible Melting Man at age 9 . Ritter said , " I was too young to see the movie , but the trailer really got into my imagination " . 
 = = = Home release = = = 
 The Incredible Melting Man was released on VHS in 1986 by Vestron Video , and was rereleased in 1994 by Orion Pictures Library , although unlike other Orion VHS releases , it was not digitally remastered . In September 2000 , The Incredible Melting Man was once again released on VHS as part of Midnite Movies , a line of B movies and exploitation films released to home video by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . Although currently unavailable on DVD in Region 1 , it was released in Region 2 by CMV <unk> on February 2 , 2003 . In addition to the home video and DVD releases , The Incredible Melting Man has been featured in several film festivals , including the 1987 Visions Film Festival at the Enmore Theatre in Sydney , Australia ; the 2007 B @-@ Fest in Chicago ; the 2008 <unk> Movie Festival in Englewood , Colorado ; and the 2010 Groovy B @-@ Movie Marathon in Durham , North Carolina . Scream Factory released the film on Blu @-@ ray in 2013 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The film appeared in It Came from Hollywood , a 1982 comedy film featuring a compilation of clips from more than 100 B movies from the 1930s to the 1970s , which are shown between scripted segments performed by comedians . Baker 's effects from The Incredible Melting Man inspired the make @-@ up effects for a scene in the science fiction @-@ action film RoboCop ( 1987 ) . During the scene , Emil <unk> ( Paul McCrane ) attempts to drive RoboCop off the road , but instead accidentally drives into a vat of toxic waste , causing the flesh to melt off his face and hands . These effects were conceived and designed by special make @-@ up effects artist Rob <unk> , who was inspired by Baker 's work on The Incredible Melting Man and dubbed the RoboCop effects " the Melting Man " as an homage to the production . 
 The Incredible Melting Man was featured a seventh season episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 . The film appeared in the fourth episode of the seventh season , which was broadcast on Comedy Central on February 24 , 1996 . Michael J. Nelson , the show 's head writer , spoke disparagingly about the film while describing it to the press : " The plot is – and I 'm not kidding here – the plot is , a guy is melting . That 's the plot " . 
 = Brian Moore presidential campaign , 2008 = 
 Brian Patrick Moore , a local activist from Florida , announced his candidacy for the presidency of the United States in St. Louis , Missouri , on October 19 , 2007 . The same month he was declared the nominee of the Socialist Party USA for the 2008 presidential election . The SPUSA national convention elected Stewart Alexis Alexander of California as Moore 's vice presidential nominee . 
 During his campaign , Moore focused on the American @-@ led wars abroad , labor rights and community ownership of corporations . Throughout his campaign Moore failed to gather much support in the states he had access to , and ended in 11th place overall , receiving 6 @,@ 555 votes nationwide . Moore was not able to increase the party 's voter base , and instead , it lowered itself from 10 to 6 thousand votes nationwide from the previous presidential election . Moore 's campaign raised $ 9 @,@ 516 . 
 While minor , Moore managed to earn much needed media interest in the later part of the election mostly due to John McCain 's red baiting against Barack Obama and making an appeal to the 5th US Circuit Court to get ballot access in the state of Louisiana . His media campaign included writing articles in several leading newspapers such as The New Republic and the National Journal and making appearances on television , most notably The Colbert Report . 
 = = Chronicle = = 
 = = = Campaign developments = = = 
 On October 19 , 2007 the Socialist Party USA held their national convention in St. Louis , Missouri . Brian Moore was voted the party 's presidential candidate , with four out of 11 opponents earning less votes than him combined . He earned the majority during the third election round . Later , Stewart Alexander was selected by the party as Moore 's Vice Presidential candidate . A week later , Moore stood as a candidate for the Peace and Freedom Party , against Ralph Nader , Gloria La Riva , and Cynthia McKinney . Nader became the presidential candidate for the Peace and Freedom Party , Moore then stood as a candidate for the Natural Law Party in Michigan , where he was again defeated by Nader . Moore won the presidential candidacy for the Natural Law Party of Mississippi . 
 After not completing the necessary paperwork in time to field candidates in the state of Louisiana , the Socialist Party USA along with the Libertarian Party lost their respective privileges to field write @-@ in candidates and party affiliated candidates in the state . Mark R. Brown of the Libertarian Party , along with Moore , made an appeal . The 5th US Circuit Court overturned US District Judge James Brady 's order to include the Libertarian candidate on the Louisiana ballot , but upheld their ruling towards the Socialist Party USA , concluding that they had " filed too little , too late " . Another reason is that the Socialist Party USA is an " un @-@ recognized " organization according to the law of the state of Louisiana . 
 This election marked the first time since the days of the Socialist Party of America , that a socialist candidate was on a ballot in the state of Ohio . Following legal challenges , US District Court Judge Edmund <unk> ordered Moore 's name placed on the Ohio ballot . During their presidential campaign , the party earned little funding from supporters , with Moore remarking that the only candidates able or having a slim chance to win were " millionaires , or sellouts to corporate America " . He further commented that it would be impossible for a third party candidate to win an election without ballot access in all fifty states . While highly vocal that he did not even have a slim chance of winning , he believed there would be a good chance of getting on the ballot in at least 20 states , because of the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Moore ended in 11th place overall , receiving 6 @,@ 555 votes nationwide out of over 125 million cast . He thus missed , by a large margin , the 5 percent needed to qualify the Socialist Party USA for federally distributed public funding in the next election . His best showings were in Tennessee , where he received 1 @,@ 326 votes out of over 2 million votes cast , and in Ohio , where he managed to receive 2 @,@ 731 votes . His weakest showings were in Kentucky and Minnesota , where he managed to gain 7 votes in each state . Moore was not able to enlarge the party 's voter base , but instead the voter base shrunk by over 4 thousand votes nationwide from the previous election fronted by Walt Brown . 
 = = Position and beliefs = = 
 Being a former member of the Democratic Party , Brian Moore said he moved to socialism because the system wasn 't as bad as it was made out to be , further stating that it was " mixed up with McCarthy and Stalin and the Red Scare " . He ended his thoughts on the matter by clearly stating that socialism wasn 't communism . He has also noted that even before joining the Socialist Party , he " always promoted a national socialized health plan , antiwar , favored a guaranteed annual income , advocated worker control and elimination of corporate control . " Moore has stated at various times that he promoted a platform to inform Americans of an alternative option in American politics . He believes that capitalism was a selfish system which focused on the wealthy and not the weak and the poor . Moore felt that " capitalism is an economic system where decisions are made at the top and come down in a dictatorial fashion " He felt that redistributing the wealth between the rich and the poor would give the United States a stronger public sector , which would in turn focus more on renewable energy and the needy . During his presidential campaign he claimed that the current economic system was falling apart because of capitalist greed . Moore guaranteed an income of " approximately $ 10 @,@ 000 per family a year and decent housing for all families " . He also called for the " elimination of exorbitant executive salaries , outsourcing of jobs and companies , and calls for an end to for @-@ profit corporations " . When asked what made socialism better than capitalism , Moore said ; 
 It 's based on fairness and equality . [ ... ] And right now America under the capitalistic system is based on greed and getting ahead and you usually do it at the expense of your fellow man . 
 Moore has publicly criticized claims that Barack Obama is a socialist , saying he is offended by this characterization . According to the weekly periodical , The Nation , Moore said Obama along with John McCain was " bought and sold " by Wall Street , saying that the two major candidates cannot change their opinion , since they are both " imprisoned " by the " corporate machine " . 
 Moore was against the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , and supported free and accessible health insurance for all . He also wanted to transfer ownership of corporations to the workers . When discussing the War on Terror , Moore felt it was destroying small communities throughout the country with higher taxes and more pressure on the local governments . Moore and Vice Presidential candidate Stewart Alexander supported a 50 % reduction of the United States Department of Defense spending , and using the other 50 % to improve veteran benefits . Alexander proposed that retired veterans with 10 – 30 years of military service should receive an income of $ 15 – 30 thousand annually from the state . 
 = = Media campaign = = 
 Moore along with America First chairman Jonathan M Hill appeared on Al Jazeera English , discussing strategic development plans for third parties in the United States . The broadcast was viewed by over 100 million viewers worldwide . He also made two appearances on Fox News , first on the TV special The Rescue Rumble and later on Your World , both shows were hosted by Neil Cavuto . He later appeared as a guest on the Comedy Central TV series The Colbert Report , a news satire show about modern American politics . According to Moore , the decision to have him on the show came from Stephen Colbert , the current host for the TV series . A spokeswoman from Comedy Central would not comment on the motives behind the selection . Moore also wrote several articles in The Nation , The New Republic and National Journal , and the newspapers The St. Petersburg Times , The Los Angeles Times and the Chicago Tribune . The question of whether or not Barack Obama was a socialist , led to an increased interest in Moore during the election . The Left Party , a Swedish democratic socialist political party , officially endorsed Moore for president during a televised debate in Sweden . 
 = Metroid : Zero Mission = 
 Metroid : Zero Mission is an action @-@ adventure video game developed by Nintendo R & D1 for the Game Boy Advance handheld console . It was published by Nintendo in North America in February 2004 , in Australia in March 2004 , in Europe in April 2004 , and in Japan in May 2004 . It is an enhanced remake of the original Metroid game , designed to retell that entry 's story with Super Metroid @-@ like gameplay . Like the other titles in the series , it features space @-@ faring bounty hunter Samus Aran as the player @-@ controlled main character . 
 Samus Aran travels to Zebes after learning that Space Pirates are experimenting with Metroids in an attempt to duplicate them and use them for their own gain . Samus finds and destroys Mother Brain , the mechanical life @-@ form that controls the Space Pirates ' base . However , while she escapes the planet in her gunship , she is attacked by Space Pirates , causing the ship to crash back onto Zebes , near the Space Pirate Mothership . Samus decides to explore the ship and encounters Mecha Ridley , who she defeats . Finding a shuttle , she uses it to escape the planet as the Metroids and the Space Pirates ' research are destroyed in an explosion . 
 Reviews were generally positive towards the game . Praise focused on the new content , while criticism targeted the game 's short length . Metroid : Zero Mission received several honors , including a 46th @-@ place ranking in a list of the Top 200 Games compiled by Nintendo Power . It was also chosen as the 9th Best Game Boy Advance Game by IGN . The game has sold over 439 @,@ 000 units in the United States and 69 @,@ 000 in Japan as of February 2005 . The Wii U 's Virtual Console version was released in Japan on June 19 , 2014 ; in Europe on March 12 , 2015 ; and in North America on January 14 , 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Metroid : Zero Mission takes place on Planet Zebes , a large , open @-@ ended world with areas connected by doors and elevators . The player controls Samus Aran as she travels through the planet 's caverns and environments , hunting Space Pirates . Along the way , the player collects power @-@ ups that enhance Samus 's armor and weaponry , as well as grant her special abilities . These abilities allow Samus to access areas that were previously inaccessible , so that the game can be played linearly or non @-@ linearly . For example , the player may come across underground caverns that bypass certain sections , a method termed sequence breaking . To save their progress , players can enter either Save Rooms or Samus 's ship on <unk> . As a remake of Metroid , Metroid : Zero Mission 's layout bears a resemblance to the original , and various powerups and items make reappearances from previous games in the series , with similar uses , effects , and appearances . However , the game adds new items , areas , and mini @-@ bosses , as well as a completely new area named <unk> . 
 Zero Mission is the first game in the Metroid series to include a sequence in which the player controls Samus without her Power Suit . In this portion of the game , Samus is more vulnerable to damage , must crawl through ducts on her hands and knees without the help of her Morph Ball mode , and has a weak pistol that briefly stuns enemies as her only weapon . However , Samus retains all energy tanks she acquired previously . 
 Completion of the game unlocks an emulated version of the original Metroid game . Zero Mission also allow players to unlock the Metroid Fusion picture gallery by linking between Zero Mission and Fusion cartridges via the Game Boy Advance Game Link Cable . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Space Pirates attack a Galactic Federation @-@ owned space research vessel and seize samples of Metroid creatures . Dangerous floating organisms , Metroids can latch on to any organism and drain its life energy to kill it . The Space Pirates plan to replicate Metroids by exposing them to beta rays and then using them as biological weapons to destroy all living beings that oppose them . While searching for the stolen Metroids , the Galactic Federation locates the Space Pirates ' base of operations on the planet Zebes . The Federation assaults the planet , but the Pirates resist , forcing the Federation to retreat . As a last resort , the Federation decides to send a lone bounty hunter to penetrate the Pirates ' base and destroy Mother Brain , the mechanical life @-@ form that controls the Space Pirates ' fortress and its defenses . Considered the greatest of all bounty hunters , Samus Aran is chosen for the mission . 
 Samus lands on the surface of Zebes and explores the planet , traveling through the planet 's caverns . She eventually comes across Kraid , an ally of the Space Pirates , and Ridley , the Space Pirates ' commander , and defeats them both . Along the way , Samus finds and destroys Mother Brain . However , while Samus leaves the planet in her gunship , it is attacked by Space Pirates , causing it to crash back onto Zebes , near the Space Pirate Mothership . Exploring the Mothership , Samus eventually reaches the Mecha Ridley , a mechanized form of Ridley . After defeating it , Samus escapes the planet using one of the Space Pirate 's shuttles , while the Mothership self @-@ destructs . 
 = = Development = = 
 Metroid : Zero Mission was directed by Yoshio Sakamoto , a Nintendo veteran who has been involved with the Metroid series since it first appeared on the Nintendo Entertainment System , and has played a role in every Metroid game except for Metroid II . Official positions that he held include director of Super Metroid for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and Metroid Fusion for the Game Boy Advance , producer of Metroid Prime for the Nintendo GameCube , and supervisor of Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . Sakamoto is the only member from the Metroid development team to also work on Metroid : Zero Mission . Metroid : Zero Mission was the last game developed by Nintendo R & D1 before the team was disbanded due to Nintendo restructuring . 
 While working on the concept for the next Metroid game after Metroid Fusion was released in 2002 , one of the developers for Metroid Fusion suggested that Super Metroid be ported to the Game Boy Advance ; however , Sakamoto decided to port Metroid instead . The development team decided to return to the roots of Metroid gameplay by creating a game based on the original . Sakamoto , noting that Metroid Fusion 's gameplay was drastically different from previous Metroid games , wanted to " show people who had never played a Metroid game prior to Metroid Fusion , the roots of the Metroid franchise , that this is what Metroid is , this is the style of gameplay that Metroid sprang from [ ... ] at the same time , retell the story of Samus ' original mission " . 
 One of the biggest challenges that the developers faced was in adding enough elements to Metroid : Zero Mission to make it feel new , while keeping the spirit of the original Metroid . Because both games were made for the Game Boy Advance , Metroid : Zero Mission uses a rebuilt version of the game engine used for Metroid Fusion so that it did not need to be built from scratch . This marked the first time two Metroid installments have been released for the same video game console . Metroid Fusion had offered connectivity with Metroid Prime on the Nintendo GameCube , but Metroid : Zero Mission did not offer such a feature . Sakamoto explained that the developers wanted to make the game connect to Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes on the GameCube , but the fact that both their release dates were far apart and not enough development time to implement connectivity features prevented them from doing so . However , they managed to include the ability for Metroid Fusion to connect with Metroid : Zero Mission . 
 In addition to borrowing the plot from Metroid , Metroid : Zero Mission introduces new cinematics to push the story forward . Sakamoto believed in the importance of having a story to complement a game . He found it particularly difficult to convey the game 's plot accurately in a way that the player can understand , because of the sparse use of dialogue in the Metroid series . The story for Metroid : Zero Mission was rewritten to explore Samus Aran 's backstory more than in the original Metroid . <unk> are used to show Samus ' memories to move the story forward and to keep the plot open for interpretation . Sakamoto claimed that this was intended to expand the original story while retaining some mystery . The game is the first Metroid game to let the player choose a difficulty level at the start of the game ; each of three levels varies in the amount of damage caused by enemies . The battle with Mother Brain marked the end of the original Metroid ; however , Metroid : Zero Mission offers players extra levels to play after the battle . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Nintendo first revealed Metroid : Zero Mission at the E3 convention in 2003 , and its North American release date of February 9 , 2004 was announced later that year . In other territories , Zero Mission was released in Australia on March 19 , 2004 , in Europe on April 8 , and in Japan on May 27 . The Wii U 's Virtual Console version of Zero Mission was released in Japan on June 19 , 2014 . This was followed by the release in Europe on March 12 , 2015 , and in North America on January 14 , 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Metroid : Zero Mission was given " generally favorable reviews " , according to Metacritic . The game was praised by a number of reviews , several which called it one of the best games available for the Game Boy Advance . X @-@ Play and GamePro enjoyed the game ; X @-@ Play said the game was " perfect for blasting space pirates on the go " , and GamePro was " constantly surprised " with what the game offered . GameZone found it " hard to imagine a Game Boy Advance game that could match the style and addictive action of ' Metroid Fusion ' " , but admitted that Metroid : Zero Mission surpasses the game quite easily . Agreeing with GameZone , Nintendo World Report called the game a masterpiece and the perfect example of how a Metroid game should be done : " The designers carefully mix all the best elements from the other games and layer them on top of the already brilliant level design and concepts of the original Metroid . " Eurogamer appreciated every minute of the game , affirming that Metroid : Zero Mission should be considered one of the best games available for the Game Boy Advance . 
 A number of reviews were pleased with the new content added to Metroid : Zero Mission . Game Informer appreciated the new material , and believed that fans of the Metroid series would " absolutely adore " Metroid : Zero Mission , which they considered one of the greatest video games in the history of gaming . 1UP.com considered Metroid : Zero Mission to be one of the " most ambitious , comprehensive and successful " remakes for a game such as Metroid , noting that " [ Metroid : Zero Mission ] expands on its source material with refined control , gameplay ideas retrofitted from its sequels , new plot hooks for subsequent chapters of the saga , and some jaw @-@ droppingly cool innovations which add new layers of complexity to the series . " 
 Criticism of the game stemmed from its short length . Regarded as a " weak one @-@ shot experience " , IGN felt that players would enjoy the game only after they had completed it and played it again Eurogamer stated simply : " We can 't help but wish that it had been longer . " Even though GamesRadar liked the game 's quality , they said that Nintendo should have " [ made ] the experience last longer . " GameSpot was disappointed with the " short @-@ lived experience " , but blamed the game 's captivating quality that compelled them to complete the game in a few sittings . Calling Metroid : Zero Mission stale , GameSpy asserted that players less familiar with Metroid games would get more enjoyment out of it because of its similarities to previous Metroid games . 
 Metroid : Zero Mission was ranked the best @-@ selling Game Boy Advance game in the United States in its debut month of February 2004 , selling 151 @,@ 807 units , and it was the 3rd best @-@ selling game across all video game systems in that month . In May 2004 , the game 's sales dropped to 7th among Game Boy Advance games , with 31 @,@ 619 copies sold and $ 938 @,@ 681 in revenue . By February 2005 , the game had sold over 439 @,@ 000 units in the United States and 69 @,@ 000 in Japan . The game was ranked the 46th @-@ best game for any Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . In their March 2010 issue , the magazine also ranked Metroid : Zero Mission as the eighth @-@ best game to be released on a Nintendo console in the 2000 decade , in their " Best of the Decade " feature . Metroid : Zero Mission was voted IGN 's Game Boy Advance Game of the Month for February 2004 , and the website 's staff picked the game as both the Best Game Boy Adventure Game of 2004 , and the 9th Best Game Boy Advance Game . Electronic Gaming Monthly also picked it as the Best Handheld Game of 2004 . Official Nintendo Magazine ranked the game 94th in a list of the best Nintendo games . Nintendo Power also ranked it the best Game Boy Advance game of all @-@ time in its August 2011 issue . 
 = 2005 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2005 Atlantic hurricane season was the most active Atlantic hurricane season in recorded history , shattering numerous records . The impact of the season was widespread and ruinous with an estimated 3 @,@ 913 deaths and record damage of about $ 159 @.@ 2 billion . Of the storms that made landfall , five of the season 's seven major hurricanes — Dennis , Emily , Katrina , Rita , and Wilma — were responsible for most of the destruction . The Mexican states of Quintana Roo and Yucatán and the US states of Florida and Louisiana were each struck twice by major hurricanes ; Cuba , the Bahamas , Haiti , Mississippi , Texas , Alabama , and Tamaulipas were each struck once and in each case brushed by at least one more . The most catastrophic effects of the season were felt on the United States ' Gulf Coast , where a 30 ft ( 10 m ) storm surge from Hurricane Katrina caused devastating flooding that destroyed most structures on the Mississippi coastline ; subsequent levee failures in New Orleans , Louisiana caused by the storm crippled the city . Furthermore , Hurricane Stan combined with an extratropical system to cause deadly mudslides across Central America , with Guatemala being hardest @-@ hit . 
 The 2005 season was the first to observe more tropical cyclones in the Atlantic than the West Pacific ; on average , the latter experiences 26 while the Atlantic only averages 12 . This event was repeated in the 2010 season ; however , the 2010 typhoon season broke the record for the fewest storms observed in a single year , while the 2005 typhoon season featured near average activity . 
 The season officially began on June 1 , 2005 , and lasted until November 30 , although it effectively persisted into January 2006 due to continued storm activity . A record twenty @-@ eight tropical and subtropical storms formed , of which a record fifteen became hurricanes . Of these , a record seven strengthened into major hurricanes , a record @-@ tying five became Category 4 hurricanes and a record four reached Category 5 strength , the highest categorization for hurricanes on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Among these Category 5 storms were hurricanes Katrina and Wilma , respectively the costliest and the most intense Atlantic hurricanes on record . This year was also notable because the list of storm names was used up and six Greek letter names had to be used . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane expert William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) , and separately by forecasters with the U.S. Government 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) . Prior to and during the 2005 season , Gray issued four forecasts , each time increasing the predicted level of activity . The NOAA issued two forecasts , one shortly before the season and one two months into the season , drastically increasing the predicted level of activity in the second release . Nonetheless , all forecasts fell far short of the actual activity of the season . 
 = = = Preseason forecasts = = = 
 On December 3 , 2004 , Gray 's team issued its first extended @-@ range forecast for the 2005 season , predicting a slightly above @-@ average season . Additionally , the team predicted a greatly increased chance of a major hurricane striking the East Coast of the United States and the Florida peninsula . Though the forecast predicted above @-@ average activity , the level predicted was significantly less than the 2004 season . On April 1 , 2005 , after confirming that El Niño conditions would not develop , Gray and his team revised the December forecast upward , expecting thirteen tropical storms instead of eleven and seven hurricanes instead of six . In addition , the chance of a storm impacting the United States was raised slightly . On May 16 , 2005 , 16 days before the season began , NOAA issued its outlook for the 2005 season , forecasting a 70 % chance of above @-@ normal activity . The accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) value for the season was predicted to be 120 – 190 % of the median ACE of 87 @.@ 5 × 104 kt2 . Shortly thereafter , on May 31 , the day before the season officially began , Gray 's team revised its April forecast upwards to 15 named storms , 8 hurricanes , and 4 major hurricanes . 
 = = = Midseason outlook = = = 
 On August 2 , after an extraordinarily active early season , the NOAA released an updated outlook on the remainder of the season , significantly raising the expected level of activity to numbers about double those of a normal season . The ACE value was now forecast to be 180 to 270 % of the median . The NOAA also noted a higher than normal confidence in the forecast of above @-@ normal activity . On August 5 , 2005 , Gray and his associates followed suit and issued their updated forecast ; it was consistent with NOAA 's update . Although neither the NOAA nor Gray had ever forecast such high levels of activity , even the midseason outlooks fell far short of the actual level of activity . The actual ACE would prove to be 248 × 104 kt2 — 277 % of the median . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = June and July = = = 
 On June 8 , nearly two months earlier than when the 2004 season started , Tropical Storm Arlene formed in the western Caribbean , crossing Cuba before making landfall on the Florida Panhandle on June 11 . Arlene caused only moderate damage , although one swimmer was caught in a <unk> and drowned in Miami Beach , Florida . 
 Tropical Storm Bret formed in the Bay of Campeche on June 28 and made landfall in Veracruz the next morning . The storm damaged hundreds of homes and caused flooding which killed two people . 
 Hurricane Cindy formed in the Gulf of Mexico on July 4 . Originally thought to be a tropical storm , Cindy made landfall in Louisiana on July 5 as a minimal hurricane , dropping up to five in ( 130 mm ) of rain , spawning several tornadoes , flooding some coastal areas including Coden , Alabama , and killing three people . Cindy was upgraded to a hurricane in the post @-@ storm analysis . 
 On July 5 , Hurricane Dennis formed in the eastern Caribbean ; it crossed Grenada before intensifying into a Category 4 hurricane , the strongest ever recorded in July with a pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ) . Dennis struck Cuba at full force , then made a final landfall on the Florida Panhandle . The hurricane killed 89 people ( mostly in Haiti ) and caused $ 4 – $ 6 billion ( 2005 USD , $ 4 @.@ 85 billion – $ 7 @.@ 27 billion 2016 USD ) in damage in Cuba and the United States . 
 Soon thereafter , Hurricane Emily formed in the Atlantic on July 11 . It entered the Caribbean Sea and quickly intensified to a Category 4 storm , breaking Dennis 's record for July intensity when its pressure reached 929 mbar ( hPa ) . Emily then briefly reached Category 5 intensity — the earliest such storm ever recorded in the Atlantic . Emily crossed the Yucatán Peninsula at Category 4 strength before hitting Tamaulipas at Category 3 strength . Emily killed at least 14 people over the course of its path . An estimated $ 400 million ( 2005 USD ; $ 485 million 2016 USD ) in damage was reported . 
 Tropical Storm Franklin formed off the Bahamas on July 18 . The storm moved northeast and became extratropical off the coast of Atlantic Canada without ever having threatened land . 
 Tropical Storm Gert followed soon after on July 24 . Gert struck Veracruz near where Emily had hit a few days before ; roughly 1 @,@ 000 people were evacuated for fear of flooding , but no damage or deaths were reported . 
 = = = August = = = 
 Like July , August also got off to a fast start : Tropical Storm Harvey formed southwest of Bermuda on August 3 . Harvey dropped some rain on Bermuda as it moved to the northeast ; it became extratropical on August 8 in the open Atlantic Ocean . 
 The tropical depression that would become Hurricane Irene formed west of the Cape Verde Islands on August 4 . The system moved west and north and did not reach hurricane strength until August 14 , at which point it became the second Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane of the season . Irene turned northeast and briefly reached Category 2 status before weakening and becoming extratropical on August 18 . It never posed a threat to land . 
 Tropical Depression Ten formed east of the Lesser Antilles on August 13 . The system dissipated the next day . Its remnants soon merged with another system and eventually contributed to the formation of Hurricane Katrina . 
 Tropical Storm Jose followed , forming in the Bay of Campeche on August 22 . It strengthened rapidly but quickly reached the coast and made landfall in the Mexican state of Veracruz on August 23 , preventing further strengthening . Jose forced 25 @,@ 000 people to evacuate their homes in Veracruz and killed six people in the state of Oaxaca ; two more were reported missing . In all , damage in Mexico amounted to $ 45 million ( 2005 USD ; $ 54 @.@ 5 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Hurricane Katrina formed in mid @-@ August over the Bahamas . It became a tropical storm on August 24 and reached hurricane intensity before making landfall in south Florida as a minimal hurricane . A few hours later , the storm entered the Gulf of Mexico and intensified rapidly into a Category 5 hurricane while crossing the Loop Current on August 28 . Katrina made landfall shortly after 06 : 00 CST on August 29 near the mouth of the Mississippi River as an extremely large Category 3 hurricane . Category 5 @-@ level storm surges ( as the storm had weakened only in the previous several hours ) caused catastrophic damage along the coastlines of Louisiana , Mississippi , and Alabama . Within hours , levees separating Lake Pontchartrain from New Orleans , Louisiana were breached by the surge , ultimately flooding about 80 % of the city . Wind damage was reported well inland , impeding relief efforts . Katrina is estimated to be responsible for at least $ 108 billion ( 2005 USD ; $ 131 billion in 2016 USD ) in damage , breaking Hurricane Andrew 's record in 1992 and making it the costliest natural disaster in U.S. history . It was the deadliest U.S. hurricane since the 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane , killing at least 1 @,@ 836 people . The 1900 Galveston Hurricane remains the deadliest natural disaster in United States history , with a death toll of approximately 6 @,@ 000 . 
 On August 24 , a vigorous tropical wave developed off the coast of Africa which eventually spawned an area of low pressure . The low gradually became better organized and was designated Tropical Depression Thirteen on August 28 , about midway between the Lesser Antilles and Africa . However , northerly wind shear prevented the depression from strengthening and it degenerated into a broad low @-@ pressure area the next day . After traveling rapidly towards the north the low regenerated into a tropical depression and shortly after was declared Tropical Storm Lee on August 31 . Lee was only briefly a tropical storm before it weakened back to a tropical depression . The depression degenerated into a broad low @-@ pressure area again before being absorbed by a cold front on September 4 . 
 = = = September = = = 
 Hurricane Maria led off the month of September , forming as a tropical storm well east of the Leeward Islands on September 2 . Maria reached its peak as a Category 3 hurricane on September 5 , turning northeast and weakening before becoming extratropical on September 10 . Unusually , this extratropical storm strengthened as it moved toward Iceland ; its remnants struck Norway where one person was killed in a landslide . 
 Hurricane Nate formed southwest of Bermuda on September 5 and moved northeast as it strengthened into a strong Category 1 hurricane . Nate became extratropical on September 10 ; the storm never approached land , although it did interfere with Canadian naval vessels en route to the Gulf Coast to help in Katrina relief efforts . 
 Hurricane Ophelia formed as a tropical depression in the Bahamas on September 6 and almost immediately made landfall on Grand Bahama . It became a tropical storm off the coast of Florida before strengthening into a large Category 1 storm and raking a long stretch of the southern North Carolina coast with heavy winds and storm surge on September 12 and September 13 . The hurricane 's eye never made landfall and moved back out to sea before becoming extratropical on September 17 and striking Atlantic Canada . Total damage estimates were around $ 70 million ( 2005 USD ) . 
 Hurricane Philippe formed east of the Leeward Islands on September 17 . It moved northwards , reaching Category 1 intensity before weakening and finally dissipating on September 23 . No landmasses were affected . 
 Hurricane Rita formed as a tropical storm over the Turks and Caicos Islands on September 18 . The storm reached Category 2 intensity as it moved south of the Florida Keys on September 20 . Rapid intensification ensued as Rita moved into the Gulf of Mexico , and Rita became a Category 5 hurricane on September 21 , becoming the third ( now fourth ) most intense hurricane ever recorded in the Atlantic Basin . Rita made landfall near the Texas @-@ Louisiana border on September 24 . Major flooding was reported in Port Arthur and Beaumont , Texas , while Cameron and Calcasieu parishes in Louisiana were devastated . Offshore oil platforms throughout Rita 's path also suffered significant damage . Six people are confirmed dead from Rita 's direct effects , and total damage from the storm is estimated at about $ 10 billion ( 2005 USD ; $ 12 @.@ 1 billion 2016 USD ) . One hundred and thirteen indirect deaths have been reported , mostly from the exodus from Houston , Texas and surrounding counties . 
 Tropical Depression Nineteen formed west of the Cape Verde Islands on September 30 but dissipated on October 2 without having threatened land . 
 = = = October = = = 
 Hurricane Stan was the first October storm , reaching tropical storm status on October 2 just before crossing the Yucatán Peninsula . In the Bay of Campeche , Stan briefly reached hurricane strength before making landfall south of Veracruz , Veracruz , on October 4 . Stan was a part of a large system of rainstorms , which dropped torrential rainfall that caused catastrophic flooding and mudslides over southern Mexico and Central America . Well over 1 @,@ 000 total deaths were caused by the flooding , of which 80 – 100 are directly attributed to Stan . 
 An initially unnoticed Unnamed Subtropical Storm was discovered by the NHC during the postseason analysis . This short @-@ lived subtropical storm formed on October 4 south of the Azores and was absorbed by an extratropical low the next day , after passing over those islands . 
 Tropical Storm Tammy led a brief existence before making landfall in northeastern Florida on October 5 . Tammy dropped heavy rains over portions of the southeast United States before merging with a frontal system that would eventually cause the Northeast U.S. flooding of October 2005 . 
 Subtropical Depression Twenty @-@ two formed southeast of Bermuda on October 8 . It dissipated the next day , although its remnants approached New England and contributed to the Northeast U.S. flooding of October 2005 . 
 Hurricane Vince formed over unfavorably cold water in the east Atlantic near the Madeira Islands on October 8 as a subtropical storm . It was first recorded by the NHC on October 9 when it became tropical , and shortly thereafter , it briefly strengthened into a hurricane . The storm made an even more unusual landfall in Spain on October 11 , making it the first tropical cyclone to impact Spain since the 1842 Spain hurricane . 
 Hurricane Wilma formed on October 17 in the western Caribbean southwest of Jamaica and rapidly strengthened . On October 19 it became the strongest tropical cyclone on record in the Atlantic basin , with 185 mph ( 295 km / h ) winds and a central pressure of 882 millibars ( 26 @.@ 0 inHg ) . The hurricane moved slowly and struck Quintana Roo on October 22 as a Category 4 hurricane , causing very heavy damage to Cancún and Cozumel . After emerging into the Gulf of Mexico , Wilma sharply changed directions and passed north of Cuba before striking southern Florida on the 24th as a Category 3 storm , then moving into the Atlantic Ocean and becoming extratropical . Wilma is directly credited with 23 deaths ; total damage is estimated at around $ 29 billion ( 2005 USD ; $ 35 @.@ 1 billion 2016 USD ) , mostly in the United States , Mexico , and Cuba . 
 Tropical Storm Alpha formed in the eastern Caribbean on October 22 and crossed Hispaniola , causing major flooding before merging with Wilma . A total of 42 people are reported dead from the storm in Haiti and the Dominican Republic . 
 Hurricane Beta formed in the southern Caribbean on October 26 and strengthened into a Category 3 hurricane before making landfall in the Colombian islands of San Andrés & Providencia and in Nicaragua on October 30 . As of 2012 , Hurricane Beta was responsible for nine fatalities and more than $ 15 @.@ 5 million in damage across four countries . 
 = = = November , December , and January 2006 = = = 
 Tropical activity declined very slowly as the season wound down . Tropical Storm Gamma initially formed on November 15 in the central Caribbean , and degenerated into a tropical wave before reforming . Although the storm dissipated on November 20 after having made landfall in northern Honduras , rainfall from Gamma caused 41 deaths in Honduras and Belize . 
 Tropical Storm Delta formed in the eastern Atlantic on November 23 ; it approached but never attained hurricane strength . Delta became extratropical on November 28 shortly before striking the Canary Islands at full force , causing seven deaths and toppling El <unk> de Dios , a famous land formation on Gran Canaria . 
 Hurricane Epsilon formed as a tropical storm on November 29 in a hostile environment in the middle of the Atlantic . It reached hurricane strength on December 2 and defied forecasting by persisting for over a week before dissipating . 
 Tropical Storm Zeta became the final storm of the season when it formed on December 30 , six hours short of tying the record of Hurricane Alice of 1954 as the latest @-@ forming named storm in a season . Zeta dissipated on January 6 , 2006 , having become the longest @-@ lived January tropical cyclone in Atlantic basin history . 
 = = Deaths and damage = = 
 The storms of the season were extraordinarily damaging and were responsible for significant loss of life . Total damage is estimated to be about $ 159 @.@ 2 billion ( 2005 US $ ) , and an estimated 2 @,@ 067 people were confirmed dead . However , due to uncertainties in the death toll caused by Stan , the death toll from the season could be as high as 4 @,@ 000 people . 
 The hardest @-@ hit area was the United States Gulf Coast from eastern Texas to the Florida Panhandle . First to strike the area was Hurricane Dennis , which caused $ 2 @.@ 23 billion in damage along the Florida Panhandle . Hurricane Katrina caused catastrophic damage to the Gulf Coast , devastating a long stretch of coast along Louisiana , Mississippi , and Alabama with a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 m ) storm surge . Wind damage was reported well inland , slowing down recovery efforts . Storm surge also breached levees in the city of New Orleans , Louisiana , flooding about 80 % of the city . Total damage has been estimated at $ 108 billion , and at least 1 @,@ 836 people were killed by the storm ; Katrina is by far the costliest hurricane in U.S. history , surpassing 1992 's Hurricane Andrew , and the deadliest hurricane in the U.S. since 1928 . Hurricane Rita struck near the same area , re @-@ flooded New Orleans ( though to a far less degree than Katrina ) , and caused extensive damage along the coastlines of Louisiana and Texas ; total damage is estimated at about $ 12 billion . Tropical Storm Arlene and Hurricane Cindy also struck the Gulf Coast but caused much lighter damage . 
 The Mexican state of Quintana Roo was also heavily hit , suffering billions of dollars in damage when Hurricanes Emily and Wilma both made landfall between Cozumel and Cancún . Wilma was particularly devastating , lashing the area with major hurricane @-@ force winds for over a full day , and was possibly the most damaging hurricane in Mexican history . 
 Wilma caused widespread heavy damage in south Florida , causing $ 20 @.@ 6 billion in damage total in the United States . Hurricanes Katrina and Rita had struck the same area earlier , causing lesser ( but still significant ) damage , and Tropical Storm Arlene killed one person caught in a rip current . Hurricane Dennis also brushed the area on its track northward . 
 In October the remnants of Tropical Storm Tammy and Subtropical Depression Twenty @-@ two met over the Northeastern United States , causing intense flooding . 
 Southeastern North Carolina suffered some damage from the slow @-@ moving Hurricane Ophelia ; damage from that storm were originally estimated at $ 1 @.@ 6 billion , but finalized at only $ 70 million . The remainder of the Atlantic coast escaped the major storms , although some regions were affected by the remnants of several storms ( including Katrina , Ophelia , Tammy , Subtropical Depression Twenty @-@ two , and Wilma ) . 
 Northeastern Mexico , including Veracruz and Tamaulipas , was struck repeatedly . Hurricane Emily struck Tamaulipas directly , causing severe damage . Tropical Storms Bret , Gert , and Jose also made landfall in the area but caused minimal damage , although they did cause 12 deaths . 
 Southern Mexico , along with portions of Central America , suffered heavy flooding and mudslides from Hurricane Stan and nearby nontropical rains . Over 1 @,@ 600 people were confirmed dead in total , with some towns completely wiped out , though most of these deaths were not directly related to the hurricane . Central America also suffered flooding from Tropical Storm Gamma and Hurricane Wilma , and Nicaragua was struck directly by Hurricane Beta . Gamma caused $ 13 – 18 million ( 2005 USD ) in damage to crops ; no damage figures are available for any of the other storms . 
 The island of Hispaniola escaped the worst storms ; however , at least 89 people were killed in Haiti from the effects of Hurricanes Dennis and Wilma and Tropical Storm Alpha . The Leeward Islands were generally spared all the storms , although Dennis and Emily caused significant damage in the Windward Islands . 
 Cuba was struck by Hurricane Dennis at peak strength , causing $ 1 @.@ 4 billion in damage ; it was the worst hurricane to hit Cuba in over 40 years . Some areas of Cuba also suffered heavy damage from Hurricanes Rita and Wilma . 
 Unusual impacts were felt in Europe and nearby islands from four storms . Hurricane Maria intensified and affected northern Europe as a vicious extratropical storm , while Hurricane Vince maintained tropical characteristics onto the Iberian Peninsula as a weak tropical depression . Tropical Storm Delta struck the Canary Islands just after becoming extratropical , causing extensive damage before reaching Morocco as a weak extratropical system . In addition , the Azores were affected by the unnamed subtropical storm at its peak strength . Eight people were killed by those storms , and significant damage was reported as a result of Maria and Delta , although no figures are available . 
 = = Economic impact = = 
 The level of activity of the season had far @-@ reaching economic consequences . Because of the vulnerability of both oil extracting and refining capacity in the Gulf of Mexico , storms led to speculative spikes in the price of crude oil . The damage to refinery capacity in the United States caused gasoline to soar to record prices ( even adjusted for inflation ) . Governments in Europe and the United States tapped strategic reserves of gasoline and petroleum , and shortages were reported in the days after Katrina in areas heavily dependent on the Gulf of Mexico for refined gasoline . Even weeks after the storm , prices remained elevated as the shortage in production remained over 1 million barrels ( 160 @,@ 000 m3 ) per day . 
 Rita damaged wells in the western Gulf of Mexico which were primarily exploratory , leading to concerns that future production would be damped for some time to come . Additionally , as the storm churned in the Gulf , forecasters predicted that it would strike Houston , Texas , the location of many major oil refineries that survived Katrina , leading to additional spikes in oil prices before the predictions changed . In Georgia , Governor Sonny Perdue declared " snow days " on September 26 and September 27 , 2005 , at all Georgia public schools to conserve fuel for school buses in anticipation of Rita 's impact . However , as the storm veered away from Houston shortly before landfall , damage to refining capacity was not as great as feared . 
 Agriculture in multiple countries was hard hit by extremely heavy rains from severe storms during the season . Early in the season , Hurricane Dennis caused significant damage to various citrus and vegetable crops in Cuba , though the damage was not crippling . In Central America , Hurricane Stan and associated nontropical storms dropped upwards of 20 inches ( 500 mm ) of rain , causing , in addition to severe flash floods and mud slides , heavy damage to crops , especially to the banana and coffee crops , which were nearly ready to be harvested . This caused significant economic disruption in Guatemala and surrounding nations , as the rural economies are highly dependent on the coffee and banana crops . When Hurricane Beta struck Nicaragua later in the season , it also caused heavy damage to the banana crop , but the harvests had already ended , mitigating economic disruption . 
 Katrina also had significant political consequences , as President George W. Bush , Louisiana governor Kathleen Blanco , and New Orleans mayor Ray Nagin all came under heavy criticism for what were considered sluggish or inappropriate responses to Hurricane Katrina . On December 14 , 2005 , congressional hearings began to investigate whether these claims had any merit . In addition , Michael Brown , head of the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) , was forced to resign from his post after the organization came under fire for what was perceived as an insufficient response to Katrina . 
 = = Forecasting uncertainty = = 
 A number of storms that formed in 2005 exhibited unusual behavior and challenged forecasters ' ability to make correct predictions . Hurricane Vince formed farther northeast in the Atlantic than any other tropical cyclone on record at the time — only 2009 's Grace has formed farther north — and then unexpectedly reached hurricane strength over waters considered too cold to support a hurricane . Hurricane Wilma became the fastest @-@ intensifying hurricane on record , and later strengthened unexpectedly in the face of strong wind shear . Tropical Storm Delta , Hurricane Epsilon and Tropical Storm Zeta all formed over the cold waters of the late @-@ season eastern Atlantic , much like Hurricane Vince ( though at lower latitudes ) . All three persisted in the face of heavy wind shear , and Epsilon managed to reach hurricane strength over waters well below the temperatures previously thought necessary for hurricane formation . Epsilon became the longest @-@ lasting December hurricane while Zeta became the longest @-@ lasting storm in January . 
 = = Records and notable events = = 
 The 2005 season broke numerous records for tropical cyclone activity , although records before 1944 are incomplete , so it is possible it might not be the most active season in history . 
 = = = Number of storms = = = 
 During the season 28 storms formed ( 27 named and one unnamed ) , surpassing almost all records for storm formation in the Atlantic . More tropical storms , hurricanes , major hurricanes and Category 5 hurricanes formed during the season than in any previously recorded Atlantic season . 
 The season was the first season to use " V " and " W " names , and when the season ran out of official alphabetical names after the use of Wilma , forecasters resorted to using letters from the Greek alphabet for the first time ( although Alpha and Delta had been used for subtropical storms in the 1970s ) . 
 Almost every storm in 2005 set a record for early formation . Of the twenty @-@ eight storms which formed , twenty @-@ two of them qualified as the earliest @-@ forming storm of that number ; starting with Hurricane Dennis , almost every storm was such . ( The record set by Dennis was later broken by Debby in 2012 , which was again broken in 2016 with Danielle . ) The season 's activity was reflected with a very high cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 250 . This total ranks it as the second @-@ most active season on record , with only the 1933 season having a higher ACE value . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 = = = Intense storms = = = 
 Three of the six most intense hurricanes on record formed in 2005 , topped off by Hurricane Wilma 's 882 mbar ( 26 @.@ 0 inHg ) minimum pressure , shattering the 17 @-@ year @-@ old record set by Hurricane Gilbert . Hurricanes Emily , Katrina and Rita also attained Category 5 intensity , and Hurricanes Rita and Katrina became the fourth and sixth most intense recorded Atlantic storms , respectively . Hurricane Emily was not originally recorded as a Category 5 storm , but it was upgraded in the post @-@ storm analysis by the National Hurricane Center . The 2005 season is the only season on record with four Category 5 storms on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ; the previous record was only two . In addition , Hurricane Dennis reached Category 4 status , tying the record set by the 1999 season with five Category 4 storms . 
 = = = Early strength and activity = = = 
 In July , Hurricane Dennis became the strongest storm to form prior to August and the earliest Category 4 storm to form in the Caribbean . When Hurricane Emily reached Category 5 intensity later in the month , the 2005 season became the only season to have two hurricanes reach Category 4 intensity before the end of July ; Emily also broke Dennis 's nine @-@ day @-@ old record for the strongest storm on record before August . Emily was also the first Category 5 hurricane ever recorded in July and the earliest by nearly three weeks ( beating Hurricane Allen ) . The high level of activity and strength was reflected in the accumulated cyclone energy value at the end of July ; at 63 it was the highest ever . 
 Additionally , seven storms formed before the end of July , breaking the record of five set in the 1887 , 1933 , 1936 , 1959 , 1966 , and 1995 seasons . Five of those storms formed during July , also a new record . 
 = = = Late activity = = = 
 After forming on November 29 , Hurricane Epsilon became the longest @-@ lasting December hurricane on record when it maintained hurricane strength from December 2 to December 7 . Epsilon is the second @-@ strongest hurricane ever recorded in the month of December ; only Hurricane Nicole of 1998 was stronger . 
 When Tropical Storm Zeta formed on December 30 , it came second only to Hurricane Alice ( also December 30 , 1954 , but later in the day ) as the latest ever that the last storm of the season formed . Zeta also became only the second storm , after Alice , to persist through the end of the year and still be active at the start of the next . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The names to the right were used for tropical storms and hurricanes that formed in the North Atlantic in 2005 . This was the same list used for the 1999 season , with the exceptions of Franklin and Lee , which replaced Floyd and Lenny . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season . Storms were named Franklin , Lee , Maria , Nate , Ophelia , Philippe , Rita , Stan , Tammy , Vince , Wilma , Beta , Gamma , Epsilon , and Zeta for the first time in 2005 ( the names Alpha and Delta had been previously used in 1972 for two subtropical storms , but this is the first time they have been used in this way ) . This season used fifteen previously unused names , the most ever in an Atlantic season . Additionally , a subtropical storm that formed in early October was not recognized as such at the time and so did not receive a name . Vince and Wilma were the first named " V " and " W " storms ever in the Atlantic basin . In the spring of 2006 , the World Meteorological Organization retired five hurricane names : Dennis , Katrina , Rita , Stan , and Wilma . Their replacements in the 2011 season were Don , Katia , Rina , Sean , and Whitney , respectively . This surpassed the previous record for the number of hurricane names retired after a single season , four ( held by the 1955 , 1995 , and 2004 seasons ) . 
 = Invasion of Isle de France = 
 The Invasion of Isle de France was a complicated but successful amphibious operation in the Indian Ocean , launched in November 1810 during the Napoleonic Wars . During the operation , a substantial British military force was landed by the Royal Navy at Grand Baie on Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) . Marching inland against weak French opposition , the British force was able to overwhelm the defenders in a series of minor engagements , culminating in the capture of the island 's capital Port Napoleon and the surrender of Charles Decaen , the French governor . The surrender eliminated the last French territory in the Indian Ocean and among the military equipment captured were five French Navy frigates and 209 heavy cannon . Isle de France was retained by Britain at the end of the war under the name of Mauritius and remained part of the British Empire until 1968 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The operation was the culmination of two years of conflict over the island and the neighbouring Île Bourbon between frigate squadrons commanded by Josias Rowley and Jacques Hamelin . Hamelin repeatedly raided British trade convoys and Rowley responded with amphibious assaults on French harbours , but neither had gained ascendancy by the time Rowley sent most of his force to attack the port of Grand Port on Isle de France in August 1810 . At the ensuing battle at Grand Port the British squadron was destroyed and Hamelin began to blockade Rowley on Île Bourbon . As British reinforcements were urgently despatched , several actions were fought between recently arrived British ships and the more numerous French forces . At the last of these on 18 September 1810 , Hamelin was defeated and captured by Rowley . This allowed Rowley to build his forces over the next two months until they were sufficient for a successful invasion , which was led by the recently arrived Admiral Albemarle Bertie . 
 The Indian Ocean had been an important strategic region for British trade since the first British trading posts were developed in India . By the Napoleonic Wars , millions of pounds worth of goods crossed the ocean 's trade routes every year , mostly in the heavily guarded convoys of East Indiamen . The French recognised the economic importance of these convoys but until 1808 failed to provide sufficient forces to disrupt the Indian trade . Late in 1808 , it was decided to send a strong frigate squadron to the Ocean under the command of Jacques Hamelin to augment the forces available on the island bases of Île Bonaparte and Isle de France and raid British shipping in the region . Hamelin was an able commander and between May 1809 and July 1810 his ships captured seven East Indiamen and a large number of small merchant ships and warships . 
 The British response to Hamelin 's deployment was provided by Admiral Albemarle Bertie , who collected a squadron of ships from those available at the Cape of Good Hope and placed them under the command of Commodore Josias Rowley . Bertie gave Rowley instructions to blockade the islands and prepare for invasion attempts once the required forces could be spared . During 1809 and the spring of 1810 , Rowley maintained the blockade and launched a series of small raids , the largest being at Saint Paul on Île Bonaparte in September 1809 . By July 1810 , Rowley had developed sufficient forces at his island base on Rodriguez to successfully invade and capture Île Bonaparte , which he restored to its former name of Île Bourbon . In August , Rowley attempted to extend his blockade of Isle de France by seizing small islands off the main ports that could control the passage of shipping through the coral reefs that surround the island . The first operation was to capture Île de la Passe off Grand Port , which was successfully secured on 13 August . Shortly afterwards a French squadron forced passage into the harbour and Captain Samuel Pym ordered the four frigates of the blockade squadron to attack the ships anchored in the bay . The ensuing Battle of Grand Port was a disaster for the British , as two frigates were wrecked on the reefs and two others captured with their entire crews : only the very seriously wounded , including Captain Nesbit Willoughby , were repatriated to Île Bourbon . 
 With his squadron reduced to a single frigate , Rowley sent urgent messages to the British bases at Madras and Cape Town requesting reinforcements . The naval authorities responded by sending the forces they had available to join Rowley at Rodriguez . The first two frigates to arrive , HMS Africaine and HMS Ceylon were both attacked while sailing alone and captured by Hamelin 's squadron , which was now blockading Île Bourbon . Rowley was able to recapture both ships within hours of their loss , and was also able to seize Hamelin and his flagship Vénus at the Action of 18 September 1810 . The loss of the French naval commander was a serious blow to the squadron on Isle de France , which was also beset by supply problems resulting from a lack of naval stores and food supplies . Unable to make the lengthy cruises needed to disrupt the Indian Ocean trade routes , they were forced to remain in harbour as Rowley was heavily reinforced during September and October 1810 , and eventually the senior naval officer , Captain Jean Dornal de Guy , had his four frigates , Manche , Astrée , Bellone and Minerve , moored in Port @-@ Louis and their crew disembarked to reinforce the garrison of the town . 
 = = Planning = = 
 The invasion of Isle de France , although prompted by the defeat at Grand Port , had been the ultimate intention of Rowley 's squadron since its creation in 1809 and had been planned carefully both on a strategic level by Bertie at Cape Town and Lord Minto at Madras and on a tactical level by Rowley and his British Army counterpart Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Henry Keating on Rodriguez . The transport ships and soldiers would come from the Indian garrisons at Madras , Bombay and Calcutta , to be led by General John Abercromby ( although they were also accompanied by Rear @-@ Admiral William O 'Bryen Drury , whom Bertie ordered to return to Madras before the invasion ) while the naval forces to protect and support the invasion force were to be provided by Bertie from the Cape of Good Hope . These forces were to gather at Rodriguez in preparation for the invasion . The landings themselves were planned by Rowley and Keating , who relied on Willoughby 's intimate knowledge of the coastline of Isle de France and a series of careful surveys of the reefs that surrounded the island to select a landing site . 
 The chosen point was at Grand Baie , on the northwestern coastline approximately 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of the island 's capital Port Napoleon . The intention was to prepare an elite force of 1 @,@ 555 men formed from the Grenadier and light companies of the regiments attached to the invasion . This vanguard would storm ashore and advance rapidly towards the capital closely supported by a naval brigade and Royal Marines units , followed by the main body of the army of 5 @,@ 293 soldiers . The entire force would have logistical assistance and artillery support from Royal Navy ships that would shadow the advance along the coast . The army 's orders were to seize Port Napoleon and capture Governor Charles Decaen , action which , it was hoped , would be sufficient to force the surrender of the entire island . Subsequent landings would be made to the west of the capital if French resistance was stronger than expected . 
 On 15 October , Bertie arrived at Rodriguez with his squadron from Cape Town . On 3 November troops from the Bombay garrison arrived , followed on 6 November by the Madras contingent . On Rodriguez the invasion plans were finalised , HMS Staunch sent to reconnoitre the northern coastline of Isle de France to seek a suitable beach . Command of the landing and the naval support role was given to Captain Philip Beaver , who had a reputation as an expert in amphibious operations . Keating was placed in command of the vanguard of the land force , with Captain William Augustus Montagu commanding of the naval brigade , and Abercromby in overall charge . Rowley would remain offshore in HMS Boadicea , as would Bertie who took Africaine as his flagship . 
 The French response to the impending British invasion was to mobilise the island 's 10 @,@ 000 strong militia . Despite their large numbers , this force was untrained , poorly armed and poorly motivated . Decaen himself recognised that they would be unreliable in the face of attack by British regular soldiers . He also bolstered his forces by attempting to recruit volunteers from among the hundreds of prisoners of war held in the island 's prisons ( a principal cause of the food shortages on Isle de France ) . Over 500 volunteers agreed to join his army , the majority of them Irishmen promised French assistance in obtaining Irish independence from Britain . Altogether , Decaen could muster 1 @,@ 300 regular soldiers to defend the capital , which he placed under the command of General Edmé @-@ Martin <unk> . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 On 22 November 1810 , all the British troops and ships were assembled and Bertie ordered the squadron to rendezvous off Grand Baie , which was reached early on 29 November despite adverse winds . The vanguard landed unopposed , their landing craft supported by ship 's boats carrying cannon , supplemented by the firepower of the larger ships offshore . Although there was some disruption in the early stages of the attack caused by adverse weather conditions , by 21 : 00 the entire vanguard and naval brigades were ashore . The landing had been effected with just two casualties , both men who died of natural causes . Keating took command of the vanguard and advanced on Fort Malartic , the garrison retreating before his troops and blowing up the fort as they left . During the morning of 30 November , Keating pushed southwards to the River Tombeau which overlooked Port Napoleon , his front units skirmishing with French defenders across the river , during which Decaen himself was lightly wounded by a musket ball . The bridge over the river had been held by a force of militia , but they fell back before the British advance and failed to properly demolish the bridge , allowing Keating to rapidly cross and threaten Port Napoleon . At Grand Baie , the remainder of the invasion force were coming ashore , so that the entire army had landed by midday , although Abercromby himself elected to stay with Beaver on HMS Nisus and follow the advance from offshore . 
 On 1 December , <unk> made a stand before Port Napoleon , defending the entrance to the town with his available regular troops and some small cannon . Keating attacked him , engaging the French front while a second attack by Madras sepoys outflanked the French line and disrupted it , allowing a successful frontal assault . With their defences breached the French fell back and on 2 December Decaen proposed a ceasefire , which was accepted . The following day Decaen surrendered , although with guarantees that he and the garrison would be repatriated and allowed to retain their personal arms and Eagles . Although some in the British force were unhappy with the terms of the surrender , the British commanders were relieved to have the invasion complete before the hurricane season began later in the month . The danger to the 70 ships in the British fleet from such a storm was serious and it was vitally important that they be in a safe harbour when the hurricane season began . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The surrender of Isle de France marked the final British operation of the campaign and the capture of the last French territory east of Africa . The island was restored to its pre @-@ 1715 name of Mauritius and the towns renamed under Decaen ( such as Port Napoleon ) were restored to their pre @-@ Revolutionary names . Governor Robert Townsend Farquhar of Île Bourbon was placed in administrative control of the island , Île Bourbon taken over by Keating . Although the French garrison was repatriated , the invaders captured six French frigates ( Manche , Astrée , Bellone and Minerve , Iphigénie and Néréide ) and several smaller warships ( the corvette Victor , the brig Entreprenant , the aviso <unk> and schooner @-@ aviso Mouche n ° 23 ) in the various harbours of Isle de France , as well as 24 merchant ships . Lloyd 's List published a list of all the vessels captured , military and civilian , on 15 February 1811 . The British also seized 209 heavy cannon . 
 The British recaptured the East Indiamen Ceylon , Charlton and United Kingdom , which the French were using as prison ships . Among the hundreds of prisoners released were the survivors of the Battle of Grand Port and the crews and passengers from the Indiamen captured over the previous year . Among the French prisoners , were discovered 12 deserters from the British Army or Royal Navy ( at least 40 successfully passed as Frenchmen and were repatriated to France ) . These 12 were put on trial on their return to Britain : two were later hanged and five transported . Rewards were forthcoming , particularly for Bertie , who was made a baronet . This created a scandal when Admiral Drury accused Bertie of taking credit for the work of others ( principally Drury himself ) . Mauritius , unlike Île Bourbon , remained in British hands after the end of the war in 1814 and was retained as part of the British Empire until granted independence in 1968 . 
 Although there were no further British operations in the region , the Mauritius campaign was not quite over . When news of the victory at Grand Port had reached France , there was pressure to resupply and reinforce the victorious squadron under Hamelin and a small squadron commanded by Commodore François Roquebert was ordered to sail for Isle de France . This squadron included three frigates : Renommée , Clorinde and Néréide and carried extensive stores to repair and rearm Hamelin 's frigates . The journey from France to the Indian Ocean was a long one , and it was not until February 1811 that Roquebert 's squadron arrived at Mauritius . Discovering that the island was in British hands , Roquebert attempted to return to France but was chased by the frigates stationed on Mauritius and captured at the Action of 20 May 1811 . Only Clorinde escaped the British pursuit . 
 = = Orders of battle = = 
 = Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut = 
 Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut is a 2004 extended version of Richard Kelly 's directorial debut , Donnie Darko . A critical success but a commercial failure when first released in 2001 , Donnie Darko grew in popularity through word @-@ of @-@ mouth due to strong DVD sales and regular midnight screenings across the United States . As a result of this growth , Kelly was approached by Bob Berney , president of the distributor Newmarket Films , who suggested that the film be rereleased . Kelly proposed producing a director 's cut , and was given $ 290 @,@ 000 to create what he called his interpretation of the original film . Donnie Darko was subsequently described as being the first " flop " to be given a director 's cut . 
 Kelly made various alterations to create the director 's cut . Almost all of the deleted scenes that had previously been included as bonus features on the film 's DVD were added , which increased the runtime by twenty minutes . Kelly also superimposed text from the in @-@ universe book The Philosophy of Time Travel , providing an explanation for some of the more ambiguous elements of the film 's plot . Additionally , the sound quality was improved , digital effects were added , and a new soundtrack was created using songs for which Kelly had previously been unable to obtain the rights – for the opening scene , " The Killing Moon " by Echo & the Bunnymen was replaced with " Never Tear Us Apart " by INXS . The new cut made its premiere on May 29 , 2004 , at a sold @-@ out screening during the Seattle International Film Festival . 
 Critical reception to Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut was initially positive : review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a rating of 91 % based on 43 reviews , while Metacritic awarded a score of 88 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " . Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four , describing it as " alive , original and exciting " . Retrospective reviews have been more negative , with reviewers criticizing the new soundtrack and the plot 's lack of ambiguity . The film was released on DVD on February 15 , 2005 , and on Blu @-@ ray four years later . Domestically , Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut took a total of $ 1 @.@ 3 million at the box office . 
 = = Background = = 
 Initially struggling to find financial backing for Donnie Darko in Hollywood , director Richard Kelly spent a year and a half pitching the project to executives . After reading the script , Drew Barrymore agreed to finance the film through her production company Flower Films . Following Barrymore 's involvement , Kelly was able to hire several well @-@ known actors — such as Patrick Swayze , Mary McDonnell and Katharine Ross — and to produce the film for a budget of $ 4 @.@ 5 million . On January 19 , 2001 , Donnie Darko made its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival . Despite the film receiving considerable acclaim from critics , distributors felt daunted and were unsure of what could be done with it . With its genre @-@ bending themes and complex plot , it was described as " inaccessible " and " not marketable " . After several months it was close to going directly to home video , but was eventually picked up by Newmarket Films and received a wide release on October 26 , 2001 . 
 Commercially , Donnie Darko performed poorly at first . Released only a month after the September 11 attacks in New York , audiences did not respond well to the film 's dark mood or jet engine plot point . Against its budget of $ 4 @.@ 5 million , the film made only $ 110 @,@ 000 in its first weekend in limited release at 58 screens . By the end of 2001 it had taken $ 420 @,@ 000 at the box office ; on completing its theatrical run , it had made a total of $ 515 @,@ 375 . Consequently , the film had its international release date pushed back by a year , and was not released in the UK until October 25 , 2002 . In this market , the film became a minor hit , making £ 1 million at the box office and being named the second best film of the year on BBC Two 's Film 2002 programme . Michael Andrews 's cover of " Mad World " by Tears for Fears — used in the film 's final sequence — topped the UK Singles Chart in December 2003 and became a Christmas number one . 
 As a result , in part , of its success overseas , Donnie Darko gained a new life in the US and developed a cult following . Its DVD was a best @-@ seller on Amazon.com with sales reaching $ 10 million , and it was regularly shown at midnight screenings across the country . At Visions Bar Noir in Washington D.C. , the film was screened for over a year , while at the Pioneer Theater in the East Village , Manhattan , the film played for a consecutive 28 months in a series of midnight showings . At one such event at the Pioneer in late 2003 , Kelly was in attendance , and was approached by Bob Berney , president of Newmarket Films , who suggested that the film could benefit from a rerelease . Kelly had always wanted to do a director 's cut of the film , and proposed this to Berney ; he went on to describe it as a " win @-@ win situation for everyone " . Kelly was subsequently given $ 290 @,@ 000 to create a new cut of Donnie Darko , which he called his interpretation of the film . Given the film 's box office performance , it was described as being the first " flop " to be given a director 's cut . 
 = = Changes = = 
 When originally editing Donnie Darko in 2001 , Kelly was required to keep the final film shorter than two hours , with its final runtime coming to 113 minutes . With more freedom in 2004 , his director 's cut is twenty minutes longer than the original release . Most of the deleted scenes that had been included as extras on the Donnie Darko DVD were added to narrative , bringing the runtime to a total of 133 minutes . Such scenes include additional sequences with Donnie and his parents , Donnie 's therapist Dr Thurman telling him that his drugs are placebos , and his English teacher Karen <unk> teaching Watership Down to her class . Close @-@ up shots of Donnie 's eyeballs were included , as well as footage of waves crashing on a beach , and a scene in which Donnie and Gretchen play the 1986 arcade game Out Run . 
 Alongside the deleted scenes , Kelly also superimposed pages from the fictional book The <unk> of Time Travel , which had previously been available on the film 's official website , onto the film . Kelly had written these passages after he had finished shooting , and explained that their inclusion was to help the film " operate on a more logical , fluid level , a bit more as the science fiction film that [ he ] always intended it to be " . The text introduces new concepts that had previously been unmentioned in the original release . According to The Philosophy of Time Travel , much of the film 's plot take place in an unstable " Tangent Universe " , a duplicate of the " Primary Universe " from which Donnie originates . Donnie is described as being the " Living Receiver " , and is granted superpowers such as strength , telekinesis and premonition . Donnie 's task over the course of the film is to return the jet engine ( called the " Artifact " in the book ) to the Primary Universe to avert a disaster . During his quest , he is aided by " The Manipulated Living " and " The Manipulated Dead " , who are the other characters in the film . These plot points received criticism from reviewers , who objected to the narrative 's new lack of ambiguity . Jonathan Dean of Total Film described them as " unsatisfactory " and " handholding " . In an interview , Kelly stated that the pages had been created " as an exercise in interpretation " , and that they were not necessarily intended to be viewed as canon . 
 The film 's sound quality was improved and its soundtrack revised . Kelly had originally wanted to use the songs " Never Tear Us Apart " by INXS and " West End Girls " by the Pet Shop Boys during the opening scene of Donnie cycling home and Sparkle Motion 's dance at the talent show respectively , but financial constraints meant that he instead had to use " The Killing Moon " by Echo & the Bunnymen and " Notorious " by Duran Duran . For the director 's cut , Kelly was able to gain the rights to use " Never Tear Us Apart " for the opening scene , and moved " The Killing Moon " to later in the film ; " Notorious " was not moved from the talent show scene . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut made its world premiere at a sold @-@ out screening on May 29 , 2004 , during the Seattle International Film Festival , where it was described as an " unprecedented experiment " . To test the reaction to the film , Newmarket then opened it exclusively in eight further theaters in the Seattle / Tacoma area . Seattle was chosen for this run to see if it could perform well in the suburbs . Six weeks after this test run , the film was released in New York City and Los Angeles , then in eight more cities that summer . It received a wide release on August 27 , three months after its Seattle premiere . Domestically , Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut took a total of $ 1 @.@ 3 million at the US box office . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Initial reaction to Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut was positive . On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 91 % , based on 43 reviews , with an average rating of 8 / 10 . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from critics , the film received an average score of 88 based on 15 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four , describing it as " alive , original and exciting " . Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times predicted that , as a " richer " cut , the movie would " be ranked as one of the key American films of the decade " . Writing for the Chicago Tribune , Robert K. Elder gave the film 3 ½ stars out of 4 , calling it Kelly 's " mind @-@ bending masterwork " . He added : " In his quest to make ' Darko ' more accessible , Kelly might upset a few loyalists of the original , but there are still enough questions left to confound and enthrall audiences in ' Donnie Darko 's ' reconfigured version . " In an otherwise positive review , Dennis Lim of The Village Voice criticized the superimposed shots of The Philosophy of Time Travel , stating that they " [ diminished ] the narrative 's mystery and [ disrupted ] its somnambulist tempo " . 
 Retrospective reviews of the film have been more negative . In 2014 , David Sims of The Wire listed Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut in his list of " directors ' cuts messed up their own movies " . Sims disliked the lack of ambiguity in Kelly 's new version , and argued that " <unk> [ a very specific plot thread ] into his director 's cut made for a lesser movie " . Similarly , Tom Hawking of Flavorwire felt that the director 's cut ruined the " enduring ambiguity " of the original . Hawking included Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut in his 2010 list of " 10 director 's cuts that are worse than the original " . Writing in Collider.com for a review of the 10 @-@ year anniversary Blu @-@ ray , Scott Wampler said that he felt " let @-@ down " by the director 's cut , and that it was " right in line with the sort of choices [ Kelly has ] made as a filmmaker since releasing Donnie Darko " . In the Total Film book The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time , where the original cut of Donnie Darko was listed at number 87 , Jonathan Dean also criticized this loss of ambiguity , remarking : " Unwisely building concrete bypasses over gossamer plot strands , [ the director 's cut ] steers us through a spaghetti junction of possible meanings when all we really want to do is get lost . " In a 2016 retrospective review , Germain <unk> of io9 stated that the director 's cut " simply isn 't as good " and " feels less magical " . He argued that the inclusion of The Philosophy of Time Travel " prevent the film from being a text that the viewer could read into whatever they wanted " . 
 The new soundtrack received considerable criticism , with several commentators bemoaning the decision to replace " The Killing Moon " with " Never Tear Us Apart " for the opening sequence . Wampler felt that the song " didn 't fit nearly as well " , while Sims described it as being " horribly mismatched " . Ashe <unk> of Film School Rejects echoed this sentiment , and argued that the soundtrack " got turned into kind of a pile of crap " ; Shaun Munro of WhatCulture.com similarly felt that " replacing the music is a crime " . In an interview with the British music magazine NME , Ian McCulloch — the lead singer of Echo & the Bunnymen — branded Kelly a " <unk> " for making the change . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut was released on DVD on February 15 , 2005 in both single and double @-@ disc versions ; the latter was available in a standard DVD case or in a limited edition lenticular slipcase . Most additional features are exclusive to the two @-@ DVD set , such as an audio commentary with Kelly and director Kevin Smith , excerpts from the Donnie Darko storyboard , a 52 @-@ minute production diary with commentary by director of photography Steven Poster , featurettes # 1 Fan : A <unk> and They Made Me Do it Too – The Cult of Donnie Darko , and the film 's theatrical trailer . 
 As a promotional giveaway , a single @-@ DVD edition of Donnie Darko : The Director 's Cut was <unk> to the February 19 , 2006 issue of the UK 's The Sunday Times newspaper . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray in February 2009 , and received a 10th anniversary special edition rerelease on July 26 , 2011 . 
 = Rufus ( Street Fighter ) = 
 Rufus ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a fictional character in the Street Fighter series of fighting games . Designed by Daigo Ikeno for Capcom 's development team , he first appeared in the arcade version of Street Fighter IV and later in related promotions and media for the title . 
 A very large , overweight martial artist , Rufus seeks to defeat Ken Masters , angered by his claim of being the " number one fighter in America " . Along the way he instead fights many people he confuses for Ken due to similar attire or hair color , regardless of gender . The character is voiced by Wataru Hatano in Japanese , and Christopher Corey Smith in English . 
 Since Rufus 's introduction , the character has received a mostly positive reception . Though some criticism has been made over the character 's design and aesthetic , the majority have praised the character as exceeding expectations based solely on his appearance . 
 = = Character design = = 
 While previous Street Fighter titles relied almost solely on Capcom 's Research and Development branch , the development team instead allowed other branches of the company to give input on the design of new characters , due to the influx of fan requests from outside Japan . Rufus was designed based upon marketing research on what sorts of characters an American audience would enjoy playing , and was one of several characters considered for inclusion during the game 's development . 
 Designed by Daigo Ikeno , Rufus was initially intended to be a bald slender black male wearing a gi named " King Cobra " , meant to be a more acrobatic counterpart to series characters Ryu and Ken and voiced by Wataru Hatano . His fighting style was intended to be " <unk> @-@ fu " , mixing elements of Chinese martial arts with breakdancing , which they perceived as a fad in the United States at the time , and Ikeno developed the character 's concept around it . Midway through the process of recording the character 's lines , however , art director Takashi Kamei proposed that they have the character be overweight , an idea Ikeno agreed with . As a result , the design was gradually changed completely , becoming more obese and turned into a blonde , long haired white male , a design which Ikeno later admitted was in fact rushed . The changed appearance surprised many of Capcom 's staff members , including Hatano , who remarked " Wait , is that my character ? " Rufus final appearance was chosen over his initial design because the developers felt he would " freak people out " . Street Fighter IV 's executive producer Yoshinori Ono likened his inclusion to that of Blanka in Street Fighter II , noting that Rufus ' " over @-@ the @-@ top " design was intended to help set the game apart from the " really cool @-@ looking but ultimately bland " characters of Tekken and Virtua Fighter . 
 In an interview , Ono noted they made Rufus intentionally silly , adding that he could be called an " American Dan " in terms of being a joke character in the game 's roster . He later referred to Rufus as " quite grotesque to look at " when describing the new characters for the game . When asked about comparisons between Rufus and Bob , a character introduced by Namco for their Tekken series around the same time , Ono emphasized that the characters were different in many regards , and while Bob represented a " cool fat guy " , Rufus represented a " weird fat guy " . Other Capcom staff members including community manager Seth Killian have received the character warmly , noting Rufus as their favorite new character in the series . 
 Street Fighter IV sound director Masayuki <unk> developed the character 's musical theme for the title with a " freewheeling spirit " in mind due to Rufus 's motorcycle and personality , utilizing an American drummer and drum set for parts of the theme . Feeling it would be an interesting approach , Hatano 's recorded voice samples to be incorporated into the character 's background music . The development team agreed , feeling that his voice gave the character presence and fit Rufus ' overall image . 
 = = = Personality and attributes = = = 
 Rufus is an American motorcycle repair shop mechanic . Using a self @-@ taught fighting style from watching martial arts films and putting his own spin on the attacks , he believes he is handsome and America 's best martial artist . Rufus takes himself very seriously in this regard , to the point of referring to himself as " Lord Rufus " and regarding rude people as beneath him . Capcom describes the character as having a hasty personality , prone to jumping to conclusions to achieve a goal and sacrificing accuracy for speed . Rufus tends to speak in a long @-@ winded manner , demonstrated through considerably long victory quotes at the end of fights . His girlfriend , Candy , accompanies him as a result of him protecting her from an angry waiter she attempted to <unk> and paying the bill . 
 Rufus is depicted as a large , heavily obese blond male . His head is mostly bald , with a long braided ponytail jutting from the top , and a mustache extending down the sides of his mouth to his chin . His clothing consists of a yellow and black sleeveless jumpsuit with padded shoulders , with the closing straps left open due to his girth and exposing the center of his torso and lower abdominal hair . Black shoes cover his feet , while black fingerless gloves cover his hands and most of his forearms . His secondary outfit is similar , changing the jumpsuit to a dark blue and green version with sleeves and a raised collar , additionally removing the gloves and changing his hairstyle to a double ponytail . Other alternate designs were considered but rejected , amongst which included an Elvis impersonator appearance and martial artist attire . Rufus stands 1 @.@ 95 m ( 6 ft 5 in ) tall , and weighs 185 kilograms ( 408 lb ) . 
 For Super Street Fighter IV , a third outfit intended to resemble the Chinese jiangshi was included , consisting of a long Chinese robe , black hat with his ponytail extruding from the top , yellow and black striped pants , and a yellow strip of paper meant to represent a sealing charm extending from the front of the hat and over his face . The developers considered to have the charm able to be knocked off by an opponent 's attacks , and as a result alter his attack patterns and power ; however , they felt this overcomplicated the character , and instead abandoned the idea . Assistant producer Natsuki Shiozawa cited the outfit as one of her five favorites in the game , feeling that design suited his body well . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Introduced in the 2008 video game Street Fighter IV , Rufus is angered that martial artist Ken Masters is declared the best fighter in America . Per Candy 's suggestion that he find and defeat Ken to prove himself as the best , he declares Ken as his rival and sets out to find him . However , along the way he repeatedly mistakes other fighters for Ken , attacking similarly dressed or blonde people regardless of gender , and blames the mistaken identities on his belief Ken is using decoys to delay him , notably , the character Abel . He eventually confronts Ken , who states he does not know who Rufus is , which angers him further before they fight . In the game 's conclusion , Rufus is shown pushing his broken down motorcycle uphill with Candy on board , using it as training and blaming Ken for the predicament . At the conclusion of Super Street Fighter IV , Rufus repairs his motorcycle and at Candy 's request for a colder climate , heads due north to the North Pole . Rufus appears with his official tag partner , Zangief in Street Fighter X Tekken . 
 Outside of the video game , Rufus has also appeared in UDON 's Street Fighter comic series . First appearing in their Street Fighter II Turbo comic in February 2009 , Rufus is shown to hate Ken for being named the best fighter in America as well as for the media attention he receives , feeling Ken put no effort into the achievement . Taking Candy along with him , Rufus sets out to find and defeat Ken at the story 's conclusion . Later appearing in the second issue of UDON 's Street Fighter IV comic book , Rufus attempts to find him through his friend Sakura <unk> , defeating Dan Hibiki in the process but is himself defeated afterwards . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 Rufus was purposefully made faster than his outward appearance would indicate and given the ability to string his attacks together more readily , in order to " [ defy ] expectations based on what he looks like " , and to contrast against other large characters in fighting games . During development of his attacks , the developers devised several options for his fighting style , considering different ways to combine it with his appearance . After considering his design , they decided to allow his movements to be quick and strengthened by the inertia of his body fat , accompanied by martial artist yells and shouts . 
 Rufus 's gameplay has been compared to the fighting styles used by Street Fighter III characters Yun and Yang by the development team , notably in regards to his diving kick attack , and emphasized mobility while attacking . Other attacks were designed as a means to negate enemy offensives , such as the Galactic Tornado , which destroys enemy projectiles while drawing the opponent closer to Rufus for a final strike . His Ultra Combo , Space Opera Symphony , is a barrage of attacks that requires close proximity to the opponent , dealing several blows and ending in a final upwards blast . 
 In Super Street Fighter IV , a second Ultra Combo named " Big Bang Typhoon " was added , consisting of Rufus spinning his body with arms outward in a tornado @-@ inspired fashion . The attack was designed to have deceptive range , but a long startup period . In addition , several attacks were altered in terms of range and damage . This in turn gave the development team trouble and relied on a lot of " trial and error " to balance the character . 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 To promote Street Fighter IV and the character , artwork of Rufus including hand @-@ drawn sprites of the character is included in Xbox Live themes . Worldwide restaurants Wan Zhu Ji and <unk> <unk> Bo offered four Street Fighter IV themed meals , which included a <unk> meat dish named after the character . At organized events , Capcom distributed a limited series of Street Fighter IV cards to promote the arcade title , one of which features Rufus in a fighting stance . 
 Rufus has received mixed to positive reception since his debut . GameDaily named Rufus the strangest of the new characters introduced in Street Fighter IV , placing him 12th on their " Most Bizarre Fighting Characters " list and noting his high attack speed despite his weight . IGN described Rufus as one of the most interesting new characters introduced in the title , due to the " juxtaposition between his comical size and impressive speed " and added that his attack set " shows that if you can get past Rufus ' comical exterior , a capable fighter hides within . " IGN AU stated that while they felt the character was the ugliest in the game , they enjoyed his unpredictability and acrobatics , as well as his attitude . 1UP.com called Rufus a worthy addition to the series , " despite ... outward , me @-@ too appearances " . Anime News Network described Rufus as well @-@ designed and engaging , despite initial reservations regarding the character . VideoGamer.com praised Rufus as one of the game 's better new characters in the title , in heavy contrast to other additions such as Crimson Viper . GameTrailers praised the character and noted he " definitely offered something different " , adding " You may not have expected a game 's most obvious jiggle physics to apply to a male character . " Stars and Stripes noted the level of detail in Rufus 's animations and movements , describing his mobility as " weirdly awesome " . 
 In contrast , Doug Buel of The Tampa Tribune considered Rufus a character the game could have done without , describing him as " an obnoxious , overweight fighter with a big mouth " , additionally citing the character as the game 's worst feature . GameSpot described him as " a bit of a sight gag " , though noting his speed as " deceptive " . A reviewer for the New Straits Times felt that though the character stood out from the other newcomers , his play was too " lethargic " . Giant Bomb 's Jeff Gerstmann noted that the character was " a bit out of place " with the rest of the cast , describing him as a " big , bobbing belly with appendages " , though he added that Rufus was feasible as a playable character . 
 = VVVVVV = 
 VVVVVV is a 2010 2D puzzle platform video game created by Terry Cavanagh . The game was built in Adobe Flash and released on January 11 , 2010 , for Microsoft Windows and OS X. The game was ported to C + + by Simon Roth in 2011 , and released as part of the Humble Indie Bundle # 3 . The port to C + + allowed the porting of the game to other platforms as Linux , Pandora and Nintendo 3DS later . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Unlike most platforming games , in VVVVVV the player is not able to jump , but instead can reverse the direction of gravity when standing on a surface , causing Captain Viridian to fall either upwards or downwards . This unusual feature was first seen in the 1986 8 @-@ bit game Terminus . The player uses this mechanic to traverse the game 's environment and avoid various hazards , including stationary spikes and moving enemies . 
 Later areas introduce new mechanics such as moving floors or rooms which , upon touching one edge of the screen , cause the player character to appear on the other side . VVVVVV contains eight main levels situated inside a larger open world for the player to explore . Due to its high level of difficulty , the game world contains many checkpoints , to which the player 's character is reset upon death . 
 The sad elephant , sometimes also called the elephant in the room , is a large elephant with a tear dropping from its eye . It spans four rooms near the Space Station area of Dimension VVVVVV , flickering constantly from color to color . If the player stands near the elephant for a short period of time , it will cause Captain Viridian to become sad . The elephant serves no function to the game , but has served to provoke much discussion about its meaning or symbolism amongst fans of the game . Similarly to many of the enemies in the game , the sad elephant originated in dream journals kept by creator Terry Cavanagh and not from Jet Set Willy as once believed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The player controls Captain Viridian , who at the outset of VVVVVV must evacuate the spaceship along with the captain 's crew , when the ship becomes affected by " dimensional interference " . The crew escapes through a teleporter on the ship ; however , Captain Viridian becomes separated from the rest of the crew on the other end of the teleporter . Upon returning to the ship , the Captain learns that the ship is trapped in an alternative dimension ( referred to as Dimension VVVVVV ) , and that the ship 's crew has been scattered throughout this dimension . The player 's goal , as Captain Viridian , is to rescue the missing crew members and find the cause of the dimensional interference . 
 = = Development = = 
 The gravity @-@ flipping mechanic of VVVVVV is based on an earlier game designed by Cavanagh , entitled Sine Wave Ninja . In an interview with IndieGames.com , Cavanagh said that he was interested in using this idea as a core concept of a game , something he felt other games which include a gravity @-@ flipping mechanism had never done before . 
 Cavanagh first unveiled VVVVVV on his blog in June 2009 . The game had been in development for two weeks , and Cavanagh estimated that the game would be finished in another two , " but hopefully not much longer . " A follow @-@ up post published in July 2009 included screenshots of the game and an explanation of the game 's gravity @-@ flipping mechanic . Cavanagh wrote that VVVVVV , unlike some of his previous work such as Judith and Pathways , would not be a " storytelling experiment " , but rather " focused on the level design " . The game was first shown publicly at the 2009 Eurogamer Expo , which gave Cavanagh the opportunity to collect feedback from players . In December 2009 , a beta version of VVVVVV which had been given to donors was leaked on 4chan . 
 The visual style of VVVVVV is heavily inspired by games released for the Commodore 64 8 @-@ bit computer from the 1980s , especially Jet Set Willy which is referenced by the element of collecting difficult @-@ to @-@ reach shiny objects and most notably the naming of each room ; Cavanagh aimed to create a game " that looked and felt like the C64 games I grew up with . " He eventually entrusted naming the rooms to QWOP developer Bennett Foddy , who created every room name in the final version . The graphical style of VVVVVV is heavily influenced by the Commodore 64 ; similarly , the game 's music is heavily dependent on chiptune elements . Swedish composer Magnus Pålsson scored the game , and released the original soundtrack in 2010 , titled <unk> . 
 Cavanagh also considered this game an opportunity to indulge in his " retro fetish " . He has said because he lacks the technical prowess to make more modern @-@ looking games , he instead focuses on making them visually interesting ; additionally , he finds this to be made easier by " work [ ing ] within narrow limits " . VVVVVV was the first game which Cavanagh sold commercially . While his previous games were all released as freeware , due to the size of VVVVVV compared to his previous work , Cavanagh felt that he " couldn 't see [ himself ] going down that route . " 
 VVVVVV was released on January 11 , 2010 for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X. A trial version of the game is playable on the website Kongregate . A Linux version was in development , but a number of technical difficulties arose in the porting process , which led Cavanagh to cancel it for the time being . 
 The game was rewritten in C + + by games developer Simon Roth in 2011 , allowing Linux support to be successfully implemented . This formed version 2 @.@ 0 of VVVVVV , launched on July 24 , 2011 as part of the third Humble Indie Bundle . Version 2 @.@ 0 also features support for custom levels , and a level editor . The C + + port also allowed for the implementation of new graphics modes and various speed improvements . Version 2 @.@ 0 , however , does not support saved games from the original Flash version of VVVVVV ; many players received this update via Steam without warning , and hence were unable to continue their existing saved games . A save @-@ file exporter is in development . 
 Based on this source code it was also ported in 2011 for the Open Pandora , which requires the data files from the Microsoft Windows , Mac OS X or Linux version of the game to work . 
 On October 7 , 2011 , it was announced that a version of the game was being made for Nintendo 3DS by Nicalis . It was released on December 29 , 2011 in North America and May 10 , 2012 in Europe . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack of VVVVVV was composed by chiptune musician Magnus Pålsson ( also known as <unk> ) . Cavanagh approached Pålsson to compose VVVVVV after playing Space Phallus , an indie game by Charlie 's Games , which featured a song by him . Pålsson wrote on the <unk> blog that , upon playing Cavanagh 's previous games , he was " amazed at the depth that came with the games , even though they were small and short . " In writing the music for VVVVVV , Pålsson aimed to make " uptempo happy songs that would <unk> themselves into your minds whether you want to or not , hopefully so much so that you ’ d go humming on them when not playing , and making you want to come back to the game even more . " The complete soundtrack , titled <unk> , was released alongside VVVVVV and is sold as a music download or CD on Pålsson 's personal website . On June 12 , 2014 Pålsson released a power metal version of the soundtrack titled <unk> which was arranged and performed by guitarist Jules Conroy . The album contains a mod file to replace the in @-@ game music with the metal tracks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 VVVVVV has been generally well received by critics , earning a score of 78 @.@ 78 % ( PC ) and 80 @.@ 28 % ( 3DS ) on review aggregation website GameRankings . The game was noted for being the first important independent release of 2010 ; Kieron Gillen of Rock , Paper , Shotgun called it " the first great Indie game of the year " , while Michael Rose , writing for IndieGames.com , noted that the release of VVVVVV followed a year which " some may argue ... didn 't really deliver an outstanding indie title which showed the mainstream that independent developers mean business . " The level design of VVVVVV was lauded by critics : Rose considered the game to have no filler content , which he found to be " one of the game 's strongest points " . Michael McWhertor of gaming news blog Kotaku wrote that the game 's areas contained " a surprising amount of variation throughout ... ensuring that VVVVVV never feels like its designer failed to explore the gameplay possibilities . " 
 Most reviewers wrote of VVVVVV 's high level of difficulty . McWhertor found that " the game 's trial and error moments can seriously test one 's patience . " However , several critics noted that the game 's challenge is made less frustrating due to its numerous checkpoints , as well as the player 's ability to retry after dying as many times as needed . These additions made VVVVVV " not unforgiving " , according to IGN staff writer Samuel Claiborn , while still being " old @-@ school in its demands of player dedication " . Independent reviewer Declan Tyson said that he feels " victimised by the game 's criminally unforgiving collision detection and over @-@ enthusiastically sensitive controls " but that " it 's all worth it for when you reach the next checkpoint and feel that split second of relief " . 
 The price of VVVVVV when it was originally released was $ 15 . This was seen by McWhertor as being the game 's " one unfortunate barrier " to entry : " While there 's plenty to see and do after blazing through the game 's core campaign , the steeper than expected asking price will probably turn some off . " Likewise , Gillen wrote in his review that the cost " does strike you as a lot for an Indie lo @-@ fi platformer " , while insisting that " it is worth the money " . Since its original release , the price of VVVVVV has been reduced to $ 5 . On his blog , Cavanagh said that the decision was difficult to make , but added , " I know that the original price of $ 15 was off putting for a lot of people " . 
 VVVVVV was awarded the IndieCade 2010 award for " Most Fun and Compelling " game in October 2010 . Game development blog Gamasutra honored VVVVVV in its year @-@ end independent games awards , which earned second place in 2009 and an honorable mention in 2010 . The game 's protagonist , Captain Viridian , is a playable character in the Windows version of the platform game Super Meat Boy . 
 = = Nintendo 3DS homebrew exploit = = 
 On May 1 , 2016 , <unk> discovered that the Nintendo 3DS port of VVVVVV can be exploited to load homebrew software . In a similar manner to Cubic Ninja , Nintendo removed the game from the eShop after the exploit was discovered . 
 = NSB Class 93 = 
 NSB Class 93 ( Norwegian : NSB @-@ type 93 ) is a tilting two @-@ carriage diesel multiple unit used by Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) for passenger trains on non @-@ electrified stretches of the Norwegian railway network . Used on the Nordland Line , the Røros Line and the Rauma Line , they were purchased to replace the aging Di3 locomotive @-@ hauled trains . The Class 93 was produced by Bombardier , and is part of the Talent family . Fifteen units were delivered between 2000 and 2002 . 
 Powered by two Cummins diesel engines with a combined output of 612 kW ( 821 hp ) , the trains are capable of speeds of 140 km / h ( 87 mph ) . The trains entered service as part of the Agenda regional train concept . However , the technical problems to which the units have been prone and a cramped interior design have made them unpopular among riders . In 2007 , the units were replaced by locomotive @-@ hauled trains on some services on the Nordland Line . 
 = = History = = 
 During the mid @-@ 1990s , NSB had initiated a program to replace the traditional locomotive and carriage trains with new , tilting multiple units . This had led to the order of sixteen Class 73 four @-@ car units for the three mainline routes on the Bergen , Dovre and Sørland Lines . To supplement this , on 14 November 1996 the board of NSB decided to purchase seven tilting diesel multiple units for the Røros and Rauma Lines . In particular , the aging Di3 locomotives would be retired within five years , and NSB was reluctant to purchase new diesel locomotives for passenger trains . The failure of the <unk> , which were returned to the manufacturer Siemens , further motivated NSB to avoid locomotive @-@ hauled trains . 
 Three bids were submitted by the deadline of 1 April 1997 , and the contract with Talbot , which had just been bought by Bombardier , was finalized on 27 November 1997 . By this time the order had been extended to eleven units , which are variations of the Talbot Talent . Before delivery a further four units were purchased , so the trains could operate all the services on the Nordland Line , replacing most of the locomotive @-@ hauled day trains . Only the night train would remain locomotive @-@ hauled . 
 The Class 93 was put into service as part of the Agenda regional train concept . Along with the Class 70 InterCity Express trains in Eastern Norway , the Class 93 would serve the regional services of NSB . Trains were initially put into service in 2000 on the Nordland Line , followed by the Rauma and Røros Line . The trains had several operational problems , some related to humidity , creating situations where the both engines would stop . This caused NSB in 2002 to demand an interior and technical reconfiguration by Bombardier . One year after delivery , six of eleven trains were out of order . To solve the problem , NSB had to rent back used Di3 locomotives from Ofotbanen . NSB had chosen to sell the old locomotives for less than market price , but Ofotbanen demanded that NSB pay the entire purchase price for the short @-@ term rental back . The brand name Agenda failed , since customers were dissatisfied with the new stock , and NSB chose to discontinue the branding , just calling all former Agenda and Signatur trains regional trains . 
 On the Rauma Line , the units are used as feeders between the Oslo – Trondheim express trains on the Dovre Line , connecting Dombås to Åndalsnes . On the Røros Line , the trains are used both on the Hamar – Røros and the Røros – Trondheim section . On the Nordland Line , the Class 93 serves both the Ole Tobias service between Trondheim and Mo i Rana . The unit was considered for use on the Meråker Line as well , but this has continued to be operated by Class 92 units . The initial plan was that eight of the eleven units were needed for daily operations . Four on the Røros Line , two on the Nordland Line and two on the Rauma Line . The additional four units were needed for operating the Trondheim – Bodø trains on the Nordland Line , of which three would be used at any one time . Double units ( four cars ) are sometimes operated on the Trondheim – Mo i Rana train , as are the Friday and Sunday afternoon trains on the Rauma Line , for exchange of equipment , and to handle the increased traffic on these days . In addition , NSB uses the trains on the commuter services Bodø – Fauske – Rognan and Mo i Rana – Mosjøen . 
 In 2007 , the Trondheim – Bodø service was again operated by Di 4 locomotive @-@ hauled trains . This is the longest rail service in the country , and customers were dissatisfied with the comfort of the Class 93 , despite the higher permitted speeds . 
 During May and June 2012 all NSB Class 93 trains were fitted with free wireless Internet access for passengers 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Class 93 is a double @-@ car diesel multiple unit with a built @-@ in tilting mechanism to allow faster speeds on conventional track . A double @-@ car is 38 @.@ 21 m ( 125 @.@ 4 ft ) long , 2 @.@ 92 m ( 9 @.@ 6 ft ) wide and 3 @.@ 97 m ( 13 @.@ 0 ft ) high . Empty weight is 77 t ( 76 long tons ; 85 short tons ) . The body is built in modular stainless steel , with the bottom , sides and top bolted together . 
 There are two Cummins <unk> @-@ R diesel engines , with a combined power of 612 kW ( 821 hp ) . The displacement is 14 l ( 850 cu in ) ; full power is achieved at 1 @,@ 500 revolutions per minute . There is a five @-@ stage gear box , and a fuel capacity of two tanks each of 1 @,@ 140 l ( 250 imp gal ) . There are three bogies ( sets of wheels ) , of which the ends are powered . Maximum speed is 140 km / h ( 87 mph ) . The tilting mechanism allows 5 degree tilting of the entire frame . 
 The interior is in red and wood . The central part , including both doors on each side , are on a low @-@ floor section , while the area at the front is higher . The original seating configuration was for 88 seats , but due to customer complaints about lack of seat pitch , NSB has reconfigured the trains in 2006 to 76 seats . Trains are equipped with vending machines for simple refreshments . Garbage is recycled in three categories . 
 = 6th Division ( Australia ) = 
 The 6th Division was an infantry division of the Australian Army . It was raised briefly in 1917 during World War I , but was broken up to provide reinforcements before seeing action . It was not re @-@ raised until the outbreak of World War II , when it was formed as a unit of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) . Throughout 1940 – 41 it served in the North African Campaign , the Greek campaign , on Crete and in Syria , fighting against the Germans , Italians and Vichy French . In 1942 , the division left the Middle East and returned to Australia to meet the threat of Japan 's entry into the war . Part of the division garrisoned Ceylon for a short period of time , before the division was committed to the New Guinea campaign . In New Guinea , its component brigades had a major role in the successful counter @-@ offensive along the Kokoda Track , at Buna – Gona and around Salamaua – Lae in 1942 – 43 . Throughout late 1943 – 44 , the division was re @-@ organised in Australia before being committed as a complete formation to one of the last Australian operations of the war around Aitape – Wewak in 1944 – 45 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The 6th Division was first formed in 1917 in Britain during World War I as part of an effort to expand the First Australian Imperial Force . Its existence was short @-@ lived , though , and as a result of manpower shortages that occurred because of a failure to make good the heavy losses that the AIF had suffered on the Western Front in 1917 , it was decided to disband the division and its subordinate units in September 1917 and use their personnel to reinforce other units . As a result , the division was broken @-@ up as replacements several months later , before it saw action . 
 The division was not re @-@ raised during the interwar years and subsequently remained off the Australian Army 's order of battle until World War II broke out . Due to the provisions of the Defence Act , which precluded the five existing Militia divisions from serving overseas , the government decided to raise an all @-@ volunteer force known as the 2nd AIF . The 6th Division was the first division formed within the 2nd AIF , being raised on 28 September 1939 . Initially under the command of Lieutenant General Thomas Blamey , upon formation the division consisted of the 16th , 17th and 18th Brigades , each established with four infantry battalions . Later , though , it was reorganised as a result of the 18th Brigade being sent to the United Kingdom in June 1940 and the decision to adopt the British establishment of three infantry battalions to a brigade . The 19th Brigade was subsequently raised as the division 's third infantry brigade , being formed by taking one battalion from each of the other three brigades when they were reduced from four to three . Of the division 's infantry battalions , all except one – the 2 / 11th – were raised in either New South Wales or Victoria . 
 In early 1940 , the majority of the 6th Division was sent to Palestine , to complete their training before joining the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) in France . Together with the 7th Division they formed the Australian I Corps . However , France fell to German forces in July 1940 , before I Corps arrived . While the rest of the division was training in the Middle East , the division 's third artillery regiment , the 2 / 3rd Field Regiment and the 2 / 1st Anti @-@ tank Regiment were sent to the United Kingdom to help bolster the garrison there in light of an expected invasion following the Fall of France . After being partially broken up to provide personnel to serve as infantry in the 25th Brigade , once the threat of invasion was over these two regiments were sent to the Middle East to rejoin the division , arriving there in December 1940 . 
 = = North Africa = = 
 The 6th Division first saw action in early 1941 , against Italian forces in North Africa , in the advance to Benghazi as part of Operation Compass . By this time , Major General Iven Mackay had taken over command of the division . In June 1940 , Italy had declared war on the Allies and began to build up forces in Libya . In September 1940 , the Italian Tenth Army invaded Egypt , a British colony , threatening Allied control of the Middle East and most particularly , the Suez Canal and international supply routes . British forces under General Sir Archibald Wavell expelled the Italians from Sidi Barrani and pursued them back towards the Libyan border . In December 1940 , the 6th Division was moved forward from training camps around Alexandria to relieve British troops around Bardia and at the end of December they were ordered to prepare to attack . 
 On 3 January 1941 , at Bardia , a small coastal town just inside the Libyan border , the first major Australian action of World War II took place . Amidst a heavy artillery barrage and supported by British Matilda tanks and Bren carriers of the divisional cavalry , the 6th Division penetrated the defences of the Italian stronghold . Despite some heavy resistance the town fell to the Australians just two days later . The Australians captured a large amount of Italian war material as well as thousands of Italian prisoners of war ( POWs ) , many of whom were shipped to prison camps in Australia . The fighting continued until 5 January when the Italian position had been cut almost into two . The Allies took nearly 40 @,@ 000 Italian prisoners and considerable amounts of enemy weapons , supplies and equipment . The battle for Bardia cost 130 Australian lives with 326 men wounded . 
 On 22 January 1941 , the Italian held port of Tobruk fell to the AIF and 25 @,@ 000 Italians became prisoners . During January and February 1941 , the 6th Division , together with British units , pushed the Italian army back across Libya , including actions at Derna , Barce and Benghazi . The Italian Tenth Army was destroyed . Although Wavell initially planned to leave the 6th Division in Cyrenaica for defence , the 7th Division was still insufficiently trained and equipped . As such in early April 1941 , the 6th Division was withdrawn from North Africa to defend Greece and replaced by the 9th Division , which took part in the epic Siege of Tobruk between April and November 1941 against Italian and German forces . Throughout the campaign , the division lost 241 killed , 790 wounded and 21 captured . 
 = = Greece , Crete and Syria = = 
 Hitler was concerned that if Greece — which since 28 October 1940 was fighting against the Italians in Albania — became a British ally then the <unk> oilfields in Romania , on which Germany relied for her fuel , might be open to air attack from Greece . As the Germans were planning an invasion of Russia for June 1941 , they could not allow such a threat to their essential oil supplies , and so they began planning an invasion of Greece . In March 1941 , Prime Minister Robert Menzies , of Australia , with the concurrence of his Cabinet , agreed to the sending of Australian troops to Greece to defend against a German attack . Both Menzies and the I Corps commander , Blamey , felt that the operation was risky and might end in disaster , but Menzies stated that Greece should be supported against German aggression and that the defence of Greece was a " great risk in a good cause " . 
 The 6th Division arrived in Greece in late March and early April 1941 , where they joined with a New Zealand and British force . On 6 April the Germans began their invasion of Greece , sending a total of 27 divisions . After arriving in Greece , the Australians were transported north towards the Yugoslav border , where they took up defensive positions around the Florina Valley . During the fighting around Vevi that followed , troops from the 2 / 4th and 2 / 8th Infantry Battalions and the 2 / 3rd Field Regiment , from Brigadier George Vasey 's 19th Brigade , fought against the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler brigade . Despite their efforts , the Allied force , together with Greek units , was unable to halt the rapid German advance down central Greece towards Athens . The Allies were outflanked by the Germans , and by 27 April they were driven off the Greek mainland , with a final act of defiance being made around Porto Rafti . The division 's casualties in Greece amounted to 320 killed , 494 wounded and 2 @,@ 030 captured . 
 After the withdrawal from Greece , while some elements of the division were evacuated back to Alexandria , the majority of the 6th Division was sent to Crete where they were cobbled together to form a hasty garrison . The 19th Brigade had been landed intact with all of its infantry battalions , while only elements of the 16th and 17th Brigades had been landed and these two were combined together to form composite battalions . In addition to the infantry , two of the division 's field artillery units , the 2 / 2nd and 2 / 3rd Field Regiments had also been landed . They had both lost all of their equipment in Greece and as a result the 2 / 2nd were thrown into the line as infantry , while the 2 / 3rd were hastily re @-@ equipped with 14 captured French and Italian artillery pieces . On 20 May , the Germans launched an airborne assault on the island and over the course of a week @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half heavy fighting ensued around Maleme airfield , Heraklion , Canea , and Retimo during which heavy casualties were inflicted upon the Germans before , having exhausted their ammunition and lacking air support , the garrison was evacuated back to Egypt close to the end of the month . As in Greece , a large number of men were unable to be evacuated and as a result many 6th Division personnel , including the majority of the 2 / 1st , 2 / 7th and 2 / 11th Battalions , were taken prisoner . A great deal of equipment was also lost . During the fighting , the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , fighting alongside the New Zealand 28th ( Maori ) Battalion , undertook a bayonet charge at a position known as 42nd Street that was later described as " one of the epics of the war " , which resulted in about 300 Germans being killed . The fighting on Crete added a further 274 killed , 507 wounded and 3 @,@ 102 captured to the division 's casualty list . 
 While the majority of the division was in Crete , the 6th Division Cavalry Regiment , which had not been sent to Greece , was detached to the British 7th Armoured Brigade and subsequently took part in Operation Brevity in the Western Desert in May . Following the evacuation of Crete , while the 6th Division began rebuilding in Palestine , the cavalry was allocated to take part in the bloody but successful attack on Vichy French forces in the Syria @-@ Lebanon campaign . Two depleted infantry battalions from the 17th Brigade – the 2 / 3rd and 2 / 5th – were also committed and subsequently took part in the drive on Damascus in mid @-@ June . They were later joined by the 2 / 2nd Pioneer Battalion and together they fought through the campaign until the French capitulated in mid @-@ July . In the process they suffered 168 casualties ; total 6th Division casualties for the Syrian campaign amounted to 39 killed and 129 wounded . 
 After the conclusion of the fighting in Syria , the rest of the 6th Division joined the 17th Brigade and undertook garrison duties there . In December 1941 , the division received news that the Japanese had attacked on Pearl Harbor and invaded Malaya . Nevertheless , the division remained in Syria over Christmas , during which time they endured a bitterly cold winter that saw heavy snow falls . Finally , in January 1942 , the decision was made to withdraw them back to Australia to meet threat posed by Japanese advances in the Pacific . The 19th Brigade departed first and subsequently arrived at Fremantle on 10 March . Meanwhile , the 16th and 17th Brigades were diverted to defend Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) from the Japanese . They remained there from mid @-@ March through to early July 1942 . 
 = = The Pacific War = = 
 = = = Return to Australia = = = 
 While the 16th and 17th Brigades were in Ceylon , the 19th Brigade had proceeded from Fremantle to Adelaide in mid @-@ March . They remained there until April when a short period of leave was granted . Once the men had reported back , the brigade was split up , with the 2 / 11th Infantry Battalion being sent to Western Australia to undertake garrison duty while the brigade 's other infantry battalions and the divisional cavalry regiment were sent to the Northern Territory to bolster its defences in the wake of Japanese successes ; the 19th Brigade would subsequently not see any combat for another three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years . While there , the 2 / 11th 's place within the 19th Brigade was taken by a Militia unit , the 23rd / 21st Battalion . At the same time , many of the division 's experienced officers and non commissioned officers were transferred out to Militia units in order to prepare them for operations against the Japanese . The 6th Division headquarters was subsequently used to form Headquarters , Northern Territory Force in April , and does not appear to have officially been reformed in its own right until August or September . In June , one the division 's artillery regiments , the 2 / 3rd was transferred to the 5th Division . Having spent nearly six months in Ceylon , the 16th and 17th Brigades arrived back in Australia in August and they subsequently returned to their states of origin . After a brief period of leave , welcome home parades were held in Sydney for the 16th and in Melbourne for the 17th . Less than a week later , the 6th Division received orders to deploy overseas again , this time to meet the Japanese southward thrust through New Guinea . After this , the division would spend the remainder of the war fighting elements of the Japanese XVII Army in New Guinea and until the final year of the war , it would do so in individual brigade @-@ level components , rather than as a unified command . 
 = = = Kokoda to Buna – Gona = = = 
 In mid @-@ September 1942 , the 16th Brigade , under the command of Brigadier John Lloyd , and other elements of the division were sent to New Guinea to reinforce and relieve the Militia 30th Brigade and the 7th Division units that had been fighting a desperate holding action on the Kokoda Track since July . The campaign to that point had consisted of a series of battles fought along the track after the Japanese had landed around Buna and pushed south towards Port Moresby , but were checked at Ioribaiwa . The divisional headquarters opened at Port Moresby on 19 September and the 16th Brigade arrived three days later ; the 17th Brigade was sent to Milne Bay , to relieve the 18th Brigade following the successful defensive action they had fought earlier in the month . As the Japanese , having reached the extent of their supply lines , began to withdraw from Ioribaiwa , the Australians went on the offensive , pursuing them back north towards Buna . 
 On 17 October , the 16th Brigade was detached to the 7th Division 's command and moved up the track . It subsequently took over the advance from the exhausted troops of the 25th Brigade three days later . The Japanese had established themselves in strong positions on the high ground north of Eora Creek . For the next week @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , the brigade fought desperately against the terrain , driving rain , and cold , inhospitable conditions to outflank these positions . Making heavy work of it against strong resistance , the Australians slowly made headway , but the Japanese remained in possession of the citadel . Finally , on 28 October when the 2 / 3rd Infantry Battalion took the Japanese right flank , killing 50 and forcing the remaining defenders into a headlong retreat . In securing the crossing , the brigade had suffered almost 300 casualties . Suffering from disease and with rations running low , the brigade continued along the eastern fork of the track . Amidst almost no opposition , they took <unk> and passed through <unk> before setting out for Wairopi by 4 November . 
 Heavy resistance was encountered that day as the 2 / 2nd Infantry Battalion advanced towards the high ground around Oivi . They were held up for a number of days until outflanking moves by the 2 / 1st Infantry Battalion , temporarily detached to the 25th Brigade , pushed the Japanese back and enabled the brigade to continue its advance . Gorari was taken and by mid @-@ November the brigade , having suffered 471 battle casualties since the being committed to the fighting around Kokoda , finally reached Wairopi , where the swollen Kumusi River was forded . 
 After crossing the Kumusi , the 16th Brigade was ordered to move towards Sanananda Point to support the joint Australian – US effort to attack the Japanese beachheads around the Buna – Gona area . The ration situation had grown worse by this time , and progress was slow as the march proved too difficult for many of the soldiers in their weakened physical states . Nevertheless , by 18 November , the 2 / 2nd Infantry Battalion had led the brigade into Popondetta , after which the 2 / 3rd moved into the vanguard . For the next two days they experienced almost no opposition until 21 November when Japanese artillery began to target the 2 / 1st . Launching a quick attack with three companies , the 2 / 1st outflanked the Japanese gun pit with two companies while the third provided support @-@ by @-@ fire . In the rout that followed over 80 Japanese were killed . By nightfall , the 2 / 1st , which had dug @-@ in and subsequently fought off a number of Japanese counterattacks , was relieved from the forward position just a few kilometres from the coast . The brigade had been severely depleted in reaching the position and at that point had only 1 @,@ 040 fit men , so they were ordered to hold their position along the front to provide cover to troops of the US 126th Infantry Regiment , which was slowly moving towards the Soputa – Sanananda – Cape Killerton track junction . On 23 November , the 16th Brigade finally received artillery support , after a battery from the 2 / 1st Field Regiment was flown into the hastily established airfield at Popondetta and began firing upon <unk> . The inexperienced American regiment made very slow progress and as a result , the 16th Brigade held their position until 6 December , when they were progressively relieved by troops from the 30th Brigade , having suffered over 85 per cent casualties . The 2 / 3rd Infantry Battalion was the last out , being withdrawn on the night of 19 / 20 December . 
 Meanwhile , a small element of the division remained in action until Sanananda fell in late January 1943 . The 2 / 1st Field Regiment 's detachment at Popondetta was expanded to a full troop of four guns , while another troop was sent to support the US forces around Buna and a third force was sent to Oro Bay . In addition to these artillery assets , in October a small group of five Bren carriers from the 17th Brigade 's carrier platoon had been sent from Milne Bay to support the General Robert Eichelberger 's 32nd Division . With crews drawn mainly from the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion and one from the 2 / 5th , they were thrown into action around Buna on 5 December to support a major assault and , despite making some headway against the heavily entrenched Japanese , were wiped out with heavy casualties . During the 6th Division 's involvement in the campaign , it lost 207 killed and 397 wounded . 
 = = = Wau – Salamaua = = = 
 As the 16th Brigade 's involvement in its first New Guinea campaign was being fought to a successful conclusion around the beachheads between Buna and Gona , the 17th Brigade was preparing for its first encounter with the Japanese . Shortly after the Japanese landings around Salamaua and Lae in March 1942 a small band of commandos known as " Kanga Force " had established themselves around Wau and in May commenced a seven @-@ month guerilla campaign in the area . In early January 1943 , the Japanese heavily reinforced the Salamaua – Lae area , moving 4 @,@ 000 troops from both Guadalcanal and Papua where they had suffered setbacks , in the hope of destroying Kanga Force , capturing the Wau , which lay in the strategically important Bulolo Valley , which offered the Allies an airstrip that could serve as a " potential springboard " that could be used to move large concentrations of troops over the Owen Stanley Range to attack the Japanese bases at Salamaua and Lae . 
 Throughout the fighting around Kokoda and Buna – Gona , the 17th Brigade , under the command of Brigadier Murray Moten , had been kept back at Milne Bay by Australian commanders with the intention of keeping them fresh to reinforce the garrison at Wau . While at Milne Bay , the brigade had been significantly reduced by sickness , specifically malaria ; however , in response to the arrival of Japanese reinforcements at Lae , the 17th Brigade was relieved at Milne Bay by the 29th Brigade and , after being shipped to Port Moresby , on 14 January , one company of the 2 / 6th Infantry Battalion , representing the brigade 's advanced elements , was flown into Wau on six US C @-@ 47 Dakotas . Upon arrival , the company – ' B ' Company – began moving towards Mubo , where they were to link up with the commandos there and establish themselves to defend the Bulolo Valley . Amidst difficult flying conditions and limited resources , the arrival of the rest of the battalion took place over the following four days , while the rest of the brigade was also delayed . On 20 January the Japanese began moving small groups towards Mubo with the intention of taking Wau , and in response the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion was dispatched on 24 January , arriving over the course of the next three days . 
 On the morning of 28 January , at <unk> , the main Japanese thrust fell upon the 70 @-@ man strong ' A ' Company , 2 / 6th Infantry Battalion . Throughout the day the company fought desperately to hold the Japanese while reinforcements from the 2 / 5th were brought up from Wau ; in the mid @-@ afternoon , as it looked like they would be overrun , a desperate bayonet charge temporarily bought the Australians some relief and they eventually withdrew about a mile to the south @-@ west , back towards the Bulolo River where they formed a night defensive position , having successfully delayed the Japanese advance and inflicted over 75 killed upon them . Throughout the following day , as poor weather hampered efforts to fly in the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , a large group of about 500 Japanese bypassed ' A ' Company 's position and continued on towards Wau . In response two companies of the 2 / 5th were moved to the airstrip , reaching there early on 29 January just before Japanese mortars began firing on it . By mid @-@ morning , however , the weather cleared and Allied aircraft soon began arriving at the airfield , disgorging men from the 2 / 7th who were quickly thrown into the line . That night several counterattacks were fought off and the following day , as a section of guns from the 2 / 1st Field Regiment arrived , the 17th Brigade went on the offensive . A company of machine guns from the 7th Machine Gun Battalion was also flown in . By 5 February the Japanese began withdrawing from the area . Significant fighting occurred on 9 February , and over the course of the next three weeks further clashes took place as the Australians followed up the retreating Japanese . The last actions came around <unk> and <unk> and by 26 February the withdrawal was complete with the Japanese establishing themselves around <unk> and Mubo . 
 Following this , the 17th Brigade advanced towards <unk> , but after supply problems ground this to a halt , throughout March and April a series of patrols were sent out towards Mubo . By late April the brigade was detached to the 3rd Division , a primarily Militia formation , which took up the task of defending Wau . Throughout this time , engineers from the 6th Division , including the 2 / 1st Field Company , would to improve supply lines throughout the area , cutting a road to Wau . The 2 / 2nd Field Ambulance also provided support to the brigade 's operations , establishing medical services close to the Australian forward areas . 
 Between 22 April and 29 May 1943 , the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , at the end of a long and tenuous supply line , unsuccessfully attacked the southern extremity of Japanese lines , the Mubo area , at features known to the Allies as " The Pimple " and " Green Hill " , north of Lababia Ridge . In early May , over the course of two days , the 2 / 7th repelled eight strong Japanese counterattacks , before being relieved . At the same time , the Allies began planning wider operations to capture Lae . As a part of this , Salamaua was also to be taken . Initially , the 3rd Division was to secure Nassau Bay and the 17th Brigade was to capture Mubo and push north towards Mount Tambu to secure Komiatum . 
 Moving over steep , muddy ridges amidst dense , fetid jungle terrain the 2 / 7th found the going tough and by late May the 2 / 6th took over the drive towards Nassau Bay . Feeling their way from Lababia Ridge they located a traversable path through the jungle towards the coast but on 20 June , ' D ' Company came under heavy attack from two Japanese battalions from the 66th Regiment , amounting to 1 @,@ 500 men , and for three days intense fighting followed before the Japanese were successfully beaten back . The Australians relied on well @-@ established and linked defensive positions , featuring extensive , cleared free @-@ fire zones . The battle was later described as one of the Australian Army 's " classic engagements " of World War II . 
 By the end of the month the 2 / 6th had reached Nassau Bay where it secured landing beaches for an amphibious landing by US troops from the 162nd Regimental Combat Team . Once established , the 2 / 6th then led the way back west towards <unk> Ridge , ranging ahead of the Americans as the Allies began to encircle Mubo . In early July , the 2 / 7th attacked Observation Hill and as the Japanese began to withdraw from Mubo , the 2 / 5th was sent north to act in support of the newly arrived Militia 15th Brigade , which was moving on Bobdubi Ridge . In mid @-@ July , amidst heavy close @-@ quarters fighting , the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion captured the southern parts of Mount Tambu . 
 Throughout late July a situation of stalemate developed on Mount Tambu , which held up the Australian advance . As a result , Moten decided to bypass it in early August , sending the 2 / 6th Battalion north @-@ west towards Komiatum . A path was eventually found and after securing Laver 's Knoll , the Australians began working around behind Mount Tambu , towards the northern end of Bobdubi Ridge . The 2 / 7th was heavily involved with the 15th Brigade at this time , fighting to take a position known as " The Coconuts " . Finally , as the noose around Mount Tambu tightened , the Japanese abandoned it on 19 August . 
 The 17th Brigade 's advance continued for the next two days until , when the brigade had reached the final ridge before Salamaua , the 29th Brigade arrived to take over . The 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , however , still detached to the 15th Brigade , continued on with them and as a result remained in the thick of it until the end when Salamaua fell on 20 September . Meanwhile , the rest of the 17th Brigade was on its way back to Australia and by mid @-@ September , it arrived on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland where it was once again was placed under the 6th Division 's command . The Wau – Salamaua campaign cost the 6th Division 240 killed and 520 wounded . 
 A long period of waiting and training followed . Throughout 1943 – 44 , the division was re @-@ organised under the jungle divisional establishment . This saw a reduction in the division 's artillery , vehicles , equipment and manning , with divisional strength falling from around 18 @,@ 000 men to about 16 @,@ 000 . The division also lost many of its experienced personnel during this time as they were promoted and moved on to other formations ; although it also received reinforcements from the disbanded 30th Brigade . The division 's next deployment would not come until November 1944 when they were committed to the Aitape – Wewak campaign . Once again they would be unified as a full division , with several units that had previously been detached , including the 2 / 3rd Field Regiment and the 19th Brigade , rejoining the division . 
 = = = Aitape – Wewak campaign = = = 
 The Japanese had occupied the Aitape – Wewak area in northern New Guinea in 1942 and had held it until April 1944 when the Americans had undertaken an amphibious landing around Aitape . Later in the year , responsibility for clearing the remaining Japanese troops from the area was passed to the Australians as the US sought to reallocate its troops towards retaking the Philippines . From early October , the 6th Division began to take over from US troops , with the first unit to arrive being the 2 / 6th Cavalry Commando Regiment , which had been formed in early 1943 when the division 's cavalry regiment had been converted into a headquarters formation for three commando squadrons : the 2 / 7th , 2 / 9th and 2 / 10th . The 2 / 3rd Machine Gun Battalion was also assigned as a corps unit for the campaign . As a result of shortages in available shipping , the rest of the division arrived slowly over the course of a couple of months . Starting in December , the division commenced a limited offensive , advancing towards the main Japanese base at Wewak along the coast and through the Torricelli Mountains to Maprik , which the Japanese had been using for sustainment , having established a number of gardens there . 
 With the 19th Brigade and the 2 / 7th Commando Squadron leading off along the coast route in December and the 17th Brigade with the 2 / 10th moving into the <unk> , a series of small @-@ scale actions followed . In mid @-@ January the 19th Brigade was relieved by the 16th and the 2 / 9th Commando Squadron , which continued the drive along the coast , while in the <unk> , the 17th Brigade 's infantry battalions took turns leading the way with the commandos . The closed terrain hindered the movement of supplies from the rear areas and consequently the Australians made slow progress . The dense jungle also limited the size of the forces that could be deployed , with the largest formations being sent out by the division being limited to company size at this time . Isolated pockets of Japanese offered significant resistance in places , which had to be overcome with artillery , air and tank support , while daily patrols risked ambush and attacks from snipers . The elements also posed a significant threat to the Australians , with many men drowning when they attempted to cross the flood @-@ swollen rivers . Nevertheless , Maprik was taken on 23 April , as was Wewak , which fell on 10 May . Operations in the area continued through to the end of the war as the Australians exploited south from Maprik towards <unk> , and east towards Kiarivu ; after taking Wewak , the coastal route was expanded east towards the Brandi Plantation , while patrols ranged inland towards <unk> and Mount <unk> . 
 During the campaign , two members of the division performed actions for which they were later awarded the Victoria Cross , the Commonwealth 's highest gallantry decoration . The first of these was awarded posthumously to Lieutenant Albert <unk> of the 2 / 2nd Infantry Battalion for his courage and leadership while commanding a platoon on 25 March around Dagua . The second went to Private Edward Kenna , of the 2 / 4th Infantry Battalion , for destroying several Japanese bunkers that were holding up his company 's advance around the <unk> Mission . The campaign was also significant for the distance that the division travelled . After landing , they traversed over 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) inland and 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) along the coast . In doing so the 6th Division captured 7 @,@ 700 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Over 9 @,@ 000 Japanese were killed and 264 captured . Against this the division suffered its highest casualties of the war , losing 442 killed , 1 @,@ 141 wounded and over 16 @,@ 000 men being hospitalised with sickness . 
 = = Disbandment = = 
 On 13 September , the division took the formal surrender of the XVII Army 's commander , Lieutenant General Hatazō Adachi , at Cape <unk> airstrip . After this , the division remained in New Guinea as its constituent units were slowly demobilised . As transport shortages delayed the process , the division was employed on garrison duties and aiding war crimes investigations . Finally , by November 1945 , most of the 6th Division 's units had returned to Australia and the division was formally disbanded ; the majority of the division 's infantry battalions were disbanded shortly afterwards in the early months of 1946 . During its six @-@ year existence , a total of about 40 @,@ 000 men served in the division 's ranks . Of these , 1 @,@ 763 were killed in action or died , a further 3 @,@ 978 were wounded and a total of 5 @,@ 153 men became prisoners of war . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The 6th Division 's structure changed considerably during its existence with units being detached or attached to meet operational needs . This was particularly so during early 1942 and late 1943 . Below is a divisional order of battle that is indicative of its generic make up . In addition to those listed , during 1942 – 43 , the 14th , 21st , 25th and 30th Brigades were also attached , albeit temporarily for varying periods . 
 Infantry units ( and state of origin ) 16th Australian Infantry Brigade , New South Wales 
 2 / 1st Australian Infantry Battalion 
 2 / 2nd Australian Infantry Battalion 
 2 / 3rd Australian Infantry Battalion 
 2 / 4th Australian Infantry Battalion ( to 19th Brigade in 1940 ) 
 17th Australian Infantry Brigade , Victoria 
 2 / 5th Australian Infantry Battalion 
 2 / 6th Australian Infantry Battalion 
 2 / 7th Australian Infantry Battalion 
 2 / 8th Australian Infantry Battalion ( to 19th Brigade in 1940 ) 
 18th Australian Infantry Brigade ( to 7th Division in 1940 ) 
 19th Australian Infantry Brigade ( formed from other 6th Division brigades , 1940 ) 
 2 / 4th Australian Infantry Battalion , New South Wales 
 2 / 8th Australian Infantry Battalion , Victoria 
 2 / 11th Australian Infantry Battalion , Western Australia 
 Armoured <unk> Australian Divisional Cavalry ( later became 2 / 6th Cavalry Commando Regiment ) 
 Artillery <unk> / 1st Field Regiment , Royal Australian Artillery ( RAA ) , New South Wales 
 2 / 2nd Field Regiment , ( RAA ) , Victoria 
 2 / 3rd Field Regiment , ( RAA ) , New South Wales , Northern Territory , South Australia and Western Australia 
 2 / 5th Field Regiment , ( RAA ) , Queensland and Tasmania . ( Became 2 / 1st Anti @-@ Tank Regiment , 1940 ) . 
 Engineer <unk> / 1st Field Company , Royal Australian Engineers ( RAE ) , New South Wales . 
 2 / 2nd Field Company , ( RAE ) , Victoria 
 2 / 3rd Field Company , ( RAE ) , South Australia , Tasmania and Western Australia . 
 2 / 8th Field Company ( RAE ) , Victoria 
 2 / 1st Field Park Company , ( RAE ) , Queensland . 
 Other <unk> / 1st Australian Machine @-@ Gun Regiment 
 2 / 1st Australian Pioneer Battalion 
 2 / 1st Field Ambulance 
 2 / 2nd Field Ambulance 
 2 / 7th Field Ambulance 
 6th Division Signals 
 6th Division Australian Army Service Corps 
 Light Aid Detachments 
 2 / 1st Army Field Workshops 
 6th Division Provost Company 
 6th Division Postal Unit 
 6th Division Salvage Unit 
 6th Division Field Cash Office 
 = = Commanders = = 
 The following officers served as divisional commander : 
 Lieutenant General Thomas Blamey ( 13 October 1939 – 3 April 1940 ) ; 
 Major General Iven Mackay ( 4 April 1940 – 13 August 1941 ) ; 
 Major General Edmund Herring ( 14 August 1941 – 30 April 1942 ) ; 
 Major General Allan Boase ( 1 May 1942 – 13 September 1942 ) ; 
 Major General George Vasey ( 14 September 1942 – 14 March 1943 ) ; 
 Major General Jack Stevens ( 15 March 1943 – 26 July 1945 ) ; and 
 Major General Horace Robertson ( 26 July 1945 – 30 November 1945 ) . 
 = The Expendables 2 = 
 The Expendables 2 is a 2012 American ensemble action film directed by Simon West , written by Richard Wenk and Sylvester Stallone and based on a story by Ken Kaufman , David Agosto and Wenk . Brian Tyler returned to score the film . It is the sequel to the 2010 action film The Expendables , and stars Sylvester Stallone , Jason Statham , Jet Li , Dolph Lundgren , Chuck Norris , Terry Crews , Randy Couture , Liam Hemsworth , Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme , Bruce Willis , and Arnold Schwarzenegger . The story follows the mercenary group known as " the Expendables " as they undertake a seemingly simple mission which evolves into a quest for revenge against rival mercenary Jean Vilain , who murdered one of their own and threatens the world with a deadly weapon . It is the second installment in The Expendables film series . 
 Principal photography took place over 14 weeks ( beginning in September 2011 ) on an estimated $ 100 million budget . Film locations included Bulgaria , Hong Kong and New Orleans . Controversy arose over the accidental death of a stuntman and environmental damage caused during filming in Bulgaria . 
 The film was released in Europe on August 16 , 2012 and in North America the following day . The Expendables 2 grossed over $ 310 million worldwide , with its greatest success outside North America . Critics generally considered the film an improvement over its predecessor ( citing an increased use of humor and action scenes ) , but its plot and dialogue received negative reviews . A tie @-@ in downloadable video game was released on July 31 , 2012 as a prequel to the events of the film . A sequel , The Expendables 3 , was released on August 15 , 2014 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Expendables — leader Barney Ross , knife specialist Lee Christmas , hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat specialist Yin Yang , heavy @-@ weapons specialist Hale Caesar , demolitions expert Toll Road , the unstable Gunner Jensen , and sniper Billy the Kid , the team 's newest recruit and Ross ' protégé — are deployed to Nepal to rescue Dr. Zhou , a hostage . They also rescue the captured mercenary Trench , Ross 's rival . Yang leaves the group to escort Zhou back to China . 
 After returning to New Orleans , Billy tells Ross that he intends to retire at the end of the month and live with his girlfriend Sophia . Later , Ross is forced to accept a mission from CIA operative Mr. Church to retrieve an item from a downed airplane in Albania . Church sends technical expert Maggie Chan with the team . In Albania the Expendables retrieve the item , but are then ambushed by international criminal and arms dealer Jean Vilain , his right @-@ hand man Hector and his mercenary group ( the Sangs ) , who have captured Billy . Vilain demands the item in exchange for Billy 's life . The team gives up the item , but Vilain roundhouse kicks a knife through Billy 's heart and flees with the Sangs by helicopter . Ross recovers a note for Sophia from Billy 's body ; the team buries their fallen comrade , swearing vengeance on Vilain . 
 Maggie tells them that the item is a computer , with the location of five tons of refined plutonium abandoned in a mine by the Soviet Union after the Cold War . Vilain intends to retrieve the plutonium and sell it . The Expendables are able to weakly track the computer 's signal and follow Vilain , which leads them to Bulgaria where they stay overnight at an abandoned Russian military base . The next morning , the team is ambushed by the Sangs and a tank . After the Expendables run out of ammunition , they are saved by Ross 's old friend , Booker , who quickly eliminates both the Sangs and the tank . Before he departs , Booker informs the group of a nearby village whose residents oppose Vilain . Meanwhile , Hector and Vilain dig up the plutonium and begin collecting it . 
 In the village , the Expendables find several armed female villagers guarding their children from Vilain 's forces . The local inhabitants are taken and put to work as slaves in the mine , never returning , and the women ask for the Expendables ' help . The Sangs arrive for more villagers , but are ambushed by the Expendables and killed . After locating Vilain and the mine , the team assaults the area with their plane before deliberately crashing into the mine . The team saves the enslaved miners from execution , but Vilain and Hector escape with the plutonium . Vilain remotely detonates explosive charges in the mine ; it collapses , trapping the miners and the Expendables . 
 Church and Trench arrive , freeing the miners and the team , and join the Expendables to pursue Vilain . The group intercepts Vilain and his men at an airport as he prepares to leave by plane . Joined again by Booker , the Expendables , Trench and Church engage the Sangs in battle . Christmas decapitates Hector , while Ross and Vilain fight hand @-@ to @-@ hand . Ross defeats Vilain , stabbing him and avenging Billy . 
 In the aftermath , Ross is given an old Antonov An @-@ 2 biplane by Church ; Church , Maggie , Booker and Trench then leave the team . In France , Sophia discovers a box on her doorstep with a large sum of money and Billy 's letter . As the Expendables depart in the plane , they propose a final toast to Billy . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sylvester Stallone as Barney Ross : 
 The Expendables ' leader . Stallone insisted on performing his own stunts , ignoring his doctor 's advice after several surgeries to repair a broken back and neck injury he received while filming The Expendables . 
 Jason Statham as Lee Christmas : 
 The team 's knife expert . Statham described his character as " kind of a workingman 's hero … a guy you ’ d want to go out and have a beer with . " 
 Jet Li as Yin Yang : 
 The Expendables ' hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat expert . Schedule conflicts with Flying Swords of Dragon Gate meant Li could only participate in the film 's opening . 
 Dolph Lundgren as Gunner Jensen : 
 A volatile member of the team , undone by years of combat stress and alcohol abuse . Lundgren 's personal history ( including his chemical engineering degree ) were incorporated into the character 's story by Stallone . Lundgren was hesitant to participate in the film based on the first script draft ; however , rewrites and additional content for his character changed his mind . 
 Chuck Norris as Booker : 
 A retired military operative on a mission to save his old teammates . The character 's name is an homage to the 1978 action film Good Guys Wear Black , where Norris plays John T. Booker . During the film , Booker claims to have been bitten by a cobra and states that the cobra later died as a result ; this is a reference to Chuck Norris facts , satirical factoids about the actor . 
 Terry Crews as Hale Caesar : 
 The Expendables ' barrel @-@ weapons specialist . 
 Randy Couture as Toll Road : 
 The team 's demolitions expert . Couture described his character as " the glue that holds all of these dysfunctional guys together " . 
 Liam Hemsworth as Billy the Kid : 
 An ex @-@ military sniper , disenchanted after service in Afghanistan . Hemsworth was confirmed for the role on September 19 , 2011 . He was cast in The Expendables in a similar role as a different character , but his role was written out of the script . Stallone remained in contact with him , offering him a role in the sequel when production began . Stallone described the character as the next generation of the Expendables , who is not as " cynical as the other team members " . 
 Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme as Jean Vilain : 
 The leader of an opposing team of mercenaries known as the Sangs . Van Damme was intentionally distant from the cast and crew during filming to stay in character . Commenting on the role , Stallone said : " We ’ ll have a big showdown between me and Van Damme , which has been anticipated for a long time , so it should be a good one . " Van Damme was offered a role in The Expendables , but ultimately turned it down . 
 Bruce Willis as Church : 
 A secretive CIA agent . In late August 2010 , Stallone expressed an interest in having Willis return in the sequel ( expanding upon his brief cameo in the original ) as a potential " super @-@ villain " . Willis was confirmed in a " substantial " role on September 6 , 2011 , saying , " Hopefully , they 'll start shooting it while we 're young enough to survive . " 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger as Trench Mauser : 
 Ross ' arch @-@ rival ( and occasional ally ) . Stallone intended to have Schwarzenegger return for a sequel before the release of The Expendables : " If this works , I would love to get him in the next one " . Schwarzenegger 's involvement was confirmed on September 6 , 2011 , his " substantial " role expanding a cameo appearance in the original film . He filmed his scenes in four days . 
 Scott Adkins as Hector : 
 Vilain 's right @-@ hand man . Adkins was offered a role in the original film , but turned it down for Undisputed III : Redemption . 
 Yu Nan as Maggie Chan : 
 A CIA agent working for Church who teams with the Expendables to retrieve the lost safe . 
 The cast is rounded out by Charisma Carpenter ( reprising her role as Christmas 's girlfriend , Lacy ) , Swedish actress Amanda <unk> as Pilar , opposition leader in the enslaved village and <unk> Noel as Sophia , Billy 's girlfriend . Bulgarian mixed martial artist Lyubomir <unk> has a cameo as one of the Sangs . Tennis pro Novak Djokovic filmed a cameo as himself ( after being invited to participate by producer Avi Lerner ) , but his scenes were cut from the film . 
 At several stages of development , other actors were pursued for the film . In October 2010 , Willis said that Steve Austin would reprise his role as villain Dan Paine . In November 2010 , Charlie Sheen was reported to be in consideration for the role of a CIA agent hunting down Willis ' Mr. Church . In August 2011 , Variety reported that actor and martial artist Donnie Yen was offered a role in the film ; however , Yen declined the role because he did not find it intriguing . 
 In September 2011 , Stallone confirmed that he was in talks with Nicolas Cage and John Travolta , and scheduling would be the only obstacle to their involvement . In July 2011 , Mickey Rourke was stated to be reprising his role as Tool ; by late September it was reported that he had dropped out of the film , and on October 18 this was confirmed . Antonio Banderas was reportedly offered a role , but was unable to participate due to other commitments . Jackie Chan said he had been offered a role , but was forced to turn it down due to scheduling conflicts with <unk> . 
 On his approach to casting , Stallone said that he was looking for actors who had not experienced recent success in film : " I like using people that had a moment and then maybe have fallen on some hard times and give them another shot . So we ’ re always looking for actors like Michael Biehn and Michael Paré . I like those kinds of guys . Someone did it for me and I like to see if I can do it for them . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Plans for a sequel to The Expendables were in place before the film 's release in August 2010 ; Stallone said , " I have an idea ready to go ... I 'm going to try to do something that 's quite radical " . In an interview in August 2010 he noted that he did not have a new script yet , but " It 's plotted out in my mind 's eye . " On April 18 , 2011 , Stallone confirmed that he would not be repeating his directing duties in The Expendables , making a list of directors to serve as his replacement . In April 2011 , the film was given a scheduled release date of August 17 , 2012 and a teaser poster for the film was released at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival . In June 2011 , Simon West was confirmed as director . 
 In August 2011 , it was reported that Nu Image / Millennium Films was in negotiations with an unnamed Chinese distributor . The distributor would produce the film , in exchange for a Chinese actor ( Donnie Yen ) being cast and filming in China . The partnership was considered to make a Chinese release of the film easier , and would have granted Millennium Films a larger share of its Chinese revenue . However , the partnership fell apart before production began . However , another Chinese studio , Le Vision Pictures , invested in the film . Lionsgate Films purchased the North American and United Kingdom distribution rights to the film for $ 35 million . 
 On January 19 , 2012 , Stallone stated that the film was being aimed at a PG @-@ 13 audience . Unlike the first film ( which was restricted to viewers over age 17 ) , this would have made the sequel available to all viewers over 13 years of age ( and younger children , with parental consent ) . The reported change received a negative reception . Speaking to Ain 't It Cool News about the change , Stallone said " The PG @-@ 13 rumor is true , but before your readers pass judgement , trust me when I say this film is large in every way and delivers on every level . " It was reported that the change was requested by Norris before he would take part in the film , because he did not appreciate the swearing in the script . However , these plans for a more family @-@ friendly rating did not succeed and the finished film was rated R. When the adult @-@ oriented rating was confirmed shortly before release , West stated that " the shooting style and the dialogue , from day one , it was R @-@ rated . " However , the visual effects supervisor said that The Expendables 2 was shot as a PG @-@ 13 film , with all bullet wounds being dust @-@ hits . Once it was decided that the film would be R @-@ rated , blood , decapitations , eviscerations and severed limbs were digitally added in post @-@ production . 
 Van Damme redesigned his final fight with Stallone , with the latter 's approval . Van Damme was unhappy with the scripted fight , which had his character running away and only a brief confrontation between the pair . He felt that the audience wanted a longer fight scene between the two actors . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On a budget of $ 100 million , principal photography of The Expendables 2 began on September 29 , 2011 and lasted 14 weeks . Filming took place largely in Bulgaria : at the Nu Boyana Film studio in Sofia , the city of Plovdiv and the town of Bansko . One of the film 's larger set pieces took place at Bulgaria 's second @-@ largest airport ( in Plovdiv ) , including gunfights , explosions and car chases throughout the terminal . On October 27 , 2011 , while the second @-@ unit stunt team was filming at the <unk> reservoir 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Sofia , stuntman Kun Liu was killed and another ( <unk> Sun ) , was critically injured in a staged explosion on a rubber boat . Sun underwent a five @-@ hour operation , which left him in stable condition . 
 Filming also took place at Devetashka Cave in Lovech Province . As part of the cave shoot , <unk> ( $ 408 @,@ 762 ) was spent rebuilding a 114 metres ( 125 yd ) bridge from the cave over the <unk> River ; only the concrete bridge columns remained from the original structure . Nu Boyana Film Studios announced that the bridge would remain after filming , as a gift to Bulgaria . 
 Other filming locations included Hong Kong and New Orleans , and filming was completed by December 25 , 2011 . On February 9 , 2012 , it was reported that The Expendables 2 was in post @-@ production . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The Expendables 2 contains approximately 1 @,@ 547 digital effect shots . The main effects studio was Worldwide FX ( WWFX ) , which produced 1 @,@ 186 of the shots , and a further 800 shots which were discarded in response to changes to the film 's story . Several other studios , including El <unk> , <unk> , Tata Elxsi , Reliance <unk> , and R @-@ Team , also produced effects shots for the film through WWFX . Digital effect pre @-@ production began in July 2011 and was completed one year later . WWFX 's primary facility is situated in Sofia , allowing them to have constant access to the production , and model assets of the sets before their practical versions were built ; this enabled WWFX to raise issues relating to the designs early and develop an optimised construction plan . Anything that was considered to potentially need a computer generated double was photographed and digitally modeled even if it was not scheduled to appear in the film , which later served useful as the film 's story was adjusted , requiring WWFX to rebuild entire scenes . 
 Several sets were rendered digitally , and almost all of the sets had some form of digital enhancement . The largest digital environment was the Devetashka cave , which had to be digitally recreated because of the environmental concerns of filming explosions in the real cave . Using over 5 @,@ 000 photographs taken at different times of day , the cave was accurately illuminated and rendered down to crevices and moss . The cave 's interior containing a concealed nuclear vault was subjected to several changes up to two months before the effects ' delivery date based on editorial input , including modifications to its scale . The railcar used within the cave was also digitally built alongside a practical version , but the digital versions versatility saw it largely replace its practical counterpart . The scene featuring the Expendables and prisoners trapped in the cave were shot entirely on Chroma key with the cave background inserted later . 
 The entire opening sequence of the film was shot in Bulgaria during the winter , but was meant to take place in tropical South Asia . Digital effects were used to remove the snow and deciduous trees present and replace them with tropical flora . The alterations required over 340 shots alone . The scene was further complicated by Jet Li 's scheduling conflict , which meant the interior sets had to be shipped to Hong Kong , reassembled and shot with him there , and the exterior sets had to be digitally built and then merged with footage of Li shot on Chroma key . A fish tank in the opening was filled with digital eels based on South Asian river eels , but increased in size by three times , after the real fish died and sank to the bottom . The finale in the airport was another complex digital environment , shot in three entirely differently locations in two seasons , which were then merged to create one seamless location . When the trucks break through glass to exit the airport , the scene is entirely digital and was filmed on Chroma screens in the middle of Sofia . Numerous digital matte paintings were used to modify the winter Bulgarian terrain in different scenes to represent its intended location . 
 Vehicles also received digital enhancement . For the scene in which the Expendables crash their Canadair CL @-@ 215 amphibious plane into a cave , the effects team intended to use Miniature effects , filming using a 1 / 3 scale model of the 90 @-@ feet wing span plane . Production constraints and the limited shooting schedule meant the miniature shoot was abandoned and the entire sequence was rendered digitally . The plane itself was also digitally modified , adding a nose mounted gun which in practice could have stalled the engine with its recoil . A rear hatch door was required for jet skis to drive into the plane but the crafts design made such a door impractical ; visual trickery was used to obscure this fact and make the door fit into the existing plane design . A helicopter used in the opening sequence was required to perform more dynamic moves and so it was digitally removed entirely and replaced with a digital recreation that better fit the scene 's requirements . The helicopter which decapitates Hector during his fight with Christmas had no rotors and they were digitally added . WWFX later enhanced it more , modifying lighting and stabilizing the helicopter 's body which shook unnaturally when struck during the fight . The Sangs Mi @-@ 8 helicopter was a civilian variant , but it was digitally replaced with the gunship variant , the Hip @-@ E , to make it look meaner and more fitting for Van Damme 's villainous mercenary , with a black reflective coating and armaments . The T @-@ 72 tank used to assault the Expendables would have devastated the set with the resulting concussive wave if it had fired a single shot , so it was replaced in most shots with a digital version that performed the shooting . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 On November 16 , 2011 , the production received a fine ( between $ 343 – $ 3 @,@ 440 ) from the Bulgarian environmental protection agency for unlawfully removing shrubs and small trees from the entrance of Devetashka Cave . Although permits had been obtained allowing sets to be built in the area ( including a bridge to the cave ) , environmentalists complained that filming could damage the cave ( home to about 40 endangered species ) . To avoid further problems , the producers agreed not to film explosions , car chases and fires near the cave . 
 However , later that month Bulgarian environmentalists stated that the bat population in the cave had been reduced by up to 75 % ( from about 30 @,@ 000 in 2010 to 8 @,@ 000 in 2011 ) . Nikolay <unk> of the Center for Bat Studies and Protection at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences blamed The Expendables 2 's production for the reduction . On January 16 , 2012 , the Veliko Tarnovo Appellate Prosecutor 's Office overturned a ruling by its Lovech equivalent to prevent an investigation of what environmentalists stated to be an " excessive " number of dead bats found in the cave after filming ( including several endangered species ) . The European Commission became involved , contacting the Bulgarian Ministry of Environment and Waters for information about the dead bats ; the Bulgarian Ministry and the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences conducted their own probe , stating that the bat kill was within normal parameters . The Veliko Tarnovo Appellate stated that the Lovech Environmental Ministry failed to investigate violations made by The Expendables 2 's crew . On February 23 , 2012 , a Bulgarian court ruled that the crew had violated its filming license . 
 In July 2012 the family of Kun Liu ( the stuntman killed during filming ) filed a wrongful death suit against the producers of the film , Nu Image and Millennium Films , and stunt coordinator Chad <unk> . The suit alleged that conditions for the stunt were unsafe . The Expendables 2 credits contain a dedication to Liu 's memory . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film premiered on August 8 , 2012 in Madrid , Spain , followed by premieres in Paris on August 9 , London on August 13 and Hollywood on August 15 . The film was first released on August 16 , 2012 , with its North American release the following day . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Expendables 2 earned $ 85 @,@ 028 @,@ 192 ( 28 @.@ 3 % ) in North America and $ 215 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 ( 71 @.@ 7 % ) in markets elsewhere , for a worldwide total of $ 305 @,@ 428 @,@ 192 . This made it the 25th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 . 
 In the week before its release , North American pre @-@ release tracking estimated that the film would gross between $ 30 – $ 38 million , making it the number @-@ one film during its opening weekend . Other tracking showed that up to 17 % of North American audiences were reluctant to visit cinemas following the mass shootings in a Colorado cinema in late July 2012 , which might affect ticket sales . The Expendables 2 earned $ 10 @.@ 5 million on its opening day ; during its opening weekend , the film earned $ 28 @.@ 59 million in 3 @,@ 316 theaters ( an average of $ 8 @,@ 622 per theater ) finishing as the weekend 's number @-@ one film . The gross was 18 % lower than The Expendables ' $ 34 @.@ 8 million opening in 2010 . The largest demographic for its opening weekend was male ( 63 % ) over age 25 ( 65 % ) . During its second weekend , the movie held the number @-@ one spot with $ 13 @.@ 4 million . By its third weekend , analysis showed that the film 's gross had fallen behind the original at the same time in its release by $ 16 million . 
 Outside North America the film grossed $ 24 @.@ 7 million during its opening weekend ( August 17 – 19 ) in 18 markets , including Italy ( $ 1 @.@ 9 million ) , Mexico , Russia ( $ 8 million ) and the United Kingdom ( $ 3 million ) . The following weekend ( August 24 – 26 ) it expanded to a total of 36 markets — including France ( $ 6 @.@ 1 million ) , Spain ( $ 2 @.@ 3 million ) and India ( $ 1 @.@ 8 million ) — and grossed approximately $ 25 @.@ 9 million to remain the number @-@ one film . The film also had successful September opening weekends in Germany ( $ 4 @.@ 2 million ) , Brazil ( $ 3 @.@ 7 million ) and Australia ( $ 3 @.@ 1 million ) . Over the September 14 – 16 weekend , the film 's total gross increased to $ 186 million , outperforming the original film 's $ 171 million . The film was also successful in China , where it grossed approximately $ 54 million in its first 35 days — making it the eighth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 in the country and outperforming The Dark Knight Rises ( $ 52 @.@ 5 million ) and The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( $ 48 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film garnered a 65 % approval rating from 123 critics – an average rating of 5 @.@ 8 out of 10 – on the review @-@ aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , which gave the following consensus : " <unk> , violent , and suitably self @-@ deprecating , The Expendables 2 gives classic action fans everything they can reasonably expect from a star @-@ studded shoot- ' em @-@ up — for better and for worse . " Metacritic gave it a score of 51 ( out of 100 ) from 28 critics , indicating " mixed or average " reviews . CinemaScore polls reported that moviegoers gave the film an average grade of A – on an A + -to @-@ F scale , compared to The Expendables ' B + . 
 Boxoffice 's Amy Nicholson compared the film to Fast Five as an " over @-@ the @-@ top sequel [ that ] caters to the lowest common denominator in the best possible way " , appreciating the characters ' unique facets and the use of references from the actors ' other films . Of the action scenes , Nicholson said " they 're glorious nonsense , a guns @-@ blazing bullet barrage " . The Hollywood Reporter 's Justin Lowe called the film " taut , humorous and attractively packaged " . Lowe considered Schwarzenegger 's brief role to have the most memorable dialogue , noting that he stole any scene in which he was present . On West 's direction and cinematographer Shelly Johnson , he said " the action choreography never disappoints " . Variety 's Justin Chang appreciated the self @-@ referential humor in each actor 's film history and the violent action scenes ; however , he felt the scenes were undermined by poor editing and a " grimy " visual scheme throughout the film . Chang commented that the " thrill " of seeing all the actors on screen mitigated plot issues . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum said West 's action direction improved upon the previous film 's direction by Stallone . Schwarzbaum considered that the film is " excellent crap , fine junk , an exercise in campy movie nostalgia " , commenting that while she did not consider the film artistic , she found it enjoyable . USA Today 's Claudia Puig considered the shift from the serious tone of the original to an emphasis on humor to be entertaining . Puig said the film was " corny , barbaric and sometimes visually murky . But humor and self @-@ deprecating macho charm make this male pattern badness crowd @-@ pleasing fun . " The New York Times ' Neil Genzlinger judged the film " pleasantly @-@ dumb fun if you watch with the right mindset " , but considered its dialog " embarrassing " ( if intended seriously ) and the plot formulaic . Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers gave the film two ( out of four ) stars , saying that the film was not even " big , dumb fun " and criticizing the script ; it did not " so much defy credulity as bludgeon it to death . " 
 The Daily Telegraph 's Robbie Collin gave the film three ( out of five ) stars . He appreciated the use of stunts and special effects over computerized effects , stating that it " gives proceedings a flame @-@ grilled authenticity " . Collin added , " I was thoroughly appalled , mainly at myself for enjoying it . " Empire 's Nick de Semlyen was more critical , labeling it a " huge , bulging disappointment " . Semlyen criticized the plot and what he judged an overuse of references , set pieces and dialogue from the cast 's filmography without creating memorable moments of its own . Semlyen praised Van Damme 's " grandstanding , plutonium @-@ crazed baddie " and Lundgren 's " action @-@ troll " as high points . The Village Voice 's Nick Pinkerton found the violence creative , but said that the film was negatively impacted by self @-@ referencing , " joyless one @-@ line nods " and " outright cash @-@ in cynicism " ( referring to cameo appearances by some of the actors ) . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Expendables 2 was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray Disc , and digital download on November 20 , 2012 . The Blu @-@ ray disc edition contains the theatrical cut of the The Expendables 2 , a DVD and digital copy of the film and supplemental material including a director 's commentary , deleted scenes , a gag reel , and four featurettes about the film : Gods of War : Assembling Earth 's Mightiest Anti @-@ Heroes ; Big Guns , Bigger Heroes : The 1980s and the Rise of the Action Film ; On the Assault : The Real @-@ Life Weaponry of The Expendables and Guns for Hire : The Real Expendables . The Blu @-@ ray disc version is the first film release to support the 11 @.@ 1 @-@ channel DTS Neo : X sound format . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 The Expendables 2 Videogame is a downloadable four @-@ player cooperative shoot ' em up video game . It was published by Ubisoft for PC , PlayStation Network ( PSN ) and Xbox Live Arcade ( XBLA ) and released on July 31 , 2012 for PSN and August 20 for PC ( via Steam ) and XBLA . The game 's plot is a prequel to The Expendables 2 , with Barney Ross , Gunner Jensen , Yin Yang and Hale Caesar appearing as playable characters . Lundgren and Crews voiced their respective characters . According to review aggregators Metacritic and GameRankings , the game received generally negative reviews . 
 The Expendables 2 : <unk> & Destroy is a single @-@ player tower defense , real @-@ time strategy online game . Published by Roadshow Films and Soap Creative , the game was released on July 13 , 2012 . Its plot was derived from village scenes in the film , where players can choose their squad from the cast , set up defences and battle the enemy . 
 = = Music = = 
 Brian Tyler composed the score for The Expendables 2 , who scored the original film . His score combined percussion and electronic elements with orchestral music , and was released as the 14 @-@ track album The Expendables 2 : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack by Lionsgate Records on iTunes on August 14 , 2012 . Several popular songs also appear in the film , including " The Wanderer " by Dion DiMucci , " Mustang Sally " by Mack Rice , " Crystal Blue Persuasion " by Tommy James & the Shondells , " Groovin ' " and " Beautiful Morning " by The Young Rascals , " Rip It Up " by Little Richard , " I Just Want to Celebrate " by Rare Earth , and " You Don 't Want to Fight with Me " by Stallone 's younger brother Frank Stallone . Empire 's Danny Graydon awarded the soundtrack a score of 4 out of 5 , and said " Tyler ’ s action fare is , as ever , superbly judged , mixing real thrills with some dramatic weight ... resulting in a score that is affectionately nostalgic and not riddled with cliché . " Graydon singled out the pieces " Party Crashers " and " Track ' Em Find ' Em Kill ' Em " for praise . 
 Track listing 
