 Idries Shah was born in Simla , India , to an Afghan @-@ Indian father , Sirdar Ikbal Ali Shah , a writer and diplomat , and a Scottish mother , Saira Elizabeth <unk> Shah . His family on the paternal side were <unk> Sayyids . Their ancestral home was near the Paghman Gardens of Kabul . His paternal grandfather , Sayed Amjad Ali Shah , was the nawab of <unk> in the North @-@ Indian state of Uttar Pradesh , an hereditary title the family had gained thanks to the services an earlier ancestor , Jan @-@ <unk> Khan , had rendered to the British . 
 Shah mainly grew up in the vicinity of London . According to L. F. Rushbrook Williams , Shah began accompanying his father in his travels from a very young age , and although they both travelled widely and often , they always returned to England where the family made their home for many years . Through these travels , which were often part of Ikbal Ali Shah 's Sufi work , Shah was able to meet and spend time with prominent statesmen and distinguished personalities in both East and West . Williams writes , 
 Such an upbringing presented to a young man of marked intelligence , such as Idries Shah soon proved himself to possess , many opportunities to acquire a truly international outlook , a broad vision , and an acquaintance with people and places that any professional diplomat of more advanced age and longer experience might well envy . But a career of diplomacy did not attract Idries Shah ... 
 Shah described his own unconventional upbringing in a 1971 BBC interview with Pat Williams . He described how his father and his extended family and friends always tried to expose the children to a " multiplicity of impacts " and a wide range of contacts and experiences with the intention of producing a well @-@ rounded person . Shah described this as " the Sufi approach " to education . 
 After his family moved from London to Oxford in 1940 to escape The Blitz ( German bombing ) , he spent two or three years at the City of Oxford High School for Boys . In 1945 , he accompanied his father to Uruguay as secretary to his father 's halal meat mission . He returned to England in October 1946 , following allegations of improper business dealings . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Shah married Cynthia ( <unk> ) <unk> in 1958 ; they had a daughter , Saira , in 1964 , followed by twins – a son , Tahir , and another daughter , Safia – in 1966 . 
 = = = Friendship with Gerald Gardner and Robert Graves , and publication of The Sufis = = = 
 Towards the end of the 1950s , Shah established contact with Wiccan circles in London and then acted as a secretary and companion to Gerald Gardner , the founder of modern Wicca , for some time . In those days , Shah used to hold court for anyone interested in Sufism at a table in the Cosmo restaurant in Swiss Cottage ( North London ) every Tuesday evening . 
 In 1960 , Shah founded his publishing house , Octagon Press ; one of its first titles was Gardner 's biography – titled Gerald Gardner , Witch . The book was attributed to one of Gardner 's followers , Jack L. Bracelin , but had in fact been written by Shah . 
 According to Wiccan Frederic Lamond , Bracelin 's name was used because Shah " did not want to confuse his Sufi students by being seen to take an interest in another esoteric tradition . " Lamond said that Shah seemed to have become somewhat disillusioned with Gardner , and had told him one day , when he was visiting for tea : 
 When I was interviewing Gerald , I sometimes wished I was a News of the World reporter . What marvellous material for an exposé ! And yet I have it on good authority that this group will be the cornerstone of the religion of the coming age . But rationally , rationally I can 't see it ! 
 In January 1961 , while on a trip to Mallorca with Gardner , Shah met the English poet Robert Graves . Shah wrote to Graves from his pension in Palma , requesting an opportunity of " saluting you one day before very long " . He added that he was currently researching ecstatic religions , and that he had been " attending ... experiments conducted by the witches in Britain , into mushroom @-@ eating and so on " – a topic that had been of interest to Graves for some time . 
 Shah also told Graves that he was " intensely preoccupied at the moment with the carrying forward of ecstatic and intuitive knowledge . " Graves and Shah soon became close friends and confidants . Graves took a supportive interest in Shah 's writing career and encouraged him to publish an authoritative treatment of Sufism for a Western readership , along with the practical means for its study ; this was to become The Sufis . Shah managed to obtain a substantial advance on the book , resolving temporary financial difficulties . 
 In 1964 , The Sufis appeared , published by Doubleday , with a long introduction by Robert Graves . The book chronicles the impact of Sufism on the development of Western civilisation and traditions from the seventh century onward through the work of such figures as Roger Bacon , John of the Cross , Raymond Lully , Chaucer and others , and has become a classic . Like Shah 's other books on the topic , The Sufis was conspicuous for avoiding terminology that might have identified his interpretation of Sufism with traditional Islam . 
 The book also employed a deliberately " scattered " style ; Shah wrote to Graves that its aim was to " de @-@ condition people , and prevent their reconditioning " ; had it been otherwise , he might have used a more conventional form of exposition . The book sold poorly at first , and Shah invested a considerable amount of his own money in advertising it . Graves told him not to worry ; even though he had some misgivings about the writing , and was hurt that Shah had not allowed him to proofread it before publication , he said he was " so proud in having assisted in its publication " , and assured Shah that it was " a marvellous book , and will be recognised as such before long . Leave it to find its own readers who will hear your voice spreading , not those envisaged by Doubleday . " 
 = = = John G. Bennett and the Gurdjieff connection = = = 
 In June 1962 , a couple of years prior to the publication of The Sufis , Shah had also established contact with members of the movement that had formed around the mystical teachings of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky . A press article had appeared , describing the author 's visit to a secret monastery in Central Asia , where methods strikingly similar to Gurdjieff 's methods were apparently being taught . The otherwise unattested monastery had , it was implied , a representative in England . 
 One of Ouspensky 's earliest pupils , Reggie Hoare , who had been part of the Gurdjieff work since 1924 , made contact with Shah through that article . Hoare " attached special significance to what Shah had told him about the Enneagram symbol and said that Shah had revealed secrets about it that went far beyond what we had heard from Ouspensky . " Through Hoare , Shah was introduced to other <unk> , including John G. Bennett , a noted Gurdjieff student and founder of an " Institute for the Comparative Study of History , Philosophy and the Sciences " located at Coombe Springs , a 7 @-@ acre ( 28 @,@ 000 m2 ) estate in Kingston upon Thames , Surrey . 
 At that time , Bennett had already investigated the Sufi origins of many of Gurdjieff 's teachings , based on both Gurdjieff 's own numerous statements , and on travels Bennett himself made in the East where he met various Sufi Sheikhs . He was convinced that Gurdjieff had adopted many of the ideas and techniques of the Sufis and that , for those who heard Gurdjieff 's lectures in the early 1920s , " the Sufi origin of his teaching was unmistakable to anyone who had studied both . " 
 Bennett wrote about his first meeting with Shah in his autobiography Witness ( 1974 ) : 
 At first , I was wary . I had just decided to go forward on my own and now another ' teacher ' had appeared . One or two conversations with Reggie convinced me that I ought at least to see for myself . Elizabeth and I went to dinner with the <unk> to meet Shah , who turned out to be a young man in his early 40s . He spoke impeccable English and but for his beard and some of his gestures might well have been taken for an English public school type . Our first impressions were unfavourable . He was restless , smoked incessantly and seemed too intent on making a good impression . Halfway through the evening , our attitude completely changed . We recognized that he was not only an unusually gifted man , but that he had the indefinable something that marks the man who has worked seriously upon himself ... Knowing Reggie to be a very cautious man , trained moreover in assessing information by many years in the Intelligence Service , I accepted his assurances and also his belief that Shah had a very important mission in the West that we ought to help him to accomplish . 
 Shah gave Bennett a " Declaration of the People of the Tradition " and authorised him to share this with other <unk> . The document announced that there was now an opportunity for the transmission of " a secret , hidden , special , superior form of knowledge " ; combined with the personal impression Bennett formed of Shah , it convinced Bennett that Shah was a genuine emissary of the " <unk> Monastery " in Afghanistan , an inner circle of Sufis whose teachings had inspired Gurdjieff . 
 For the next few years , Bennett and Shah had weekly private talks that lasted for hours . Later , Shah also gave talks to the students at Coombe Springs . Bennett says that Shah ’ s plans included " reaching people who occupied positions of authority and power who were already half @-@ consciously aware that the problems of mankind could no longer be solved by economic , political or social action . Such people were touched , he said , by the new forces moving in the world to help mankind to survive the coming crisis . " 
 Bennett agreed with these ideas and also agreed that " people attracted by overtly spiritual or esoteric movements seldom possessed the qualities needed to reach and occupy positions of authority " and that " there were sufficient grounds for believing that throughout the world there were already people occupying important positions , who were capable of looking beyond the limitations of nationality and cultures and who could see for themselves that the only hope for mankind lies in the intervention of a Higher Source . " 
 Bennett wrote , " I had seen enough of Shah to know that he was no charlatan or idle boaster and that he was intensely serious about the task he had been given . " Wishing to support Shah 's work , Bennett decided in 1965 , after agonising for a long time and discussing the matter with the council and members of his Institute , to give the Coombe Springs property to Shah , who had insisted that any such gift must be made with no strings attached . Once the property was transferred to Shah , he banned Bennett 's associates from visiting , and made Bennett himself feel unwelcome . 
 Bennett says he did receive an invitation to the " Midsummer Revels " , a party Shah held at Coombe Springs that lasted two days and two nights , primarily for the young people whom Shah was then attracting . Anthony Blake , who worked with Bennett for 15 years , says , " When Idries Shah acquired Coombe Springs , his main activity was giving parties . I had only a few encounters with him but much enjoyed his irreverent attitude . Bennett once said to me , ' There are different styles in the work . Mine is like Gurdjieff ’ s , around struggle with one ’ s denial . But Shah ’ s way is to treat the work as a joke . ' " 
 After a few months , Shah sold the plot – worth more than £ 100 @,@ 000 – to a developer and used the proceeds to establish himself and his work activities at Langton House in Langton Green , near Tunbridge Wells , a 50 @-@ acre estate that once belonged to the family of Lord Baden @-@ Powell , founder of the Boy Scouts . 
 Along with the Coombe Springs property , Bennett also handed the care of his body of pupils to Shah , comprising some 300 people . Shah promised he would integrate all those who were suitable ; about half of their number found a place in Shah 's work . Some 20 years later , the <unk> author James Moore suggested that Bennett had been duped by Shah . Bennett gave an account of the matter himself in his autobiography ( 1974 ) ; he said that Shah 's behaviour after the transfer of the property was " hard to bear " , but also insisted that Shah was a " man of exquisite manners and delicate sensibilities " and considered that Shah might have adopted his behaviour deliberately , " to make sure that all bonds with Coombe Springs were severed " . He added that Langton Green was a far more suitable place for Shah 's work than Coombe Springs could have been and said he felt no sadness that Coombe Springs lost its identity ; he concluded his account of the matter by stating that he had " gained freedom " through his contact with Shah , and had learned " to love people whom [ he ] could not understand " . 
 According to Bennett , Shah later also engaged in discussions with the heads of the Gurdjieff groups in New York . In a letter to Paul Anderson from March 5 , 1968 , Bennett wrote , " Madame de Salzmann and all the others ... are aware of their own limitations and do no more than they are able to do . While I was in New York , Elizabeth and I visited the Foundation , and we saw most of the leading people in the New York group as well as Jeanne de Salzmann herself . Something is preparing , but whether it will come to fruition I cannot tell . I refer to their connection with Idries Shah and his capacity for turning everything upside down . It is useless with such people to be passive , and it is useless to avoid the issue . For the time being , we can only hope that some good will come , and meanwhile continue our own work ... " 
 The author and clinical psychologist Kathleen <unk> later wrote , 
 Witnessing the growing conservatism within the [ Gurdjieff ] Foundation , John Bennett hoped new blood and leadership would come from elsewhere ... Although there may have been flirtation with Shah , nothing came of it . The prevailing sense [ among the leaders of the Gurdjieff work ] that nothing must change , that a treasure in their safekeeping must at all costs be preserved in its original form , was stronger than any wish for a new wave of inspiration . " 
 = = = Sufi studies and institutes = = = 
 In 1965 , Shah founded the Society for Understanding Fundamental Ideas ( <unk> ) , later renamed The Institute for Cultural Research ( ICR ) – an educational charity aimed at stimulating " study , debate , education and research into all aspects of human thought , behaviour and culture " . He also established the Society for Sufi Studies ( SSS ) . 
 Langton House at Langton Green became a place of gathering and discussion for poets , philosophers and statesmen from around the world , and an established part of the literary scene of the time . The ICR held meetings and gave lectures there , awarding fellowships to international scholars including Sir John Glubb , Aquila <unk> <unk> , Richard Gregory and Robert Cecil , the head of European studies at the University of Reading who became Chairman of the Institute in the early 1970s . 
 Shah was an early member and supporter of the Club of Rome , and several presentations were given to the Institute by scientists like Alexander King . 
 Other visitors , pupils , and would @-@ be pupils included the poet Ted Hughes , novelists J. D. Salinger , Alan Sillitoe and Doris Lessing , zoologist Desmond Morris , and psychologist Robert Ornstein . The interior of the house was decorated in a Middle @-@ Eastern fashion , and buffet lunches were held every Sunday for guests in a large dining room that was once the estate stable , nicknamed " The Elephant " ( a reference to the Eastern tale of the " Elephant in the Dark " ) . 
 Over the following years , Shah developed Octagon Press as a means of publishing and distributing reprints of translations of numerous Sufi classics . In addition , he collected , translated and wrote thousands of Sufi tales , making these available to a Western audience through his books and lectures . Several of Shah 's books feature the Mullah Nasruddin character , sometimes with illustrations provided by Richard Williams . In Shah 's interpretation , the Mulla Nasruddin stories , previously considered a folkloric part of Muslim cultures , were presented as Sufi parables . 
 Nasruddin was featured in Shah 's television documentary <unk> , which aired on the BBC in 1970 . Segments included Richard Williams being interviewed about his unfinished animated film about Nasruddin , and scientist John <unk> discussing the use of Nasruddin stories at the Rand Corporation Think Tank . Other guests included the British psychiatrist William <unk> discussing the hampering effects of brainwashing and social conditioning on creativity and problem @-@ solving , and the comedian Marty Feldman talking with Shah about the role of humour and ritual in human life . The program ended with Shah asserting that humanity could further its own evolution by " breaking psychological limitations " but that there was a " constant accretion of pessimism which effectively prevents evolution in this form from going ahead ... Man is asleep – must he die before he wakes up ? " 
 Shah also organised Sufi study groups in the United States . Claudio Naranjo , a Chilean psychiatrist who was teaching in California in the late 1960s , says that , after being " disappointed in the extent to which Gurdjieff 's school entailed a living lineage " , he had turned towards Sufism and had " become part of a group under the guidance of Idries Shah . " Naranjo co @-@ wrote a book with Robert Ornstein , entitled On The Psychology of Meditation ( 1971 ) . Both of them were associated with the University of California , where Ornstein was a research psychologist at the Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute . 
 Ornstein was also president and founder of the Institute for the Study of Human Knowledge , established in 1969 ; seeing a need in the U.S. for books and collections on ancient and new ways of thinking , he formed the ISHK Book Service in 1972 as a central source for important contemporary and traditional literature , becoming the sole U.S. distributor of the works of Idries Shah published by Octagon Press . 
 Another Shah associate , the scientist and professor Leonard Lewin , who was teaching telecommunications at the University of Colorado at the time , set up Sufi study groups and other enterprises for the promotion of Sufi ideas like the Institute for Research on the Dissemination of Human Knowledge ( <unk> ) , and also edited an anthology of writings by and about Shah entitled The Diffusion of Sufi Ideas in the West ( 1972 ) . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Shah wrote around two dozen more books over the following decades , many of them drawing on classical Sufi sources . Achieving a huge worldwide circulation , his writings appealed primarily to an intellectually oriented Western audience . By translating Sufi teachings into contemporary psychological language , he presented them in vernacular and hence accessible terms . His folktales , illustrating Sufi wisdom through anecdote and example , proved particularly popular . Shah received and accepted invitations to lecture as a visiting professor at academic institutions including the University of California , the University of Geneva , the National University of La Plata and various English universities . Besides his literary and educational work , he found time to design an air <unk> ( forming a company together with <unk> Laws ) and run a number of textile , ceramics and electronics companies . He also undertook several journeys to his ancestral Afghanistan and involved himself in setting up relief efforts there ; he drew on these experiences later on in his book Kara Kush , a novel about the Soviet war in Afghanistan . 
 = = = Illness = = = 
 In late spring of 1987 , about a year after his final visit to Afghanistan , Shah suffered two successive and massive heart attacks . He was told that he had only eight per cent of his heart function left , and could not expect to survive . Despite intermittent bouts of illness , he continued working and produced further books over the next nine years . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Idries Shah died in London on November 23 , 1996 , at the age of 72 . According to his obituary in The Daily Telegraph , Idries Shah was a collaborator with Mujahideen in the Soviet war in Afghanistan , a Director of Studies for the Institute for Cultural Research and a Governor of the Royal Humane Society and the Royal Hospital and Home for <unk> . He was also a member of the Athenaeum Club . At the time of his death , Shah 's books had sold over 15 million copies in a dozen languages worldwide , and had been reviewed in numerous international journals and newspapers . 
 = = Teachings = = 
 = = = Books on magic and the occult = = = 
 Shah 's early books were studies of what he called " minority beliefs " . His first book Oriental Magic , published in 1956 , was originally intended to be titled Considerations in Eastern and African Minority Beliefs . He followed this in 1957 with The Secret Lore of Magic : Book of the Sorcerers , originally entitled Some Materials on European Minority @-@ Belief Literature . The names of these books were , according to a contributor to a 1973 festschrift for Shah , changed before publication due to the " exigencies of commercial publishing practices . " 
 Before his death in 1969 , Shah 's father asserted that the reason why he and his son had published books on the subject of magic and the occult was " to forestall a probable popular revival or belief among a significant number of people in this nonsense . My son ... eventually completed this task , when he researched for several years and published two important books on the subject . " 
 In an interview in Psychology Today from 1975 , Shah elaborated : 
 The main purpose of my books on magic was to make this material available to the general reader . For too long people believed that there were secret books , hidden places , and amazing things . They held onto this information as something to frighten themselves with . So the first purpose was information . This is the magic of East and West . That 's all . There is no more . The second purpose of those books was to show that there do seem to be forces , some of which are either rationalized by this magic or may be developed from it , which do not come within customary physics or within the experience of ordinary people . I think this should be studied , that we should gather the data and analyze the phenomena . We need to separate the chemistry of magic from the alchemy , as it were . 
 Shah went on to say that his books on the subject were not written for the current devotees of magic and witchcraft , and that in fact he subsequently had to avoid them , as they would only be disappointed in what he had to say . 
 These books were followed by the publication of the travelogue Destination Mecca ( 1957 ) , which was featured on television by Sir David Attenborough . Both Destination Mecca and Oriental Magic contain sections on the subject of Sufism . 
 = = = Sufism as a form of timeless wisdom = = = 
 Shah presented Sufism as a form of timeless wisdom that predated Islam . He emphasised that the nature of Sufism was alive , not static , and that it always adapted its visible manifestations to new times , places and people : " Sufi schools are like waves which break upon rocks : [ they are ] from the same sea , in different forms , for the same purpose , " he wrote , quoting Ahmad al @-@ Badawi . 
 Shah was often dismissive of orientalists ' descriptions of Sufism , holding that academic or personal study of its historical forms and methods was not a sufficient basis for gaining a correct understanding of it . In fact , an obsession with its traditional forms might actually become an obstacle : " Show a man too many camels ' bones , or show them to him too often , and he will not be able to recognise a camel when he comes across a live one , " is how he expressed this idea in one of his books . 
 Shah , like Inayat Khan , presented Sufism as a path that transcended individual religions , and adapted it to a Western audience . Unlike Khan , however , he <unk> religious or spiritual trappings and portrayed Sufism as a psychological technology , a method or science that could be used to achieve self @-@ realisation . In doing so , his approach seemed to be especially addressed to followers of Gurdjieff , students of the Human Potential Movement , and intellectuals acquainted with modern psychology . For example , he wrote , " Sufism ... states that man may become objective , and that objectivity enables the individual to grasp ' higher ' facts . Man is therefore invited to push his evolution ahead towards what is sometimes called in Sufism ' real intellect ' . " Shah taught that the human being could acquire new subtle sense organs in response to need : 
 Sufis believe that , expressed in one way , humanity is evolving towards a certain destiny . We are all taking part in that evolution . Organs come into being as a result of the need for specific organs ( Rumi ) . The human being 's organism is producing a new complex of organs in response to such a need . In this age of transcending of time and space , the complex of organs is concerned with the transcending of time and space . What ordinary people regard as sporadic and occasional outbursts of telepathic or prophetic power are seen by the Sufi as nothing less than the first stirrings of these same organs . The difference between all evolution up to date and the present need for evolution is that for the past ten thousand years or so we have been given the possibility of a conscious evolution . So essential is this more rarefied evolution that our future depends upon it . 
 Shah dismissed other Eastern and Western projections of Sufism as " watered down , generalised or partial " ; he included in this not only Khan 's version , but also the overtly Muslim forms of Sufism found in most Islamic countries . On the other hand , the writings of Shah 's associates implied that he was the " Grand Sheikh of the Sufis " – a position of authority undercut by the failure of any other Sufis to acknowledge its existence . Shah felt the best way to introduce Sufi wisdom in the West , while at the same time overcoming the problems of gurus and cults , was to clarify the difference between a cult and an educational system , and to contribute to knowledge . In an interview , he explained , " You must work within an educational pattern – not in the mumbo @-@ jumbo area . " As part of this approach , he acted as Director of Studies at the ICR . He also lectured on the study of Sufism in the West at the University of Sussex in 1966 . This was later published as a monograph entitled Special Problems in the Study of Sufi Ideas . 
 Shah later explained that Sufi activities were divided into different components or departments : " studies in Sufism " , " studies of Sufism " , and " studies for Sufism " . 
 Studies for Sufism helped lead people towards Sufism and included the promotion of knowledge which might be lacking in the culture and needed to be restored and spread , such as an understanding of social conditioning and brainwashing , the difference between the rational and intuitive modes of thought , and other activities so that people 's minds could become more free and wide @-@ ranging . Studies of Sufism included institutions and activities , such as lectures and seminars , which provided information about Sufism and acted as a cultural liaison between the Sufis and the public . Finally , Studies in Sufism referred to being in a Sufi school , carrying out those activities prescribed by the teacher as part of a training , and this could take many forms which did not necessarily fit into the preconceived notion of a " mystical school " . 
 Shah 's Sufi aims and methodologies were also delineated in the " Declaration of the People of the Tradition " given at Coombe Springs : 
 In addition to making this announcement , to feeding into certain fields of thought certain ideas , and pointing out some of the factors surrounding this work , the projectors of this declaration have a practical task . This task is to locate individuals who have the capacity for obtaining the special knowledge of man which is available ; to group them in a special , not haphazard , manner , so that each such group forms a harmonious organism ; to do this in the right place at the right time ; to provide an external and interior format with which to work , as well as a formulation of ' ideas ' suitable to local conditions ; to balance theory with practice . 
 In a BBC interview from 1971 , Shah explained his contemporary , adaptive approach : " I am interested in making available in the West those aspects of Sufism which shall be of use to the West at this time . I don ’ t want to turn good Europeans into poor Asiatics . People have asked me why I don ’ t use traditional methods of spiritual training , for instance , in dealing with people who seek me out or hunt me down ; and of course , the answer is , that it ’ s for the same reason that you came to my house today in a motorcar and not on the back of a camel . Sufism is , in fact , not a mystical system , not a religion , but a body of knowledge . " 
 Shah frequently characterised some of his work as really only preliminary to actual Sufi study , in the same way that learning to read and write might be seen as preliminary to a study of literature : " Unless the psychology is correctly oriented , there is no spirituality , though there can be obsession and emotionality , often mistaken for it . " " Anyone trying to graft spiritual practices upon an unregenerate personality ... will end up with an aberration " , he argued . For this reason , most of the work he produced from The Sufis onwards was psychological in nature , focused on attacking the <unk> @-@ i @-@ <unk> , the false self : " I have nothing to give you except the way to understand how to seek – but you think you can already do that . " 
 Shah was frequently criticised for not mentioning God very much in his writings ; his reply was that given man 's present state , there would not be much point in talking about God . He illustrated the problem in a parable in his book Thinkers of the East : " Finding I could speak the language of ants , I approached one and inquired , ' What is God like ? Does he resemble the ant ? ' He answered , ' God ! No indeed – we have only a single sting but God , He has two ! ' " 
 = = = Teaching stories = = = 
 Shah used teaching stories and humour to great effect in his work . Shah emphasised the therapeutic function of surprising anecdotes , and the fresh perspectives these tales revealed . The reading and discussion of such tales in a group setting became a significant part of the activities in which the members of Shah 's study circles engaged . The transformative way in which these puzzling or surprising tales could destabilise the student 's normal ( and unaware ) mode of consciousness was studied by Stanford University psychology professor Robert Ornstein , who along with fellow psychologist Charles Tart and eminent writers such as Poet Laureate Ted Hughes and Nobel @-@ Prize @-@ winning novelist Doris Lessing was one of several notable thinkers profoundly influenced by Shah . 
 Shah and Ornstein met in the 1960s . Realising that Ornstein could be an ideal partner in propagating his teachings , translating them into the idiom of psychotherapy , Shah made him his deputy ( khalifa ) in the United States . Ornstein 's The Psychology of Consciousness ( 1972 ) was enthusiastically received by the academic psychology community , as it coincided with new interests in the field , such as the study of biofeedback and other techniques designed to achieve shifts in mood and awareness . Ornstein has published more books in the field over the years . 
 Philosopher of science and physicist Henri <unk> used teaching tales from Shah 's corpus as analogies of the habits of mind which prevented people from grasping the scientific method of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . <unk> 's The <unk> of Nature : Goethe 's Way of Science includes tales from Tales of the Dervishes , The Exploits of the Incomparable Mullah Nasruddin and A Perfumed Scorpion . 
 In their original historical and cultural setting , Sufi teaching stories of the kind popularised by Shah – first told orally , and later written down for the purpose of transmitting Sufi faith and practice to successive generations – were considered suitable for people of all ages , including children , as they contained multiple layers of meaning . Shah likened the Sufi story to a peach : " A person may be emotionally stirred by the exterior as if the peach were lent to you . You can eat the peach and taste a further delight ... You can throw away the stone – or crack it and find a delicious kernel within . This is the hidden depth . " It was in this manner that Shah invited his audience to receive the Sufi story . By failing to uncover the kernel , and regarding the story as merely amusing or superficial , a person would accomplish nothing more than looking at the peach , while others internalised the tale and allowed themselves to be touched by it . 
 Tahir Shah mentions his father 's storytelling at several points throughout his 2008 book In Arabian Nights , first to discuss how Idries Shah made use of teaching stories : " My father never told us how the stories worked . He did not reveal the layers , the nuggets of information , the fragments of truth and fantasy . He didn 't need to – because , given the right conditions , the stories activated , sowing themselves . " He then explains how his father used these stories to impart wisdom : " My father always had a tale at hand to divert our attention , or to use as a way of transmitting an idea or a thought . He used to say that the great collections of stories from the East were like encyclopedias , storehouses of wisdom and knowledge ready to be studied , to be appreciated and cherished . To him , stories represented much more than mere entertainment . He saw them as complex psychological documents , forming a body of knowledge that had been collected and refined since the dawn of humanity and , more often than not , passed down by word of mouth . " 
 Later on in the book , he continues his discussion of stories as teaching tools , quoting the following explanation his father gave him at the end of a story : 
 These stories are technical documents , they are like maps , or kind of blueprints . What I do is show people how to use the maps , because they have forgotten . You may think it 's a strange way to teach – with stories – but long ago this was the way people passed on wisdom . Everyone knew how to take the wisdom from the story . They could see through the layers , in the same way you see a fish frozen in a block of ice . But the world where we are living has lost this skill , a skill they certainly once had . They hear the stories and they like them , because the stories amuse them , make them feel warm . But they can 't see past the first layer , into the ice . The stories are like a lovely chessboard : we all know how to play chess and we can be drawn into a game so complicated that our faculties are drained . But imagine if the game was lost from a society for centuries and then the fine chessboard and its pieces were found . Everyone would cluster round to see them and praise them . They might never imagine that such a fine object ever had a purpose other than to entertain the eyes . The stories ' inner value has been lost in the same way . At one time everyone knew how to play with them , how to decipher them . But now the rules have been forgotten . It is for us to show people again how the game is played . 
 Olav Hammer , in Sufism in Europe and North America ( 2004 ) , cites an example of such a story . It tells of a man who is looking for his key on the ground . When a passing neighbour asks the man whether this is in fact the place where he lost the key , the man replies , " No , I lost it at home , but there is more light here than in my own house . " 
 Peter Wilson , writing in New Trends and Developments in the World of Islam ( 1998 ) , quotes another such story , featuring a dervish who is asked to describe the qualities of his teacher , Alim . The dervish explains that Alim wrote beautiful poetry , and inspired him with his self @-@ sacrifice and his service to his fellow man . His questioner readily approves of these qualities , only to find the dervish rebuking him : " Those are the qualities which would have recommended Alim to you . " Then he proceeds to list the qualities which actually enabled Alim to be an effective teacher : " Hazrat Alim Azimi made me irritated , which caused me to examine my irritation , to trace its source . Alim Azimi made me angry , so that I could feel and transform my anger . " He explains that Alim Azimi followed the path of blame , intentionally provoking vicious attacks upon himself , in order to bring the failings of both his students and critics to light , allowing them to be seen for what they really were : " He showed us the strange , so that the strange became commonplace and we could realise what it really is . " 
 = = = Views on culture and practical life = = = 
 Shah 's concern was to reveal essentials underlying all cultures , and the hidden factors determining individual behaviour . He discounted the Western focus on appearances and <unk> , which often reflected mere fashion and habit , and drew attention to the origins of culture and the unconscious and mixed motivations of people and the groups formed by them . He pointed out how both on the individual and group levels , short @-@ term disasters often turn into blessings – and vice versa – and yet the knowledge of this has done little to affect the way people respond to events as they occur . 
 Shah did not advocate the abandonment of worldly duties ; instead , he argued that the treasure sought by the would @-@ be disciple should derive from one 's struggles in everyday living . He considered practical work the means through which a seeker could do self @-@ work , in line with the traditional adoption by Sufis of ordinary professions , through which they earned their livelihoods and " worked " on themselves . 
 Shah 's status as a teacher remained indefinable ; disclaiming both the guru identity and any desire to found a cult or sect , he also rejected the academic hat . Michael Rubinstein , writing in Makers of Modern Culture , concluded that " he is perhaps best seen as an embodiment of the tradition in which the contemplative and intuitive aspects of the mind are regarded as being most productive when working together . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Idries Shah considered his books his legacy ; in themselves , they would fulfil the function he had fulfilled when he could no longer be there . Promoting and distributing their teacher 's publications has been an important activity or " work " for Shah 's students , both for fund @-@ raising purposes and for transforming public awareness . The ICR suspended its activities in 2013 following the formation of a new charity , The Idries Shah Foundation , while the SSS had ceased its activities earlier . The ISHK ( Institute for the Study of Human Knowledge ) , headed by Ornstein , is active in the United States ; after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , for example , it sent out a brochure advertising Afghanistan @-@ related books authored by Shah and his circle to members of the Middle East Studies Association , thus linking these publications to the need for improved cross @-@ cultural understanding . 
 When Elizabeth Hall interviewed Shah for Psychology Today in July 1975 , she asked him : " For the sake of humanity , what would you like to see happen ? " Shah replied : " What I would really want , in case anybody is listening , is for the products of the last 50 years of psychological research to be studied by the public , by everybody , so that the findings become part of their way of thinking ( ... ) they have this great body of psychological information and refuse to use it . " 
 Shah 's brother , Omar Ali @-@ Shah ( 1922 – 2005 ) , was also a writer and teacher of Sufism ; the brothers taught students together for a while in the 1960s , but in 1977 " agreed to disagree " and went their separate ways . Following Idries Shah 's death in 1996 , a fair number of his students became affiliated with Omar Ali @-@ Shah 's movement . 
 One of Shah 's daughters , Saira Shah , became notable in 2001 for reporting on women 's rights in Afghanistan in her documentary Beneath the Veil . His son , Tahir Shah , is a noted travel writer , journalist and adventurer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Shah 's books on Sufism achieved considerable critical acclaim . He was the subject of a BBC documentary ( " One Pair of Eyes " ) in 1969 , and two of his works ( The Way of the Sufi and Reflections ) were chosen as " Outstanding Book of the Year " by the BBC 's " The Critics " programme . Among other honours , Shah won six first prizes at the UNESCO World Book Year in 1973 , and the Islamic scholar James <unk> , commenting on Shah 's Tales of the Dervishes , said that it was " beautifully translated " . 
 A collection of positive assessments of Shah 's work entitled Sufi Studies : East and West was published in 1973 which included , among others , contributions from L. F. Rushbrook Williams , Rom Landau , Mohammad <unk> , Gyula Germanus , Sir John Glubb , Sir Razik Fareed , <unk> Hussain Qureshi , Ahmet Emin <unk> , Mahmoud Youssef <unk> and <unk> S. <unk> . 
 Colin Wilson stated that " partly through Idries Shah , I have begun to see some rather new and interesting implications [ about the subject of mysticism ] " and in his review of The Magic Monastery ( 1972 ) noted that Shah " is not primarily concerned with propagating some secret doctrine . He is concerned with the method by which mystical knowledge is transmitted ... [ The Sufis ] transmit knowledge through direct intuition rather in the manner of the Zen masters , and one of the chief means of doing this is by means of brief stories and parables which work their way into the subconscious and activate its hidden forces . " 
 In Afghanistan , the Kabul Times said that Caravan of Dreams ( 1968 ) was " highly recommended " and " of especial interest to Afghans " because it is " basically an anthology of short stories , tales and proverbs , jokes and extracts , from the written and oral literature which forms a part of many an evening 's talk and interchange – even in these modern times – in Afghanistan . " The Afghanistan News reported that The Sufis " covers important Afghan contributions to world philosophy and science " and was " the first fully @-@ authoritative book on Sufism and the human development system of the dervishes . " As far as doubts about Shah 's background and credentials are concerned , the Sardar Haji Faiz Muhammad Khan <unk> , an Afghan scholar who had served as Afghan Minister of Education and later Ambassador and Foreign Minister of Afghanistan , issued a notarized Declaration for the scholars of the world about the Shah family in 1970 : " The <unk> <unk> of Afghanistan and Khans of Paghman are recognized as the descendants of the Prophet – may peace be upon him . They are recognized to be of the most noble descent of Islam and are respected as Sufi teachers and erudite scholars . <unk> Idries Shah , son of the late <unk> Ikbal Ali Shah , is personally known to me as an honourable man whose rank , titles and descent are attested and known by repute . " 
 In 1980 , Professor <unk> Khalili , former Poet Laureate of Afghanistan , praised the work of his " compatriot and friend the Arif ( Sufi Illuminate ) The Sayed Idries Shah " , saying " Especially to be appreciated are his brilliant and important services in revealing the celestial inspirations and inner thoughts of the great teachers of Islam and Sufis . " 
 The Hindustan Standard of India found that Caravan of Dreams , was a " fine anthology , <unk> @-@ into at any time for entertainment , refreshment , consolation , and inspiration ... witty , engrossing , utterly and appealingly human . " 
 The Institute for Cross @-@ cultural Exchange ( ICE ) , a Canadian charity founded in 2004 , decided to use Idries Shah 's children 's books to distribute to thousands of needy children in Canada , Mexico and Afghanistan , as part of their children 's literacy programme and promotion of cross @-@ cultural understanding . This series of books is published by Hoopoe Books , a non @-@ profit initiative by the American psychologist Robert Ornstein 's Institute for the Study of Human Knowledge ( ISHK ) . ISHK provides these books to needy children through their own Share Literacy initiative . 
 = = = " Shah @-@ school " writings = = = 
 A hostile critic was James Moore , a <unk> who disagreed with Shah 's assertion that Gurdjieff 's teaching was essentially <unk> in nature and took exception to the publication of a chronologically impossible , pseudonymous book on the matter ( The Teachers of Gurdjieff by Rafael Lefort ) that was linked to Shah . In a 1986 article in Religion Today ( now the Journal of Contemporary Religion ) , Moore covered the Bennett and Graves controversies and noted that Shah was surrounded by a " nimbus of exorbitant adulation : an adulation he himself has fanned " . He described Shah as supported by a " coterie of serviceable journalists , editors , critics , animators , broadcasters , and travel writers , which gamely choruses Shah 's praise " . Moore questioned Shah 's purported Sufi heritage and upbringing and deplored the body of pseudonymous " Shah @-@ school " writings from such authors as " Omar Michael Burke Ph. D. " and " <unk> B. M. Dervish " , who from 1960 heaped intemperate praise – ostensibly from disinterested parties – on Shah , referring to him as the " <unk> Grand Sheikh Idries Shah Saheb " , " Prince Idries Shah " , " King Enoch " , " The Presence " , " The <unk> King " , the " Incarnation of Ali " , and even the Qutb or " Axis " – all in support of Shah 's incipient efforts to market Sufism to a Western audience . 
 Peter Wilson similarly commented on the " very poor quality " of much that had been written in Shah 's support , noting an " unfortunately fulsome style " , claims that Shah possessed various paranormal abilities , " a tone of superiority ; an attitude , sometimes smug , condescending , or pitying , towards those ' on the outside ' , and the apparent absence of any motivation to substantiate claims which might be thought to merit such treatment " . In his view , there was a " marked difference in quality between Shah 's own writings " and the quality of this secondary literature . Both Moore and Wilson , however , also noted similarities in style , and considered the possibility that much of this pseudonymous work , frequently published by Octagon Press , Shah 's own publishing house , might have been written by Shah himself . 
 Arguing for an alternative interpretation of this literature , the religious scholar Andrew Rawlinson proposed that rather than a " transparently self @-@ serving [ ... ] deception " , it may have been a " masquerade – something that by definition has to be seen through " . Stating that " a critique of entrenched positions cannot itself be fixed and doctrinal " , and noting that Shah 's intent had always been to undermine false certainties , he argued that the " Shah myth " created by these writings may have been a teaching tool , rather than a tool of concealment ; something " made to be deconstructed – that is supposed to dissolve when you touch it " . Rawlinson concluded that Shah " cannot be taken at face value . His own axioms preclude the very possibility . " 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 Doris Lessing , one of Shah 's greatest defenders , stated in a 1981 interview : " I found Sufism as taught by Idries Shah , which claims to be the reintroduction of an ancient teaching , suitable for this time and this place . It is not some regurgitated stuff from the East or watered @-@ down Islam or anything like that . " In 1996 , commenting on Shah 's death in The Daily Telegraph , she stated that she met Shah because of The Sufis , which was to her the most surprising book she had read , and a book that changed her life . Describing Shah 's œuvre as a " phenomenon like nothing else in our time " , she characterised him as a many @-@ sided man , the wittiest person she ever expected to meet , kind , generous , modest ( " Don 't look so much at my face , but take what is in my hand " , she quotes him as saying ) , and her good friend and teacher for 30 @-@ odd years . 
 Arthur J. <unk> , a professor of psychiatry and long @-@ time researcher in the area of meditation and change of consciousness who began his study of Sufi teaching stories in the early seventies , expressed the view that Western <unk> could benefit from the perspective provided by Sufism and its universal essence , provided suitable materials were studied in the correct manner and sequence . Given that Shah 's writings and translations of Sufi teaching stories were designed with that purpose in mind , he recommended them to those interested in assessing the matter for themselves , and noted that many authorities had accepted Shah 's position as a spokesman for contemporary Sufism . The psychologist and consciousness researcher Charles Tart commented that Shah 's writings had " produced a more profound appreciation in [ him ] of what psychology is about than anything else ever written " . 
 Asked to give an assessment of Shah in 1973 , J.G. Bennett said that Shah was doing important work on a large scale , " stirring people up very effectively all over the place , making them think , showing them that modes of thought that appear to be free are really largely conditioned . " He referred to Shah as the Krishnamurti of Sufism , breaking down people 's fixed ideas in many directions as part of an awakening process that is " a very necessary preparation for the new world . " 
 The Indian philosopher and mystic Osho , commenting on Shah 's work , described The Sufis as " just a diamond . The value of what he has done in The Sufis is immeasurable " . He added that Shah was " the man who introduced Mulla Nasrudin to the West , and he has done an incredible service . He cannot be repaid . [ ... ] Idries Shah has made just the small anecdotes of Nasrudin even more beautiful ... [ he ] not only has the capacity to exactly translate the parables , but even to beautify them , to make them more poignant , sharper . " 
 Richard <unk> and Jay Kinney , writing in Hidden Wisdom : A Guide to the Western Inner Traditions ( 2006 ) , pronounced Shah 's The Sufis an " extremely readable and wide @-@ ranging introduction to Sufism " , adding that " Shah 's own slant is evident throughout , and some historical assertions are debatable ( none are footnoted ) , but no other book is as successful as this one in provoking interest in Sufism for the general reader . " They described Learning How to Learn , a collection of interviews , talks and short writings , as one of Shah 's best works , providing a solid orientation to his " psychological " approach to Sufi work , noting that at his best , " Shah provides insights that inoculate students against much of the nonsense in the spiritual marketplace . " 
 Ivan Tyrrell and social psychologist Joe Griffin , in their book about innate emotional needs , Human Givens : A new approach to emotional health and clear thinking , wrote that Shah " more than anyone else , understood and appreciated the real significance of the givens of human nature " . In another book , Godhead : The Brain ’ s Big Bang – The explosive origin of creativity , mysticism and mental illness , they said that Shah ’ s stories , " when told to young and old alike [ ... ] lay down blueprints in the mind , not only for living and overcoming everyday difficulties but also for travelling the spiritual path . Their impact may not be recognized or felt for months or years after first hearing or reading them , but eventually the structural content they contain will exploit the pattern @-@ matching nature of the brain and make it possible for students to observe the functioning of their own emotionally conditioned responses to changing life circumstances . It then makes it easier for them to take any action required by reality , and for their minds to connect to higher realms . Teaching stories should be read , told and reflected on , but not intellectually analysed , because that destroys the beneficial impact that they would otherwise have had on your mind . " Shah , they added , was " a great collector and publisher of tales and writings that contain this ' long @-@ term impact ' quality . He understood the vital importance for humanity of the ' mental blueprint ' aspect of them and his books are full of nourishing examples . " 
 Olav Hammer notes that during Shah 's last years , when the generosity of admirers had made him truly wealthy , and he had become a respected figure among the higher echelons of British society , controversies arose due to discrepancies between autobiographical data – mentioning kinship with the prophet Muhammad , affiliations with a secret Sufi order in Central Asia , or the tradition in which Gurdjieff was taught – and recoverable historical facts . While there may have been a link of kinship with the prophet Muhammad , the number of people sharing such a link today , 1300 years later , would be at least one million . Other elements of Shah 's autobiography appeared to have been pure fiction . Even so , Hammer noted that Shah 's books have remained in public demand , and that he has played " a significant role in representing the essence of Sufism as a non @-@ confessional , individualistic and life @-@ affirming distillation of spiritual wisdom . " 
 Peter Wilson wrote that if Shah had been a swindler , he had been an " extremely gifted one " , because unlike merely commercial writers , he had taken the time to produce an elaborate and internally consistent system that attracted a " whole range of more or less eminent people " , and had " provoked and stimulated thought in many diverse quarters " . Moore acknowledged that Shah had made a contribution of sorts in popularising a humanistic Sufism , and had " brought energy and resource to his self @-@ aggrandisement " , but ended with the damning conclusion that Shah 's was " a ' Sufism ' without self @-@ sacrifice , without self @-@ transcendence , without the aspiration of gnosis , without tradition , without the Prophet , without the Qur 'an , without Islam , and without God . Merely that . " 
 Gore Vidal opined that Shah 's " books are a great deal harder to read than they were to write . " 
 = = = = The Sufis controversy = = = = 
 The reception of Shah 's movement was also marked by controversy . Some orientalists were hostile , in part because Shah presented classical Sufi writings as tools for self @-@ development to be used by contemporary people , rather than as objects of historical study . 
 Graves ' introduction to The Sufis , written with Shah 's help , described Shah as being " in the senior male line of descent from the prophet Mohammed " and as having inherited " secret mysteries from the Caliphs , his ancestors . He is , in fact , a Grand Sheikh of the Sufi <unk> ... " Privately , however , writing to a friend , Graves confessed that this was " misleading : he is one of us , not a Moslem personage . " The introduction is not included in Octagon Press editions of the book after 1983 but has always been included in the Anchor / Doubleday editions . 
 And Shah 's fiercest critic , University of Edinburgh scholar L.P. Elwell @-@ Sutton , in a 1975 article critical of what he called " pseudo @-@ Sufis " like Gurdjieff and Shah , opined that Graves had been trying to " upgrade " Shah 's " rather undistinguished lineage " , and that the reference to Mohammed 's senior male line of descent was a " rather unfortunate gaffe " , as Mohammed 's sons had all died in infancy . Although Elwell @-@ Sutton accepted that the family were Sayyids descended from the seventh Imam Musa al @-@ Kadhim , the great @-@ <unk> of Hussein ibn Ali , who was the younger son of the marriage of Fatimah ( the daughter of the Prophet ) and Alī ibn Abī <unk> , he considered this an " undistinguished lineage " with no special sanctity because " Sayyids proliferate throughout the Islamic world , in all walks of society and on both sides of every religious and political fence . " He described <unk> ' books as " trivial " , replete with errors of fact , slovenly and inaccurate translations and even misspellings of Oriental names and words – " a muddle of platitudes , <unk> and plain mumbo @-@ jumbo " , adding for good measure that Shah had " a remarkable opinion of his own importance " . He took a dim view of Rushbrook Williams ' festschrift in honour of Shah , saying he considered many of the claims made in the book on behalf of Shah and his father , concerning their representing the Sufi tradition , to be self @-@ serving publicity marked by a " disarming disregard for facts " . Expressing amusement and amazement at the " sycophantic manner " of Shah 's interlocutors in a BBC radio interview , Elwell @-@ Sutton concluded that some Western intellectuals were " so desperate to find answers to the questions that baffle them , that , confronted with wisdom from ' the mysterious East , ' they abandon their critical faculties and submit to brainwashing of the crudest kind " . To Elwell @-@ Sutton , Shah 's Sufism belonged to the realm of " Pseudo @-@ Sufism " , " centred not on God but on man . " 
 = = = = Omar Khayyam controversy = = = = 
 In the late 1960s and early 1970s , Shah came under attack over a controversy surrounding the 1967 publication of a new translation of Omar Khayyam 's Rubaiyat , by Robert Graves and Shah 's older brother , Omar Ali @-@ Shah . The translation , which presented the Rubaiyat as a Sufi poem , was based on an annotated " crib " , supposedly derived from a manuscript that had been in the Shah family 's possession for 800 years . L. P. Elwell @-@ Sutton , an orientalist at Edinburgh University , and others who reviewed the book expressed their conviction that the story of the ancient manuscript was false . 
 Shah 's father , the Sirdar Ikbal Ali Shah , was expected by Graves to present the original manuscript to clear the matter up , but he died in a car accident in Tangier in November 1969 . A year later , Graves asked Idries Shah to produce the manuscript . Shah replied in a letter that the manuscript was not in his possession , but even if it were , producing it would prove nothing , because it could not be accurately dated using the current methods and its authenticity would still be contested . It was time , Shah wrote , " that we realised that the hyenas who are making so much noise are intent only on opposition , destructiveness and carrying on a campaign when , let 's face it , nobody is really listening . " He added that his father had been so infuriated by those casting these aspersions that he refused to engage with them , and he felt his father 's response had been correct . Graves , noting that he was now widely perceived as having fallen prey to the Shah brothers ' gross deception , and that this affected income from sales of his other historical writings , insisted that producing the manuscript had become " a matter of family honour " . He pressed Shah again , reminding him of previous promises to produce the manuscript if it were necessary . 
 Neither of the brothers ever produced the manuscript , leading Graves ' nephew and biographer to muse that it was hard to believe – bearing in mind the Shah brothers ' many obligations to Graves – that they would have withheld the manuscript if it had ever existed in the first place . According to his widow writing many years later , Graves had " complete faith " in the authenticity of the manuscript because of his friendship with Shah , even though he never had a chance to view the text in person . The scholarly consensus today is that the " Jan @-@ <unk> Khan " manuscript was a hoax , and that the Graves / Ali @-@ Shah translation was in fact based on a Victorian amateur scholar 's analysis of the sources used by previous Rubaiyat translator Edward FitzGerald . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Magic = = = 
 Oriental Magic ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 017 @-@ 9 ( 1956 ) 
 The Secret Lore of Magic ISBN 0 @-@ 8065 @-@ 0004 @-@ 2 ( 1957 ) 
 = = = Sufism = = = 
 The Sufis ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ( 1964 ) 
 Tales of the Dervishes ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 47 @-@ 2 ( 1967 ) 
 Caravan of Dreams ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 043 @-@ 8 ( 1968 ) 
 Reflections ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 07 @-@ 3 ( 1968 ) 
 The Way of the Sufi ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 80 @-@ 4 ( 1968 ) 
 The Book of the Book ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 12 @-@ X ( 1969 ) 
 Wisdom of the Idiots ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 046 @-@ 2 ( 1969 ) 
 The <unk> Probe ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 045 @-@ 4 ( 1970 ) 
 Thinkers of the East – Studies in <unk> ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 46 @-@ 4 ( 1971 ) 
 The Magic Monastery ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 058 @-@ 6 ( 1972 ) 
 The Elephant in the Dark – Christianity , Islam and the Sufis ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 36 @-@ 7 ( 1974 ) 
 A Veiled Gazelle – Seeing How to See ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 58 @-@ 8 ( 1977 ) 
 Neglected Aspects of Sufi Study ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 56 @-@ 1 ( 1977 ) 
 Special Illumination : The Sufi Use of Humour ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 57 @-@ X ( 1977 ) 
 A Perfumed Scorpion ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 62 @-@ 6 ( 1978 ) 
 Learning How to Learn : Psychology and Spirituality in the Sufi Way ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 59 @-@ 6 ( 1978 ) 
 The Hundred Tales of Wisdom ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 049 @-@ 7 ( 1978 ) 
 Evenings with Idries Shah ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 008 @-@ X ( 1981 ) 
 Letters and Lectures of Idries Shah ISBN 08 @-@ <unk> @-@ 010 @-@ 1 ( 1981 ) 
 Observations ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 013 @-@ 6 ( 1982 ) 
 Seeker After Truth ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 91 @-@ X ( 1982 ) 
 Sufi Thought and Action ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 051 @-@ 9 ( 1990 ) 
 The Commanding Self ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 066 @-@ 7 ( 1994 ) 
 Knowing How to Know ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 072 @-@ 1 ( 1998 ) 
 = = = = Collections of Mulla Nasrudin stories = = = = 
 The Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla Nasrudin ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 022 @-@ 5 ( 1966 ) 
 The <unk> of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 023 @-@ 3 ( 1968 ) 
 The <unk> of the <unk> Mulla Nasrudin ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 021 @-@ 7 ( 1973 ) 
 The World of Nasrudin ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 086 @-@ 1 ( 2003 ) 
 = = = Studies of the English = = = 
 Darkest England ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 039 @-@ X ( 1987 ) 
 The Natives are Restless ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 044 @-@ 6 ( 1988 ) 
 The Englishman 's Handbook ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 077 @-@ 2 ( 2000 ) 
 = = = Travel = = = 
 Destination Mecca ISBN 0 @-@ 900860 @-@ 03 @-@ 0 ( 1957 ) 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Kara Kush , London : William Collins Sons and Co . , Ltd .. ISBN 0 @-@ 685 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ( 1986 ) 
 = = = Folklore = = = 
 World Tales ISBN 0 @-@ 86304 @-@ 036 @-@ 5 ( 1979 ) 
 = = = For children = = = 
 Neem the Half @-@ Boy ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 10 @-@ 3 ( 1998 ) 
 The Farmer ’ s Wife ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 07 @-@ 3 ( 1998 ) 
 The Lion Who Saw Himself in the Water ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 25 @-@ 1 ( 1998 ) 
 The Boy Without A Name ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 20 @-@ 0 ( 2000 ) 
 The Clever Boy and the Terrible Dangerous Animal ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 51 @-@ 0 ( 2000 ) 
 The Magic Horse ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 26 @-@ X ( 2001 ) 
 The Man With Bad Manners ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 30 @-@ 8 ( 2003 ) 
 The Old Woman and The Eagle ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 27 @-@ 8 ( 2005 ) 
 The Silly Chicken ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 50 @-@ 2 ( 2005 ) 
 Fatima the Spinner and the Tent ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 42 @-@ 1 ( 2006 ) 
 The Man and the Fox ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 43 @-@ X ( 2006 ) 
 = = = As <unk> <unk> = = = 
 A History of Secret Societies ISBN 0 @-@ 8065 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ( 1961 ) 
 Witches and Sorcerers ISBN 0 @-@ 8065 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ( 1962 ) 
 = = = Audio Interviews , Seminars and Lectures = = = 
 Shah , Idries , and Pat Williams . A Framework for New Knowledge . London : Seminar Cassettes , 1973 . Sound recording . 
 Shah , Idries . Questions and Answers . London : Seminar Cassettes , 1973 . Sound recording . 
 King , Alexander , Idries Shah , and Aurelio <unk> . The World @-@ and Men . Seminar Cassettes , 1972 . Sound recording . 
 King , Alexander , et al . Technology : The Two @-@ Edged Sword . London : Seminar Cassettes , 1972 . Sound recording . 
 Learning From Stories ( 1976 Lecture ) ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 03 @-@ 0 ( 1997 ) 
 On the Nature of Sufi Knowledge ( 1976 Lecture ) ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 04 @-@ 9 ( 1997 ) 
 An Advanced Psychology of the East ( 1977 Lecture ) ISBN 1 @-@ 883536 @-@ 02 @-@ 2 ( 1997 ) 
 Overcoming Assumptions that <unk> Spiritual Development ; previously entitled A Psychology of the East ( 1976 Lecture ) ISBN <unk> @-@ 23 @-@ 5 ( 2000 ) 
 = Clemuel Ricketts Mansion = 
 The Clemuel Ricketts Mansion ( also known as the Stone House , the William R. Ricketts House , and Ganoga ) is a Georgian @-@ style house made of sandstone , built in 1852 or 1855 on the shore of Ganoga Lake in Colley Township , Sullivan County , Pennsylvania in the United States . It was home to several generations of the Ricketts family , including R. Bruce Ricketts and William Reynolds Ricketts . Originally built as a hunting lodge , it was also a tavern and post office , and served as part of a hotel for much of the 19th century . 
 After 1903 the house served as the Ricketts family 's summer home ; they kept it even as they sold over 65 @,@ 000 acres ( 26 @,@ 000 ha ) to the state of Pennsylvania from 1920 to 1950 . The house was included in the Historic American Buildings Survey ( HABS ) in 1936 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) in 1983 . A group of investors bought the lake , surrounding land , and house in 1957 and developed them privately for housing and recreation . The house became the Ganoga Lake Association 's clubhouse , and is not open to the public . 
 The original mansion is an L @-@ shaped structure , two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stories high , with stone walls 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) thick . It was built in a clearing surrounded by old @-@ growth forest with a view to the lake 900 feet ( 270 m ) to the east . In 1913 a 2 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ story wing was added to the north side of the house and the original structure was renovated . The house has twenty @-@ eight rooms , four porches , and its original hardware and woodwork . <unk> and some windows were added in the renovation , and electrical wiring and modern plumbing have been added since . According to the NRHP nomination form , the Clemuel Ricketts Mansion " is a stunning example of Georgian vernacular architecture " . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Clemuel Ricketts Mansion is on the southwest shore of Ganoga Lake in Colley Township in the southeastern part of Sullivan County . The mansion and lake are on a part of the Allegheny Plateau known as North Mountain ; the plateau formed about 300 to 250 million years ago in the Alleghenian orogeny . Rocks — gray sandstone with conglomerates and some siltstone — of the Mississippian Pocono Formation more than 340 million years old , underlie the house and lake . The lake is in a shallow valley , 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) deep , which is impounded by glacial till up to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) thick at the southeast end , where Kitchen Creek exits . 
 The earliest recorded inhabitants of the region were the Susquehannocks , who left or died out by 1675 . The land then came under the control of the Iroquois , who sold it to the British in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix in 1768 . The land on which the house was later built was first part of Northumberland County , then became part of Lycoming County in 1795 . The Susquehanna and Tioga Turnpike , which followed the lake 's western shore , was built between 1822 and 1827 ; it connected the Pennsylvania communities of Berwick in the south and Towanda in the north . The lake was then known as Long Pond , and the Long Pond Tavern , just north of where the house was later built , was a lunch stop for the stagecoach on the turnpike . Sullivan County was formed from Lycoming County in 1847 , and two years later Colley Township was formed from Cherry Township . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Lodge and tavern = = = 
 Brothers Clemuel Ricketts ( 1794 – 1858 ) and Elijah G. Ricketts ( 1803 – 1877 ) were frustrated at having to spend the night on a hotel 's parlor floor while on a hunting trip on Loyalsock Creek north of Ganoga Lake in 1850 , and wanted their own hunting preserve . They bought the lake , Long Pond Tavern , and 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 ha ) of surrounding land in the early 1850s and soon began building a stone house between the turnpike and the lake shore to replace the log tavern . According to William Reynolds Ricketts ' HABS history of the house , Petrillo 's history of the region Ghost Towns of North Mountain , and the house 's NRHP nomination form , the Ricketts brothers bought the lake and surrounding land in 1851 , began building the stone house that year , and finished it in 1852 . The year 1852 is also carved in stone on the front ( west side ) of the house , which faced the highway . However , according to <unk> 's The Life and Times of Robert Bruce Ricketts , the brothers purchased the lake , tavern , and land on April 13 , 1853 , for $ 550 ( approximately $ 16 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , and had the house built from 1854 to 1855 . 
 According to Ricketts family tradition , Gad Seward built the mansion . While it was originally known as " Ricketts Folly " for its isolated location in the wilderness , the official name was the Stone House . The house served as the brothers ' lodge and as a tavern for travelers on the turnpike . Clemuel was named postmaster of a new post office at the lake on October 3 , 1853 , and received a tavern license from Sullivan County on August 7 , 1854 . When Clemuel died in 1858 , Elijah bought his share of the house and land . The post office closed April 12 , 1860 . 
 Elijah 's son Robert Bruce Ricketts ( 1839 – 1918 ) , for whom the nearby Ricketts Glen State Park is named , joined the Union Army as a private at the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 , and rose through the ranks to become a colonel in the artillery . After the war , R. B. Ricketts returned to Pennsylvania and purchased the stone house , lake , and some of the land around it from his father on September 25 , 1869 , for $ 3 @,@ 969 @.@ 81 ( approximately $ 71 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) ; eventually he controlled or owned more than 80 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 ha ) , including the lake and the park 's glens and waterfalls . 
 From 1872 to 1875 Ricketts and his partners operated a sawmill 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of his house . In 1872 Ricketts used lumber from the mill to build a three @-@ story wooden addition about 100 feet ( 30 m ) north of the stone house , with a verandah connecting the two . The addition cost $ 45 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 889 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , and was known as the Ark for its resemblance to Noah 's Ark . That same year Ricketts put new white birch floors in the stone house , which are still there as of 2008 . 
 = = = Hotel = = = 
 The Ark and stone house together formed the North Mountain House hotel , which opened in 1873 , and was managed by Ricketts ' brother Frank until 1898 . Many of the guests , who came from Wilkes @-@ Barre , Philadelphia , New York City , and other places , were Ricketts ' friends and relations . The hotel was open year @-@ round ; in summer , guests frequently arrived after school let out in June and stayed until school resumed in September . In 1876 and 1877 , Ricketts ran the first summer school in the United States at his house and hotel ; one of the teachers was Joseph Rothrock , later known as the " Father of Forestry " in Pennsylvania . 
 By 1874 Ricketts had renamed Long Pond as Highland Lake , and by 1875 had named the highest waterfall on Kitchen Creek as Ganoga Falls . That year the North Mountain House hotel was featured in John B. Bachelder 's travel guide Popular resorts , and how to reach them , which praised its location in a virgin forest , the lake and nearby waterfalls , and opportunities for hunting , fishing , and hiking . In 1881 , Ricketts renamed Highland Lake as Ganoga Lake . Pennsylvania senator Charles R. Buckalew suggested the name Ganoga , an Iroquoian word which he said meant " water on the mountain " in the Seneca language . 
 The house and hotel were on the east side of the old turnpike ; a 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) field on the other side of the road had a small herd of milk cows and a vegetable garden to provide for the guests ' needs . The field also had a rifle range and a nine @-@ hole golf course . Guests could enjoy tennis and croquet , and a lawn stretched from the house east to the lake , which offered boating and bathing . There was an outlook point 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) southwest of the house , and Ricketts built a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) observation tower at the highest point on North Mountain , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) south . After the first tower collapsed , he built a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) replacement , and named the site Grand View . 
 Ricketts was a lumberman who made his fortune clearcutting nearly all his land , but no logging was allowed within 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) of the lake , and the glens and their waterfalls in the state park were " saved from the lumberman 's axe through the foresight of the Ricketts family " . One hemlock tree cut near the lake to clear land for a building in 1893 was 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter and 532 years old . The North Mountain House hotel was threatened by a forest fire in 1900 ; the subsequent loss of much of the surrounding old @-@ growth forest led to decreased numbers of hotel guests . Changing tastes may have also played a role in the decline in popularity ; the hotel had over 150 guests in August 1878 , but only about 70 guests in August 1894 . 
 In 1903 another large fire on North Mountain threatened the sawmill in the lumber town of Ricketts northeast of the lake . Beginning in 1893 , a 3 @.@ 85 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 20 km ) branch line of the Lehigh Valley Railroad ran from Ricketts to a log station at the north end of the lake ; a boardwalk and coach service brought guests from the station to the hotel . There was daily passenger service to Wilkes @-@ Barre and Towanda , and the line also served freight trains hauling ice from the lake for use in refrigeration from 1895 . 
 The North Mountain House was long known for its rustic charms ; it was heated with open fireplaces , decorated with animal skins and <unk> made of antlers , and had two live black bears on chains in the field across the road from the house . In 1895 and 1900 the stone house was refurbished , and telephone service , acetylene lighting , and steam heat were added . In 1900 The Sullivan Review newspaper recalled its former state and wrote of the changes : " We hardly call that an improvement . ... When the North Mountain House is lighted by gas , heated by a modern furnace , etc . , its great charm is gone . " 
 = = = House = = = 
 The wooden addition to the stone house was torn down in either 1897 or 1903 , and the land became a garden . The hotel closed in November 1903 , and passenger train service ended at that time . The sawmills at Ricketts closed when the timber was exhausted in 1913 , and the ice company closed in 1915 . The stone house remained the Ricketts ' summer home . Ricketts proposed moving the highway from his front yard in 1904 ; the Pennsylvania General Assembly approved this in 1908 , after he paid for the construction of the new highway , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) east of the house . Thomas Henry Atherton of Wilkes @-@ Barre was the architect for a new wing that was added to the stone house in 1913 , as well as renovations to the original structure . Ricketts died in 1918 at the stone house ; his wife died a few days after and they are buried in the small Ricketts family cemetery near the north end of the lake . As part of Ricketts ' will , the stone house and its outbuildings were valued at $ 12 @,@ 000 in 1918 ( approximately $ 189 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . 
 R. B. Ricketts and his wife had three children ; their son William Reynolds Ricketts ( 1869 – 1956 ) lived in the house after his parents ' deaths . Beginning in 1920 , the Ricketts heirs began selling land to the state of Pennsylvania , but still owned over 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 900 ha ) surrounding the house , Ganoga Lake , and the glens with their waterfalls . The stone house was included in the Historic American Buildings Survey ( HABS ) in 1936 as the William R. Ricketts House . Atherton , the architect for the 1913 addition , helped prepare the HABS architectural drawings , which gave the house 's name as " Ganoga " . William Reynolds Ricketts ' history for the HABS refers to it as the stone house . The area was approved as a national park site in the 1930s ; a 1935 article in The New York Times reported that the federal government planned to purchase 22 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 900 ha ) in the area , mentioning the waterfalls and the Ricketts estate and house , which it called " the oldest stone hotel in Pennsylvania " . The National Park Service operated a Civilian Conservation Corps camp at " Ricketts Glynn " ( sic ) , but budget problems and World War II brought an end to national plans for development . 
 In 1942 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania began buying the glens and their waterfalls from the heirs for $ 82 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 1 @,@ 188 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) and opened Ricketts Glen State Park in 1944 ; from 1920 to 1950 the state bought more than 65 @,@ 000 acres ( 26 @,@ 000 ha ) from the Ricketts family for the park and Pennsylvania State Game Lands . William Reynolds Ricketts died in 1956 and the lake and surrounding land were sold in October 1957 for $ 109 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 918 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . The Department of Forests and Waters ( predecessor of the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ) bid on the 3 @,@ 140 acres ( 1 @,@ 270 ha ) including the house and lake , but were outbid by a group of private investors . These " formed the Lake Ganoga Association in September 1959 to regulate and preserve the recreation and residential facilities at Lake Ganoga " . The association built a road around the lake , cleared some land at its southern end , and its members built about 50 houses on the lake shore . In 1983 the stone house was listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Clemuel Ricketts Mansion ; it serves as the association 's headquarters and clubhouse , and is used for association meetings , weddings , and picnics . As part of a private development , the house and lake are not open to the public : " To all outsiders that have no property around the lake , the lake and grounds are off limits . " 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Clemuel Ricketts , the architect of the stone house , was very interested in architecture from the colonial period and had traveled widely . In the 1840s he published a book which examined the British and European sources of colonial architecture in the United States . Clemuel designed the house in the colonial or Georgian style in the early 1850s ; construction began in either 1851 or 1854 and finished the next year . 
 The Clemuel Ricketts Mansion lies 900 feet ( 270 m ) west of Ganoga Lake , on what the HABS map described as a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 89 ha ) " clearing completely surrounded by primeval forest " , with a view to the lake . The house was originally on the east side of the turnpike and faced it , but when what became Pennsylvania Route 487 was built in 1907 , the course of the highway was changed so that it now runs on the other ( east ) side of the lake . Since then , the house is on a private road 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the highway . 
 The original house built in the 1850s is L @-@ shaped . According to the architectural drawings made for the HABS , the bottom of the L is 60 feet 4 inches ( 18 @.@ 39 m ) north – south by 35 feet 8 inches ( 10 @.@ 87 m ) east – west . In 1935 the ground floor of this part of the house included the main door and entrance hall , living room , parlor , library , and stairs . The main entrance is on the west side , which has a porch 60 feet 4 inches ( 18 @.@ 39 m ) wide by 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep , supported by pairs of square pillars with stairs on the north , south , and west sides . The top of the L is 24 feet 2 inches ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) north – south by 40 feet 6 inches ( 12 @.@ 34 m ) east – west , and in 1935 the ground floor of the top of the L had the dining room , gun room , " brush up room " , toilet , stairs , and a passage to the 1913 addition . The inside corner of the L has a two @-@ story covered porch along the south side , and an open terrace on the east side 's ground floor . In 1935 the second story of the original house had four bedrooms and a bathroom in the lower part of the L and two bedrooms and a bath in the upper part , as well as two staircases and hallways . 
 The mansion 's stone walls are 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) thick ; the individual building stones are " field sandstone about 17 inches square , of various thicknesses " ( 17 inches is 43 cm ) . There is a basement below the original house . The lower part of the L is five bays by two bays ; the original double @-@ hung sash windows in each bay of the 1850s house have six panes of glass per sash . All the original windows have shutters , these are paneled on the first floor and louvered on the second . The main door is in the Federal style with a large fanlight above the door and sidelights on either side . The attic in the 1850s part of the house is not finished , and the gable roof has " boxed cornices with returns " . 
 In 1897 or 1903 a formal garden was added north of the stone house , on the site of the razed wooden structure where most of the hotel guests had stayed . In 1913 a two @-@ and @-@ half story wing was added on the north side of the original house , which was renovated ; Thomas Henry Atherton was the architect . The new wing is 48 feet 3 inches ( 14 @.@ 71 m ) north – south and 20 feet 4 inches ( 6 @.@ 20 m ) east – west , with a large enclosed one @-@ story porch on the north and east sides . In 1935 the addition had the kitchen , pantry , storage and refrigeration rooms , and a " maid 's dining room " on the first floor , two bedrooms and a bathroom on the second floor , and two servant rooms and a bath in the finished attic . 
 The new wing has six dormers ( three on a side ) , and six dormers were added to the old house in the 1913 renovation ( four on the east side , two on the west ) . The windows on the first floor of the new wing matched the old windows , but the windows in the second story of the addition have twelve panes in the upper sash and eight in the lower . As part of the renovation work , four new windows were placed in the 1850s house : two just west of the new wing , and two on the east wall of the lower part of the L. A small porch was added in the corner where the west wall of the new wing meets the north wall of the old house , and all the old porches were restored . In the original house two chimneys were restored and two replaced , and new fireplaces were installed in the living room , library , and dining room . The house has a total of 28 rooms . 
 The NRHP nomination form lists two other structures on the property : a utility building made of brick and covered in stucco east of the house , and a large barn to the southwest . Since the house 's 1913 renovation , the only changes have been the installation of electrical wiring and modernization of the plumbing . The original hardware and woodwork are still present inside the house . According to the NRHP nomination form , the Clemuel Ricketts Mansion " is a stunning example of Georgian vernacular architecture " which " represents the manifestations of one man 's architectural dream preserved within the wilderness for over a century " . 
 = Manitoba Provincial Road 280 = 
 Provincial Road 280 ( PR 280 ) is a road in the Canadian province of Manitoba . It runs from PR 391 northwest of Thompson to local streets in Gillam . The route is 291 kilometres ( 181 mi ) long , which during its length , passes several large lakes and intersects with one provincial road , PR 290 , just north of Gillam . The route is very scenic , passing through dense forests and rural lands . The route supplies three municipalities , Thompson , Split Lake , and Gillam . From its terminus north of Thompson , Manitoba to the town Gillam , PR 280 is classified as a Class A1 Provincial Route . 
 PR 280 was designated in 1987 as a connector from Thompson to Gillam with a spur to Sundance . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PR 280 begins at an intersection north of Thompson on the shores of Birch Tree Lake with PR 391 . PR 280 runs northeast from PR 391 as a two @-@ lane gravel road through the dense woods north of Thompson Airport . As the road bends to the northeast , it runs west of Mystery Lake , which is connected by a gravel road that runs to the shoreline . Continuing northeast , PR 280 leaves the Mystery Lake area and soon reaches a dirt road that connects to nearby Moak Lake . 
 After Moak Lake , PR 280 continues northeast past <unk> Lake and Orr Lake while paralleling the Burntwood River . After <unk> Lake , PR 280 turns eastward along the Burntwood River , which soon drains into Split Lake . The road turns northeast away from the river and runs into a junction with a winter road that connects to the settlement of Split Lake . Paralleling the north shore of eponymous lake , PR 280 runs to the northeast from Split Lake and starts wandering through the dense woods of northern Manitoba . 
 Approaching the western end of Stephens Lake , PR 280 turns east and soon to the southeast as it reaches the northern shore of the lake . Passing a local connector to the shore , the route reaches a junction with the southern terminus of PR 290 , which connects to the abandoned settlement of Sundance . At this junction , PR 280 turns west , reaching the shores of the Nelson River . The route crosses over the Nelson River and reaches the settlement of Long Spruce . 
 After Long Spruce , PR 280 runs west along the southern shore of the Nelson River then turns south and southwest away from the river . The route winds west , then turns to the northwest , approaching the river and Stephens Lake . Paralleling railroad tracks , PR 280 passes an electrical substation as it enters the city of Gillam . Through the northeastern section of Gillam , the route crosses over the railroad tracks and turn north and west in short order . Running southwest , PR 280 reaches the access point to Gillam Airport and soon enters downtown Gillam . 
 Through downtown Gillam , PR 280 reaches a junction with <unk> Road , which marks the eastern terminus of the highway . <unk> Road connects to downtown Gillam . 
 = = History = = 
 Before PR 280 existed , the only ways to the northern terminus town of Gillam was via a nearby airport to the southeast of town and the railroad line that stretched from Thompson to northern parts of Manitoba . The railroad opened in 1929 . PR 280 was designated by the Manitoba Ministry of Infrastructure and Transportation in 1987 as a designated gravel road from PR 391 northwest of Thompson to Gillam with an unnumbered spur to Sundance . PR 290 was designated on the spur in 1989 . 
 On March 28 , 2002 , the government of Manitoba order out an CAD $ 84 @.@ 8 million plan to work on its province 's roads . $ 940 @,@ 000 was spent for gravel stabilization beginning at PR 391 and ending in Gillam . This work was also under the Community Main Access Gravel Road Stabilization Program . $ 700 @,@ 000 of this $ 84 million went for additional gravel between 391 and PR 290 . $ 600 @,@ 000 went to road development near <unk> Lake , 52 kilometres ( 32 mi ) north of PR 391 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = La Caravelle ( New York ) = 
 La Caravelle was a restaurant in New York City , specialising in French cuisine . It opened on September 21 , 1960 , at 33 West 55th Street in Manhattan . The restaurant was established by Fred Decré and Robert Meyzen , with Roger Fessaguet as head chef , and took its name from the type of sailing ships Christopher Columbus sailed on his voyages to the New World . Like most European restaurants , La Caravelle had a menu that changed daily . This made the restaurant popular with new customers and also brought them back regularly . Salvador Dalí , John Lindsay , Leland Hayward , Walter Cronkite and Dorothy Kilgallen often dined at the restaurant in its early years . President John F. Kennedy was especially fond of La Caravelle 's <unk> and chicken in champagne sauce , and he often requested them as " take out " orders to eat on the plane while traveling . In 1973 , La Caravelle 's preparations for lunch were the subject of a short film , French Lunch . 
 Twenty years after its opening , chef Roger Fessaguet left the kitchen to become an owner with Meyzen due to the retirement of Fred Decré . In 1984 , Robert Meyzen retired and Fessaguet and André Jammet took over ownership of the restaurant . The following year , a New York Magazine article cited it as one of the best restaurants in New York City , and mentioned that most guidebooks gave it their highest rating . Fessaguet retired in 1988 , leaving ownership with Jammet and his wife . The Jammets redecorated La Caravelle in 1990 , replacing the original red carpets and banquettes with a color scheme of green and peach . Artist Nina Duran was hired to create a small mural for the restaurant 's foyer . The restaurant closed on May 22 , 2004 , despite garnering the James Beard Foundation 's Most Outstanding Restaurant in the Country award in the same year . The name is now known for champagnes produced by the Jammets ; the restaurant began serving them as its house brand in 1997 . 
 = = History = = 
 The restaurant was originally owned by Fred Decré and Robert Meyzen , with Roger Fessaguet as head chef . Decré and Meyzen , <unk> d ’ hôtel at Le Pavillon , left there to open the restaurant in midtown Manhattan 's Shoreham Hotel , hiring <unk> , who also worked at Le Pavillon , as its first executive chef . The restaurant 's name was taken from the type of sailing ships Christopher Columbus sailed on his voyages to the New World and represented their hopes for a new beginning in the restaurant business with its opening . Artist Jean Pagès was hired to create a series of murals depicting typical Parisian scenes for the space that was a speakeasy during the Prohibition era . Pagès added to the restaurant 's murals in the 1960s ; his work was accidentally altered by fellow artist Salvador Dalí when Dali scratched one of the murals with his cane while dining there with friends . 
 Like most European restaurants , La Caravelle had a menu that changed daily . This made the restaurant popular with new customers and also brought them back regularly . Salvador Dalí , John Lindsay , Leland Hayward and Dorothy Kilgallen often dined at the restaurant in its early years . The journalist and broadcaster Walter Cronkite was a regular visitor to La Caravelle and enjoyed eating pike quenelles in lobster cream sauce . Other frequent visitors included the Duke and Duchess of Windsor and Marlene Dietrich . 
 Joseph P. Kennedy had been a patron of Le Pavillon , but after Decré and Meyzen opened their new restaurant , Kennedy switched his patronage to La Caravelle , dining there regularly when in New York . It became a popular place for the Kennedy family to visit . Fessaguet chose and trained René Verdon to be chef at the White House when John F. Kennedy was elected president the year after opening . Verdon spent some weeks working with <unk> on the Kennedy family 's favorite dishes . President Kennedy was especially fond of La Caravelle 's <unk> and chicken in champagne sauce . He often requested them as " take out " orders and would have them heated up on the plane as he traveled . Decré and Meyzen renamed the dish on their menu ; <unk> Maison Blanch then became " White House Chicken " . In 1964 , the Kennedys held a family reunion at La Caravelle ; one of the subjects of discussion at the reunion was said to be whether Robert F. Kennedy should ask to be nominated as vice president at the upcoming 1964 Democratic National Convention . Joseph P. Kennedy was in attendance and walked into the restaurant with the aid of a cane . 
 = = Lunch preparation at La Caravelle = = 
 By 7 : 30am , head chef Fessaguet had decided on the day 's lunch menu , estimated the number of diners La Caravelle would have and ordered the provisions for it . An hour later , the fresh vegetables were being peeled and sliced and the various sauces were on the stoves . The restaurant 's pastry chef began his work on the various pastries and desserts for the day 's lunch ; the lunch preparations were completed and the kitchen staff could sit down for lunch . By noon , the waiters had donned their uniforms and the prepared food was on silver trays on a kitchen table . At 12 : 45 , the orders for the day 's luncheon guests began coming into the kitchen ; by 2pm , 92 patrons had been served . In 1973 , La Caravelle 's preparations for lunch were the subject of a short film , French Lunch . The film short depicts the behind @-@ the scenes preparations of a meal at the restaurant . 
 = = Management and cuisine changes = = 
 Twenty years after its opening , chef Roger Fessaguet left the kitchen to become an owner with Meyzen due to the retirement of Fred Decré . In 1984 , Robert Meyzen retired and Fessaguet and André Jammet took over ownership of the restaurant . The following year , a New York Magazine article cited it as one of the best restaurants in New York City , and mentioned that most guidebooks gave it their highest rating . Fessaguet retired in 1988 , leaving ownership with Jammet and his wife . The Jammets redecorated La Caravelle in 1990 , replacing the original red carpets and banquettes with a color scheme of green and peach . Artist Nina Duran was hired to create a smaller mural for the restaurant 's foyer . 
 Beginning in 2001 , the Jammets started replacing many of the dishes La Caravelle was noted for with updated cuisine they described as more pleasing to the " contemporary palate " . Some of the old favorite selections were relegated to a menu section labeled " Les <unk> " , which became the minority of the offerings . The couple decided not to renew the restaurant 's lease and it was closed in 2004 . 
 = = Last night of business = = 
 The customers who arrived on La Caravelle ‍ ' s last night of business were a mixture of regulars who had come for one last meal and bid <unk> , as well as those who had never visited it before and wanted to see a piece of New York history before it was no more . Mr. and Mrs. Walter Cronkite dined with colleague Andy Rooney and his daughter ; the <unk> said they had been patrons of La Caravelle for 43 years . A couple came with their teenage daughter , who was so fussy about food , the La Caravelle chef would cook a packaged macaroni and cheese dinner for her . Another family of three made reservations for four ; one for the husband 's mother who had been a La Caravelle regular and had died in 2000 . People with no reservations managed to gain entrance to the restaurant 's bar and were able to be seated at a table . A young couple who had come to have a drink on La Caravelle 's last night was graciously seated at the table which was formerly reserved for Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis , who continued to patronize the restaurant after her marriage to Aristotle Onassis . Upon entering the restaurant 's main room , a woman exclaimed that it was her best New York moment and she could now move to the suburbs . Though the restaurant never offered music or entertainment , the Jammets had arranged for Robert White , a tenor and teacher at the Juilliard School to perform " Danny Boy " . White was a patron of La Caravelle on the restaurant 's first night of business in 1960 . It was awarded the James Beard Foundation 's Most Outstanding Restaurant in the Country award in the year of its closing . The name is now known for champagnes produced by the Jammets ; the restaurant began serving them as its house brand in 1997 . 
 = The Boat Race 1963 = 
 The 109th Boat Race took place on 23 March 1963 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race , umpired by Gerald Ellison , the Bishop of Chester , was won by Oxford with a winning margin of five lengths . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race by five lengths , and led overall in the event with 60 victories to Oxford 's 47 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge 's coaches were Harry Almond ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1950 and 1951 races ) , Tony Butcher ( who rowed in the 1947 race for Cambridge ) , David Jennens ( who rowed three times between 1949 and 1951 ) and Charles Lloyd ( who also rowed three times from 1949 to 1951 ) . Oxford were coached by R. M. A. Bourne ( who represented Oxford in the 1946 and 1947 races ) , Ronnie Howard ( who rowed twice , in the 1957 and 1959 races ) , Mike Nicholson ( the non @-@ rowing boat club president of Cambridge in 1947 ) , Antony Rowe ( who had rowed in the 1948 and 1949 races ) and E. R. Spencer . During practice rows at Putney , Cambridge experienced a number of " crabs " and while the crew demonstrated a " nervous disability to cope with rough water " , they had the quicker start . 
 The race was umpired by Gerald Ellison , Bishop of Chester , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1932 and 1933 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 13 st 0 @.@ 125 lb ( 82 @.@ 4 kg ) , over 5 @.@ 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew contained just a single rower with Boat Race experience in the boat club president and stroke Lord Chewton , while Oxford saw Richard Morton , David <unk> and cox Christopher Strong return . Four rowers , two from each university , were registered as overseas participants in the race : Oxford 's Philip Roff was Australian while D. Spencer was American , and Cambridge 's B. Jackson was South African while John <unk> hailed from New Zealand . Oxford 's boat club president Toby Tennant had removed himself from the crew two weeks prior to the race as a result of a lack of form . 
 A correspondent for The Times noted that although there " has never been the slightest possibility " that the Cambridge crew would be of " really first rate " , the hard work had produced a " presentable University crew " . Meanwhile , although Oxford had " no stars " and had arrived at Putney as an " unusually backward crew " , progress during practice made for definite improvement . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . The race commenced at <unk> in a " fresh north @-@ north @-@ westerly wind " . As had been anticipated , Cambridge took an early lead and were three @-@ quarters of a length ahead after the first minute of the race . Continuing at a higher stroke rate than Oxford in the second minute , the Light Blues were almost clear by the end of the Fulham Wall . Still nearly a length behind by the Mile Post , Oxford cox Strong began to steer towards Cambridge , forcing them towards the centre of the river , narrowly avoiding a warning from the umpire . 
 Level by Harrods Furniture Depository , Oxford were half a length up by Hammersmith Bridge , increasing to over a length by The Doves pub , despite an " almost despairing spurt " from Cambridge . The lead was three and a half lengths by Chiswick Steps and four and a half by Barnes Bridge . Oxford won by five lengths in a time of 20 minutes 47 seconds , the slowest time since the 1951 race . It was the Dark Blues ' first victory in three years and took the overall record to 60 – 48 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = Protactinium = 
 Protactinium or protoactinium ( former name ) is a chemical element with symbol Pa and atomic number 91 . It is a dense , silvery @-@ gray metal which readily reacts with oxygen , water vapor and inorganic acids . It forms various chemical compounds where protactinium is usually present in the oxidation state + 5 , but can also assume + 4 and even + 2 or + 3 states . The average concentrations of protactinium in the Earth 's crust is typically on the order of a few parts per trillion , but may reach up to a few parts per million in some uraninite ore deposits . Because of its scarcity , high radioactivity and high toxicity , there are currently no uses for protactinium outside of scientific research , and for this purpose , protactinium is mostly extracted from spent nuclear fuel . 
 Protactinium was first identified in 1913 by Kasimir Fajans and Oswald Helmuth Göhring and named brevium because of the short half @-@ life of the specific isotope studied , namely protactinium @-@ 234 . A more stable isotope ( 231Pa ) of protactinium was discovered in 1917 / 18 by Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner , and they chose the name proto @-@ actinium , but then the IUPAC named it finally protactinium in 1949 and confirmed Hahn and Meitner as discoverers . The new name meant " parent of actinium " and reflected the fact that actinium is a product of radioactive decay of protactinium . It is noted that John Arnold Cranston ( working with Frederick Soddy and Ada Hitchins ) is also credited with discovering the most stable isotope in 1915 but delayed his announcement due to being called up for service in the First World War . 
 The longest @-@ lived and most abundant ( nearly 100 % ) naturally occurring isotope of protactinium , protactinium @-@ 231 , has a half @-@ life of 32 @,@ 760 years and is a decay product of uranium @-@ 235 . Much smaller trace amounts of the short @-@ lived nuclear isomer protactinium @-@ <unk> occur in the decay chain of uranium @-@ 238 . Protactinium @-@ 233 results from the decay of thorium @-@ 233 as part of the chain of events used to produce uranium @-@ 233 by neutron irradiation of thorium @-@ 232 . It is an undesired intermediate product in thorium @-@ based nuclear reactors and is therefore removed from the active zone of the reactor during the breeding process . Analysis of the relative concentrations of various uranium , thorium and protactinium isotopes in water and minerals is used in radiometric dating of sediments which are up to 175 @,@ 000 years old and in modeling of various geological processes . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1871 , Dmitri Mendeleev predicted the existence of an element between thorium and uranium . The actinide element group was unknown at the time . Therefore , uranium was positioned below tungsten , and thorium below zirconium , leaving the space below tantalum empty and , until the 1950s , periodic tables were published with this structure . For a long time chemists searched for eka @-@ tantalum as an element with similar chemical properties to tantalum , making a discovery of protactinium nearly impossible . Tantalum 's heavier analogue was later found to be the transuranic element dubnium . 
 In 1900 , William Crookes isolated protactinium as an intensely radioactive material from uranium ; however , he could not characterize it as a new chemical element and thus named it uranium @-@ X ( UX ) . Crookes dissolved uranium nitrate in ether , the residual aqueous phase contains most of the 234 
 90Th and 234 
 91Pa . His method was still used in the 1950s to isolate 234 
 90Th and 234 
 91Pa from uranium compounds . Protactinium was first identified in 1913 , when Kasimir Fajans and Oswald Helmuth Göhring encountered the isotope 234Pa during their studies of the decay chains of uranium @-@ 238 : 238 
 92U → 234 
 90Th → 234 
 91Pa → 234 
 92U . They named the new element brevium ( from the Latin word , brevis , meaning brief or short ) because of its short half @-@ life , 6 @.@ 7 hours for 234 
 91Pa . In 1917 / 18 , two groups of scientists , Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner of Germany and Frederick Soddy and John Cranston of Great Britain , independently discovered another isotope of protactinium , 231Pa having much longer half @-@ life of about 32 @,@ 000 years . Thus the name brevium was changed to protoactinium as the new element was part of the decay chain of uranium @-@ 235 before the actinium ( from Greek : πρῶτος = <unk> meaning first , before ) . For ease of pronunciation , the name was shortened to protactinium by the IUPAC in 1949 . The discovery of protactinium completed one of the last gaps in the early versions of the periodic table , proposed by Mendeleev in 1869 , and it brought to fame the involved scientists . 
 Aristid von Grosse produced 2 milligrams of Pa2O5 in 1927 , and in 1934 first isolated elemental protactinium from 0 @.@ 1 milligrams of Pa2O5 . He used two different procedures : in the first one , protactinium oxide was irradiated by 35 keV electrons in vacuum . In another method , called the van Arkel – de Boer process , the oxide was chemically converted to a halide ( chloride , bromide or iodide ) and then reduced in a vacuum with an electrically heated metallic filament : 
 2 <unk> → 2 Pa + 5 I2 
 In 1961 , the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority ( UKAEA ) produced 125 grams of 99 @.@ 9 % pure protactinium by processing 60 tonnes of waste material in a 12 @-@ stage process , at a cost of about 500 @,@ 000 USD . For many years , this was the world 's only significant supply of protactinium , which was provided to various laboratories for scientific studies . Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the US provided protactinium at a cost of about 280 USD / gram . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 Twenty @-@ nine radioisotopes of protactinium have been discovered , the most stable being 231Pa with a half @-@ life of 32 @,@ 760 years , 233Pa with a half @-@ life of 27 days , and <unk> with a half @-@ life of 17 @.@ 4 days . All of the remaining isotopes have half @-@ lives shorter than 1 @.@ 6 days , and the majority of these have half @-@ lives less than 1 @.@ 8 seconds . Protactinium also has two nuclear isomers , <unk> ( half @-@ life 1 @.@ 2 milliseconds ) and 234mPa ( half @-@ life 1 @.@ 17 minutes ) . 
 The primary decay mode for isotopes of protactinium lighter than ( and including ) the most stable isotope 231Pa ( i.e. , <unk> to 231Pa ) is alpha decay and the primary mode for the heavier isotopes ( i.e. , <unk> to <unk> ) is beta decay . The primary decay products of isotopes of protactinium lighter than ( and including ) 231Pa are actinium isotopes and the primary decay products for the heavier isotopes of protactinium are uranium isotopes . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Protactinium is one of the rarest and most expensive naturally occurring elements . It is found in the form of two isotopes – 231Pa and 234Pa , with the isotope 234Pa occurring in two different energy states . Nearly all natural protactinium is protactinium @-@ 231 . It is an alpha emitter and is formed by the decay of uranium @-@ 235 , whereas the beta radiating protactinium @-@ 234 is produced as a result of uranium @-@ 238 decay . Nearly all uranium @-@ 238 ( 99 @.@ 8 % ) decays first to the 234mPa isomer . 
 Protactinium occurs in uraninite ( pitchblende ) at concentrations of about 0 @.@ 3 @-@ 3 parts 231Pa per million parts ( ppm ) of ore . Whereas the usual content is closer to 0 @.@ 3 ppm ( e.g. in Jáchymov , Czech Republic ) , some ores from the Democratic Republic of the Congo have about 3 ppm . Protactinium is homogeneously dispersed in most natural materials and in water , but at much lower concentrations on the order of one part per trillion , that corresponds to the radioactivity of 0 @.@ 1 picocuries ( pCi ) / g . There is about 500 times more protactinium in sandy soil particles than in water , even the water present in the same sample of soil . Much higher ratios of 2 @,@ 000 and above are measured in loam soils and clays , such as bentonite . 
 = = = In nuclear reactors = = = 
 Two major protactinium isotopes , 231Pa and 233Pa , are produced from thorium in nuclear reactors ; both are undesirable and are usually removed , thereby adding complexity to the reactor design and operation . In particular , 232Th via ( n , 2n ) reactions produces 231Th which quickly ( half @-@ life 25 @.@ 5 hours ) decays to 231Pa . The last isotope , while not a transuranic waste , has a long half @-@ life of 32 @,@ 760 years and is a major contributor to the long term radiotoxicity of spent nuclear fuel . 
 Protactinium @-@ 233 is formed upon neutron capture by 232Th . It further either decays to uranium @-@ 233 or captures another neutron and converts into the non @-@ fissile uranium @-@ 234 . 233Pa has a relatively long half @-@ life of 27 days and high cross section for neutron capture ( the so @-@ called " neutron poison " ) . Thus instead of rapidly decaying to the useful 233U , a significant fraction of 233Pa converts to non @-@ fissile isotopes and consumes neutrons , degrading the reactor efficiency . To avoid this , 233Pa is extracted from the active zone of thorium molten salt reactors , during their operation , so that it only decays to 233U . This is achieved using several meters tall columns of molten bismuth with lithium dissolved in it . In a simplified scenario , lithium selectively reduces protactinium salts to protactinium metal which is then extracted from the molten @-@ salt cycle , and bismuth is merely a carrier . It is chosen because of its low melting point ( 271 ° C ) , low vapor pressure , good solubility for lithium and actinides , and <unk> with molten halides . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Before the advent of nuclear reactors , protactinium was separated for scientific experiments from uranium ores . Nowadays , it is mostly produced as an intermediate product of nuclear fission in thorium high @-@ temperature reactors : 
 <formula> ( The times are half @-@ lives . ) 
 Protactinium metal can be prepared by reduction of its fluoride with calcium fluoride , lithium or barium at a temperature of 1300 – 1400 ° C. 
 = = Physical and chemical properties = = 
 Protactinium is an actinide which is positioned in the periodic table to the left of uranium and to the right of thorium , and many of its physical properties are intermediate between those two actinides . So , protactinium is more dense and rigid than thorium but is lighter than uranium , and its melting point is lower than that of thorium and higher than that of uranium . The thermal expansion , electrical and thermal conductivities of these three elements are comparable and are typical of post @-@ transition metals . The estimated shear modulus of protactinium is similar to that of titanium . Protactinium is a metal with silvery @-@ gray luster that is preserved for some time in air . Protactinium easily reacts with oxygen , water vapor and acids , but not with alkalis . 
 At room temperature , protactinium crystallizes in body @-@ centered tetragonal structure which can be regarded as distorted body @-@ centered cubic lattice ; this structure does not change upon compression up to 53 GPa . The structure changes to face @-@ centered cubic ( fcc ) upon cooling from high temperature , at about 1200 ° C. The thermal expansion coefficient of the tetragonal phase between room temperature and 700 ° C is 9 @.@ 9 × 10 − 6 / ° C. 
 Protactinium is paramagnetic and no magnetic transitions are known for it at any temperature . It becomes superconductive at temperatures below 1 @.@ 4 K. Protactinium tetrachloride is paramagnetic at room temperature but turns ferromagnetic upon cooling to 182 K. 
 Protactinium exists in two major oxidation states , + 4 and + 5 , both in solids and solutions , and the + 3 and + 2 states were observed in some solid phases . As the electron configuration of the neutral atom is [ Rn ] <unk> , the + 5 oxidation state corresponds to the low @-@ energy ( and thus favored ) <unk> configuration . Both + 4 and + 5 states easily form hydroxides in water with the predominant ions being Pa ( OH ) 3 + , Pa ( OH ) 2 + 
 2 , Pa ( OH ) + 
 3 and Pa ( OH ) 4 , all colorless . Other known protactinium ions include <unk> + 
 2 , <unk> + 
 4 , <unk> + , <unk> + 
 2 , <unk> − 
 6 , <unk> − 
 7 and <unk> − 
 8 . 
 = = Chemical compounds = = 
 Here a , b and c are lattice constants in picometers , No is space group number and Z is the number of formula units per unit cell ; fcc stands for the face @-@ centered cubic symmetry . Density was not measured directly but calculated from the lattice parameters . 
 = = = Oxides and oxygen @-@ containing salts = = = 
 Protactinium oxides are known for the metal oxidation states + 2 , + 4 and + 5 . The most stable is white pentoxide Pa2O5 , which can be produced by igniting protactinium ( V ) hydroxide in air at a temperature of 500 ° C. Its crystal structure is cubic , and the chemical composition is often non @-@ stoichiometric , described as <unk> Another phase of this oxide with orthorhombic symmetry has also been reported . The black dioxide PaO2 is obtained from the pentoxide by reducing it at 1550 ° C with hydrogen . It is not readily soluble in either dilute or concentrated nitric , hydrochloric or sulfuric acids , but easily dissolves in hydrofluoric acid . The dioxide can be converted back to pentoxide by heating in oxygen @-@ containing atmosphere to 1100 ° C. The monoxide <unk> has only been observed as a thin coating on protactinium metal , but not in an isolated bulk form . 
 Protactinium forms mixed binary oxides with various metals . With alkali metals A , the crystals have a chemical formula <unk> and perovskite structure , or <unk> and distorted rock @-@ salt structure , or <unk> where oxygen atoms for a hexagonal close @-@ packed lattice . In all these materials , protactinium ions are octahedrally coordinated . The pentoxide Pa2O5 combines with rare @-@ earth metal oxides <unk> to form various nonstoichiometric mixed @-@ oxides , also of perovskite structure . 
 Protactinium oxides are basic ; they easily convert to hydroxides and can form various salts , such as sulfates , phosphates , nitrates , etc . The nitrate is usually white but can be brown due to <unk> decomposition . Heating the nitrate in air at 400 ° C converts it to the white protactinium pentoxide . The <unk> Pa ( PO3 ) 4 can be produced by reacting difluoride sulfate <unk> with phosphoric acid ( <unk> ) under inert gas atmosphere . Heating the product to about 900 ° C eliminates the reaction by @-@ products such as hydrofluoric acid , sulfur trioxide and phosphoric anhydride . Heating to higher temperatures in an inert atmosphere decomposes Pa ( PO3 ) 4 into the diphosphate <unk> , which is analogous to diphosphates of other actinides . In the diphosphate , the PO3 groups form pyramids of <unk> symmetry . Heating <unk> in air to 1400 ° C decomposes it into the <unk> of phosphorus and protactinium . 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 Protactinium ( V ) fluoride forms white crystals where protactinium ions are arranged in pentagonal <unk> and coordinated by 7 other ions . The coordination is the same in protactinium ( V ) chloride , but the color is yellow . The coordination changes to octahedral in the brown protactinium ( V ) bromide and is unknown for protactinium ( V ) iodide . The protactinium coordination in all its tetrahalides is 8 , but the arrangement is square antiprismatic in protactinium ( IV ) fluoride and dodecahedral in the chloride and bromide . Brown @-@ colored protactinium ( III ) iodide has been reported where protactinium ions are 8 @-@ coordinated in a bicapped trigonal prismatic arrangement . 
 Protactinium ( V ) fluoride and protactinium ( V ) chloride have a polymeric structure of monoclinic symmetry . There , within one polymeric chain , all the halide atoms lie in one graphite @-@ like plane and form planar pentagons around the protactinium ions . The coordination 7 of protactinium originates from the 5 halide atoms and two bonds to protactinium atoms belonging to the nearby chains . These compounds easily hydrolyze in water . The pentachloride melts at 300 ° C and sublimates at even lower temperatures . 
 Protactinium ( V ) fluoride can be prepared by reacting protactinium oxide with either bromine pentafluoride or bromine trifluoride at about 600 ° C , and protactinium ( IV ) fluoride is obtained from the oxide and a mixture of hydrogen and hydrogen fluoride at 600 ° C ; a large excess of hydrogen is required to remove atmospheric oxygen leaks into the reaction . 
 Protactinium ( V ) chloride is prepared by reacting protactinium oxide with carbon tetrachloride at temperature of 200 – 300 ° C. The by @-@ products ( such as <unk> ) are removed by fractional sublimation . Reduction of protactinium ( V ) chloride with hydrogen at about 800 ° C yields protactinium ( IV ) chloride – a yellow @-@ green solid which sublimes in vacuum at 400 ° C ; it can also be obtained directly from protactinium dioxide by treating it with carbon tetrachloride at 400 ° C. 
 Protactinium bromides are produced by the action of aluminium bromide , hydrogen bromide , carbon tetrabromide or a mixture of hydrogen bromide and thionyl bromide on protactinium oxide . An alternative reaction is between protactinium pentachloride and hydrogen bromide or thionyl bromide . Protactinium ( V ) bromide has two similar monoclinic forms , one is obtained by sublimation at 400 – 410 ° C and another by sublimation at slightly lower temperature of 390 – 400 ° C. 
 Protactinium iodides result from the oxides and aluminium iodide or ammonium iodide heated to 600 ° C. Protactinium ( III ) iodide was obtained by heating protactinium ( V ) iodide in vacuum . As with oxides , protactinium forms mixed halides with alkali metals . Among those , most remarkable is <unk> where protactinium ion is symmetrically surrounded by 8 F − ions which form a nearly perfect cube . 
 More complex protactinium fluorides are also known such as <unk> and ternary fluorides of the types <unk> ( M 
 = Li , Na , K , Rb , Cs or NH4 ) , M2PaF7 ( M = 
 K , Rb , Cs or NH4 ) and <unk> ( M 
 = Li , Na , Rb , Cs ) , all being white crystalline solids . The <unk> formula can be represented as a combination of MF and <unk> . These compounds can be obtained by evaporating a hydrofluoric acid solution containing these both complexes . For the small alkali cations like Na , the crystal structure is tetragonal , whereas it lowers to <unk> for larger cations K + , Rb + , Cs + or NH4 + . A similar variation was observed for the M2PaF7 fluorides , namely the crystal symmetry was dependent on the cation and differed for <unk> and M2PaF7 ( M = 
 K , Rb or NH4 ) . 
 = = = Other inorganic compounds = = = 
 Oxyhalides and oxysulfides of protactinium are known . <unk> has a monoclinic structure composed of double @-@ chain units where protactinium has coordination 7 and is arranged into pentagonal <unk> . The chains are interconnected through oxygen and bromine atoms , and each oxygen atom is related to three protactinium atoms . <unk> is a light @-@ yellow non @-@ volatile solid with a cubic crystal lattice isostructural to that of other actinide oxysulfides . It is obtained by reacting protactinium ( V ) chloride with a mixture of hydrogen sulfide and carbon disulfide at 900 ° C. 
 In hydrides and nitrides , protactinium has a low oxidation state of about + 3 . The hydride is obtained by direct action of hydrogen on the metal at 250 ° C , and the nitride is a product of ammonia and protactinium tetrachloride or pentachloride . This bright yellow solid is stable to heating to 800 ° C in vacuum . Protactinium carbide <unk> is formed by reduction of protactinium tetrafluoride with barium in a carbon crucible at a temperature of about 1400 ° C. Protactinium forms <unk> which include Pa ( <unk> ) 4 . It has an unusual polymeric structure with helical chains where the protactinium atom has coordination number of 12 and is surrounded by six <unk> − ions . 
 = = = Organometallic compounds = = = 
 Protactinium ( IV ) forms a tetrahedral complex tetrakis ( cyclopentadienyl ) protactinium ( IV ) ( or Pa ( C5H5 ) 4 ) with four cyclopentadienyl rings , which can be synthesized by reacting protactinium ( IV ) chloride with molten Be ( C5H5 ) 2 . One ring can be substituted with a halide atom . Another organometallic complex is golden @-@ yellow bis ( π @-@ cyclooctatetraene ) protactinium , or <unk> , Pa ( C8H8 ) 2 , which is analogous in structure to uranocene . There , the metal atom is sandwiched between two cyclooctatetraene ligands . Similar to uranocene , it can be prepared by reacting protactinium tetrachloride with dipotassium cyclooctatetraenide , <unk> , in tetrahydrofuran . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Although protactinium is located in the periodic table between uranium and thorium , which both have numerous applications , owing to its scarcity , high radioactivity and high toxicity , there are currently no uses for protactinium outside of scientific research . 
 Protactinium @-@ 231 arises from the decay of uranium @-@ 235 formed in nuclear reactors , and by the reaction 232Th + n → 231Th + 2n and subsequent beta decay . It was once thought to be able to support a nuclear chain reaction , which could in principle be used to build nuclear weapons : the physicist Walter <unk> once estimated the associated critical mass as 750 ± 180 kg . However , the possibility of criticality of 231Pa has been ruled out since then . 
 With the advent of highly sensitive mass spectrometers , an application of 231Pa as a tracer in geology and <unk> has become possible . So , the ratio of protactinium @-@ 231 to thorium @-@ 230 is used for radiometric dating of sediments which are up to 175 @,@ 000 years old and in modeling of the formation of minerals . In particular , its evaluation in oceanic sediments allowed to reconstruct the movements of North Atlantic water bodies during the last melting of Ice Age glaciers . Some of the protactinium @-@ related dating variations rely on the analysis of the relative concentrations for several long @-@ living members of the uranium decay chain – uranium , thorium and protactinium , for example . These elements have 6 , 5 and 4 f @-@ electrons in the outer shell and thus favor + 6 , + 5 and + 4 oxidation states , respectively , and show different physical and chemical properties . So , thorium and protactinium , but not uranium compounds are poorly soluble in aqueous solutions , and precipitate into sediments ; the precipitation rate is faster for thorium than for protactinium . Besides , the concentration analysis for both protactinium @-@ 231 ( half @-@ life 32 @,@ 760 years ) and thorium @-@ 230 ( half @-@ life 75 @,@ 380 years ) allows to improve the accuracy compared to when only one isotope is measured ; this double @-@ isotope method is also weakly sensitive to inhomogeneities in the spatial distribution of the isotopes and to variations in their precipitation rate . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Protactinium is both toxic and highly radioactive and thus all manipulations with it are performed in a sealed glove box . Its major isotope 231Pa has a specific activity of 0 @.@ 048 curies ( 1 @.@ 8 GBq ) per gram and primarily emits alpha @-@ particles with an energy of 5 MeV , which can be stopped by a thin layer of any material . However , it slowly decays , with a half @-@ life of 32 @,@ 760 years , into 227Ac , which has a specific activity of 74 curies ( 2 @,@ 700 GBq ) per gram , emits both alpha and beta radiation , and has a much shorter half @-@ life of 22 years . 227Ac , in turn , decays into lighter isotopes with even shorter half @-@ lives and much greater specific activities ( SA ) , as summarized in the table below showing the decay chain of protactinium @-@ 231 . 
 As protactinium is present in small amounts in most natural products and materials , it is ingested with food or water and inhaled with air . Only about 0 @.@ 05 % of ingested protactinium is absorbed into the blood and the remainder is excreted . From the blood , about 40 % of the protactinium deposits in the bones , about 15 % goes to the liver , 2 % to the kidneys , and the rest leaves the body . The biological half @-@ life of protactinium is about 50 years in the bones , whereas in other organs the kinetics has a fast and slow component . So in the liver 70 % of protactinium have a half @-@ life of 10 days and 30 % remain for 60 days . The corresponding values for kidneys are 20 % ( 10 days ) and 80 % ( 60 days ) . In all these organs , protactinium promotes cancer via its radioactivity . The maximum safe dose of Pa in the human body is 0 @.@ 03 µCi ( 1 @.@ 1 kBq ) , which corresponds to 0 @.@ 5 micrograms of 231Pa . This isotope is 2 @.@ 5 × 108 times more toxic than <unk> acid . The maximum allowed concentrations of 231Pa in the air in Germany is 3 × 10 − 4 Bq / m3 . 
 = Grameen Bank = 
 The Grameen Bank ( Bengali : <unk> ্ <unk> <unk> ) is a Nobel Peace Prize @-@ winning microfinance organization and community development bank founded in Bangladesh . It makes small loans ( known as microcredit or " <unk> " ) to the impoverished without requiring collateral . The name Grameen is derived from the word gram which means " rural " or " village " in the Bengali Language . 
 Grameen Bank originated in 1976 , in the work of Professor Muhammad Yunus at University of Chittagong , who launched a research project to study how to design a credit delivery system to provide banking services to the rural poor . Based on his results , in October 1983 the Grameen Bank was authorized by national legislation as an independent bank . In 2006 , the bank and its founder , Muhammad Yunus , were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . In 1998 the Bank 's " Low @-@ cost Housing Program " won a World Habitat Award . In 2011 , the Bangladesh Government forced Yunus to resign from Grameen Bank , saying that at age 72 , he was years beyond the legal limit for the position . 
 = = History = = 
 Muhammad Yunus earned a doctorate in economics from Vanderbilt University in the United States . He was inspired during the Bangladesh famine of 1974 to make a small loan of US $ 27 to a group of 42 families as start @-@ up money so that they could make items for sale , without the burdens of high interest under predatory lending . Yunus believed that making such loans available to a larger population could stimulate businesses and reduce the widespread rural poverty in Bangladesh . 
 Yunus developed the principles of the Grameen Bank ( literally , " Bank of the Villages " in Bengali ) from his research and experience . He began to expand microcredit as a research project together with the Rural Economics Project at Bangladesh 's University of Chittagong to test his method for providing credit and banking services to the rural poor . In 1976 , the village of Jobra and other villages near the University of Chittagong became the first areas eligible for service from Grameen Bank . Proving successful , the Bank project , with support from Bangladesh Bank , was extended in 1979 to the Tangail District ( to the north of the capital , Dhaka ) . The bank 's success continued and its services were extended to other districts of Bangladesh . 
 The Grameen Bank staff not only work in harsh , grueling conditions but are an " elite brigade of poverty fighters " . Required to have a passion for changing the lives of the poor , the Grameen staff must be willing to step out of their comfort zones on a daily basis . Potential employees receive 6 months of on @-@ the @-@ job training while shadowing qualified and experienced individuals from various branches of Grameen . The goal of this training is for the trainee to " appreciate the unexplored potential of the destitute " and to discover new ways to solve problems that arise within the Grameen branch . After completing the 6 @-@ month period , trainees return to Dhaka headquarters for a time of review and critique . Ultimately these new staff are appointed to a new branch of the Grameen bank . 
 By a Bangladeshi government ordinance on October 2 , 1983 , the project was authorized and established as an independent bank . Bankers Ron <unk> and Mary Houghton of <unk> , a community development bank in Chicago , helped Yunus with the official incorporation of the bank under a grant from the Ford Foundation . The bank 's repayment rate suffered from the economic disruption following the 1998 flood in Bangladesh , but it recovered in the subsequent years . By the beginning of 2005 , the bank had loaned over USD 4 @.@ 7 billion and by the end of 2008 , USD 7 @.@ 6 billion to the poor . 
 The Bank continues to expand across the nation . By 2006 , Grameen Bank branches numbered over 2 @,@ 100 . Its success has inspired similar projects in more than 40 countries around the world , including a World Bank initiative to finance Grameen @-@ type schemes . 
 The bank has gained its funding from different sources , and the main contributors have shifted over time . In the initial years , donor agencies used to provide the bulk of capital at low rates . By the mid @-@ 1990s , the bank started to get most of its funding from the central bank of Bangladesh . More recently , Grameen has started bond sales as a source of finance . The bonds are implicitly subsidised , as they are guaranteed by the Government of Bangladesh , and still they are sold above the bank rate . In 2013 , Bangladesh parliament passed ' Grameen Bank Act ' which replaces the Grameen Bank Ordinance , 1983 , authorizing the government to make rules for any aspect of the running of the bank . 
 The bank is also engaged in social business and <unk> fields . In 2009 , the Grameen Creative Lab collaborated with the Yunus Centre to create the Global Social Business Summit . The meeting has become the main platform for social businesses worldwide to foster discussions , actions and collaborations to develop effective solutions to the most pressing problems plaguing the world . 
 = = Application of microcredit = = 
 Grameen Bank is founded on the principle that loans are better than charity to interrupt poverty : they offer people the opportunity to take initiatives in business or agriculture , which provide earnings and enable them to pay off the debt . 
 The bank is founded on the belief that people have endless potential , and unleashing their creativity and initiative helps them end poverty . Grameen has offered credit to classes of people formerly underserved : the poor , women , illiterate , and unemployed people . Access to credit is based on reasonable terms , such as the group lending system and weekly @-@ installment payments , with reasonably long terms of loans , enabling the poor to build on their existing skills to earn better income in each cycle of loans . 
 Grameen 's objective has been to promote financial independence among the poor . Yunus encourages all borrowers to become savers , so that their local capital can be converted into new loans to others . Since 1995 , Grameen has funded 90 percent of its loans with interest income and deposits collected , aligning the interests of its new borrowers and depositor @-@ shareholders . Grameen converts deposits made in villages into loans for the more needy in the villages ( Yunus and Jolis 1998 ) . 
 It targets the poorest of the poor , with a particular emphasis on women , who receive 95 percent of the bank ’ s loans . Women traditionally had less access to financial alternatives of ordinary credit lines and incomes . They were seen to have an inequitable share of power in household decision making . Yunus and others have found that lending to women generates considerable secondary effects , including empowerment of a marginalized segment of society ( Yunus and Jolis 1998 ) , who share betterment of income with their children , unlike many men . Yunus claims that in 2004 , women still have difficulty getting loans ; they comprise less than 1 percent of borrowers from commercial banks ( Yunus 2004 ) . The interest rates charged by microfinance institutes including Grameen Bank is high compared to that of traditional banks ; Grameen 's interest ( reducing balance basis ) on its main credit product is about 20 % . 
 Grameen has diversified the types of loans it makes . It supports hand @-@ powered wells and loans to support the enterprises of Grameen members ' immediate relatives . It has found that seasonal agricultural loans and lease @-@ to @-@ own agreements for equipment and livestock help the poor establish better agriculture . The bank has set a new goal : to make each of its branch locations free of poverty , as defined by benchmarks such as having adequate food and access to clean water and latrines . 
 Grameen Bank is best known for its system of solidarity lending . The Bank also incorporates a set of values embodied in Bangladesh by the Sixteen Decisions . At every branch of Grameen Bank , the borrowers recite these Decisions and vow to follow them . As a result of the Sixteen Decisions , Grameen borrowers have been encouraged to adopt positive social habits . One such habit includes educating children by sending them to school . Since the Grameen Bank embraced the Sixteen Decisions , almost all Grameen borrowers have their school @-@ age children enrolled in regular classes . This in turn helps bring about social change , and educate the next generation . 
 Solidarity lending is a cornerstone of microcredit , and the system is now used in more than 43 countries . Although each borrower must belong to a five @-@ member group , the group is not required to give any guarantee for a loan to its members . <unk> responsibility rests solely on the individual borrower . The group and the centre oversee that everyone behaves responsibly and none gets into a repayment problem . No formal joint liability exists , i.e. group members are not obliged to pay on behalf of a defaulting member . But , in practice the group members often contribute the defaulted amount with an intention to collect the money from the defaulted member at a later time . Such behavior is encouraged because Grameen does not extend further credit to a group in which a member defaults . 
 No legal instrument ( i.e. no written contract ) is made between Grameen Bank and its borrowers ; the system works based on trust . To supplement the lending , Grameen Bank requires the borrowing members to save very small amounts regularly in a number of funds , designated for emergency , the group , etc . These savings help serve as an insurance against contingencies . 
 In a country in which few women may take out loans from large commercial banks , Grameen has focused on women borrowers ; 97 % of its members are women . While a World Bank study has concluded that women 's access to microcredit empowers them through greater access to resources and control over decision making , some other economists argue that the relationship between microcredit and women @-@ empowerment is less straightforward . 
 In other areas , Grameen has had very high payback rates — over 98 percent . However , according to the Wall Street Journal , in 2001 a fifth of the bank 's loans were more than a year overdue . Grameen says that more than half of its borrowers in Bangladesh ( close to 50 million ) have risen out of acute poverty thanks to their loan , as measured by such standards as having all children of school age in school , all household members eating three meals a day , a sanitary toilet , a <unk> house , clean drinking water , and the ability to repay a 300 taka @-@ a @-@ week ( around 4 USD ) loan . 
 = = = Village phone program = = = 
 The bank has diversified among different applications of microcredit . In the Village Phone program , women entrepreneurs can start businesses to provide wireless payphone service in rural areas . This program earned the bank the 2004 Petersburg Prize worth EUR 100 @,@ 000 , for its contribution of Technology to Development . In the press release announcing the prize , the Development Gateway Foundation noted that through this program : 
 ... Grameen has created a new class of women entrepreneurs who have raised themselves from poverty . Moreover , it has improved the livelihoods of farmers and others who are provided access to critical market information and lifeline communications previously unattainable in some 28 @,@ 000 villages of Bangladesh . More than 55 @,@ 000 phones are currently in operation , with more than 80 million people benefiting from access to market information , news from relatives , and more . 
 = = = Struggling members program = = = 
 In 2003 , Grameen Bank started a new program , different from its traditional group @-@ based lending , exclusively targeted to the beggars in Bangladesh . This program is focused on distributing small loans to beggars . The loans are completely interest @-@ free , the repayment period can be arbitrarily long , and the borrower is covered under life insurance free of cost . For example , a beggar taking a small loan of around 100 taka ( about US $ 1 @.@ 50 ) may pay back only 2 @.@ 00 taka ( about 3 @.@ 4 US cents ) per week . 
 = = = Housing loans = = = 
 In 1984 , Grameen applied to the Central Bank for help setting up a housing loan program for its borrowers . Their application was rejected on the grounds that the $ 125 suggested loan could not possibly build a suitable living structure . So Grameen instead proposed the idea of " shelter loans " . They were again rejected , this time on the grounds that their borrowers could not afford non @-@ income generating loans . Grameen changed tactics and applied a third time , this time to make " factory loans " , the explanation being that borrowers worked from home , so the home was also a factory that made it possible for borrowers to earn income . Grameen was rejected for a third time . 
 After this third rejection , Yunus , the bank ’ s founder , met personally with the Central Bank governor to plead for their application . When asked if he thought the borrowers would repay the loans , he replied , " Yes , they will . They do . Unlike the rich , the poor cannot risk not repaying . This is the only chance they have . " Grameen was then allowed to add housing loans to their range of services . 
 As of 1999 , Grameen has made housing loans totaling $ 190 million to build over 560 @,@ 000 homes with near @-@ perfect repayment . By 1989 , their average housing loan had grown to $ 300 . That year , the Grameen housing program received the Aga Khan International Award for Architecture . 
 = = Grameen Bank 's perception of people with economic disadvantages = = 
 When Muhammed Yunus took the first steps toward establishing Grameen Bank in Bangladesh and began to provide micro @-@ credit loans to those living in abject poverty in the rural area surrounding Jobra , he adopted and maintained two basic premises . First , that credit is a human right ; second , that the poor are those who know best how to better their own situation . 
 In his book Banker to the Poor : Micro @-@ lending and the Battle Against World Poverty , Muhammad Yunus shows the outlook behind why Grameen Bank runs the way it does , saying , “ When you hold the world in your palm and inspect it only from a birds eye view , you tend to become arrogant , you do not realize things become blurred when viewed from an enormous distance . I opted instead for the ” worms eye view . ” … The poor taught me an entirely new economics . I learned about the problems they face from their own perspective . “ Here we see his willingness to immerse himself with the people he is aiming to help . We get our first look at Muhammad Yunus ’ s perception of the absolute poor when he meets Sufiya Begum , a bamboo stool maker who was trapped in poverty ’ s vicious cycle due to a lack of 27 cents . That is where we find that what will become Grameen bank , is founded upon one man ’ s heart for those that society and big corporations could or would not help . Taking productive action , Yunus worked with the banks and community around to empower people like Sufiya to be able to apply for credit , and use it in the best and most productive way that she knows how in her unique situation . Grameen Bank would need to be a bank of unusual standards . It would have to be , as Yunus put it , “ an institution that would lend to those that had nothing . “ Later , as time progressed , more situations would arise , such as battling for those who were landless , or small @-@ time farmers such as those in Jobra who could not use a deep tube @-@ well that was available to them . 
 As Grameen bank has developed and expanded in the years since its beginning , it continues to operate on those same two principles . Today , Grameen bank still assumes that when individuals are provided credit , they will be able to initiate upward social mobility for themselves through entrepreneurial endeavors . As a result , Grameen differs from many other social justice efforts in that it does not include intensive rehabilitation training programs for the disadvantaged persons it serves . Instead , Grameen gives its borrowers freedom to pursue a better future using the skills they already possess in the best way they can with membership in a five @-@ person support group being the only requirement . 
 The Grameen Bank encourages its members to create a positive impact by becoming actively involved in the politics of their country . According to Muhammad Yunus 's book , Baker to the Poor , Yunus commissioned his bank staff to encourage Grameen borrowers to vote ; however , the staff were not to influence the voters ' decisions on which political party to support . While all Grameen groups are required to exhibit a form of democracy ( such as electing a chairperson and secretary ) , the Grameen staff were surprised to find that borrowers were thrilled with the opportunity to display their voting rights as citizens of Bangladesh in the 1991 national election . The work of the Grameen staff initiated a sharp increase in political activity which continued into the 1992 , 1996 , and 1997 elections . Since the Grameen Bank caters to women , the 1996 elections received more women voting then men , which led to the removal of political parties opposing women 's rights . Not only did more women participate in political activism , but over 1 @,@ 750 Grameen members , 268 male and 1 @,@ 485 female , were elected to local offices in 1997 . 
 In an interview with PBS in 2006 , ( after sixteen years of experience with Grameen Bank as a social business ) Yunus expressed satisfaction in the micro @-@ credit system of Grameen bank as a motivation and an opportunity for the poor to improve their own situations . He stressed that he has observed that Grameen 's borrowers attain a sense of confidence and self @-@ sufficiency when they pay back their loans from Grameen bank . While being careful not to criticize charity 's rightful place , he added that the recipient of a charitable gift does not experience these long @-@ term emotional benefits in the same way . 
 = = Operational statistics = = 
 Grameen Bank is owned by the borrowers of the bank , most of whom are poor women . Of the total equity of the bank , the borrowers own 94 % , and the remaining 6 % is owned by the Bangladesh government . 
 The bank grew significantly between 2003 @-@ 2007 . As of January 2011 , the total borrowers of the bank number 8 @.@ 4 million , and 97 % of those are women . The number of borrowers has more than doubled since 2003 , when the bank had 3 @.@ 12 million members . Similar growth can be observed in the number of villages covered . As of October 2007 , the Bank has a staff of more than 24 @,@ 703 employees ; its 2 @,@ 468 branches provide services to 80 @,@ 257 villages , up from the 43 @,@ 681 villages covered in 2003 . 
 The bank has distributed Tk 684 @.@ 13 billion ( USD 11 @.@ 35 billion ) in loans , out of which Tk 610 @.@ 81 billion ( USD 10 @.@ 11 billion ) has been repaid . The bank claims a loan recovery rate of 96 @.@ 67 % , up from the 95 % recovery rate claimed in 1998 . David <unk> has critiqued the accounting practices that Grameen used to determine this rate . 
 The global number of potential micro @-@ borrowers is estimated to be 1 billion , with a total loan demand of $ 250 billion . The present microfinance model is serving 100 million people with $ 25 billion of loans . The Grameen Bank is 95 % owned by the local poor and 5 % by the government . 
 = = Honours = = 
 1994 , Grameen Bank received the Independence Day Award in 1994 , which is the highest government award . 
 October 13 , 2006 , the Nobel Committee awarded Grameen Bank and its founder , Muhammad Yunus , the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize " for their efforts to create economic and social development from below . " The award announcement also mentions that : 
 From modest beginnings three decades ago , Yunus has , first and foremost through Grameen Bank , developed micro @-@ credit into an ever more important instrument in the struggle against poverty . Grameen Bank has been a source of ideas and models for the many institutions in the field of micro @-@ credit that have sprung up around the world . 
 On December 10 , 2006 , <unk> <unk> Begum , who used her first 16 @-@ euro ( 20 @-@ dollar ) loan from the bank in 1992 to buy a goat and subsequently became a successful entrepreneur and one of the elected board members of the bank , accepted the Nobel Prize on behalf of Grameen Bank 's investors and borrowers at the prize awarding ceremony held at Oslo City Hall . 
 Grameen Bank is the only business corporation to have won a Nobel Prize . Professor Ole <unk> <unk> , Chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee , in his speech said that , by giving the prize to Grameen Bank and Muhammad Yunus , the Norwegian Nobel Committee wanted to encourage attention on achievements of the Muslim world , on the women 's perspective , and on the fight against poverty . 
 Citizens of Bangladesh celebrated the prize . Some critics said that the award affirms neoliberalism . 
 = = Related ventures = = 
 The Grameen Bank has grown into over two dozen enterprises of the Grameen Family of Enterprises . These organizations include Grameen Trust , Grameen Fund , Grameen Communications , Grameen Shakti ( Grameen Energy ) , Grameen Telecom , Grameen <unk> ( Grameen Education ) , Grameen <unk> ( Grameen Fisheries ) , Grameen <unk> <unk> ( Grameen Business Development ) , Grameen Phone , Grameen Software Limited , Grameen <unk> Limited , Grameen <unk> Limited , and Grameen <unk> ( owner of the brand Grameen Check ) . 
 On July 11 , 2005 the Grameen Mutual Fund One ( <unk> ) , approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission of Bangladesh , was listed as an Initial Public Offering . One of the first mutual funds of its kind , <unk> will allow the more than four million Grameen bank members , as well as non @-@ members , to buy into Bangladesh 's capital markets . The Bank and its constituents are together worth over USD 7 @.@ 4 billion . 
 The Grameen Foundation was developed to share the Grameen philosophy and expand the benefits of microfinance for the world ’ s poorest people . Grameen Foundation , which has an A @-@ rating from [ Charity Watch ] , provides <unk> in the USA ( the only developed country where this is done ) , and supports microfinance institutions worldwide with loan guarantees , training , and technology transfer . As of 2008 , Grameen Foundation supports microfinance institutions in the following regions : 
 Asia @-@ Pacific : Bangladesh , China , East Timor , Indonesia , India , Lebanon , Pakistan , Philippines , Saudi Arabia , Yemen 
 Americas : Bolivia , Dominican Republic , El Salvador , Haiti , Honduras , Mexico , Peru , US 
 Africa : Cameroon , Egypt , Ethiopia , Ghana , Morocco , Nigeria , Rwanda , Tunisia , Uganda 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Some analysts have suggested that microcredit can bring communities into debt from which they cannot escape . Researchers have noted instances when <unk> from the Grameen Bank were linked to exploitation and pressures on poor families to sell their belongings , leading in extreme cases to humiliation and ultimately suicides . 
 The Mises Institute 's Jeffrey Tucker suggests that microcredit banks depend on subsidies in order to operate , thus acting as another example of welfare . Yunus believes that he is working against the subsidized economy , giving borrowers the opportunity to create businesses . Some of Tucker 's criticism is based on his interpretation of Grameen 's " 16 decisions , " seen as indoctrination , without considering what they mean in the context of poor , illiterate peasants . 
 Maulana Ibrahim , an imam in Bangladesh , spoke out against the Grameen Bank in 1993 for fostering " un @-@ Islamic ways . " He alleged that the lenders ' pledge required women to say they would not obey their husbands and would not live in poverty anymore . 
 The Norwegian documentary , Caught in Micro debt , said that Grameen evaded taxes . The Spanish documentary , Microcredit , also suggested this . The accusation is based on the unauthorised transfer of approximately US $ 100 million , donated by The Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation ( NORAD ) , from one Grameen entity to another in 1996 , before the expiry of the Grameen Bank 's tax exemption . 
 Yunus denies that this is tax evasion : 
 There is no question of tax evasion here . The Government has provided organizations with opportunities ; we have made use of these opportunities with aim of benefitting our shareholders who are the rural poor women of Bangladesh . 
 David <unk> and Jonathan <unk> question the statistical validity of studies of microcredit 's effects on poverty , noting the complexity of the situations involved . <unk> Lee and Ruth David discuss how microfinance and the Grameen model in South India have in recent years been distorted by venture capitalism and profit @-@ makers . In some cases , poor rural families have suffered debt spirals , harassment by microfinance debt collectors , and in some cases suicide . 
 = = Representation in other media = = 
 The film To Catch a Dollar ( 2010 ) documents the process of establishing Grameen America programs in Queens , New York in 2008 . It premiered at the 2010 Sundance Film Festival . 
 The documentary film Living on One Dollar ( 2010 ) includes Grameen Bank providing microcredit to start small home businesses in a rural Guatemalan village . The documentary is available directly from the organization " Living On One " [ 2 ] , and on Netflix [ 3 ] . 
 = Realty Bites = 
 " Realty Bites " is the ninth episode of the The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 7 , 1997 . The episode sees Marge becoming a real estate agent , while Homer enjoys Snake 's car . It was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Swinton O. Scott III . 
 This episode has the final speaking appearance of Lionel Hutz , five months before the death of Phil Hartman . The episode 's development grew out of a desire by the writers to do a show focused on Marge , where her job did not work out . The episode received positive mention in the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , and is featured in the special 2003 DVD release The Simpsons : Risky Business . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer drags Marge to a police seized @-@ property auction . While there , he buys Snake 's car , the Li 'l Bandit . Upon seeing this , Snake vows to kill Homer . After the auction , Marge encounters Lionel Hutz , who has become a realtor . Marge decides to try the job for herself and begins to work for Hutz at Red Blazer Realty . She tells prospective buyers her honest opinion about the houses she shows them . 
 Due to her honesty , Marge does not sell any homes . Hutz tells her to use more positive descriptions when selling the houses , and also tells Marge if she does not sell a house in the first week , she will be fired . Marge tries to bend the truth , but fails as she just cannot lie to others . Marge does not disclose the entire truth of the house she sells to Ned Flanders and his family , which had been the site of a multiple homicide . The Flanders purchase the house and bid farewell to the Simpsons . 
 Meanwhile , Snake escapes from the prison and jumps into the Li 'l Bandit to get the car back from Homer . They start fighting each other to gain control of the moving car , and Chief Wiggum starts chasing them . 
 Feeling guilty about her deception and concerned for the Flanders ' safety , Marge goes to check on them at their new house . There , she tells them the truth about the murders , but they are not annoyed . Ned and Maude are pleased to be a part of Springfield 's history , and refuse Marge 's offer of returning the deposit . Unfortunately , the house is destroyed seconds later when Li 'l Bandit and Wiggum 's police car crash through the house . Marge returns Flanders ' down payment . Hutz , irritated at the damage costs and especially by the return of the money , fires Marge . At the end of the episode , Homer takes Marge to the government unemployment office to collect a welfare check . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writers wanted to do a " Marge episode " , but one where her job does not work out , unlike previous episodes . The episode marks the first appearance of Gil Gunderson , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , and Cookie Kwan , voiced by Tress MacNeille . Excuses were made by the writers to bring back Gil in future episodes based on Castellaneta 's performance at the table read , which proved popular with the staff . Snake 's prison number is <unk> , the production code of " The War of the Simpsons " , the episode in which he first appeared . 
 The piano wire scene was meant to end with Kirk 's sandwich being sliced just the way he wanted , until George Meyer suggested that his arm be cut off instead . Mike Scully described the ensuing laughter at his suggestion as the most intense he had ever heard from the staff , saying : " They were literally choking because the joke was so unexpected . It was a shocked kind of laugh , and it just started rolling , one of those laughs that build the more they reverberate through you . " In the unemployment line , the unemployment recipient with the bucket hat and the beard is a caricature of George Meyer . Due to Phil Hartman 's death , the recurring characters of Lionel Hutz and Troy McClure were retired . As such , this episode is the last speaking appearance of Hutz , with him only being featured as a background character in some future episodes . McClure 's final appearance would be in " Bart the Mother " , the third episode of season ten . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode is an allusion to the 1994 movie Reality Bites . Gil Gunderson is based on Jack Lemmon 's portrayal of Shelley Levene in the 1992 film Glengarry Glen Ross . 
 At one point in the episode , Snake sets up a wire across a road to decapitate Homer as he drives by . The wire is supplied by " Acme " , after the brand of equipment used by Wile E. Coyote to try and stop Road Runner in the Looney Tunes cartoons . When Ned Flanders explains to Marge that they were painting Todd 's room red , Todd starts saying " Red room , red room " and moves his finger , like the character of Danny does in the film The Shining . 
 When Lionel Hutz reads the list of wrecked items to Marge , it is a tribute to the Lethal Weapon movies . The newspaper front page reporting the " Jealous Jockey Murders " carries the statement " Mrs. Astor safe " beneath the headline . This is a reference to the front page of The New York Times on April 15 , 1912 , reporting the sinking of the RMS Titanic three days earlier whilst assuring that " Ismay safe , Mrs. Astor maybe " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Realty Bites " finished 21st in ratings for the week of December 1 – 7 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the third @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files and King of the Hill . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide said , " A simple but enjoyable romp , with the final few minutes in the Murder House particularly funny . Best thing though is the introduction of the hapless Gil , destined to always be a ray of light in any episode ! " The episode is featured in a special 2003 DVD compilation called The Simpsons : Risky Business , along with " Marge Gets a Job " , " Deep Space Homer " , and " Homer the Smithers " . 
 = Nathan C. Brooks = 
 Nathan Covington Brooks ( August 12 , 1809 – October 6 , 1898 ) was an American educator , historian , and poet . Born in West Nottingham , Cecil County , Maryland , Brooks grew up to become the first principal of Baltimore City College , the third oldest public high school in the United States , and the only president of the Baltimore Female College , the first institution of higher education for women in Maryland . He also was the owner of The American Museum , a literary magazine , in which he published several works of the famed poet Edgar Allan Poe , and the author of several textbooks on classical literature . Brooks died in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Nathan Covington Brooks , the youngest son of John and Mary Brooks , was born in West Nottingham , Cecil County , Maryland on August 12 , 1809 . He began his education at the West Nottingham Academy , and upon graduating enrolled at St. John 's College in Annapolis , Maryland . There he received a Master of Arts with his thesis consisting of a poem . After receiving his degree , Brooks began his teaching career at the age of 16 in Charlestown , Cecil County . He held this position for two years before opening a private school in Baltimore , Maryland in 1826 , where he remained for five years . In 1831 , he was elected principal of the Franklin Academy , located in Reisterstown , Maryland . After three years , Brooks resigned to become principal of the Brookeville Academy in Montgomery County , Maryland . However , in 1836 , he resigned from the academy because the school was unable to pay his salary . 
 In 1839 , Brooks was unanimously selected out of a pool of 45 candidates to be the first principal of the new male high school in Baltimore — later renamed the Baltimore City College . He served in this capacity until 1849 , when he resigned to serve as the only president of the Baltimore Female College , the first institution of higher learning for women in Maryland . While at the Baltimore Female College , Brooks was granted an LL.D. from Emory College in Oxford , Georgia in 1859 . He served as president of the Baltimore Female College until it was closed in 1890 . 
 Brooks was married twice and fathered 11 children . He was wed to Mary Elizabeth <unk> on May 8 , 1826 , and later married Christiana Octavia Crump on June 26 , 1867 . Brooks died on October 6 , 1898 in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 = = The American Museum = = 
 In 1838 , Brooks purchased Summer Lincoln Fairfield 's The North American Quarterly and moved the publication from Philadelphia to Baltimore . Brooks partnered with Dr. Joseph E. Snodgrass , a Baltimore physician , to transform the publication into the The American Museum of Science , Literature and the Arts . The magazine mainly functioned as a literary publication , featuring literary criticism as well as poetry and short stories . 
 Brooks , who was a friend of the famed poet Edgar Allan Poe , published several of Poe 's works in The American Museum . Poe 's " Ligeia " , " A Predicament " ( published as " The Scythe of Time " ) , and " The Haunted Palace " were all originally published in Brooks ' magazine . Nevertheless , the magazine was short lived . Only two volumes of the magazine were published and it ceased to exist after 1839 . 
 = = Literary works = = 
 Throughout his career as an educator , Brooks contributed poetry and prose writings to various literary magazines . Among the literary magazines that Brooks submitted works to , were Burton 's Gentleman 's Magazine , Graham 's Magazine , the New York Mirror , and the Southern Literary Messenger . Brooks also wrote several anthologies of poetry , including Scriptural Anthology , which was published in 1837 and The Literary Amaranth , which was published in 1840 . Poe wrote an ambivalent review of Brooks ' Scriptural Anthology , which appeared in Graham 's Magazine in December 1841 . In his review , Poe wrote , " among many inferior compositions of length , there were several shorter pieces of great merit ; — for example ' Shelley 's <unk> ' and ' The <unk> ' . " Poe was also critical of Brooks ' comic works , while praising his more serious prose . 
 In addition to his poetry and prose , Brooks authored several textbooks , which focused mainly on classical literature , and a few popular history texts . These included First Lessons in Latin , published in 1845 , First Lessons in Greek , published in 1846 , A Complete History Of The Mexican War , published in 1849 , and The History of the Church . Brooks also translated and published several editions of the works of Ovid , Caesar , and Virgil . 
 = Hurricane How ( 1951 ) = 
 Hurricane How was the only tropical cyclone to make landfall on the United States in 1951 . It was the eighth storm of the season , forming on September 28 in the northwest Caribbean and , after entering the Gulf of Mexico , turned eastward and became a tropical storm . The storm brought heavy rainfall to Florida , causing flooding and $ 2 million in damage . Tropical Storm How later became a hurricane , passing near the Outer Banks of North Carolina where it produced strong winds and high tides . A ship called the " Southern Isles " capsized off of Cape Hatteras , killing 17 out of the crew of 23 . Rains and high tides occurred in southeastern New England , before the hurricane moved out to sea and became extratropical . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane How were from an easterly wave that organized into a tropical depression , in the western Caribbean Sea on September 28 , 1951 . It moved to the north @-@ northwest , passing by the Yucatan peninsula before turning to the east in the central Gulf of Mexico on October 1 . That day , a reconnaissance aircraft in the system reported gale force winds and , as a result , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm How . The storm strengthened to just below hurricane force , making landfall near Punta Gorda , Florida with 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) winds ( 115 km / h ) . While it crossed the state , the center was not very organized , and consequently the strongest winds were in the south and southeastern portion of the storm ; heavy rains , however , fell across its path . 
 Tropical Storm How emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Vero Beach , quickly intensifying to hurricane strength by October 3 . Turning northeastward , Hurricane How reached peak winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) on October 4 as it passed near the Outer Banks of North Carolina . Subsequently the hurricane embarked on a slow weakening trend , as it briefly posed a threat to New England . It passed southeast of Cape Cod before turning more to the east @-@ northeast . It became an extratropical storm on October 7 , and the next day the remnants of How dissipated in the far northern Atlantic . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 As the storm was not very well @-@ organized when it crossed Florida , the strongest winds were not near the center , and instead were confined to squalls in the Florida Keys and the southeast coast . Miami reported a gust of 60 mph ( 96 km / h ) , and West Palm Beach reported 55 mph ( 88 km / h ) winds . Wind damage was minor , confined to a few broken windows and the sinking or damaging of some small craft . Nevertheless , heavy rainfall occurred along its path . The highest total was 15 @.@ 7 inches ( 40 cm ) near Bonita Springs , near where it moved ashore . Elsewhere , Fort Myers reported 10 @.@ 43 inches ( 26 @.@ 5 cm ) , while Clewiston along the western shore of Lake Okeechobee received about 10 inches ( 25 cm ) ; the lake rose about 4 inches ( 10 cm ) from the rainfall , but no overflow was expected . Elsewhere , the precipitation caused some significant street flooding , while about 7 @,@ 000 acres ( 28 km2 ) of tomato and bean fields were deluged . 
 Further north , the hurricane threatened to strike or move very close to the Outer Banks . Hurricane warnings were posted from Cape Hatteras to Manteo , and ships were advised to remain at port . Hurricane How produced 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) winds and high tides along the Outer Banks and southeastern Virginia . Some minor damage was reported , and two ships were washed ashore . In New England , the Weather Bureau issued storm warnings from Block Island , Rhode Island to Portland , Maine , with rains , fog , and heavy surf reported . Several roads were closed in Massachusetts due to the tides . 
 Offshore , a ship called Southern Isle was wrecked by the high surf . It had been sailing from Puerto Rico with a full load of iron ore and , as it approached the hurricane , the vessel changed directions and slowed down . By October 5 , winds were strong and the seas were moderately rough . Very quickly , the ship broke into two , which prevented any time to escape on lifeboats . By the day after the wreck , rescue boats and helicopters found seven people , one of whom later died from their injuries . Ultimately , 17 people died in the event . 
 Overall , Hurricane How caused about $ 2 million ( USD ) in damage . It was the only storm to strike the United States during the year , and consequently , 1951 had the least tropical cyclone damage in the United States since the 1939 season . 
 = Action of 18 June 1793 = 
 The Action of 18 June 1793 was the first decisive and one of the most celebrated encounters between British and French frigates during the French Revolutionary Wars . The action occurred off Start Point in Devon , when the British frigate HMS Nymphe encountered and chased the French frigate Cléopâtre . During the previous month , Cléopâtre and another frigate , Sémillante , had been successfully raiding British merchant shipping in the English Channel and Eastern Atlantic from their base at Cherbourg . In response , the British frigates Nymphe and HMS Venus had been ordered to intercept and defeat the French frigates and on 27 May Venus and Sémillante fought an inconclusive engagement off Cape Finisterre . 
 On 17 June , Nymphe was cruising alone off the Devon coast under Captain Edward Pellew when a sail appeared to the south east . Closing to investigate , Pellew rapidly identified the ship as Cléopâtre and gave chase , the French frigate initially fleeing but Captain Jean Mullon then turning to fight as Nymphe began to overtake his ship . At 06 : 15 , with both crews cheering loudly , the frigates exchanged broadsides , the action lasting 50 minutes . Both ships fought hard , but at 07 : 10 the British crew were able to successfully board the French frigate and haul down the tricolour . Mullon was mortally wounded in the engagement , and his crew lost 63 casualties compared to 50 on board Nymphe . Pellew returned to Britain with his prize , the first major French warship captured during the conflict , and was proclaimed a hero . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 1793 , the National Convention that governed the French Republic expanded the ongoing French Revolutionary Wars by declaring war on Great Britain and the Dutch Republic . The light vessels of the British Royal Navy had been preparing for the conflict for several months , having concentrated in June 1792 at Spithead in anticipation of the outbreak of war . These ships were stationed in large numbers in the North Sea and the English Channel to defend British maritime trade against the threat of French commerce raiders operating from the French Channel ports . The French Navy by contrast was riven with the same social divisions that had divided France in the aftermath of the French Revolution four years earlier . This had led to the collapse of the professional officer corps and the elimination of the rank of trained seamen @-@ gunners on the grounds of elitism , resulting in a dearth of experience both in seamanship and naval combat . 
 To counter their disadvantages , the French Navy operated several well @-@ armed frigates from their Channel and Atlantic ports to intercept and disrupt the movement of British trade . Two of the most successful vessels in the early months of the war were the frigates Cléopâtre and Sémillante under Captains Jean Mullon and Gaillard respectively and based at Cherbourg on the Cotentin Peninsula . In response to the depredations of French raiders , the Royal Navy stationed two frigates at Falmouth . The selected ships were HMS Venus under Captain Jonathan Faulknor and HMS Nymphe under Captain Edward Pellew . Pellew was a highly experienced officer who had been commended for his service in the American Revolutionary War , during which he fought at the Battle of Valcour Island on Lake Champlain , as an engineering officer at the Battle of Saratoga and later in European waters in command of a frigate . He was accompanied on board Nymphe by his younger brother Commander Israel Pellew , who was at the time an unemployed reserve officer enlisted as a volunteer aboard his brother 's ship . 
 = = = Action of 27 May 1793 = = = 
 At 01 : 00 on 27 May , 375 nautical miles ( 694 km ) north west of Cape Finisterre , lookouts on Venus sighted a ship and closed with the strange vessel , which was soon determined to be Sémillante . Gaillard 's ship weighed 940 long tons ( 955 t ) , more than 200 tons larger than the 722 long tons ( 734 t ) British vessel , and carried 40 guns mounting a 279 lb broadside to the 38 @-@ gun , 222 lb broadside of Venus . Despite the disparity , Faulknor determined on combat and at 04 : 30 the frigates were close enough to exchange long @-@ range shot , the firing becoming more general at 08 : 00 . For two hours the battle continued as the ships drifted closer to one another , until Gaillard attempted to break off the action and escape : his ship was severely damaged and casualties were mounting . Initially it seemed that Faulknor would be able to prevent Gaillard 's ship from escaping by keeping pace with the retreating Sémillante , but as he prepared to fire a second broadside into the retreating French ship a new sail appeared , belonging to a large ship flying the French tricolour . With his sails and rigging damaged , Faulknor could not compete against both Sémillante and the newcomer and fell back as the French ships linked up . The new arrival , later identified as the Cléopâtre , chased Venus but Faulknor was able to make use of a strengthening breeze to escape , eventually rejoining Nymphe on 29 May at which point Cléopâtre broke off the chase . The British frigates subsequently shadowed the French vessels northwards , chasing them into Cherbourg in the first week of June . 
 The engagement cost Faulknor two men killed and 20 wounded , with his ship 's rigging and sails badly torn but the hull undamaged . The larger Sémillante was more seriously battered , with twelve killed and 20 wounded , severe damage to the sails and rigging and at least 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of water in the hold . Faulknor was praised in subsequent histories for causing so much damage despite the disparity in size between his ship and the French frigate , although some contemporary histories misidentified the opponent as either Engageante or Proserpine . The most important outcome of the engagement was that Sémillante was forced to undergo extensive repairs , leaving Cléopâtre to continue to commerce raiding operations alone . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 17 June , after escorting the battered Venus back to Falmouth and collecting fresh supplies , Pellew sailed once more in search of Cléopâtre . Passing eastwards along the English coast until he reached Start Point in Devon , Pellew then turned southwards and at 03 : 30 on 18 June , while approximately 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) southwest of Start Point , his lookout sighted a sail 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) to the southeast . At 04 : 00 Pellew closed to investigate , and the stranger was rapidly identified as Cléopâtre , three days out of Saint @-@ Malo . Captain Mullon initially raising all sail to escape the British frigate . By 05 : 00 it was obvious that Nymphe was faster than the French ship and Mullon lowered his topsails in anticipation of combat . At 06 : 00 Nymphe pulled within range and Mullon hailed the British ship , although his words could not be clearly made out . Accounts differ on Pellew 's response , which was to elicit a cry of either " Hoa , Hoa " or " Long live King George " from his men , followed by three cheers . Mullon 's crew responded with either " Vive la nation " or " Vive la république " and cheering of their own , at which one French sailor attached the captain 's cap of liberty to the masthead as a symbol of defiance . 
 At 06 : 15 , Nymphe was in a position to begin the engagement and opened fire with the port broadside against the starboard quarter of the French ship , to which Cléopâtre responded in kind . The two ships kept up a heavy cannonade for the next fifteen minutes at extreme close range before the French ship suddenly hauled up at 06 : 30 . This gave Pellew the opportunity to engage the enemy even more closely and by 07 : 00 the French wheel had been destroyed , four successive helmsmen killed and the mizenmast snapped off 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) above the deck . This damage caused the French ship to swing around wildly , first to port and then suddenly back to starboard into Nymphe , so that the jib boom came to rest between the fore and main masts of the British ship , exerting significant pressure on the mainmast , already weakened by French shot , before the jib boom eventually snapped off . Mullon gave orders for his men to storm Nymphe while the ships were entangled , but his crew refused . As they hesitated , Cléopâtre swung back so that the frigates lay side by side , bow to stern , with Nymphe continuing the heavy cannonade as the British <unk> worked furiously to disentangle the French rigging from their own ship 's damaged mainmast , Pellew encouraging them with a promise of ten guineas to the man who successfully separated the ships . The British captain had initially been concerned that the collision was a deliberate manoeuvre from Mullon and had readied his men in case the French should launch a boarding attack on his frigate . However , as soon as it became clear that the movement was involuntary and that the French were unwilling to press an attack , Pellew reversed his orders and had the men he had assembled to repel boarders climb on board Cléopâtre instead . 
 At Pellew 's orders , British boarders clambered onto the maindeck , through the gunports of the French frigate and even jumped from their own rigging onto the French yards . Although the attackers initially encountered fierce resistance , hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat lasted just ten minutes before the leaderless French sailors broke and ran . Gaining the deck , the British boarding party hauled down the tricolour , signifying the end of the action . Pellew later described the event in a letter to his brother Samuel as " We dished her up in fifty minutes , boarded and took her " . On the quarterdeck they found Captain Mullon , who had been struck in the back by a roundshot which had also torn away most of his left hip and was close to death . Seeing that his ship was in the hands of the enemy , Mullon reached into his pocket for a sheet containing the French coastal codes and tore the paper to shreds with his teeth before dying . However , he had inadvertently destroyed his commission as ship 's captain instead of the codes , which were later found intact on his body . French casualties in the action totalled 63 , including Mullon killed and his three lieutenants wounded . Losses aboard Nymphe was almost as severe , Pellew losing 23 men , including five officers , killed and 27 wounded . More than 100 prisoners were then collected from Cléopâtre and sent aboard Nymphe , leaving 150 remaining on the French ship under the guard of the small prize crew . The ships were then separated and made their way to Portsmouth together , arriving there on 21 June . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The arrival of the captured ship in Britain was greeted with celebration as the first major French warship seized during the conflict . News of the capture reached King George while he was at the opera , and he immediately and spontaneously announced it to the auditorium . Popular prints depicting the action appeared rapidly in large numbers , many of them wildly inaccurate . Shortly after their return to Britain both Pellew brothers were subsequently introduced to King George by Lord Chatham and were rewarded , Edward with a knighthood and Israel with promotion to post captain . First lieutenant Amherst Morris was promoted to commander and the ship 's other lieutenants were commended for their actions , following Pellew 's official dispatch that praised their conduct in the engagement . Cléopâtre was rapidly purchased into the Royal Navy as HMS <unk> , as the name Cleopatra was already in use . The prize money awarded totalled £ 7 @,@ 798 17s and 1d ( the equivalent of £ 825 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , split between Pellew and the crew , and authorised for payment on 14 December 1793 . The ship was considered a good command and remained in service throughout the 23 years of warfare which followed , eventually being sold in 1816 . During this time at least 220 more French and allied frigates were captured or destroyed by British military action . More than five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants from Nymphe still living in 1847 . 
 Soon after the action , Sir Edward Pellew moved to the large frigate HMS Indefatigable while his brother was given command of the frigate HMS Amphion . Both served with distinction : Sir Edward captured several more frigates and destroyed the French ship of the line Droits de l 'Homme at the Action of 13 January 1797 , ending the war as commander in chief in the Mediterranean . Israel was most noted for capturing the French flagship Bucentaure at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 while in command of HMS Conqueror . 
 Historian William James has noted that while Nymphe was slightly heavier both in tonnage and weight of shot , the French ship carried 80 more personnel who had been serving as a unified crew for significantly longer than those aboard the British frigate ; among Pellew 's men were 80 Cornish tin miners pressed into service only a few weeks earlier . This should have conferred an advantage on the French during the final boarding action but the loss of the commanding officers and heavy casualties among the French crew enabled the British to capture the ship . Nevertheless , the heavy casualties on both ships demonstrated the fierceness of the action and James notes that " both combatants displayed , throughout the contest , an equal share of bravery and determination " . Pellew was so impressed by his opponent that he attended his funeral in Portsmouth on 23 June and later sent a considerable amount of money to Mullon 's widow in honour of her husband 's bravery . 
 = Kingdom Come ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Kingdom Come " is the sixth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on November 29 , 1996 . The episode was written by Jorge Zamacona , and directed by Winrich Kolbe . " Kingdom Come " featured guest appearances by Lindsay Crouse and Tom McBeath . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , chases a serial killer who targets clerics and holy men due to his frustration with his own faith . 
 " Kingdom Come " marked the first contributions to the series by Zamacona and Kolbe , who would both return for future episodes . The original broadcast date set for " Kingdom Come " was pushed back several weeks , as it was felt by the network that it would be in poor taste following the death of Chicago archbishop Joseph Bernardin . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When a Catholic priest is burnt at the stake in Lander , Wyoming , private investigative organisation the Millennium Group despatch offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and Ardis Cohen ( Lindsay Crouse ) who had previously worked together on a case involving the murders of three clerics several years earlier . Black sees similarities between the murders and the methods of torture employed by the medieval Inquisition . This is confirmed when a Protestant minister is drowned in imitation of another ritual torture . At the scene of the drowning , two wedding rings are found — a man 's in the stomach of the victim and woman 's nearby . 
 At a church , the killer is searching through files when he is interrupted , and flees , leaving bloodied fingerprints at the scene . Black constructs a profile of the man , and deduces that his actions are attacks on faith , believing that the killer has suffered a devastating loss which has caused him to lose his own faith . As the manhunt for the killer tightens , another cleric is tortured and killed ; however , Black senses that the killer has returned to where his life fell apart . He and the police are able to identify the killer as Galen Calloway ( Michael <unk> ) , whose wife and daughter had been killed in a house fire several years earlier . Black knows the killer 's next target will be the church that held the family 's funeral . 
 Calloway enters the church wielding explosives , taking the congregation hostage . The building is quickly surrounded by police and reporters as Calloway gives a sermon to his hostages about the loss of faith . Black believes he can connect with Calloway , and is allowed to enter the church . Calloway is initially hostile , but Black is able to talk him down , convincing Calloway that his faith has not been lost , but simply tested — despite all that has happened , Calloway has never lost his belief in God . Realizing the truth of this , Calloway surrenders . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Kingdom Come " is the first of two episodes of Millennium to be written by Jorge Zamacona , who would also pen the later season one episode " The Wild and the Innocent " . The episode also marks the first of four directorial credits for Winrich Kolbe , who would also take the reins on " Force Majeure " , " Lamentation " and " Broken World " , all in the first season . 
 Guest actor Laurie Murdoch , who portrayed one of the murdered priests in the episode , would later return in the third season episode " TEOTWAWKI " , in an unrelated role . Fellow guest Tom McBeath , who played a detective investigating the case , would also reappear in the third season , playing a prosecution lawyer in " <unk> " . 
 The episode opens with a quotation taken from the Book of Exodus , the second book of the Hebrew Bible , and one of the five books that make up the Torah . The passage used is Exodus 10 : 21 , " And there will be such intense darkness , that one can feel it " . Biblical verses were also used at the beginning of other episodes in the series , including the Book of Job in " Wide Open " and " Dead Letters " ; the Book of Jeremiah in " Weeds " ; and the Gospel of Luke in " Blood Relatives " . 
 " Kingdom Come " was the fourth episode of the series produced , postponed from its original broadcast date to be the sixth episode aired . Fox Broadcasting Company announced that the reason for this was that it would be " in poor taste " to run an episode involving the murder of clergymen soon after the death of Cardinal Joseph Bernardin , the Archbishop of Chicago . However , it was rumoured at the time that the postponement may simply have been a way to draw attention to the series , as its ratings had begun to fall . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Kingdom Come " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on November 29 , 1996 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 2 , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by approximately 7 million households . 
 " Kingdom Come " received mixed reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five , calling it " a particularly superficial addition to the series " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode 's lack of complexity was refreshing , but ultimately the " awkward " performances and " cheesy " approach to its subject matter detracted from it . Writing for The A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B , describing it as " an episode about a man who finds himself trying to lose his faith but being unable to do so " . VanDerWerff felt that the episode suffered from " the typical Millennium problems " , including " an overreliance on trite philosophical dialogue " ; however , he found that it contained " something pure and believable at its core that keeps the episode moving along nicely " . The episode 's thematic concern with the role of religion in society was noted as being " the tension Millennium would build its best episodes on " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " Kingdom Come " 5 out of 5 , describing it as being " classic Millennium " . Gibron felt that the episode had " an exceptional script that delightfully fails to spell everything out for us up front " , and noted that it served as " the blueprint for all better Millennium episodes to come " . 
 = New York State Route 431 = 
 New York State Route 431 ( NY 431 ) is a state highway in Essex County , New York , in the United States . The highway , also known as the Whiteface Mountain Veterans Memorial Highway , begins at an intersection with NY 86 in Wilmington and climbs Whiteface Mountain in the Adirondacks . The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation maintains the highway , which is 7 @.@ 96 miles ( 12 @.@ 81 km ) long . 
 Marcellus Leonard , a merchant from nearby Saranac Lake , originally proposed the highway in the late 19th century . However , serious plans for the highway did not develop until the 1920s . Construction of the route began in 1929 and was completed in 1935 ; Leonard died six months before the opening . The 25 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 40 km / h ) highway varies in elevation from over 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) to over 4 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 372 m ) and increases in elevation by about 450 feet ( 137 m ) per mile as it heads away from NY 86 . The Whiteface Highway was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2008 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Whiteface Highway , also known as NY 431 , begins at an intersection with NY 86 in Wilmington . The highway heads to the west , ascending in elevation as it approaches Whiteface Mountain . It heads through a pass between Morgan and Esther Mountains , two smaller mountains adjacent to Whiteface Mountain , on its way to an intersection with County Route 72 ( CR 72 ) , the last highway that NY 431 intersects . Just west of CR 72 , NY 431 passes through a toll booth and becomes a toll road . The NY 431 designation continues along the highway to the Union Falls Overlook , a scenic view 2 @,@ 700 feet ( 820 m ) in elevation about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) into the scenic drive . 
 At this point , NY 431 curves to the south , climbing up the western side of both Esther Mountain and Whiteface Mountain . Upon reaching 3 @,@ 300 feet ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) in elevation , a large building at the top of Whiteface Mountain called " The Castle " becomes visible , and Union Falls Pond can be seen more clearly below . The scenic drive continues up Whiteface Mountain to its summit , which NY 431 ascends toward by way of a pair of hairpin turns just north of the peak . At the first of the turns , the highway reaches an overlook 3 @,@ 700 feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) in elevation that provides views of parts of Lake Placid and the Olympic Village . The road and the NY 431 designation both terminate at a parking lot about 300 feet ( 91 m ) below the summit of Whiteface Mountain , where " The Castle " is located . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea of constructing a road up Whiteface Mountain was first conceived in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by Marcellus Leonard , an entrepreneur from Saranac Lake . The plans for the highway began to take shape in the 1920s when the land for the road was given by its owner to the state of New York on the condition that it would be named after America 's Great War veterans . The road was later renamed to honor veterans from all wars . Governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the dedication for the highway in 1929 . 
 Just after construction was announced for the new roadway , plans were developed in 1929 for a World War I monument at the top of Whiteface Mountain . The American Legion supported the new tower , which was to be 130 feet ( 40 m ) high and feature a light visible for over 75 miles ( 121 km ) . The height of the tower was later reduced to 80 feet ( 24 m ) , but the project still faced opposition from the Association for Protection of the Adirondacks and the New York Fish Game and Forest League . Lithgow Osborne , who ran the New York State Conservation Department , stated the tower would destroy the landscape of Whiteface . Despite the controversy , the bill for the memorial was passed by both houses of the New York State Legislature in April 1934 , with the State Senate approving it by a vote of 45 – 2 . Governor Herbert Lehman received the bill on April 19 , vowing to veto it . He followed through on his promise on May 16 , 1934 , commenting that the tower would deface the summit of Whiteface Mountain . Lehman added that while he generally supported memorials for veterans , it would be inappropriate to deface a summit for the memorial . 
 Plans for the Whiteface Mountain Highway surfaced in 1929 , and a bid of $ 687 @,@ 572 @.@ 50 ( 1931 USD ) was submitted to construct the new roadway two years later . The final plans called for an 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) , 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide highway climbing 3 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) in elevation with grade changes of 8 – 10 % . A toll of $ 1 for each car and its driver and $ 1 for each additional passenger would be charged to drive up the new highway . Construction started in 1931 , with crews working until near Christmas when snowfall impeded their progress . Work on the parkway resumed on March 15 , 1932 . The new stone walls guarding the new highway cost about $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1931 USD ) to construct . The highway opened to traffic on July 20 , 1935 . 
 On September 14 , 1935 , it was formally dedicated by Roosevelt , now President of the United States , at a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony . In all , the road cost $ 1 @.@ 2 million to construct . President Roosevelt also requested that an elevator be constructed to help visitors from the parking lot to the summit of Whiteface Mountain . Unfortunately , Marcellus Leonard , the person considered to be the " father " of the highway , did not live to see the highway open as he died at 90 years old on February 23 , 1935 , a few months before the road opened . The completed highway was assigned NY 431 , a designation which had been reserved for the road as early as 1932 . 
 The road was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in October 2008 as the " Whiteface Veterans Memorial Highway Complex " . The National Park Service , which keeps the Register , announced the listing nine months later . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Wilmington , Essex County . 
 = Nobody 's Perfect ( Hannah Montana song ) = 
 " Nobody 's Perfect " is a song by American recording artist Miley Cyrus , credited as her character Hannah Montana from the eponymous television series . It was released on May 15 , 2007 by Walt Disney Records as the lead single from Hannah Montana 2 ( 2007 ) , the accompanying soundtrack album for its second season . Written by Matthew Gerrard and Robbie Nevil and produced by Gerrard , " Nobody 's Perfect " discusses the importance of overcoming mistakes ; it is heavily based on synthpop musical styles . 
 Contemporary music critics spoke favorably of " Nobody 's Perfect " in their reviews , and were appreciative of its overall production . The track peaked at number 27 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 ; by exceeding sales of 906 @,@ 000 copies as of October 2010 , it has additionally become the most successful track from the Hannah Montana franchise . A live performance of Cyrus performing the track as Montana serves as the accompanying music video for the track ; it was first broadcast on July 3 , 2007 , although it was later included in the Vevo catalog on December 10 , 2010 . The song was also performed during Cyrus ' headlining Best of Both Worlds Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In Hannah Montana , Miley Cyrus portrays the character Miley Stewart , a teenager who lives the secret double life as the pop star Hannah Montana . She stated that " most songs for the first season reflect the show , with Miley or Hannah making sure the other doesn 't get caught or whatever , " opining that the tracks provided series producers with the opportunity to " make sure that everyone understood the characters " . By comparison , Cyrus described material used during the second season as " more speaking out to the fans . " 
 " Nobody 's Perfect " was written and produced by Matthew Gerrard ; he additionally oversaw its mixing and programming , and performed the guitar , bass , and keyboards . Greg Critchley plated the drums , while Marco Luciana was responsible for the keyboards and Ashley <unk> contributed the background vocals . " Nobody 's Perfect " appears as the second track on Hannah Montana 2 with a duration of three minutes and twenty seconds . It is written in the key of C @-@ minor with Cyrus ' vocals spanning two octaves from C4 to D5 . The song was described by Allmusic as " synth @-@ driven pop " , and discusses the importance of overcoming mistakes . 
 = = Release = = 
 Before being released as the lead single from Hannah Montana 2 on May 15 , 2007 , " Nobody 's Perfect " was included on the reissued two @-@ disc special edition of the original soundtrack Hannah Montana ( 2006 ) . Within the Hannah Montana storyline , " Nobody 's Perfect " was written by Miley 's father Robby Stewart ; it is first heard in the episode " Get Down , Study @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> " during the second season , where Miley reworks the song into the " Bone Dance " as a way of helping her study for a biology mid @-@ term exam . A live performance of Cyrus performing the track as Montana acts as an accompanying music video for the track ; it was initially released on July 3 , 2007 , although it was reissued through Vevo on December 10 , 2010 . It was also performed during Cyrus ' headlining Best of Both Worlds Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Nobody 's Perfect " received generally favorable reviews from contemporary music critics . Writing for AllMusic , Heather Phares appreciated the incorporation of " shiny , synth @-@ driven pop " , which she credited with " [ making ] the first soundtrack a hit . " Shirley Halperin from Entertainment Weekly shared a similar sentiment , describing it as " pure pop candy " . Bob Waliszewski and Bob Smithouser from Plugged In classified " Nobody 's Perfect " as " pro @-@ social content " , where " rather than [ beating ] herself up over mistakes , the singer acknowledges that ' Nobody 's Perfect ' " through the lyrics " Everybody has those days " and " You live and you learn it " . " Nobody 's Perfect " charted at number 27 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and reached numbers 14 and 25 on the Billboard Digital Songs and Pop 100 charts , respectively . As of October 2010 , the track has sold 906 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , becoming the most successful song from the Hannah Montana franchise . " Nobody 's Perfect " also charted at numbers 73 and 87 on the Hot Canadian Digital Singles and Australian ARIA Charts , respectively . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Hannah Montana 2 . 
 Recording 
 Mastered at Capitol Mastering ( Hollywood , California ) 
 Personnel 
 Greg Critchley – drums 
 Matthew Gerrard – songwriter , producer , mixing , guitar , bass , keyboards , programming 
 Marco Luciana – keyboards 
 Hannah Montana – lead vocals 
 Robbie Nevil – songwriter 
 Ashley <unk> – background vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = SMS Seydlitz = 
 SMS Seydlitz was a 24 @,@ 988 metric tons ( 24 @,@ 593 long tons ; 27 @,@ 545 short tons ) battlecruiser of the Imperial German Navy , built in Hamburg . She was ordered in 1910 and commissioned in May 1913 , the fourth battlecruiser built for the High Seas Fleet . She was named after Friedrich Wilhelm von Seydlitz , a Prussian general during the reign of King Frederick the Great and the Seven Years ' War . Seydlitz represented the culmination of the first generation of German battlecruisers , which had started with the Von der Tann in 1906 , and continued with the pair of Moltke @-@ class battlecruisers ordered in 1907 and 1908 . Seydlitz featured several incremental improvements over the preceding designs , including a redesigned propulsion system and an improved armor layout . The ship was also significantly larger than her predecessors — she was approximately 3 @,@ 000 metric tons heavier than the Moltke @-@ class ships . 
 Seydlitz participated in many of the large fleet actions during the First World War , including the battles of Dogger Bank and Jutland in the North Sea . The ship suffered severe damage during both of these engagements ; during the Battle of Dogger Bank , a 13 @.@ 5 in ( 34 @.@ 3 cm ) shell from the British battlecruiser Lion struck Seydlitz 's rearmost turret and nearly caused a magazine explosion that could have destroyed the ship . At the Battle of Jutland she was hit 21 times by heavy caliber shells , one of which penetrated the working chamber of the aft superfiring turret . Although the resulting fire destroyed the turret , the safety measures put in place after the battle of Dogger Bank prevented a worse catastrophe . The ship was also hit by a torpedo during the battle , causing her to take in over 5 @,@ 300 metric tons of water , and her freeboard was reduced to 2 @.@ 5 m . She had to be lightened significantly to permit her crossing of the Jade Bar . The ship inflicted severe damage on her British opponents as well ; early in the battle , salvos from both Seydlitz and Derfflinger destroyed the battlecruiser Queen Mary in a matter of seconds . 
 Seydlitz also saw some limited action in the Baltic Sea , when she provided screening for the German flotilla that attempted to clear the Gulf of Riga in 1915 . As with the rest of the German battlecruisers that survived the war , the ship was interned in Scapa Flow in 1918 . The ship , along with the rest of the High Seas Fleet , was scuttled in June 1919 , to prevent her seizure by the British Royal Navy . She was raised on 2 November 1928 , and scrapped by 1930 in Rosyth . 
 = = Development = = 
 Despite the success of the previous German battlecruisers designs — those of Von der Tann and the Moltke class — there was still significant debate as to how new ships of the type were to be designed . In 1909 , the Reichsmarineamt ( Navy Department ) requested Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the State Secretary for the navy , to provide them with the improvements that would be necessary for the next battlecruiser design . Tirpitz continued to push for the use of battlecruisers solely as fleet scouts and to destroy enemy cruisers , along the lines of the battlecruisers employed by the British Royal Navy . The Kaiser , Wilhelm II , and the majority of the Navy Department argued that due to Germany 's numerical inferiority compared to the Royal Navy , the ships would also have to fight in the line of battle . This necessitated much heavier armor protection than that afforded to the Royal Navy 's battlecruiser designs . Ultimately , the Kaiser and the Navy Department won the debate , and the battlecruiser for the 1909 – 1910 building year would continue in the pattern of the previous Von der Tann and Moltke @-@ class designs . 
 Financial constraints meant that there would have to be a trade @-@ off between speed , battle capabilities , and displacement . The initial design specifications mandated that speed was to have been at least as high as with the Moltke class , and that the ship was to have been armed with either eight 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns or ten 280 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) guns . The design staff considered triple turrets , but these were discarded when it was decided that the standard 280 mm twin turret was sufficient . 
 In August 1909 , the Reichstag stated that it would tolerate no increases in cost over the Moltke @-@ class battlecruisers , and so for a time , the Navy Department considered shelving the new design and instead to build a third Moltke @-@ class ship . Admiral Tirpitz was able to negotiate a discount on armor plate from both Krupp and Dillingen ; Tirpitz also pressured the ship 's builder , Blohm & Voss , for a discount . These cost reductions freed up sufficient funds to make some material improvements to the design . On 27 January 1910 , the Kaiser approved the design for the new ship , ordered under the provisional name " Cruiser J " . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Seydlitz was 200 meters ( 656 ft 2 in ) long at the waterline , and 200 @.@ 6 m ( 658 ft 2 in ) overall . The ship had a beam of 28 @.@ 5 m ( 93 ft 6 in ) , which was increased to 28 @.@ 8 m ( 94 ft 6 in ) with anti @-@ torpedo nets equipped . She had a draft of 9 @.@ 29 m ( 30 ft 6 in ) forward and 9 @.@ 09 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) aft . Seydlitz displaced 24 @,@ 988 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 593 long tons ) as designed , and carrying a full load , the ship displaced 28 @,@ 550 tonnes ( 28 @,@ 100 long tons ) . Seydlitz had a double bottom for 76 percent of the length of the hull . The ship carried a number of smaller boats , including one picket boat , three barges , two launches , two yawls , and two dinghies . Seydlitz was described as having been a good sea boat with gentle motion . The ship lost up to 60 percent of her speed at a hard rudder , and would heel over to 9 degrees . The ship had a standard complement of 43 officers and 1025 men , and when serving as the flagship of I Scouting Group , she was manned by an additional 13 officers and 62 men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Seydlitz 's steam plant consisted of 27 Schulz @-@ Thornycroft small @-@ tube boilers with 52 fire boxes — 2 fire boxes per boiler — divided into three engine rooms . These powered two sets of Parsons direct @-@ drive turbines . Each set consisted of a high @-@ pressure outboard turbine which exhausted into a low @-@ pressure inboard turbine . Each turbine drove a 3 @-@ bladed screw that was 3 @.@ 88 m ( 12 @.@ 7 ft ) in diameter . Steering was controlled by tandem rudders . The engines were designed to produce 62 @,@ 138 shp ( 46 @,@ 336 kW ) and a top speed of 26 @.@ 5 knots ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) . Using forced draft on trials , the engines provided up to 88 @,@ 510 shp ( 66 @,@ 002 kW ) and a top speed of 28 @.@ 1 knots ( 52 @.@ 0 km / h ; 32 @.@ 3 mph ) . The ship carried up to 3 @,@ 600 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 500 long tons ) of coal . With full fuel stores , Seydlitz could steam at a cruising speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ; 4 @,@ 800 mi ) . Electrical power was provided by six turbo generators that produced 1 @,@ 800 kW at 220 V. 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Seydlitz mounted a nearly identical main battery to that of the preceding Moltke @-@ class ships — ten 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . The guns were arranged similarly as well , with one turret fore , two staggered wing turrets , and two super @-@ firing turrets aft . They were placed in newer Drh . L C / 1910 mountings , which enabled depression of the guns down to − 8 degrees and elevation to 13 @.@ 5 degrees — the same range of motion of the earlier Drh . L C / 1908 turrets . At 13 @.@ 5 degrees , the guns could be fired to 18 @,@ 100 m ( 19 @,@ 800 yd ) . In 1916 , as with Moltke , Seydlitz had her main turrets modified to allow for elevation up to 16 degrees , for a maximum range of 19 @,@ 100 m ( 20 @,@ 900 yd ) . The fore and aft guns were able to train approximately 150 degrees in both directions from the centerline . The two staggered wing turrets were able to train only 80 degrees in both directions from the perpendicular . The main battery was supplied with 87 armor @-@ piercing rounds per gun , for a total of 870 shells . In addition to the 666 lb ( 302 kg ) shell , each gun chambered a 57 lb ( 26 kg ) fore propellant charge in a silk bag and a 174 lb ( 79 kg ) main charge in a brass case . The guns fired the shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 887 ft ( 880 m ) per second . 
 Seydlitz carried a similar secondary battery to the preceding Moltke @-@ class design . The ship mounted twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns in single casemates along the center of the ship . These guns could hit targets out to a distance of 13 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 yd ) , and after the 1916 refit , the range was extended to 16 @,@ 800 m ( 18 @,@ 400 yd ) . The 15 cm guns had a total of 1 @,@ 920 shells , with 160 rounds for each gun . The ship was also armed with twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , which were mounted in casemates as well . Two of these guns were removed in 1916 and replaced with high @-@ angle 8 @.@ 8 cm Flak L / 45 guns . As was customary for all German capital ships of the time , Seydlitz was equipped with four submerged torpedo tubes . The ship mounted one tube in the bow , one in the stern , and two on the sides of the vessel . The weapons were 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter , and a total of 11 torpedoes were stored . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 As was standard for German warships of the period , Seydlitz used Krupp cemented and nickel steel for her armor plating . The ship had an armored belt that was 300 mm ( 12 in ) thick at its strongest area in the citadel , and tapered down to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in the bow and stern . The main belt was reinforced by a torpedo bulkhead that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The forward conning tower had 350 mm ( 14 in ) of armor on the sides , and a 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick roof . The turrets were protected by 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) on the sides and armor ranging in thickness from 70 – 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) on the turret roofs . The casemates had lighter armor protection , with 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) on the sides and 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) roofs . The deck armor ranged in thickness , depending on the area being protected . In the more vital areas , the deck armor was 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick , while less important areas of the ship were covered by only 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) . A 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) belt of sloping armor was placed under the main deck armor . The turret barbettes were protected by plating 230 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The portions of the barbettes that were behind the main belt were thinner to save weight , which was a practice employed on most German and British ships of the period . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Seydlitz was launched on 30 March 1912 , and was christened by General der Kavallerie Karl Wilhelm Heinrich von Kleist . On 22 May 1913 the ship was commissioned into the German fleet , manned by the crew of the old armored cruiser Yorck , which had been recently transferred to the reserve fleet . After trials , Seydlitz joined the rest of the High Seas Fleet for maneuvers off Helgoland . Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Franz von Hipper , the commander of the I Scouting Group , raised his flag in the ship on 23 June 1914 . The ship served as Hipper 's flagship until 26 October 1917 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Battle of Heligoland Bight = = = = 
 Shortly after the outbreak of World War I , a brief engagement between German light cruisers and a raiding force of British cruisers and battlecruisers took place on 28 August 1914 . During the morning , British cruisers from the Harwich Force attacked the German destroyers patrolling the Heligoland Bight . Six German light cruisers — Cöln , Strassburg , Stettin , Frauenlob , Stralsund , and Ariadne — responded to the attack and inflicted serious damage to the British raiders . The arrival at approximately 13 : 37 of the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , under the command of Vice Admiral David Beatty , quickly put the German ships at a disadvantage . 
 Along with the rest of the I Scouting Group battlecruisers , Seydlitz was stationed in the Wilhelmshaven Roads on the morning of the battle . By 08 : 50 , Hipper had requested permission from Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander in chief of the High Seas Fleet , to send his ships to relieve the beleaguered German cruisers . The battlecruisers Von der Tann and Moltke were ready to sail by 12 : 10 , but the low tide prevented the ships from being able to pass over the sand bar at the mouth of the Jade Estuary safely . At 14 : 10 , Moltke and Von der Tann were able to cross the Jade bar ; Hipper ordered the German light cruisers to fall back to his ships , while Hipper himself was about an hour behind in Seydlitz . At 14 : 25 , the remaining light cruisers — Strassburg , Stettin , Frauenlob , Stralsund , and Ariadne — rendezvoused with the battlecruisers . Seydlitz arrived on the scene by 15 : 10 , while Ariadne succumbed to battle damage and sank . Hipper ventured forth cautiously to search for the two missing light cruisers , Mainz and Cöln , which had already sunk . By 16 : 00 , the German flotilla turned around to return to the Jade Estuary , arriving at approximately 20 : 23 . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth = = = = 
 On 2 November 1914 , Seydlitz , followed by Moltke , Von der Tann , and the armored cruiser Blücher , along with four light cruisers , left the Jade Estuary and steamed towards the English coast . The flotilla arrived off Great Yarmouth at daybreak the following morning and bombarded the port , while the light cruiser Stralsund laid a minefield . The British submarine D5 responded to the bombardment , but struck one of the mines laid by Stralsund and sank . Shortly thereafter , Hipper ordered his ships to turn back to German waters . While Hipper 's ships were returning to German waters , a heavy fog covered the Heligoland Bight , so the ships were ordered to halt until visibility improved so they could safely navigate the defensive minefields . The armored cruiser Yorck made a navigational error that led the ship into one of the German minefields . Yorck struck two mines and quickly sank ; the coastal defense ship Hagen was able to save 127 men of the crew . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby = = = = 
 Ingenohl decided that another raid on the English coast should to be carried out in the hopes of luring a portion of the Grand Fleet into combat where it could be destroyed . At 03 : 20 on 15 December , Seydlitz , Moltke , Von der Tann , the new battlecruiser Derfflinger , and Blücher , along with the light cruisers Kolberg , Strassburg , Stralsund , and Graudenz , and two squadrons of torpedo boats left the Jade . The ships sailed north past the island of Heligoland , until they reached the Horns Reef lighthouse , at which point the ships turned west towards Scarborough . Twelve hours after Hipper left the Jade , the High Seas Fleet , consisting of 14 dreadnoughts and 8 pre @-@ dreadnoughts and a screening force of 2 armored cruisers , 7 light cruisers , and 54 torpedo boats , departed to provide distant cover . 
 On 26 August 1914 , the German light cruiser Magdeburg had run aground in the Gulf of Finland ; the wreck was captured by the Russian navy , which found code books used by the German navy , along with navigational charts for the North Sea . These documents were then passed on to the Royal Navy . Room 40 began decrypting German signals , and on 14 December , intercepted messages relating to the plan to bombard Scarborough . The exact details of the plan were unknown , and it was assumed that the High Seas Fleet would remain safely in port , as in the previous bombardment . Beatty 's four battlecruisers , supported by the 3rd Cruiser Squadron and the 1st Light Cruiser Squadron , along with the 2nd Battle Squadron 's six dreadnoughts , were to ambush Hipper 's battlecruisers . 
 During the night of 15 December , the main body of the High Seas Fleet encountered British destroyers . Fearing the prospect of a nighttime torpedo attack , Ingenohl ordered the ships to retreat . Hipper was unaware of Ingenohl 's reversal , and so he continued with the bombardment . Upon reaching the British coast , Hipper 's battlecruisers split into two groups . Seydlitz , Moltke , and Blücher went north to shell Hartlepool , while Von der Tann and Derfflinger went south to shell Scarborough and Whitby . During the bombardment of Hartlepool , Seydlitz was hit three times and Blücher was hit six times by the coastal battery . Seydlitz suffered only minimal damage , and no casualties . By 09 : 45 on the 16th , the two groups had reassembled , and they began to retreat eastward . 
 By this time , Beatty 's battlecruisers were in position to block Hipper 's chosen egress route , while other forces were en route to complete the encirclement . At 12 : 25 , the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group began to pass through the British forces searching for Hipper . One of the cruisers in the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron spotted Stralsund and signaled a report to Beatty . At 12 : 30 , Beatty turned his battlecruisers towards the German ships . Beatty presumed that the German cruisers were the advance screen for Hipper 's ships , but the battlecruisers were some 50 km ( 27 nmi ) ahead . The 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , which had been screening for Beatty 's ships , detached to pursue the German cruisers , but a misinterpreted signal from the British battlecruisers sent them back to their screening positions . This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to escape and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers . The German battlecruisers wheeled to the northeast of the British forces and made good their escape . 
 Both the British and the Germans were disappointed that they failed to effectively engage their opponents . Ingenohl 's reputation suffered greatly as a result of his timidity . The captain of the Moltke was furious ; he stated that Ingenohl had turned back " because he was afraid of eleven British destroyers which could have been eliminated ... under the present leadership we will accomplish nothing . " The official German history criticized Ingenohl for failing to use his light forces to determine the size of the British fleet , stating : " He decided on a measure which not only seriously jeopardized his advance forces off the English coast but also deprived the German Fleet of a signal and certain victory . " 
 = = = = Battle of Dogger Bank = = = = 
 In early January 1915 , it became known that British ships were conducting reconnaissance in the Dogger Bank area . Ingenohl was initially reluctant to attempt to destroy these forces , because the I Scouting Group was temporarily weakened while Von der Tann was in drydock for periodic maintenance . Konteradmiral Richard Eckermann , the Chief of Staff of the High Seas Fleet , insisted on the operation , and so Ingenohl relented and ordered Hipper to take his battlecruisers to the Dogger Bank . On 23 January , Hipper sortied , with Seydlitz in the lead , followed by Moltke , Derfflinger , and Blücher , along with the light cruisers Graudenz , Rostock , Stralsund , and Kolberg and 19 torpedo boats from V Flotilla and II and XVIII Half @-@ Flotillas . Graudenz and Stralsund were assigned to the forward screen , while Kolberg and Rostock were assigned to the starboard and port , respectively . Each light cruiser had a half @-@ flotilla of torpedo boats attached . 
 Again , interception and decryption of German wireless signals played an important role . Although they were unaware of the exact plans , the cryptographers of Room 40 were able to deduce that Hipper would be conducting an operation in the Dogger Bank area . To counter it , Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , Rear Admiral Archibald Moore 's 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron and Commodore William Goodenough 's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron were to rendezvous with Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force at 8 : 00 on 24 January , approximately 30 nmi ( 56 km ) north of the Dogger Bank . At 08 : 14 , Kolberg spotted the light cruiser Aurora and several destroyers from the Harwich Force . Aurora challenged Kolberg with a search light , at which point Kolberg attacked Aurora and scored two hits . Aurora returned fire and scored two hits on Kolberg in retaliation . Hipper immediately turned his battlecruisers towards the gunfire , when , almost simultaneously , Stralsund spotted a large amount of smoke to the northwest of her position . This was identified as a number of large British warships steaming towards Hipper 's ships . 
 Hipper turned south to flee , but was limited to 23 knots ( 43 km / h ) , which was the maximum speed of the older armored cruiser Blücher . The pursuing British battlecruisers were steaming at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ) , and quickly caught up to the German ships . At 09 : 52 , Lion opened fire on Blücher from a range of approximately 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 000 m ) ; shortly thereafter , Queen Mary and Tiger began firing as well . At 10 : 09 , the British guns made their first hit on Blücher . Two minutes later , the German ships began returning fire , primarily concentrating on Lion , from a range of 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) . At 10 : 28 , Lion was struck on the waterline , which tore a hole in the side of the ship and flooded a coal bunker . At 10 : 30 , New Zealand , the fourth ship in Beatty 's line , came within range of Blücher and opened fire . By 10 : 35 , the range had closed to 17 @,@ 500 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) , at which point the entire German line was within the effective range of the British ships . Beatty ordered his battlecruisers to engage their German counterparts . Confusion aboard Tiger led the captain to believe he was to fire on Seydlitz , which left Moltke able to fire without distraction . 
 Seydlitz was struck in her forecastle at 10 : 25 , by a 13 @.@ 5 in shell from Lion , but this hit did minor damage . At 10 : 40 , Lion hit Seydlitz with a single 13 @.@ 5 in ( 343 mm ) shell , which holed the deck and penetrated the rear barbette . The shell itself failed to enter the barbette , but the explosion flashed into the working chamber and detonated the propellant charges inside . 
 In the reloading chamber , where the shell penetrated , part of the charge in readiness for loading was set on fire . The flames rose high up into the turret and down into the ammunition chamber , and thence through a connecting door , usually kept shut , through which men from the ammunition chamber tried to escape into the fore turret . The flames thus made their way through to the other ammunition chamber and thence up to the second turret , and from this cause the entire guns ' crews of both turrets perished very quickly . The flames rose above the turrets as high as a house . 
 The explosion killed 159 men , and destroyed both of the rear turrets . The fire was prevented from spreading to the shell magazines , which could have destroyed the ship , by the quick action of the executive officer , who ordered both magazines be flooded . The <unk> Wilhelm Heidkamp was severely injured when he turned the red @-@ hot valves to flood the magazines . At 11 : 01 , Seydlitz struck back at Lion , and with a single 28 cm shell , knocked out two of Lion 's engines . Shortly thereafter , a pair of 30 @.@ 5 cm shells fired by Derfflinger struck Lion , one at the waterline . The penetration allowed water to enter the port feed tank — this hit eventually crippled Lion , the sea water contamination forced the ship 's crew to shut down the port engine . At 11 : 25 , Seydlitz was struck on her armored belt amidships by a third and final shell , which did little damage . 
 By this time , Blücher was severely damaged after having been pounded by heavy shells . The chase ended when there were several reports of U @-@ boats ahead of the British ships ; Beatty quickly ordered evasive maneuvers , which allowed the German ships to increase the distance to their pursuers . At this time , Lion 's last operational dynamo failed , which dropped her speed to 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) . Beatty , in the stricken Lion , ordered the remaining battlecruisers to " Engage the enemy 's rear , " but signal confusion caused the ships to solely target Blücher , allowing Moltke , Seydlitz , and Derfflinger to escape . By the time Beatty regained control over his ships , after having boarded Princess Royal , the German ships had too far a lead for the British to catch them ; at 13 : 50 , he broke off the chase . 
 Seydlitz was repaired at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Wilhelmshaven from 25 January to 31 March 1915 , after which she rejoined the fleet . 
 = = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = = 
 On 3 August 1915 , Seydlitz , Moltke , and Von der Tann were transferred to the Baltic with I Reconnaissance Group ( AG ) to participate in a planned foray into the Riga Gulf . The intention was to destroy the Russian naval forces in the area , including the pre @-@ dreadnought Slava , and to use the minelayer Deutschland to block the entrance to Moon Sound with naval mines . The German forces , under the command of Hipper , included the four Nassau and four Helgoland @-@ class battleships , the battlecruisers Seydlitz , Moltke , and Von der Tann , and a number of smaller craft . Throughout the operation , Seydlitz and the other two battlecruisers remained in the Baltic and provided cover for the assault into the Gulf of Riga . 
 Following the operation , Seydlitz and the other heavy units of the High Seas Fleet returned to the North Sea . On 11 – 12 September , Seydlitz and the rest of the I Scouting Group covered a minefield laying operation off Terschelling . On 24 November , the ship ran aground in the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , but was quickly refloated . On 4 December , while exiting the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , Seydlitz became entangled in one of the net barriers . Divers had to remove the tangled nets from the starboard screws . 
 = = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = = 
 On 24 – 25 April 1916 , the I Scouting Group undertook another operation to bombard the English coast , this time , the towns of Yarmouth and Lowestoft . Hipper was on sick leave , so the German ships were under the command of Konteradmiral Friedrich Boedicker , who flew his flag in Seydlitz . The German battlecruisers Derfflinger , Lützow , Moltke , Seydlitz and Von der Tann left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April , and were supported by a screening force of 6 light cruisers and two torpedo boat flotillas . The heavy units of the High Seas Fleet sailed at 13 : 40 , with the objective to provide distant support for Boedicker 's ships . The British Admiralty was made aware of the German sortie through the interception of German wireless signals , and deployed the Grand Fleet at 15 : 50 . 
 By 14 : 00 , Boedicker 's ships had reached a position off Norderney , at which point he turned his ships northward to avoid the Dutch observers on the island of Terschelling . At 15 : 38 , Seydlitz struck a naval mine , which tore a 15 m ( 50 @-@ foot ) hole in her hull , just abaft of the starboard broadside torpedo tube . 11 men were killed and 1 @,@ 400 short tons ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ) of water entered the ship . The ship 's draft increased 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) at the bow of the ship . Seydlitz turned back with the screen of light cruisers at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) . The four remaining battlecruisers turned south immediately in the direction of Norderney to avoid further mine damage . By 16 : 00 , Seydlitz was clear of imminent danger , so the ship stopped to allow Boedicker to disembark . The torpedo boat V28 brought Boedicker to Lützow , and the operation continued as planned . After Boedicker departed the ship , Seydlitz , escorted by a pair of torpedo boats , withdrew southward to the Jade . She was out of service for over a month for repair work due to the mine damage . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Almost immediately after the Lowestoft raid , Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Reinhard Scheer began planning another foray into the North Sea . He had initially intended to launch the operation in mid @-@ May , but the mine damage to Seydlitz had proved difficult to repair — Scheer was unwilling to embark on a major raid without his battlecruiser forces at full strength . On May 22 , the Wilhelmshaven dockyard reported the ship to be fit for duty , but tests carried out that night showed that the broadside torpedo flat that had been damaged by the mine was still not watertight , and there were still leaks in the fore and aft transverse bulkheads . Further repairs were necessary , and so the operation was postponed another week , by which time the Wilhelmshaven dockyard assured Scheer that the ship would be ready . At noon on 28 May , the repairs to Seydlitz were finally completed , and the ship returned to the I Scouting Group . 
 On the night of 30 May 1916 , Seydlitz and the other four battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group lay in anchor in the Jade roadstead . The following morning , at 02 : 00 CET , the ships slowly steamed out towards the Skagerrak at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) . By this time , Hipper had transferred his flag from Seydlitz to the newer battlecruiser Lützow . Seydlitz took her place in the center of the line , to the rear of Derfflinger and ahead of Moltke . The II Scouting Group , consisting of the light cruisers Frankfurt , Boedicker 's flagship , Wiesbaden , Pillau , and Elbing , and 30 torpedo boats of the II , VI , and IX Flotillas , accompanied Hipper 's battlecruisers . 
 An hour and a half later , the High Seas Fleet under the command of Scheer left the Jade ; the force was composed of 16 dreadnoughts . The High Seas Fleet was accompanied by the IV Scouting Group , composed of the light cruisers Stettin , München , Hamburg , Frauenlob , and Stuttgart , and 31 torpedo boats of the I , III , V , and VII Flotillas , led by the light cruiser Rostock . The six pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron had departed from the Elbe roads at 02 : 45 , and rendezvoused with the battle fleet at 5 : 00 . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , Hipper 's force encountered Beatty 's battlecruiser squadron . The German ships were the first to open fire , at a range of approximately 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . The British rangefinders had misread the range to their German targets , and so the first salvos fired by the British ships fell a mile past the German battlecruisers . As the two lines of battlecruisers deployed to engage each other , Seydlitz began to duel with her opposite in the British line , Queen Mary . By 16 : 54 , the range between the ships decreased to 12 @,@ 900 yards ( 11 @,@ 800 m ) , which enabled Seydlitz 's secondary battery to enter the fray . She was close enough to the ships of the British 9th and 10th Destroyer Flotillas that her secondary guns could effectively engage them . The other four German battlecruisers employed their secondary battery against the British battlecruisers . 
 Between 16 : 55 and 16 : 57 , Seydlitz was struck by two heavy caliber shells from Queen Mary . The first shell penetrated the side of the ship five feet above the main battery deck , and caused a number of small fires . The second shell penetrated the barbette of the aft superfiring turret . Four propellant charges were ignited in the working chamber ; the resulting fire flashed up into the turret and down to the magazine . The anti @-@ flash precautions that had been put in place after the explosion at Dogger Bank prevented any further propellant explosions . Regardless , the turret was destroyed and most of the gun crew had been killed in the blaze . 
 By 17 : 25 , the British battlecruisers were taking a severe battering from their German opponents . Indefatigable had been destroyed by a salvo from Von der Tann approximately 20 minutes before , and Beatty sought to turn his ships away by 2 points in order to regroup , while the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron arrived on the scene and provided covering fire . As the British battlecruisers began to turn away , Seydlitz and Derfflinger were able to concentrate their fire on Queen Mary . Witnesses reported at least 5 shells from two salvos hit the ship , which caused an intense explosion that ripped the Queen Mary in half . Shortly after the destruction of Queen Mary , both British and German destroyers attempted to make torpedo attacks on the opposing lines . One British torpedo struck Seydlitz at 17 : 57 . The torpedo hit the ship directly below the fore turret , slightly aft of where she had been mined the month before . The explosion tore a hole 40 feet long by 13 feet wide ( 12 m × 4 @.@ 0 m ) , and caused a slight list . Despite the damage , the ship was still able to maintain her top speed , and kept position in the line . 
 The leading ships of the German battle fleet had by 18 : 00 come within effective range of the British ships , and had begun trading shots with the British battlecruisers and Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships . Between 18 : 09 and 18 : 19 , Seydlitz was hit by a 380 mm ( 15 in ) shell from either Barham or Valiant . This shell struck the face of the port wing turret and disabled the guns . A second 380 mm shell penetrated the already disabled aft superfiring turret and detonated the cordite charges that had not already burned . The ship also had two of her 150 mm guns disabled from British gunfire , and the rear turret lost its right @-@ hand gun . 
 As the evening wore on , visibility steadily decreased for the German ships . Seydlitz 's commander , Kapitän zur See von <unk> , later remarked : 
 " Visibility had generally become unfavorable . There was a dense mist , so that as a rule only the flashes of the enemy 's guns , but not the ships themselves , could be seen . Our distance had been reduced from 18 @,@ 000 to 13 @,@ 000 yards . From north @-@ west to north @-@ east we had before us a hostile line firing its guns , though in the mist we could only glimpse the flashes from time to time . It was a mighty and terrible spectacle . " 
 At around 19 : 00 , Beatty 's forces were nearing the main body of the Grand Fleet , and to delay the discovery of the Grand Fleet 's location by the German fleet , he turned his ships towards the German line , in order to force them to turn as well . This reduced the distance between the British and German battlecruisers from 14 @,@ 000 to 12 @,@ 000 yards ( 13 @,@ 000 to 11 @,@ 000 m ) . Visibility continued to favor the British , and the German battlecruisers paid the price . Over the next several minutes , Seydlitz was hit six times , primarily on the forward section of the ship . A fire started under the ship 's forecastle . The smothering fire from Beatty 's ships forced Hipper to temporarily withdraw his battlecruisers to the southwest . As the ships withdrew , Seydlitz began taking on more water , and the list to starboard worsened . The ship was thoroughly flooded above the middle deck in the fore compartments , and had nearly lost all buoyancy . 
 By 19 : 30 , the High Seas Fleet , which was by that point pursuing the British battlecruisers , had not yet encountered the Grand Fleet . Scheer had been considering retiring his forces before darkness exposed his ships to torpedo boat attack . He had not yet made a decision when his leading battleships encountered the main body of the Grand Fleet . This development made it impossible for Scheer to retreat , for doing so would have sacrificed the slower pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the II Battle Squadron , while using his dreadnoughts and battlecruisers to cover their retreat would have subjected his strongest ships to overwhelming British fire . Instead , Scheer ordered his ships to turn 16 points to starboard , which would bring the pre @-@ dreadnoughts to the relative safety of the disengaged side of the German battle line . 
 Seydlitz and the other battlecruisers followed the move , which put them astern of König . Hipper 's badly battered ships gained a temporary moment of respite , and uncertainty over the exact location and course of Scheer 's ships led Admiral Jellicoe to turn his ships eastward , towards what he thought was the likely path of the German retreat . The German fleet was instead sailing west , but Scheer ordered a second 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed course and pointed his ships at the center of the British fleet . The German fleet came under intense fire from the British line , and Scheer sent Seydlitz , Von der Tann , Moltke , and Derfflinger at high speed towards the British fleet , in an attempt to disrupt their formation and gain time for his main force to retreat . By 20 : 17 , the German battlecruisers had closed to within 7 @,@ 700 yards ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) of Colossus , at which point Scheer directed the ships to engage the lead ship of the British line . Seydlitz managed to hit Colossus once , but caused only minor damage to the ship 's superstructure . Three minutes later , the German battlecruisers turned in retreat , covered by a torpedo boat attack . 
 A pause in the battle at dusk allowed Seydlitz and the other German battlecruisers to cut away wreckage that interfered with the main guns , extinguish fires , repair the fire control and signal equipment , and ready the searchlights for nighttime action . During this period , the German fleet reorganized into a well @-@ ordered formation in reverse order , when the German light forces encountered the British screen shortly after 21 : 00 . The renewed gunfire gained Beatty 's attention , so he turned his battlecruisers westward . At 21 : 09 , he sighted the German battlecruisers , and drew to within 8 @,@ 500 yards ( 7 @,@ 800 m ) before opening fire at 20 : 20 . In the ensuing melee , Seydlitz was hit several times ; one shell struck the rear gun turret and other hit the ship 's bridge . The entire bridge crew was killed and several men in the conning tower were wounded . The German ships returned fire with every gun available , and at 21 : 32 hit both Lion and Princess Royal in the darkness . The maneuvering of the German battlecruisers forced the leading I Battle Squadron to turn westward to avoid collision . This brought the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron directly behind the battlecruisers , and prevented the British ships from pursuing the German battlecruisers when they turned southward . The British battlecruisers opened fire on the old battleships ; the German ships turned southwest to bring all of their guns to bear against the British ships . 
 By 22 : 15 , Hipper was finally able to transfer to Moltke , and then ordered his ships to steam at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ) towards the head of the German line . Only Seydlitz and Moltke were in condition to comply ; Derfflinger and Von der Tann could make at most 18 knots ( 33 km / h ) , and so these ships lagged behind . Seydlitz and Moltke were in the process of steaming to the front of the line when the ships passed close to Stettin , which forced the ship to drastically slow down to avoid collision . This forced Frauenlob , Stuttgart , and München to turn to port , which led them into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; at a range of 800 yards ( 730 m ) , the cruisers on both sides pummeled each other . Konteradmiral Ludwig von Reuter decided to attempt to lure the British cruisers towards Moltke and Seydlitz . Nearly simultaneously , the heavily damaged British cruisers broke off the attack . As the light cruisers were disengaging , a torpedo fired by Southampton struck Frauenlob , and the ship exploded . The German formation fell into disarray , and in the confusion , Seydlitz lost sight of Moltke . The ship was no longer able to keep up with Moltke 's 22 knots , and so detached herself to proceed to the Horns Reef lighthouse independently . 
 At 00 : 45 , Seydlitz was attempting to thread her way through the British fleet , but was sighted by the dreadnought Agincourt and noted as a " ship or Destroyer " . Agincourt 's captain did not want to risk giving away his ship 's position , and so allowed her to pass . By 01 : 12 , Seydlitz had managed to slip through the British fleet , and she was able to head for the safety of Horns Reef . At approximately 03 : 40 , she scraped over Horns Reef . Both of the ship 's gyro @-@ compasses had failed , so the light cruiser Pillau was sent to guide the ship home . By 15 : 30 on 1 June , Seydlitz was in critical condition ; the bow was nearly completely submerged , and the only buoyancy that remained in the forward section of the ship was the broadside torpedo room . Preparations were being made to evacuate the wounded crew when a pair of pump steamers arrived on the scene . The ships were able to stabilize Seydlitz 's flooding , and the ship managed to limp back to port . She reached the outer Jade river on the morning of 2 June , and on 3 June the ship entered Entrance III of the Wilhelmshaven Lock . At most , Seydlitz had been flooded by 5 @,@ 308 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 224 long tons ) of water . 
 Close to the end of the battle , at 03 : 55 , Hipper transmitted a report to Scheer informing him of the tremendous damage his ships had suffered . By that time , Derfflinger and Von der Tann each had only two guns in operation , Moltke was flooded with 1 @,@ 000 tons of water , and Seydlitz was severely damaged . Hipper reported : " I Scouting Group was therefore no longer of any value for a serious engagement , and was consequently directed to return to harbor by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , while he himself determined to await developments off Horns Reef with the battlefleet . " 
 During the course of the battle , Seydlitz was hit 21 times by heavy @-@ caliber shells , twice by secondary battery shells , and once by a torpedo . The ship suffered a total of 98 of her crew killed and 55 wounded . Seydlitz herself fired 376 main battery shells and scored approximately 10 hits . 
 = = = = Later operations = = = = 
 On 15 June 1916 , repair work to Seydlitz began in the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven , and continued until 1 October . The ship then underwent individual training , and rejoined the fleet in November . With his previous flagship Lützow at the bottom of the North Sea , Hipper again raised his flag in Seydlitz . On 4 November , Seydlitz and Moltke , along with the II Division , I Battle Squadron , the III Battle Squadron , and the new battleship Bayern sailed to <unk> on the Danish coast , in order to retrieve the stranded U @-@ boats U @-@ 20 and U @-@ 30 . 
 Late 1917 saw the High Seas Fleet beginning to conduct anti @-@ convoy raids in the North Sea between Britain and Norway . In October and December 1917 , two British convoys to Norway were intercepted and destroyed by German cruisers and destroyers , prompting Beatty , now the Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet , to detach several battleships and battlecruisers to protect convoys . This presented to Scheer the opportunity for which he had been waiting the entire war : the chance to isolate and eliminate a portion of the Grand Fleet . At 05 : 00 on 23 April 1918 , the High Seas Fleet left harbor with the intention of intercepting one of the heavily escorted convoys . Wireless radio traffic was kept to a minimum to prevent the British from learning of the operation . By 14 : 10 , the convoy had still not yet been located , and so Scheer turned the High Seas Fleet back towards German waters . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Seydlitz was to have taken part in what would have amounted to the " death ride " of the High Seas Fleet shortly before the end of World War I. The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Großadmiral of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . While the fleet was consolidating in Wilhelmshaven , war @-@ weary sailors began deserting en masse . As Von der Tann and Derfflinger passed through the locks that separated Wilhelmshaven 's inner harbor and roadstead , some 300 men from both ships climbed over the side and disappeared ashore . 
 On 24 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven . Many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on several battleships mutinied ; three ships from the III Squadron refused to weigh anchors , and acts of sabotage were committed on board the battleships Thüringen and Helgoland . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy . " The Wilhelmshaven mutiny spread to Kiel , and fueled a larger German Revolution that continued after the end of the war . Germany 's military position was hopeless , and so Generals Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff convinced the government to sign the Armistice to end the war . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and men . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Seydlitz slipped beneath the surface at 13 : 50 . On her side and on the bottom in twelve fathoms of water the wreck was frequently mistaken for a small island , and was sold in this condition as scrap to the salvage firm of Cox and Danks along with a battleship and twenty @-@ six destroyers . The ship was raised on 2 November 1928 , and while still inverted was towed south to be scrapped in Rosyth by 1930 . Seydlitz 's bell is on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial . 
 One of the ship 's 15 cm guns , which had been removed in 1916 , was later mounted aboard the commerce raider Kormoran during World War II . 
 = Vidkun Quisling = 
 Vidkun Abraham Lauritz <unk> Quisling ( Norwegian : [ <unk> <unk> ] ( listen ) ; 18 July 1887 – 24 October 1945 ) was a Norwegian military officer and politician , mostly known as the nominal head of government of Norway after the country was occupied by Nazi Germany during World War II . 
 Quisling first came to international prominence as a close collaborator of Fridtjof Nansen , organizing humanitarian relief during the Russian famine of 1921 in <unk> . He was posted as a Norwegian diplomat to the Soviet Union , and for some time also managed British diplomatic affairs there . He returned to Norway in 1929 , and served as Minister of Defence in the governments of Peder Kolstad ( 1931 – 32 ) and Jens Hundseid ( 1932 – 33 ) , representing the Farmers ' Party . Although Quisling achieved some popularity after his attacks on the political left , his party failed to win any seats in the Storting and was little more than peripheral in 1940 . On 9 April 1940 , with the German invasion of Norway in progress , he attempted to seize power in the world 's first radio @-@ broadcast coup d 'état , but failed after the Germans refused to support his government . 
 From 1942 to 1945 he served as Minister @-@ President , heading the Norwegian state administration jointly with the German civilian administrator Josef Terboven . His pro @-@ Nazi puppet government , known as the Quisling regime , was dominated by ministers from Nasjonal Samling , the party he founded in 1933 . The collaborationist government participated in Germany 's Final Solution . Quisling was put on trial during the legal purge in Norway after World War II and found guilty of charges including embezzlement , murder and high treason . He was executed by firing squad at Akershus Fortress , Oslo , on 24 October 1945 . The word " quisling " has since become a synonym for " collaborator " or " traitor , " reflecting the very poor light in which Quisling 's actions were seen , both at the time and since his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Vidkun Abraham Lauritz <unk> Quisling ( Norwegian pronunciation ) was born on 18 July 1887 in Fyresdal , in the Norwegian county of Telemark . He was the son of Church of Norway pastor and genealogist Jon Lauritz <unk> ( 1844 – 1930 ) and his wife Anna Caroline Bang ( 1860 – 1941 ) , the daughter of Jørgen Bang , ship @-@ owner and at the time the richest man of the town Grimstad in South Norway . The elder Quisling had lectured in Grimstad in the 1870s ; one of his pupils was Bang , whom he married on 28 May 1886 , following a long engagement . The newly @-@ wed couple promptly moved to Fyresdal , where Vidkun and his younger siblings were born . 
 The family name derives from <unk> , a Latinised name invented by Quisling 's ancestor Lauritz Ibsen <unk> ( 1634 – 1703 ) , based on the village of <unk> in Jutland , Denmark , whence he had emigrated . Having two brothers and a sister , the young Quisling was " shy and quiet but also loyal and helpful , always friendly , occasionally breaking into a warm smile " . Private letters later found by historians also indicate a warm and affectionate relationship between the family members . From 1893 to 1900 , his father was a chaplain for the <unk> borough in Drammen . Here , Vidkun went to school for the first time . He was bullied by other students at the school for his Telemark dialect , but proved a successful student . In 1900 , the family moved to Skien when his father was appointed provost of the city . 
 Academically Quisling proved talented in humanities , particularly history , and natural sciences ; he specialised in mathematics . At this point , however , his life had no clear direction . In 1905 , Quisling enrolled at the Norwegian Military Academy , having received the highest entrance examination score of the 250 applicants that year . Transferring in 1906 to the Norwegian Military College , he graduated with the highest score since the college 's inception in 1817 , and was rewarded by an audience with the King . On 1 November 1911 , he joined the army General Staff . Norway was neutral in the First World War ; Quisling detested the peace movement , though the high human cost of the war did temper his views . In March 1918 , he was sent to Russia as an attaché at the Norwegian legation in Petrograd , to take advantage of the five years he had spent studying the country . Though dismayed at the living conditions he experienced , Quisling nonetheless concluded that " the Bolsheviks have got an extraordinarily strong hold on Russian society " and marvelled at how Leon Trotsky had managed to mobilise Red Army forces so well ; by contrast , in granting too many rights to the people of Russia , the Russian Provisional Government under Alexander Kerensky had brought about its own downfall . When the legation was recalled in December 1918 , Quisling became the Norwegian military 's expert on Russian affairs . 
 = = = Travels = = = 
 In September 1919 , Quisling departed Norway to become an intelligence officer with the Norwegian delegation in Helsinki , a post that combined diplomacy and politics . In the autumn of 1921 , Quisling left Norway once again , this time at the request of explorer and humanitarian Fridtjof Nansen , and in January 1922 arrived in the Ukrainian capital Kharkov to help with the League of Nations humanitarian relief effort there . Highlighting the massive mismanagement of the area and the death toll of approximately ten thousand a day , Quisling produced a report that attracted aid and demonstrated his administrative skills , as well as his dogged determination to get what he wanted . On 21 August , he married the Russian Alexandra <unk> ( " Asja " ) <unk> , the daughter of a pedlar . Alexandra wrote in her memoirs that Quisling declared his love for her , but based on his letters home and investigations undertaken by his cousins , it appears that there was never any question of romantic involvement between the two . Quisling merely seems to have wanted to lift the girl out of poverty by providing her with a Norwegian passport and financial security . 
 Having left Ukraine in September 1922 , Quisling and Asja returned to Kharkov in February 1923 to prolong aid efforts , with Nansen describing Quisling 's work as " absolutely indispensable " . Quisling found the situation much improved and , with no fresh challenges , found it a more boring trip than his last . He did however meet Maria <unk> <unk> ( Russian : <unk> ́ я <unk> ́ <unk> Па ́ <unk> ) , a Ukrainian more than ten years his junior . Her diaries from the time " indicate a blossoming love affair " during the summer of 1923 , despite Quisling 's marriage to Asja the year before . She recalled that she was impressed by his fluent command of the Russian language , his Aryan appearance and his gracious demeanour . Quisling apparently married <unk> in Kharkov on 10 September 1923 , although no legal documentation has been discovered . Quisling 's biographer , Dahl , believes that in all likelihood the second marriage was never official . Regardless , the couple behaved as though they were married , and celebrated their wedding anniversary . Soon after the wedding , the aid mission came to an end and the trio left the Ukraine , and from the summer of 1923 onwards they planned to spend a year in Paris . Maria wanted to see Western Europe ; Quisling wanted to get some rest following bouts of stomach pain that had lasted all winter . 
 = = = = Paris , Eastern Europe and Norway = = = = 
 The stay in Paris required a temporary discharge from the army , which Quisling slowly grew to understand was permanent : army cutbacks meant that there would be no position available for him when he returned . Quisling devoted much of his time in the French capital to study , reading works of political theory and working on his philosophical project , which he called Universism . On 2 October 1923 he persuaded the Oslo daily newspaper Tidens Tegn to publish an article he had written calling for diplomatic recognition of the Soviet government . Quisling 's stay in Paris did not last as long as planned , and in late 1923 he started work on Nansen 's new repatriation project in the Balkans , arriving in Sofia in November . He spent the next two months travelling constantly with his wife Maria . In January she returned to Paris to look after Asja , who took on the role of the couple 's foster @-@ daughter ; Quisling joined them in February . 
 In the summer of 1924 , the trio returned to Norway where Asja subsequently left to live with an aunt in Nice and never returned . Although Quisling promised to provide for her well @-@ being , his payments were irregular , and over the coming years he would miss a number of opportunities to visit . Back in Norway , and to his later embarrassment , Quisling found himself drawn into the communist Norwegian labour movement . Among other policies , he fruitlessly advocated a people 's militia to protect the country against reactionary attacks , and asked members of the movement whether they would like to know what information the General Staff had on them , but got no response . Although this brief attachment to the extreme left seems unlikely given Quisling 's later political direction , Dahl suggests that , following a conservative childhood , he was by this time " unemployed and dispirited ... deeply resentful of the General Staff ... [ and ] in the process of becoming politically more radical " . Dahl adds that Quisling 's political views at this time could be summarised as " a fusion of socialism and nationalism " , with definite sympathies for the Soviet regime in Russia . 
 = = = = Russia and the rouble scandal = = = = 
 In June 1925 , Nansen once again provided Quisling with employment . The pair began a tour of Armenia , where they hoped to help repatriate native Armenians via a number of projects proposed for funding by the League of Nations . Despite Quisling 's substantial efforts , however , the projects were all rejected . In May 1926 , Quisling found another job with long @-@ time friend and fellow Norwegian Frederik Prytz in Moscow , working as a liaison between Prytz and the Soviet authorities who owned half of Prytz 's firm Onega Wood . He stayed in the job until Prytz prepared to close down the business in early 1927 , when Quisling found new employment as a diplomat . British diplomatic affairs in Russia were being managed by Norway , and he became their new legation secretary ; Maria joined him late in 1928 . A massive scandal broke when Quisling and Prytz were accused of using diplomatic channels to smuggle millions of roubles onto the black markets , a much @-@ repeated claim that was later used to support a charge of " moral bankruptcy " , but neither it nor the charge that Quisling spied for the British has ever been substantiated . 
 The harder line now developing in Russian politics led Quisling to distance himself from Bolshevism . The Soviet government had rejected outright his Armenian proposals , and obstructed an attempt by Nansen to help with the 1928 Ukrainian famine . Quisling took these rebuffs as a personal insult ; in 1929 , with the British now keen to take back control of their own diplomatic affairs , he left Russia . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) for his services to Britain , an honour revoked by King George VI in 1940 . By this time , Quisling had also been awarded the Romanian Crown Order and the Yugoslav Order of St. Sava for his earlier humanitarian efforts . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 = = = Final return to Norway = = = 
 Having spent nine of the previous twelve years abroad , but with no practical experience in party politics outside the Norwegian Army , Quisling returned to Norway in December 1929 , bringing with him a plan for change he termed Norsk Aktion ( " Norwegian Action " ) . The planned organisation consisted of national , regional and local units with the intention of recruiting in the style of the Soviet Communist Party . Like Action Française of the French right , it advocated radical constitutional changes . The Parliament of Norway ( Storting ) was to become bicameral with the second chamber made up of Soviet @-@ style elected representatives from the working population . Quisling focused more on organisation than the practicalities of government ; for instance , all members of Norsk Aktion were to have their own designation in a militaristic hierarchy . 
 Quisling next sold a large number of antiques and works of art that he had acquired cheaply in post @-@ revolutionary Russia . His collection stretched to some 200 paintings , including works claimed to be by Rembrandt , Goya , Cézanne and numerous other masters . The collection , including " veritable treasures " , had been insured for almost 300 @,@ 000 kroner . In the spring of 1930 he again joined up with Prytz , who was back in Norway . They participated in regular group meetings that included middle @-@ aged officers and business people , since described as " the textbook definition of a Fascist initiative group " , through which Prytz appeared determined to launch Quisling into politics . 
 After Nansen died on 13 May 1930 , Quisling used his friendship with the editor of the Tidens Tegn newspaper to get his analysis of Nansen onto the front page . The article was entitled " <unk> tanker ved Fridtjof <unk> død " ( " Political Thoughts on the Death of Fridtjof Nansen " ) and was published on 24 May . In the article , he outlined ten points that would complete Nansen 's vision as applied to Norway , among them " strong and just government " and a " greater emphasis on race and heredity " . This theme was followed up in his new book , Russia and Ourselves ( Norwegian : <unk> og vi ) , which was serialised in Tidens Tegn during the autumn of 1930 . Advocating war against Bolshevism , the openly racist book catapulted Quisling into the political limelight . Despite his earlier ambivalence , he took up a seat on the Oslo board of the previously Nansen @-@ led Fatherland League . Meanwhile , he and Prytz founded a new political movement , Nordisk folkereisning i Norge ( " Nordic popular rising in Norway " ) , with a central committee of 31 and Quisling as its <unk> – a one @-@ man executive committee – , though Quisling seems to have had no particular attachment to the term . The first meeting of the league took place on 17 March 1931 , stating the purpose of the movement was to " eliminate the imported and depraved communist insurgency " . 
 = = = Defence minister = = = 
 Quisling left Nordisk folkereisning i Norge in May 1931 to serve as defence minister in the Agrarian government of Peder Kolstad , despite being neither an Agrarian nor a friend of Kolstad . He had been suggested to Kolstad for the post by Thorvald <unk> , editor of the Agrarian newspaper <unk> , who was in turn influenced by Prytz . The appointment came as a surprise to many in the Parliament of Norway . Quisling 's first action in the post was to deal with the aftermath of the Battle of <unk> , an " extremely bitter " labour dispute , by sending in troops . After narrowly avoiding criticism by the left wing over his handling of the dispute , and the revelation of his earlier " militia " plans , Quisling turned his attention to the perceived threat posed by communists . He created a list of the Revolutionary Trade Union Opposition leadership , who had been the alleged agitators at <unk> ; a number of them were eventually charged with subversion and violence against the police . Quisling 's policies also resulted in the establishment of a permanent militia called the <unk> which , unlike the body he had previously planned , was to be counter @-@ revolutionary . Despite the ready availability of junior officers in the reserve following defence cuts , only seven units were established in 1934 , and funding restrictions meant that the enterprise included less than a thousand men before it faded away . Sometime during the period 1930 – 33 , Quisling 's first wife , Asja , received notice of the annulment of her marriage to him . 
 In mid @-@ 1932 Nordisk folkereisning i Norge was forced to confirm that although Quisling remained in the cabinet , he would not become a member of the party . They further stated that the party programme had no basis in fascism of any kind , including the National Socialism model . This did not dampen criticism of Quisling , who remained constantly in the headlines , although he was gradually earning a reputation as a disciplined and efficient administrator . After he was attacked in his office by a knife @-@ wielding assailant who threw ground pepper in his face on 2 February 1932 , some newspapers , instead of focusing on the attack itself , suggested that the assailant had been the jealous husband of one of Quisling 's cleaners ; others , especially those aligned with the Labour Party , posited that the whole thing had been staged . In November 1932 , Labour politician Johan Nygaardsvold put this theory to Parliament , prompting suggestions that charges of slander be brought against him . No charges were brought , and the identity of the assailant has never been confirmed . Quisling later indicated it was an attempt to steal military papers recently left by Swedish Lieutenant Colonel Wilhelm <unk> . The so @-@ called " pepper affair " served to polarise opinion about Quisling , and government fears grew concerning reasonably open Soviet elements in Norway who had been active in promoting industrial unrest . 
 Following Kolstad 's death in March 1932 , Quisling retained his post as defence minister in the second Agrarian government under Jens Hundseid for political reasons , though they remained in bitter opposition throughout . Just as he had been under Kolstad , Quisling was involved in many of the spats that characterised Hundseid 's government . On 8 April that year , Quisling had a chance to defend himself over the pepper affair in Parliament , but instead used the opportunity to attack the Labour and Communist parties , claiming that named members were criminals and " enemies of our fatherland and our people " . Support for Quisling from right @-@ wing elements in Norwegian society rocketed overnight , and 153 distinguished signatories called for Quisling 's claims to be investigated . In the coming months , tens of thousands of Norwegians followed suit and Quisling 's summer was full of speeches to packed political rallies . In Parliament , however , Quisling 's speech was viewed as political suicide ; not only was his evidence weak , but questions were raised as to why the information had not been handed over much sooner if the revolutionary threat were so serious . 
 = = = Popular party leader = = = 
 Over the course of 1932 and into 1933 , Prytz 's influence over Nordisk folkereisning i Norge weakened and lawyer Johan Bernhard Hjort assumed the leadership role . Hjort was keen to work with Quisling because of his new @-@ found popularity , and they devised a new programme of right @-@ wing policies including proscription of revolutionary parties including those funded by foreign bodies such as Comintern , the suspension of the voting rights for people in receipt of social welfare , agricultural debt relief , and an audit of public finances . In 1932 , during the <unk> Affair , Quisling turned on the prime minister for questioning his hard @-@ line stance over pacifist agitator Captain Olaf <unk> . In a memorandum laying out his proposals for economic and social reform distributed to the entire cabinet , Quisling called for the prime minister to stand down . As the government began to collapse , Quisling 's personal popularity reached new heights ; he was referred to as " man of the year " , and there were expectations of forthcoming electoral success . 
 Despite the new programme , some of Quisling 's circle still favoured a cabinet coup . He later said he had even considered the use of force to overthrow the government but , in late February , it was the Liberal Party that brought them down . With the assistance of Hjort and Prytz , Nordisk folkereisning i Norge quickly became a political party , Nasjonal Samling ( NS , literally " National Unity " ) , ready to contest the forthcoming October election . Quisling was mildly disappointed and would have preferred to head a national movement , not just one of seven political parties . Nasjonal Samling soon afterwards announced it would support candidates from other parties if they supported its key aim of " establishing a strong and stable national government independent of ordinary party politics " . Although not an overnight success in the already crowded political spectrum , the party slowly gained support . With its Nazi @-@ inspired belief in the central authority of a strong Führer , as well as its powerful propaganda elements , it gained support from many among the Oslo upper classes , and began to give the impression that " big money " lay behind it . 
 Increased support also materialised when the <unk> <unk> ( Norwegian Farmers ' Aid Association ) sought financial aid from Nasjonal Samling , who in turn gained political influence and a useful existing network of well @-@ trained party officers . Quisling 's party never managed a grand anti @-@ socialist coalition , however , in part because of competition from the Conservative Party for right @-@ wing votes . Though Quisling remained unable to demonstrate any skill as an orator , his reputation for scandal nonetheless ensured that the electorate were aware of Nasjonal Samling 's existence . As a result , the party showed only moderate success in the October elections , with 27 @,@ 850 votes — approximately two per cent of the national vote , and about three and a half per cent of the vote in constituencies where it fielded candidates . This made it the fifth largest party in Norway , out @-@ polling the Communists but not the Conservative , Labour , Liberal or Agrarian parties , and failing to secure a single seat in Parliament . 
 = = = Fører of a party in decline = = = 
 After the underwhelming election results , Quisling 's attitude to negotiation and compromise hardened . A final attempt to form a coalition of the right in March 1934 came to nothing , and from late 1933 , Quisling 's Nasjonal Samling began to carve out its own form of national socialism . Without a leader in Parliament , however , the party struggled to introduce the constitutional reform bill needed to achieve its lofty ambitions . When Quisling tried to introduce the bill directly , it was swiftly rejected , and the party went into decline . In the summer of 1935 , headlines quoted Quisling telling opponents that " heads [ would ] roll " as soon as he achieved power . The threat irreparably damaged the image of his party , and over the following few months several high @-@ ranking members resigned , including Kai Fjell and Quisling 's brother Jørgen . 
 Quisling began to familiarise himself with the international fascist movement , attending the 1934 Montreux Fascist conference in December . For his party , the association with Italian fascism could not have come at a worse time , so soon after headlines of illegal Italian incursions into Abyssinia . On his return trip from Montreux , he met Nazi ideologue and foreign policy theorist Alfred Rosenberg , and though he preferred to see his own policies as a synthesis of Italian fascism and German Nazism , by the time of the 1936 elections , Quisling had in part become the " Norwegian Hitler " that his opponents had long accused him of being . Part of this was due to his hardening anti @-@ Semitic stance , associating Judaism with Marxism , liberalism and , increasingly , anything else he found objectionable , and part as a result of Nasjonal Samling 's growing similarity to the German Nazi Party . Despite receiving an unexpected boost when the Norwegian government acceded to Soviet demands to arrest Leon Trotsky , the party 's election campaign never gained momentum . Although Quisling sincerely believed he had the support of around 100 @,@ 000 voters , and declared to his party that they would win an absolute minimum of ten seats , Nasjonal Samling managed to poll just 26 @,@ 577 , fewer than in 1933 when they had fielded candidates in only half the districts . Under this pressure , the party split in two , with Hjort leading the breakaway group ; although fewer than fifty members left immediately , many more drifted away during 1937 . 
 Dwindling party membership created many problems for Quisling , especially financial ones . For years he had been in financial difficulties and reliant on his inheritance , while increasing numbers of his paintings were found to be copies when he tried to sell them . Vidkun and his brother Arne sold one Frans Hals painting for just four thousand dollars , believing it to be a copy and not the fifty @-@ thousand @-@ dollar artwork they had once thought it to be , only to see it reclassified as an original and revalued at a hundred thousand dollars . In the difficult circumstances of the Great Depression , even originals did not raise as much as Quisling had hoped . His disillusionment with Norwegian society was furthered by news of the planned constitutional reform of 1938 , which would extend the parliamentary term from three to four years with immediate effect , a move Quisling bitterly opposed . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Coming of war = = = 
 In 1939 Quisling turned his attention towards Norway 's preparations for the anticipated European war , which he believed involved a drastic increase in the country 's defence spending to guarantee its neutrality . Meanwhile , Quisling presented lectures titled " The Jewish problem in Norway " and supported Adolf Hitler in what appeared to be growing future conflict . Despite condemning Kristallnacht , he sent the German leader a fiftieth @-@ birthday greeting thanking him for " saving Europe from Bolshevism and Jewish domination " . In 1939 , Quisling contended that , should an Anglo @-@ Russian alliance make neutrality impossible , Norway would have " to go with Germany " . Invited to the country in the summer of 1939 , he began a tour of a number of German and Danish cities . He was received particularly well in Germany , which promised funds to boost Nasjonal Samling 's standing in Norway , and hence spread pro @-@ Nazi sentiment . When war broke out on 1 September , Quisling felt vindicated by both the event and the immediate superiority displayed by the German army . He remained outwardly confident that , despite its size , his party would soon become the centre of political attention . 
 For the next nine months , Quisling continued to lead a party that was at best peripheral to Norwegian politics . He was nonetheless active , and in October 1939 he worked with Prytz on an ultimately unsuccessful plan for peace between Britain , France and Germany and their eventual participation in a new economic union . Quisling also mused on how Germany ought to go on the offensive against its then @-@ ally the Soviet Union , and on 9 December travelled to Germany to present his multi @-@ faceted plans . After impressing German officials , he won an audience with Hitler himself , scheduled for 14 December , whereupon he received firm advice from his contacts that the most useful thing he could do would be to ask for Hitler 's help with a pro @-@ German coup in Norway , that would let the Germans use Norway as a naval base . Thereafter , Norway would maintain official neutrality as long as possible , and finally the country would fall under German rather than British control . It is not clear how much Quisling himself understood about the strategic implications of such a move , and he instead relied on his future Minister of Domestic Affairs Albert Hagelin , who was fluent in German , to put the relevant arguments to German officials in Berlin during pre @-@ meeting talks , even though Hagelin was prone to damaging exaggeration at times . Quisling and his German contacts almost certainly went away with different views as to whether they had agreed upon the necessity of a German invasion . 
 On 14 December 1939 , Quisling met Hitler . The German leader promised to respond to any British invasion of Norway ( Plan R 4 ) , perhaps pre @-@ emptively , with a German counter @-@ invasion , but found Quisling 's plans for both a Norwegian coup and an Anglo @-@ German peace unduly optimistic . Nonetheless , Quisling would still receive funds to bolster Nasjonal Samling . The two men met again four days later , and afterwards Quisling wrote a memorandum that explicitly told Hitler that he did not consider himself a National Socialist . As German machinations continued , Quisling was intentionally kept in the dark . He was also incapacitated by a severe bout of illness , probably nephritis in both kidneys , for which he refused hospitalisation . Though he returned to work on 13 March 1940 , he remained ill for several weeks . In the meantime , the Altmark Incident complicated Norway 's efforts to maintain its neutrality . Hitler himself remained in two minds over whether an occupation of Norway should require an invitation from the Norwegian government . Finally , Quisling received his summons on 31 March , and reluctantly travelled to Copenhagen to meet with Nazi intelligence officers who asked him for information on Norwegian defences and defence protocols . He returned to Norway on 6 April and , on 8 April , the British Operation Wilfred commenced , bringing Norway into the war . With Allied forces in Norway , Quisling expected a characteristically swift German response . 
 = = = German invasion and coup d 'état = = = 
 In the early hours of 9 April 1940 , Germany invaded Norway by air and sea , intending to capture King Haakon VII and the government of Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold . However , alert to the possibility of invasion , Conservative President of the Parliament C. J. Hambro arranged for their evacuation to Hamar in the east of the country . The cruiser Blücher , carrying most of the personnel intended to take over Norway 's administration , was sunk by cannon fire and torpedoes from Oscarsborg Fortress in the Oslofjord . The Germans had expected the government to surrender and to have its replacement ready ; neither happened , although the invasion itself continued . After hours of discussion , Quisling and his German counterparts decided that an immediate coup was necessary , though this was not the preferred option of either Germany 's ambassador Curt Bräuer or the German Foreign Ministry . 
 In the afternoon , Quisling was told by German liaison Hans Wilhelm Scheidt that should he set up a government , it would have Hitler 's personal approval . Quisling drew up a list of ministers and , although it had merely relocated some 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) to Elverum , accused the legitimate government of having " fled " . 
 Meanwhile , the Germans occupied Oslo and at 17 : 30 Norwegian radio ceased broadcasting at the request of the occupying forces . With German support , at approximately 19 : 30 , Quisling entered the NRK studios in Oslo and proclaimed the formation of a new government with himself as Prime Minister . He also revoked an earlier order to mobilise against the Nazi invasion . He still lacked legitimacy . Two orders — one to a friend in the military ( Colonel Hans S. <unk> , the commanding officer of the army regiment at Elverum ) to arrest the government and another to the Oslo chief of police — were ignored . At 22 : 00 , Quisling resumed broadcasting , repeating his earlier message and reading out a list of new ministers . Hitler lent his support as promised and recognised the new Norwegian government under Quisling within 24 hours . Norwegian batteries were still firing on the German invasion force , and at 03 : 00 on 10 April Quisling acceded to a German request to halt the resistance of the Bolærne fortress . As a result of actions such as these , it was claimed at the time that Quisling 's seizure of power in a puppet government had been part of the German plan all along . 
 Quisling now reached the high @-@ water mark of his political power . On 10 April , Bräuer travelled to Elverum where the legitimate Nygaardsvold government now sat . On Hitler 's orders , he demanded that King Haakon appoint Quisling head of a new government , thereby securing a peaceful transition of power . Haakon rejected this demand . He went further in a meeting with his cabinet , letting it be known that he would sooner abdicate than appoint any government headed by Quisling . Hearing this , the government unanimously voted to support the king 's stance . It also urged the people to continue their resistance . With no popular support , Quisling was no longer of use to Hitler . Germany retracted its support for his rival government , preferring instead to build up its own independent governing commission . In this way , Quisling was manoeuvred out of power by Bräuer and a coalition of his former allies , including Hjort , who now saw him as a liability . Even his political allies , including Prytz , deserted him . 
 In return , Hitler wrote to Quisling thanking him for his good faith efforts to prevent him from losing face ( perhaps should he become a future Norwegian leader ) , guaranteeing him some sort of position in the new government . The transfer of power on these terms was duly enacted on 15 April , with Hitler still confident the Administrative Council would receive the backing of the king . Quisling 's domestic and international reputation both hit new lows , casting him as both a traitor and a failure . 
 = = = Head of the government = = = 
 Once the king had declared the German commission unlawful , it became clear that he would never be won over . An impatient Hitler appointed German Josef Terboven as the new Norwegian Reichskommissar on 24 April , reporting directly to him . Despite Hitler 's assurances , Terboven wanted to make sure that there would be no room in the government for Nasjonal Samling nor its leader Quisling , with whom he did not get on . Terboven eventually accepted a certain Nasjonal Samling presence in the government during June , but remained unconvinced about Quisling . As a result , on 25 June , Terboven forced Quisling to step down as leader of the Nasjonal Samling and take a temporary leave of absence in Germany . Quisling remained there until 20 August , while Rosenberg and Admiral Erich Raeder , whom he had met on his earlier visit to Berlin , negotiated on his behalf . In the end , Quisling returned ' in triumph , ' having won Hitler over in a meeting on 16 August . The Reichskommissar would now have to accommodate Quisling as leader of the government , then allow him to both rebuild Nasjonal Samling and bring more of his men into the cabinet . Terboven complied and addressed the Norwegian people in a radio broadcast whereupon he asserted that Nasjonal Samling would be the only political party tolerated . 
 As a result , by the end of 1940 the monarchy had been suspended although the Parliament of Norway and a body resembling a cabinet remained . Nasjonal Samling , the only pro @-@ German party , would be cultivated , but Terboven 's Reichskommissariat would keep power in the meantime . Quisling would serve as acting prime minister and ten of the thirteen " cabinet " ministers were to come from his party . He set out on a programme of wiping out " the destructive principles of the French Revolution , " including pluralism and parliamentary rule . This reached into local politics , whereby mayors who switched their allegiance to Nasjonal Samling were rewarded with much greater powers . Investments were made in heavily censored cultural programmes , though the press remained theoretically free . To bolster the survival chances of the Nordic genotype , contraception was severely restricted . Quisling 's party experienced a surge in membership to a little over 30 @,@ 000 , but despite his optimism it was never to pass the 40 @,@ 000 mark . 
 On 5 December 1940 , Quisling flew to Berlin to negotiate the future of Norway 's independence . By the time he returned on 13 December , he had agreed to raise volunteers to fight with the German Schutzstaffel ( SS ) . In January , SS head Heinrich Himmler travelled to Norway to oversee preparations . Quisling clearly believed that if Norway supported Nazi Germany on the battlefield , there would be no reason for Germany to annex her . To this end , he opposed plans to have a German SS brigade loyal only to Hitler installed in Norway . In the process , he also toughened his attitude to the country harbouring the exiled king , the United Kingdom , which he no longer saw as a Nordic ally . Finally , Quisling aligned Norwegian policy on Jews with that of Germany , giving a speech in Frankfurt on 26 March 1941 in which he argued for compulsory exile , but warned against extermination . 
 In May , Quisling was shattered by the death of his mother Anna , as the two had been particularly close . At the same time , the political crisis over Norwegian independence deepened , with Quisling threatening Terboven with his resignation over the issue of finance . In the end , the Reichskommissar agreed to compromise on the issue , but Quisling had to concede on the SS issue : A brigade was formed , but as a branch of Nasjonal Samling . 
 Meanwhile , the government line hardened , with Communist Party leaders arrested and trade unionists intimidated . On 10 September 1941 , Viggo Hansteen and Rolf <unk> were executed and many more imprisoned following the milk strike in Oslo . Hansteen 's execution was later seen as a watershed moment , dividing the occupation into its more innocent and more deadly phases . The same year the state police , abolished in 1937 , was reestablished to assist the Gestapo in Norway , and radio sets were confiscated across the country . Although these were Terboven 's decisions , Quisling agreed with them and went on to denounce the government @-@ in @-@ exile as " traitors " . As a result of the toughened stance , an informal " ice front " emerged , with Nasjonal Samling supporters ostracised from society . Quisling remained convinced this was an anti @-@ German sentiment that would fade away once Berlin had handed power over to Nasjonal Samling . However , the only concessions he won in 1941 were having the heads of ministries promoted to official ministers of the government and independence for the party secretariat . 
 In January 1942 , Terboven announced the German administration would be wound down . Soon afterwards he told Quisling that Hitler had approved the transfer of power , scheduled for 30 January . Quisling remained doubtful it would happen since Germany and Norway were in the midst of complex peace negotiations that could not be completed until peace had been reached on the Eastern Front , while Terboven insisted that the Reichskommissariat would remain in power until such peace came about . Quisling could nevertheless be reasonably confident that his position within the party and with Berlin was unassailable , even if he was unpopular within Norway , something he was well aware of . 
 After a brief postponement , an announcement was made on 1 February 1942 , detailing how the cabinet had elected Quisling to the post of Minister @-@ President of the national government . The appointment was accompanied by a banquet , rallying and other celebrations by Nasjonal Samling members . In his first speech , Quisling committed the government to closer ties with Germany . The only change to the Constitution was the reinstatement of the ban on Jewish entry into Norway , which had been abolished in 1851 . 
 = = = Minister President = = = 
 His new position gave Quisling a security of tenure he had not previously enjoyed , although the Reichskommissariat remained outside his control . A month later , in February 1942 , Quisling made his first state visit to Berlin . It was a productive trip , in which all key issues of Norwegian independence were discussed — but Joseph Goebbels in particular remained unconvinced of Quisling 's credentials , noting that it was " unlikely " he would " ... ever make a great statesman . " 
 Back at home , Quisling was now less concerned about Nasjonal Samling 's membership and even wanted action to clean up the membership list , including purging it of drunkards . On 12 March , Norway officially became a one @-@ party state . In time , criticism of , and resistance to , the party was criminalised , though Quisling expressed regret for having to take this step . He genuinely hoped every Norwegian would freely come around to accept his government . 
 This optimism was short @-@ lived . In the course of the summer of 1942 , Quisling lost any ability he might have had to sway public opinion by attempting to force children into the Nasjonal <unk> <unk> youth organisation , which was modelled on the Hitler Youth . This move prompted a mass resignation of teachers from their professional body and churchmen from their posts , along with large @-@ scale civil unrest . His attempted indictment of bishop Eivind <unk> proved similarly controversial , even amongst his German allies . Quisling now toughened his stance , telling Norwegians that they would have the new regime forced upon them " whether they like it or not " . On 1 May , the German High Command noted that " organised resistance to Quisling has started " and Norway 's peace talks with Germany stalled as a result . On 11 August , Hitler postponed any further peace negotiations until the war ended . Quisling was admonished and learned that Norway would not get the independence he so greatly yearned for . As an added insult , for the first time he was forbidden to write letters directly to Hitler . 
 Quisling had earlier pushed for a corporate alternative to the Parliament of Norway ( Storting ) , which he called a <unk> . It would comprise two chambers , the <unk> ( Economic Chamber ) and <unk> ( Cultural Chamber ) . Now , in advance of Nasjonal Samling 's eighth and last national convention on 25 September and becoming increasingly distrustful of professional bodies , he changed his mind . The <unk> became an advisory body while the <unk> ( Fører Council ) and parliamentary chambers were now to be independent bodies subordinate to their respective ministries . 
 After the convention , support for Nasjonal Samling , and Quisling personally , ebbed away . Increased factionalism and personal losses , including the accidental death of fellow politician <unk> Lunde , were compounded by heavy @-@ handed German tactics , such as the shooting of ten well @-@ known residents of Trøndelag and its environs in October 1942 . In addition , the lex <unk> ex @-@ post facto law of August 1943 , which led to the first death sentence passed by the regime , was widely seen as a blatant violation of the Constitution and a sign of Norway 's increasing role in the Final Solution , would destroy everything the convention had achieved in terms of boosting party morale . 
 With government abatement and Quisling 's personal engagement , Jews were registered in a German initiative of January 1942 . On 26 October , German forces , with help from the Norwegian police , arrested 300 registered male Jews in Norway and sent them to concentration camps , most in Berg and manned by <unk> , the paramilitary wing of Nasjonal Samling . Over @-@ 65s were quickly released by the Norwegian government . Most controversially , the Jews ' property was confiscated by the state . 
 On 26 November , the detainees were deported , along with their families . Although this was an entirely German initiative — Quisling himself was left in the dark although government assistance was provided — Quisling led the Norwegian public to believe that the first deportation of Jews , to camps in Poland , was his idea . A further 250 were deported in February 1943 and it remains unclear what the party 's official position was on the eventual fate of the 759 Norwegian deportees . There is evidence to suggest that Quisling honestly believed the official line throughout 1943 and 1944 , that they were awaiting repatriation to a new Jewish homeland . 
 At the same time , Quisling believed that the only way he could win back Hitler 's respect would be to raise volunteers for the now @-@ faltering German war effort , and he committed Norway wholeheartedly to German plans to wage total war . For him at least , after the German defeat at Stalingrad in February 1943 , Norway now had a part to play in keeping the German empire strong . In April 1943 , Quisling delivered a scathing speech attacking Germany 's refusal to outline its plans for post @-@ war Europe . When he put this to Hitler in person , the Nazi leader remained unmoved despite Norway 's contributions to the war effort . Quisling felt betrayed over this postponement of Norwegian freedom , an attitude that waned only when Hitler eventually committed to a free post @-@ war Norway in September 1943 . 
 Quisling tired during the final years of the war . In 1942 he passed 231 laws , 166 in 1943 , and 139 in 1944 . Social policy was the one area that still received significant attention . By that autumn , Quisling and Mussert in the Netherlands could be satisfied they had at least survived . In 1944 , the weight problems Quisling had been having during the preceding two years also eased . 
 Despite the increasingly dire military outlook , Nasjonal Samling 's position at the head of the government , albeit with its ambiguous relationship to the Reichskommissariat , remained unassailable . Nevertheless , the Germans exerted increasing control over law and order in Norway . Following deportation of the Jews , Germany deported Norwegian officers and finally attempted to deport students from the University of Oslo . Even Hitler was incensed by the scale of the arrests . Quisling became entangled in a similar debacle in early 1944 when he forced compulsory military service on elements of the Hird , causing a number of members to resign to avoid being drafted . 
 On 20 January 1945 , Quisling made what would be his final trip to visit Hitler . He promised Norwegian support in the final phase of the war if Germany agreed to a peace deal that would remove Norway 's affairs from German intervention . This proposal grew out of a fear that as German forces retreated southwards through Norway , the occupation government would have to struggle to keep control in northern Norway . To the horror of the Quisling regime , the Nazis instead decided on a scorched earth policy in northern Norway , going so far as to shoot Norwegian civilians who refused to evacuate the region . The period was also marked by increasing civilian casualties from Allied air raids , and mounting resistance to the government within occupied Norway . The meeting with the German leader proved unsuccessful and upon being asked to sign the execution order of thousands of Norwegian " saboteurs " , Quisling refused , an act of defiance that so enraged Terboven , acting on Hitler 's orders , that he stormed out of the negotiations . On recounting the events of the trip to a friend , Quisling broke down in tears , convinced the Nazi refusal to sign a peace agreement would seal his reputation as a traitor . 
 Quisling spent the last months of the war trying to prevent Norwegian deaths in the showdown that was developing between German and Allied forces in Norway . The regime worked for the safe repatriation of Norwegians held in German prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps . Privately , Quisling had long accepted that National Socialism would be defeated . Hitler 's suicide on 30 April 1945 left him free to pursue publicly his chosen end @-@ game , a naïve offer of a transition to a power @-@ sharing government with the government @-@ in @-@ exile . 
 On 7 May , Quisling ordered police not to offer armed resistance to the Allied advance except in self @-@ defence or against overt members of the Norwegian resistance movement . The same day , Germany announced it would surrender unconditionally , making Quisling 's position untenable . A realist , Quisling met military leaders of the resistance on the following day to discuss how he would be arrested . Quisling declared whilst he did not want to be treated as a common criminal , he did not want preferential treatment compared to his Nasjonal Samling colleagues . He argued he could have kept his forces fighting until the end , but had chosen not to so as to avoid turning " Norway into a battlefield . " Instead he tried to ensure a peaceful transition . In return , the resistance offered full trials for all accused Nasjonal Samling members after the war and its leadership agreed he could be incarcerated in a house rather than a prison complex . 
 = = Arrest , trial , death , and legacy = = 
 The civil leadership of the resistance , represented by lawyer Sven Arntzen , demanded Quisling be treated like any other murder suspect and , on 9 May , Quisling and his ministers turned themselves in to police . Quisling was transferred to Cell 12 in Møllergata 19 , the main police station in Oslo . The cell was equipped with a tiny table , a basin , and a hole in the wall for a toilet bucket . 
 After ten weeks being constantly watched to prevent suicide attempts in police custody , he was transferred to Akershus Fortress and awaited trial as part of the legal purge . Despite initially losing weight and suffering from <unk> , his strong constitution meant that he soon started working hard on his case with Henrik Bergh , a lawyer with a good track record but largely unsympathetic , at least initially , to Quisling 's plight . Bergh did , however , believe Quisling 's testimony that he tried to act in the best interests of Norway and decided to use this as a starting point for the defence . 
 Initially , Quisling 's charges related to the coup , including his revocation of the mobilisation order , to his time as Nasjonal Samling leader and to his actions as Minister President , such as assisting the enemy and illegally attempting to alter the constitution . Finally , he was accused of Gunnar <unk> 's murder . Whilst not contesting the key facts , he denied all charges on the grounds that he had always worked for a free and prosperous Norway , and submitted a sixty @-@ page response . On 11 July , a further indictment was brought , adding a raft of new charges , including more murders , theft , embezzlement and , most worrying of all for Quisling , the charge of conspiring with Hitler over the 9 April occupation of Norway . 
 The trial opened on 20 August 1945 . Quisling 's defence rested on downplaying his unity with Germany and stressing that he had fought for total independence , something that seemed completely contrary to the recollections of many Norwegians . From that point on , wrote biographer Dahl , Quisling had to tread a " fine line between truth and falsehood , " and emerged from it " an elusive and often pitiful figure . " He misrepresented the truth on several occasions and the entirely truthful majority of his statements won him few advocates in the country at large , where he remained almost universally despised . 
 In the later days of the trial Quisling 's health suffered , largely as a result of the number of medical tests to which he was subjected , and his defence faltered . The prosecution 's powerful final speech placed responsibility for the Final Solution being carried out in Norway at the feet of Quisling , using the testimony of German officials . The prosecutor <unk> <unk> called for the death penalty , using laws introduced by the government @-@ in @-@ exile in October 1941 and January 1942 . 
 Erudite speeches by both Bergh and Quisling himself could not change the outcome and when the verdict was announced on 10 September , Quisling was convicted of all but a handful of minor charges . For the numerous crimes he was found guilty of , he was sentenced to death . 
 An October appeal to the Supreme Court was rejected . The court process was judged to be " a model of fairness " in a commentary by author Maynard Cohen . After giving testimony in a number of other trials of Nasjonal Samling members , Quisling was executed by firing squad at Akershus Fortress at 02 : 40 on 24 October 1945 . His last words before being shot were , " I 'm convicted unfairly and I die innocent . " After his death his body was cremated , leaving the ashes to be interred in Fyresdal . 
 His widow Maria lived in Oslo until her death in 1980 . They had no children . Upon her death , she donated all their Russian antiques to a charitable fund that operates in Oslo to this day . For most of his later political career , Quisling lived in a mansion on Bygdøy in Oslo that he called " <unk> " , after the place in Norse mythology where survivors of the great battle of Ragnarök were to live . The house , now called Villa Grande , is today a Holocaust museum . The Nasjonal Samling movement was wiped out as a political force in Norway , though Quisling himself has become one of the most written about Norwegians of all time . The word quisling itself became synonymous with traitor . The term was coined by the British newspaper The Times in its lead of 15 April 1940 , titled " Quislings everywhere " . The noun has survived and for a while during and after World War II , the back @-@ formed verb to <unk> / <unk> / was used . One who was quisling was in the act of committing treason . 
 = = Personality = = 
 To his supporters , Quisling was regarded as a conscientious administrator of the highest order , knowledgeable and with an eye for detail . Balanced and gentle to a fault , they believed he cared deeply about his people and maintained high moral standards throughout . To his opponents , Quisling was unstable and undisciplined , abrupt , even threatening . Quite possibly he was both , at ease among friends and under pressure when confronted with his political opponents , and generally shy and retiring with both . During formal dinners he often said nothing at all except for the occasional cascade of dramatic rhetoric . Indeed , he did not react well to pressure and would often let slip over @-@ dramatic sentiments when put on the spot . Normally open to criticism , he was prone to assuming larger groups were conspiratorial . 
 Post @-@ war interpretations of Quisling 's character are similarly mixed . After the war collaborationist behaviour was popularly viewed as a result of mental deficiency , leaving the personality of the clearly more intelligent Quisling an " enigma " . He was instead seen as weak , paranoid , intellectually sterile and power @-@ hungry : ultimately " muddled rather than thoroughly corrupted " . 
 The Norwegian sociologist Johan <unk> described Quisling as a mini @-@ Hitler with a CMT ( <unk> @-@ myth @-@ trauma ) complex , or alternatively , <unk> @-@ paranoia , more often diagnosed in modern times as narcissistic personality disorder . He was " well installed in his personality " , but unable to gain a following among his own people as the population did not provide a mirror for Quisling 's ideology . In short , he was " a dictator and a clown on the wrong stage with the wrong script " . As quoted by Dahl , psychiatrist Professor Gabriel <unk> stated Quisling 's ultimate goals " fitted the classic description of the paranoid megalomaniac more exactly than any other case [ he had ] ever encountered " . 
 During his time in office , Quisling rose early , often having completed several hours of work before arriving at the office between 9 : 30 and 10 : 00 . He liked to intervene in virtually all government matters , reading all letters addressed to him or his chancellery personally and marking a surprising number for action . Quisling was independently @-@ minded , made several key decisions on the spot and , unlike his German counterpart , he liked to follow procedure to ensure that government remained " a dignified and civilised " affair throughout . He took a personal interest in the administration of Fyresdal , where he was born . 
 He rejected German racial supremacy and instead saw the Norwegian race as the progenitor of northern Europe , tracing his own family tree in his spare time . Party members did not receive preferential treatment , though Quisling did not himself share in the wartime hardships of his fellow Norwegians . Nevertheless , many gifts went unused and he did not live extravagantly . 
 = = Religious and philosophical views = = 
 Quisling was interested in science , Eastern religions and metaphysics , eventually building up a library that included the works of Spinoza , Kant , Hegel and Schopenhauer . He kept up with developments in the realm of quantum physics , but did not keep up with more current philosophical ideas . He blended philosophy and science into a new religion he called Universism ( or Universalism ) , which was a unified explanation of everything . His original writings stretched to a claimed two thousand pages . He rejected the basic teachings of orthodox Christianity and established a new theory of life , which he called Universism , a term borrowed from a textbook by Jan Jakob Maria de Groot on Chinese philosophy . De Groot 's book argued that Tao , Confucianism and Buddhism were all part of a world religion that De Groot called Universism . Quisling described how his philosophy " ... followed from the universal theory of relativity , of which the specific and general theories of relativity are special instances " . Quisling wanted <unk> to be the official state religion of his new Norway , and he said " the positing of such a system depends on the progress of science " . 
 His magnum opus was divided into four parts : an introduction ; a description of mankind 's apparent progression from individual to increasing complex consciousnesses ; a section on his tenets of morality and law ; and a final section on science , art , politics , history , race and religion . The conclusion was to be titled The World 's Organic Classification and Organisation , but the work remained unfinished . Generally , Quisling worked on it infrequently during his time in politics . The biographer Hans Fredrik Dahl describes this as " fortunate " since Quisling would " never have won recognition " as a philosopher . 
 During his trial and particularly after being sentenced , Quisling became interested once more in Universism . He saw the events of the war as part of the move towards the establishment of God 's kingdom on earth and justified his actions in those terms . During the first week of October , he wrote a fifty @-@ page document titled <unk> Aphorisms , which represented " ... an almost ecstatic revelation of truth and the light to come , which bore the mark of nothing less than a prophet " . The document was also notable for its attack on the materialism of National Socialism . In addition , he simultaneously worked on a sermon , Eternal Justice , which reiterated his key beliefs , including reincarnation . 
 = = = In Norwegian = = = 
 Barth , E. M. ( 1996 ) . Gud , det er <unk> : Vidkun Quisling som <unk> <unk> ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo , Norway : Pax Forlag . ISBN 82 @-@ 530 @-@ 1803 @-@ 7 . 
 Borgen , Per Otto ( 1999 ) . Norges <unk> ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo , Norway : Aschehoug . ISBN 82 @-@ 03 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Bratteli , Tone ; Myhre , Hans B. ( 1992 ) . Quislings <unk> <unk> ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo , Norway : <unk> . ISBN 82 @-@ 02 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Hartmann , Sverre ( 1970 ) [ 1959 ] . Fører <unk> folk . <unk> Quisling – hans <unk> og vei inn i norsk <unk> ( in Norwegian ) ( 2nd revised ed . ) . Oslo , Norway : <unk> Norsk Forlag . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Arve ( 1988 ) . <unk> Quisling og hans to <unk> ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo , Norway : Aventura . ISBN 82 @-@ 588 @-@ 0500 @-@ 2 . 
 Ringdal , Nils Johan ( 1989 ) . Gal mann til <unk> tid : NS @-@ minister Sverre <unk> – en <unk> ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo , Norway : Aschehoug . ISBN 82 @-@ 03 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Quisling , Maria ( 1980 ) . <unk> , <unk> , ed . Dagbok og <unk> <unk> <unk> ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo , Norway : Dreyer . ISBN 82 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 = Midland Football Alliance = 
 The Midland Football Alliance was an English association football league for semi @-@ professional teams . It covered Leicestershire , Shropshire , Staffordshire , Warwickshire , West Midlands , Worcestershire and also southern parts of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire . The league consisted of a single division which sat at Step 5 of the National League System , or the ninth level of the overall English football league system . 
 The league was formed in 1994 , drawing its initial membership from the strongest clubs in the Midland Football Combination and the West Midlands ( Regional ) League , both of which became feeder leagues to the new competition . Each season , the champion club of each feeder league was eligible for promotion to the Alliance , and Alliance clubs could in turn be relegated to the feeder leagues . Successful teams in the Alliance were eligible for promotion to a Step 4 league , either the Southern League or Northern Premier League depending on geographical considerations . The league merged with the Midland Combination in 2014 to form the new Midland Football League . 
 = = History = = 
 The Alliance was formed in 1994 , taking its initial member clubs from the West Midlands ( Regional ) League and the Midland Football Combination , which had existed since before the Second World War , having originally been formed as the Birmingham & District League and the Worcestershire Combination respectively . Their catchment areas had gradually converged , and by the early 1990s the standard of play and geographical coverage of the two competitions were considered to be similar enough that a new competition was formed to cater for the best clubs previously split across the two leagues . 
 The league drew ten member clubs from each of the two leagues for its inaugural season . The clubs selected to join from the Midland Combination were Barwell , <unk> St Michaels , <unk> Swifts , Pershore Town , Sandwell Borough , <unk> Dynamo , Shifnal Town , Stapenhill , Stratford Town and West Midlands Police . Those selected from the West Midlands ( Regional ) League were Brierley Hill Town , Chasetown , Halesowen Harriers , Hinckley Athletic , <unk> Victoria , Oldbury United , Paget Rangers , Rocester , Rushall Olympic and Willenhall Town . Paget Rangers won the first league championship by a margin of 12 points from Hinckley Athletic in the 1994 – 95 season , and gained promotion to the Southern League . The Alliance 's status as a feeder to the Southern League was cemented when Armitage 90 were relegated in the opposite direction . Armitage went on to dominate the league in the 1995 – 96 season but disbanded midway through the season , with the result that their record was expunged from the table . 
 For the 1999 – 2000 season the league increased in size to 22 clubs when two clubs were promoted into the Alliance but none relegated out of it . One of the promoted clubs was <unk> Town of the Leicestershire Senior League , the first time a team from that league had been promoted into the Alliance . Two years later , the league increased in size to 23 clubs as more teams joined than left , but Stapenhill resigned midway through the 2001 – 02 season , reverting the number of clubs in the competition back to 22 . The league expanded to 24 clubs for the 2003 – 04 season , at the end of which , for the first time , Alliance clubs were promoted to the Northern Premier League , rather than the Southern League , when Rocester and Willenhall Town joined the more northerly of the two leagues . The following season <unk> Town became the first Alliance team to reach the first round proper of the FA Cup , a feat which was repeated in the 2005 – 06 season by both Chasetown and Leamington . 
 With the creation of the National League System by the Football Association the league was officially defined as a Step 5 league . The champions of the Midland Combination , West Midlands ( Regional ) League and Leicestershire Senior League continued to gain promotion to the Alliance , although in 2008 the new East Midlands Counties Football League was formed at the Step 6 level and it was anticipated that successful teams from the Leicestershire Senior League , which is officially a Step 7 league , would now move up to the new league and that the champions of the new league would in turn move up to the Alliance if they fell within its coverage area . 
 In 2014 the Alliance merged with the Midland Combination to form the new Midland Football League . The clubs which had been members of the Alliance formed the Premier Division of the new league . 
 = = Structure = = 
