 = = Pornography arrest : 2002 = = 
 In November 2002 , while filming David LaChapelle 's video for Elton John 's " This Train Don 't Stop There Anymore " , Reubens learned that police were at his home with a search warrant , acting on a tip from a witness in the pornography case against actor Jeffrey Jones , finding among over 70 @,@ 000 items of kitsch memorabilia , two grainy videotapes and dozens of photographs that the city attorney 's office characterized as a collection of child pornography . Kelly Bush , Reubens ' personal representative at the time , said the description of the items was inaccurate and claimed the objects were " Rob Lowe 's sex videotape , and a few 30- to 100 @-@ year @-@ old kitsch collectible images . " Reubens turned himself in to the Hollywood division of the LAPD and was charged with possession of obscene material improperly depicting a child under the age of 18 in sexual conduct . The district attorney looked at Reubens ' collection and computer and found no grounds for bringing any felony charges against him , while the city attorney , Rocky <unk> brought misdemeanor charges against Reubens on the last day allowed by the statute . Reubens was represented by Hollywood criminal defense lawyer Blair Berk . In December he pleaded not guilty through Berk , who also complained that the city attorney failed to turn over evidence to the defense , which City Attorney Richard Katz countered that prosecutors were not required to do until after arraignment , after which they did ; neither side disclosed the contents . 
 In March 2004 , child pornography charges were dropped in exchange for Reubens ' guilty plea to a lesser charge . For the next three years he was required to register his address with the sheriff 's office and he could not be in the company of minors without the permission of a parent or legal guardian . Reubens later stated that he was a collector of erotica , including films , muscle magazines and a sizable collection of mostly homosexual vintage erotica , such as photographic studies of teen nudes . Reubens said that what the city attorney 's office viewed as pornography , he considered to be innocent art and that what they described as people underage engaged in masturbation or oral copulation was in fact a judgmental point of view of the nudes that Reubens described as people " one hundred percent not " performing sexual acts . Being an avid collector , Reubens had often purchased bulk lots , and one of his vintage magazine dealers declared that " there 's no way " he could have known the content of each page in the publications he bought and that he recalled Reubens asking for " physique magazines , vintage 1960s material , but not things featuring kids " . 
 He spent the next two years caring for his terminally ill father in Florida , who died in February 2004 of cancer . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = 2004 – 2008 = = = 
 Reubens has made cameos and guest appearances in numerous projects . He played Rick of the citizen 's patrol on the popular Comedy Central series Reno 911 ! , which gained him a small role in the 2007 film Reno 911 ! : Miami . That same year he appeared in the second music video version of The Raconteurs song " Steady , As She Goes " . The video has the band engaging in a comical soapbox car race , with Reubens playing the bad guy who sabotages the race . 
 In 2007 , Reubens attended his own tribute at the SF Sketchfest , where he talked about his career with Ben Fong @-@ Torres . He also signed with NBC to make a pilot on a show called Area 57 , a sitcom about a passive @-@ aggressive alien , but it was not picked up for the 2007 – 2008 season . Reubens did however appear on the hit NBC series 30 Rock as an inbred Austrian prince , a character Tina Fey created for him . He also made three guest appearances on FX 's series Dirt . This time he was recommended for the role by Dirt star and close friend Courteney Cox . Cox 's husband , David Arquette , would then cast Reubens for his directorial debut , the 2007 film The Tripper . 
 Reubens has also had small parts dubbing or making cameos in a series of Cartoon Network projects such as the 2006 television film Re @-@ Animated , the animated cartoon series Chowder , Tom Goes to the Mayor , and Tim and Eric Awesome Show , Great Job ! . 
 In 2008 , Reubens was slated to appear as homeopathic antidepressant salesman Alfredo <unk> in the third episode of Pushing Daisies , but the role was recast with Raúl Esparza . Reubens instead appeared in the role of Oscar <unk> in the series ' 7th and 9th episodes . 
 Also during 2008 , Reubens did a PSA for <unk> America , a website that aims to getting people to change regular light bulbs for more energy @-@ efficient ones in the form of <unk> and LED . He has also been working on David O. Russell 's Nailed and Todd Solondz 's Life During Wartime . 
 In 2009 , Reubens voiced Bat @-@ Mite in the Batman : The Brave and the Bold episode " Legends of the Dark Mite " . 
 = = = 2009 – present : the new Pee @-@ wee Herman Show and future films = = = 
 In January 2009 , Reubens hinted that negotiations were under way for his stage show to come back , and in August the return of The Pee @-@ wee Herman Show was announced . Reubens said he felt Pee @-@ wee calling , " I just got up one day and felt like I 'm gonna come back , that was it . " The show is also a way to " introduce Pee @-@ wee to the new generation that didn 't know about it " , preparing the way for Reubens ' main project , the Playhouse movie . Before this comeback , Reubens ' present age and shape had been pointed out as a possible issue , since Pee @-@ wee 's slim figure and clean skin have been one of his trademarks . But after appearing for the first time since 1992 as Pee @-@ wee at Spike TV 's 2007 Guys ' Choice Awards , Reubens had remained optimistic and had jokingly said he 's no longer nervous about being young Pee @-@ wee again thanks to digital retouching . 
 The show was originally scheduled to begin November 8 and continue until the 29th at the Music Box Theater in Hollywood . Due to high demand , the show moved to Club Nokia @ LA Live and was scheduled to run between January 12 , 2010 and February 7 . To promote the show Reubens once again gave interviews in character , appearing as a guest on The Jay Leno Show , The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien ( as well as O 'Brien 's subsequent Legally Prohibited Tour ) and Jimmy Kimmel Live ! among others . A Twitter account , a Facebook account and a new website were made for Pee @-@ wee after the show changed venues . 
 On November 1 , 2010 , Reubens was a special guest star on a WWE Raw episode as Pee @-@ wee . 
 On November 11 , 2010 , the show relocated to New York for a limited run at the Stephen Sondheim Theatre , selling over $ 3 million in advance tickets . An extra performance was taped for the HBO network on January 6 , 2011 and debuted March 19 . 
 On January 15 , 2011 , Reubens appeared on Saturday Night Live as Pee @-@ Wee in an extended and well received segment depicting Andy Samberg and Pee @-@ wee getting drunk , taking a ride on a mechanical bull , doing the tequila dance and ambushing Anderson Cooper in an alleyway with a chair . 
 From 2012 till 2013 Reubens contributed his voice talents to the animated series Tron : Uprising as Pavel . 
 = = = Pee @-@ wee 's Big Holiday and undeveloped scripts = = = 
 Ever since Reubens started giving interviews again after his 2002 arrest , he has talked about the two scripts he has written for future Pee @-@ wee Herman films . 
 Reubens once called his first script The Pee @-@ wee Herman Story , describing it as a black comedy . He has also referred to the script as " dark Pee @-@ wee " or " adult Pee @-@ wee " , with the plot involving Pee @-@ wee becoming famous as a singer after making a hit single and moving to Hollywood , where " he does everything wrong and becomes a big jerk " . Reubens further explained the film has many " Valley of the Dolls moments " . Reubens thought this script would be the first one to start production , but in 2006 Reubens announced he was to start filming his second script in 2007 . 
 The second film , a family friendly adventure , is called Pee @-@ wee 's Playhouse : The Movie by Reubens , and follows Pee @-@ wee and his Playhouse friends on a road @-@ trip adventure , meaning that they would leave the house for the first time and go out into " <unk> " . All of the original characters of the show , live @-@ action and puppets , are included in Reubens ' script . The story happens in a fantasy land that would be reminiscent of H.R. Pufnstuf and The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . In January 2009 , Reubens told Gary Panter that the rejected first script of Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure ( which they co @-@ wrote ) could have a movie deal very soon , and that it would be " 90 minutes of incredible beauty " . On December 2009 , while in character , Reubens said this film is " already done , the script is already fully written ; It 's ready to shoot . " Most of the film will take place in <unk> and claymation might be used . 
 Although he hasn 't revealed much about the scripts , he has said that one of the two films opens in prison . He has also said that using CGI for " updating " the puppets ' looks could be an option , but it all depended on the budget the films would have . Reubens once mentioned the possibility of doing one of the two as an animated film along the lines of The Polar Express , which uses performance capture technology , incorporating the movements of live actors into animated characters . 
 Reubens approached Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure director Tim Burton with one of the scripts , and talked to Johnny Depp about the possibility of having him portray Pee @-@ wee , but Burton was too busy , and Depp said he 'd have to think about it . 
 In January 2010 , Reubens reprised his role as Pee @-@ wee and reused the set of Pee @-@ wee 's Playhouse ( albeit slightly modified ) for a short sketch on Funny or Die . In the sketch , Pee @-@ wee comes home and shows off a brand @-@ new iPad given to him by Steve Jobs . This leads to a long argument between him and his puppet friends , who point out all of the iPad 's disadvantages – even <unk> himself points out its flaws by stating that " it looks like a giant iPhone " . In the end , Pee @-@ wee uses the iPad as a serving tray to hold glasses of milk and lemonade during a party being held at the Playhouse hours later . All the voices of the puppet characters are dubbed in by different actors than the TV series , except for <unk> whose voice is still done by George McGrath . 
 In June 2010 , various film news sites reported that Paul Reubens was working with Judd Apatow on a new Pee @-@ wee Herman feature film . 
 In February 2015 , Netflix acquired the rights to produce a new Pee @-@ Wee film entitled Pee @-@ Wee 's Big Holiday with Apatow and Reubens producing the film , John Lee directing , and Reubens and Paul Rust writing the screenplay . The film released on March 18 , 2016 on Netflix to positive reception . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = Ellen Harvelle = 
 Ellen Harvelle is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's Supernatural portrayed by Samantha Ferris . Introduced in the second season in order to explore a mother @-@ daughter relationship in the hunting world , the " gun @-@ toting , beer @-@ slinging " Ellen brought a " maternal energy " to the male @-@ dominated series . The mother of Jo Harvelle and the proprietor of Harvelle 's Roadhouse — a bar frequented by hunters of supernatural creatures — Ellen provides advice and assistance to Sam and Dean Winchester throughout the second season . Although the character 's appearances in the third season were dropped due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike and failed negotiations , she returns in the fifth and sixth seasons . Critical reception to the character has been positive , with many critics happy to see her return . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An old friend of John Winchester , Ellen Harvelle is the wife of hunter William Anthony Harvelle and the mother of Jo Harvelle . She runs Harvelle 's Roadhouse , a saloon and pub frequented by hunters of supernatural creatures . When Sam and Dean Winchester arrive there in the second season episode " Everybody Loves a Clown " , a wary Ellen holds them at gunpoint until she learns that they are John 's sons . She gives them information regarding a dangerous hunter named Gordon Walker in " Bloodlust " , while Sam and Dean later explain to her in " Simon Said " about the demon Azazel 's planned war against humanity . Her relationship with the brothers is strained in the episode " No Exit " , where she reveals that she believes her husband 's death was the result of a mistake made by John Winchester while they were working together on a hunt . However , she admits to Sam in " Hunted " that her husband 's death was not John 's fault and that she had forgiven him a long time ago . She also does not blame the brothers for Jo 's decision to go off hunting by herself . 
 The Roadhouse is destroyed by demons in " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part One " , and her whereabouts are unknown throughout the episode . It is revealed in " Part Two " that she had left the Roadhouse to run a few errands . She , the Winchesters , and fellow hunter Bobby Singer track Azazel 's activities to a cemetery surrounded by a giant devil 's trap made of railroad tracks . Unable to step inside the giant symbol without becoming trapped and powerless , Azazel forces the human Jake Talley to do his bidding . The hunters are unable to stop Jake from opening a gateway to Hell in a mausoleum there , and the devil 's trap is broken as hundreds of demons are released into the world . As the brothers then kill Azazel , Ellen and Bobby close the gateway . 
 In the fifth season episode " Good God , Y 'all ! " , Ellen reappears with Jo to help fellow hunter Rufus kill demons that have laid siege to a small town . By the time the Winchesters arrive , it appears that Jo , Rufus , and some other townspeople have become demonically possessed . However , Ellen and Dean eventually realize that War , one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse , is making the townspeople see each other as demons . Sam and Dean break War 's spell just as Ellen is about to be killed by one of the town 's residents . In " Abandon All Hope ... " , Ellen and Jo once again team up with the brothers to find Lucifer and kill him . Upon their arrival in a seemingly abandoned small town , however , they are attacked by the demon Meg and a pack of hellhounds . Jo is severely mauled , forcing them to barricade themselves inside a hardware store . Knowing that her wounds are fatal and that Lucifer must be stopped , Jo convinces them to build a bomb and to use her as bait for a trap . Ellen stays behind and opens the front doors while the Winchesters escape onto the roof . After Jo dies in her arms , Ellen blows up the building , killing the hellhounds and herself in the process . 
 When the angel Balthazar changes history in the sixth season episode " My Heart Will Go On " so that the Titanic never sank , Ellen is restored to life and is married to Bobby . However , the original timeline is eventually restored . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Series creator Eric Kripke felt that Ellen brought a " maternal energy " to the series , and described the character as " a lioness , which is tough and badass and ' You touch my children , I will kill you . ' " Likewise , actress Samantha Ferris described her as a " gun @-@ toting , beer @-@ slinging , bar @-@ owning broad " with a " very maternal core " . Ferris also feels that , despite Ellen having gone through a lot in her life , she is cautious rather than jaded , and is " very protective of the things she has in her life " , especially her daughter Jo and the Winchesters . Thus , her main concern is Jo 's safety , which prompts her to forbid her daughter from going on hunts . When she realizes that she can no longer stop Jo from doing what she wants , Ellen becomes her hunting partner , deciding it is the best way to look after her . By the time of Ellen 's final appearance , actress Alona Tal came to view their characters more as equals rather than mother and daughter . 
 = = Development = = 
 Due to the father @-@ son dynamics of the hunting world depicted in the series ' first season with the Winchesters , the writers decided to explore a mother @-@ daughter relationship , resulting in the introduction of Ellen and her daughter Jo . The name originated from the writers ' decision to base her on the " tough yet emotionally @-@ vulnerable " characters portrayed by actress Ellen Barkin . Ellen was meant to have a " true and honest platonic friendship " with John Winchester , and her backstory of her husband having been killed due to John 's mistake was added to the storyline to explain why John never mentioned the Roadhouse to his sons . Ferris auditioned for the role , and feels that she was exactly what they had been looking for . She commented , " I have a certain kind of personality that works specifically with a role , and Ellen is just me on television . They were looking for a tough , strong , yet a little maternal actor , and I struck a chord . " Series creator Eric Kripke agrees , feeling that Ferris " really brought the character to life " , being " nuanced and complex and tough , yet beautiful and feminine " . 
 The writers intended for the character to make only two guest appearances in the third season , which left Ferris " a bit surprised and [ disappointed ] " at Ellen 's lack of involvement . However , her initial return was scrapped due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , and the actress declined a guest appearance in the finale because the lackluster offer " could cost [ her ] money and work " . The opportunity to return for the fifth season surprised her due to the large time span since her previous appearance . Though she expected her character to eventually die , a devastated Ferris was surprised at how quickly it occurred . However , after speaking to director Phil Sgriccia — he told her that Ellen was the " perfect fodder " for the " kick " that the series needed , and would " go out in a blaze of glory " — the actress came to realize that the character 's death made sense . Ellen 's last words to Dean — " Kick it in the ass . " — was an improvised homage to the late Supernatural executive producer and director Kim Manners , who had died the year before and would often recite the phrase before filming a scene . 
 Wanting to " have a surprise in [ the new reality ] " of the sixth season episode " My Heart Will Go On " , the writers considered bringing back various deceased characters . Executive Producer Robert Singer explained that they ultimately decided upon Ellen because " she 's a fan favorite " and " in a perfect world , she probably would be a good mate for Bobby " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception to Ellen has been positive . In their initial appearance , Bryan <unk> of UGO felt that the new hunters of the Roadhouse had potential to be the Supernatural equivalent of Buffy the Vampire Slayers 's Scooby Gang , comparing Ellen to Buffy 's Giles , as she is " the elder who can help guide the boys from a home base and serve as an emotional link to their father , a parental figure without all the melodramatic baggage of the actual father from the first season " . Maureen Ryan of Chicago Tribune was " annoyed " at the destruction of the Roadhouse in the second season finale , as she " really loved Ellen " . Diana Steenbergen of IGN also favored Ellen from the beginning , believing her to be " a great addition to the show " . She deemed Ellen " tough and direct , and also female , something the boys don 't have a lot of in their lives right now " . 
 Steenbergen was happy to see the character return in the fifth season , noting that the show has been missing " smart , tough women who are not evil in general " . Tina Charles of TV Guide also welcomed the character back , and enjoyed how Ellen 's initial reaction to Dean Winchester in " Good God , Y 'all ! " — hugging and then slapping him — was " very much in character " . Regarding the character 's death , Charles noted that " when [ Ellen ] went down in ' Abandon All Hope ' like [ she ] did , I felt it . [ Her death ] meant something " . Though also happy to see Ellen reappear in the fifth season , Ryan was disappointed at the lack of screentime the character received in " Good God , Y 'All ! " . Commenting on the character 's farewells in the fifth season , Ryan noted that Ferris " brought [ her ] A @-@ game to ' Abandon All Hope … ' " . She added that " [ Ferris fits ] perfectly into the ' Supernatural ' world because [ she understands ] that on this show , restraint is everything . It 's not necessarily just about what the characters say or do , it 's about what they don 't say — what they can 't find the words for " . 
 Having missed Ellen 's " maternal influence " , Charles was happy to see her return in the sixth season episode " My Heart Will Go On " , while Ryan called Ellen 's scenes with Bobby in the episode " probably the strongest part of the show " . Ellen 's reappearance gladdened Steenbergen , who called the character a " force to be reckoned with on the show " and added that " she is still missed " . 
 In a poll conducted by SFX for the Top 200 Sexiest Characters In Sci @-@ Fi , Ellen was voted the 77th sexiest female character in fantasy and science fiction film and television . 
 = Obi Ezeh = 
 Obi Pius Ezeh ( February 2 , 1988 ) is a former American football linebacker . He was included on both the 2009 midseason and the 2009 preseason watchlist for the Butkus Award . He was the active Michigan Wolverines football career leader in tackles . 
 In high school , he played running back on offense more regularly than linebacker on defense . He shared running duties as a sophomore and junior before becoming the starter as a senior at Catholic Central High School in Grand Rapids , Michigan . He established his school career rushing record of nearly 3 @,@ 000 yards . As a senior he scored a two @-@ point conversion to give his school a one @-@ point victory and a berth in the 2005 Michigan High School Athletic Association state championship game at Ford Field . He was also a member of a three @-@ time state champion high school rugby team and was invited to tryout with the United States national rugby union team . 
 At Michigan , he redshirted as a true freshman . Then , as a redshirt freshman for the 2007 Michigan Wolverines football team , he battled for the starting middle linebacker position and appeared to have lost the position early in the season . However , after an injury he became a regular starter . He concluded the season with thirteen and twelve tackle efforts against bitter rivals Michigan State and Ohio State , respectively . He started his redshirt sophomore season with a Big Ten Conference defensive player of the week , fifteen @-@ tackle effort for the 2008 Michigan Wolverines football team . He finished the season as an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection . Just after earning 2009 midseason Butkus Award watchlist recognition , he was removed from the starting lineup and saw limited action in the final four games . 
 After his senior season in 2010 , Ezeh declared for the 2011 NFL Draft , where he went undrafted . He later signed as an undrafted free agent with the Washington Redskins . 
 = = High school = = 
 As a youth , Ezeh was unable to play football because he was too big for the local leagues according to Grand Rapids area officials . As a sophomore running back for the 2003 Catholic Central Cougars football team , Ezeh had several 100 @-@ yard games as well as multiple touchdown games , even though he was not the primary weapon in the backfield . Ezeh was also a member of the Cougars rugby team that placed 11th at the 2004 United States High School Rugby National Championships . 
 As a junior running back , he opened his football season with 170 yards on 18 carries . In the 2004 district championship game , he rushed for 88 yards in the first half , but was held to 5 in the second half as Catholic Central lost 33 – 20 . Over the course of the season he compiled 907 rushing yards and 13 touchdowns . Ezeh was recognized as a Detroit News Class B All @-@ state honorable mention linebacker . He was also selected as Grand Rapids All @-@ area honorable mention , according to The Grand Rapids Press . He also helped lead the 2005 rugby team to a State Championship threepeat . 
 In 2005 , Ezeh entered his senior season as the focal point of his school 's running game and was rated as the seventh best football prospect in the state of Michigan , according to The Detroit News . He was also invited to tryout for the United States national rugby union team as an outside center . During the season , Ezeh was regularly among the leading rushers in the area . In the Division 4 state semifinal game , Ezeh returned a kickoff 80 yards for a touchdown and rushed for 136 yards on 24 carries . During the game , after Catholic Central scored on a quarterback sneak with 2 : 28 remaining , Ezeh scored on a two @-@ point conversion to give his team a 35 – 34 victory . This led them to the 2005 MHSAA state championship game at Ford Field , which they lost 17 – 10 to Powers Catholic High School . By the end of the season , Ezeh had compiled a school record 2 @,@ 914 career rushing yards , which included 33 touchdowns . During his senior year he also occasionally played linebacker , recording 34 tackles ( 16 for a loss ) . Although , he missed part of the season with an ankle injury , he totaled 1 @,@ 391 yards and 10 touchdowns on 217 carries and added seven pass receptions , including one touchdown , and he was recognized as a 2nd @-@ team All @-@ area running back . The Detroit News recognized him as their postseason number six blue chip prospect in the state , and he was selected to play in the Michigan High School Football Coaches Association 's annual all @-@ star game . In February 2006 , he signed his letter of intent to play for Michigan , where it was unclear whether he would play fullback , tight end or linebacker . 
 = = Michigan = = 
 As expected , Ezeh , who had suffered a shoulder injury , redshirted his freshman year . Prior to his redshirt freshman season , he changed jersey numbers from 44 to 45 as he converted from fullback to linebacker . On May 22 , 2007 , he was charged with suspicion of operating a vehicle while intoxicated for an incident when his vehicle struck a utility pole on the same street on which he lives while his blood @-@ alcohol content was 0 @.@ 11 % ( the legal limit in Michigan is 0 @.@ 08 % ) . Ezeh pleaded not guilty , and the trial was scheduled for September 19 in the 15th District Court . The time of the accident was outside the permissible times for Ezeh 's restricted driving license that resulted from a prior non @-@ alcohol @-@ related accident . On the football field , redshirt freshman Ezeh entered the 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season for the 2007 Michigan Wolverines football team in a three @-@ way battle to replace NFL @-@ bound David Harris at middle linebacker with redshirt junior John Thompson and junior college transfer Austin Panter , who had been named national junior college defensive player of the year . Harris also hailed from Grand Rapids and had worn the number 45 . The week before the season opener , The Detroit News declared Ezeh the starter , however , the Ann Arbor News and Ezeh 's hometown The Grand Rapids Press both stated that the race between Ezeh and Thompson was undecided heading into the game . In the aftermath of the September 1 opening game loss to two @-@ time defending FCS champion Appalachian State Mountaineers , more was made of the fact that both players had trouble playing the position than who had started the game . Ezeh started the first game , but lost his spot to Thompson in the next two . After three weeks of play , Thompson , who had been voted the hardest hitter on the team the previous two seasons , had established himself as the starter by ranking second on the team in tackles . However , although Thompson had stepped up to the role he was notable for having trouble with pass coverage . Ezeh accumulated no statistics in the third and fourth game , but recorded his first interception in the fifth game on September 29 against Northwestern on a deflected pass . Ezeh started that game because of an injury . The following week , he again started in place of the injured Thompson and recorded nine tackles against Eastern Michigan . He also forced a fumble and fielded one kickoff return . Even though Thompson recovered from his ankle injury after four weeks , Ezeh retained the starting job the remainder of the season for a total of ten starts . Thompson only recorded four tackles the rest of the year . On November 1 , his lawyer stated that on August 29 Ezeh had pleaded guilty to an operating while visibly intoxicated charge , which is a serious misdemeanor but a lesser charge than the original operating a vehicle while intoxicated , and had sought alcohol counseling prior to his sentence . The plea resulted in a year 's probation , three days in a work release program , a substantial payment covering fines , court costs and restitution . He committed to attend a Mothers Against Drunk Driving class . In the November 3 Paul Bunyan Trophy victory against Michigan State he recorded a season @-@ high 13 tackles and two sacks . One of the sacks occurred on Michigan State 's final series of downs in Michigan territory to help secure the 28 – 24 win . Ezeh recorded 12 tackles in the Michigan – Ohio State rivalry game against Ohio State on November 17 to end the regular season . 
 After the graduation of Shawn Crable and Chris Graham there was again a notable battle for linebacker positions entering the 2008 NCAA Division I FBS football season for the 2008 Michigan Wolverines football team . Ezeh who had posted 68 tackles in 2007 was the leading returning tackler . As the only returning starting linebacker , Ezeh assumed the role of mentor . Ezeh won the Big Ten Defensive Player of the Week award on September 1 , 2008 for a game against the Utah Utes where he recorded 15 tackles and an interception . He also earned an ABC Player of the Game recognition . Ezeh also posted fifteen tackles in the October 4 game against the Illinois Fighting Illini , which earned him his second ABC Player of the Game award . He posted two other double digit tackle games , including a ten tackle effort in his second Paul Bunyan Trophy game . Ezeh finished the season seventh in the Big Ten in tackles . He was recognized as an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media . 
 Ezeh entered the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football season opener with the third most career starts ( 23 ) on the 2009 Michigan Wolverines football team behind punter Zoltan Mesko ( 38 ) and offensive lineman Stephen Schilling ( 26 ) . As a redshirt junior during the 2009 season for the Wolverines , Ezeh posted fourteen tackles against Michigan State bringing his three @-@ game career total to 37 tackles against the Spartans . Ezeh had grown up in a neighborhood with many Michigan State fans who flew their Michigan State flags , and he once attended Michigan Football camp wearing a Michigan State shirt . He has been included on both the 2009 midseason and the 2009 preseason watchlist for the Butkus Award . The midseason list includes sixteen linebackers . Although he was added to the midseason Butkus watchlist in mid October , on October 31 he was removed from the starting lineup after starting 29 straight games . 
 During the 2010 NCAA Division I FBS football season he started the first six games for the 2010 Michigan Wolverines football team before losing the starting middle linebacker position to Kenny Demens . Ezeh 's final regular start was against Michigan State on October 9 , when he tied his season @-@ high with nine tackles and boosted his career total against Michigan State to 46 . When Jonas Mouton was unavailable for the Purdue game on November 13 due to a chest injury , Ezeh stepped in and recorded his first sack of the season as well as eight solo tackles . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 At his initial March 17 , 2011 pro day , he posted modest numbers : 40 @-@ yard dash - 5 @.@ 07 seconds ; vertical jump 30 inches ( 76 @.@ 2 cm ) and standing broad jump 9 feet 2 inches ( 2 @.@ 79 m ) . However , after hiring a new trainer he posted better numbers at an April regional combine : 40 @-@ yard dash - 4 @.@ 81 seconds ; vertical jump 34 @.@ 5 inches ( 87 @.@ 6 cm ) and standing broad jump 9 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 84 m ) as well as a 4 @.@ 81 time in the 20 @-@ yard shuttle . 
 = = = Washington Redskins = = = 
 He went undrafted in the 2011 NFL Draft and in the first few days following the 2011 NFL lockout he went unsigned , before signing with the Washington Redskins as an undrafted free agent on July 31 , 2011 . He was waived on August 19 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Ezeh is the son of Pius and <unk> . He has four siblings : <unk> , Kaka , <unk> and Nicole . 
 = Christian meditation = 
 Christian meditation is a form of prayer in which a structured attempt is made to become aware of and reflect upon the revelations of God . The word meditation comes from the Latin word <unk> , which has a range of meanings including to reflect on , to study and to practice . Christian meditation is the process of deliberately focusing on specific thoughts ( such as a bible passage ) and reflecting on their meaning in the context of the love of God . 
 Christian meditation aims to heighten the personal relationship based on the love of God that marks Christian communion . Both in Eastern and Western Christianity meditation is the middle level in a broad three @-@ stage characterization of prayer : it involves more reflection than first level vocal prayer , but is more structured than the multiple layers of contemplative prayer . Teachings in both the Eastern and Western Christian churches have emphasized the use of Christian meditation as an element in increasing one 's knowledge of Christ . 
 In Aspects of Christian meditation , the Holy See warned of potential incompatibilities in mixing Christian and non @-@ Christian styles of meditation . In 2003 , in A Christian reflection on the New Age the Vatican announced that " the Church avoids any concept that is close to those of the New Age " . 
 = = Context and structure = = 
 Christian meditation involves looking back on Jesus ' life , thanksgiving and adoration of God for his action in sending Jesus for human salvation . In her book The Interior Castle ( Mansions 6 , Chapter 7 ) Saint Teresa of Avila defined Christian meditation as follows : 
 " By meditation I mean prolonged reasoning with the understanding , in this way . We begin by thinking of the favor which God bestowed upon us by giving us His only Son ; and we do not stop there but proceed to consider the mysteries of His whole glorious life . " 
 Quoting the Gospel of Matthew [ 11 : 27 ] : " No one knows the Father but only the Son and anyone whom the Son wants to reveal him " and I Corinthians [ 2 : 12 ] : " But we have received the Spirit who is from God so that we may realize what God has freely given us " , theologian Hans von Balthasar explained the context of Christian meditation as follows : 
 " The dimensions of Christian meditation develop from God 's having completed his self @-@ revelation in two directions : Speaking out of his own , and speaking as a man , through his Son , disclosing the depths of man .... And this meditation can take place only where the revealing man , God 's Son , Jesus Christ , reveals God as his Father : in the Holy Spirit of God , so we may join in probing God 's depths , which only God 's Spirit probes . " 
 Building on that theme , E. P. Clowney explained that three dimensions of Christian meditation are crucial , not merely for showing its distinctiveness , but for guiding its practice . The first is that Christian meditation is grounded in the Bible . Because the God of the Bible is a personal God who speaks in words of revelation , Christian meditation responds to this revelation and focuses on that aspect , in contrast to mystic meditations which use mantras . The second distinctive mark of Christian meditation is that it responds to the love of God , as in I John [ 4 : 19 ] : " We love , for he first loved us " . The personal relationship based on the love of God that marks Christian communion is thus heightened in Christian meditation . The third dimension is that the revelations of the Bible and the love of God lead to the worship of God : making Christian meditation an exercise in praise . 
 Thomas Merton characterized the goal of Christian meditation as follows : " The true end of Christian meditation is practically the same as the end of liturgical prayer and the reception of the sacraments : a deeper union by grace and charity with the Incarnate Word , who is the only Mediator between God and man , Jesus Christ . " While Protestants view salvation in terms of faith and grace alone ( i.e. sola fide and sola gratia ) both Western and Eastern Christians see a role for meditation on the path to salvation and redemption . Apostle Paul stated in Epistle to the Romans 9 : 16 that salvation only comes from " God that hath mercy " . The path to salvation in Christian meditation is not one of give and take , and the aim of meditation is to bring joy to the heart of God . The Word of God directs meditations to show the two aspects of love that please God : obedience and adoration . The initiative in Christian salvation is with God , and one does not meditate or love God to gain his favor . 
 = = = Role of the Holy Spirit = = = 
 In Western Christian teachings , meditation is believed to involve the inherent action of the Holy Spirit to help the meditating Christian understand the deeper meanings of the Word of God . In the 12th century , decades before Guigo II 's the Ladder of the Monk , one of his predecessors , Guigo I , emphasized this belief by stating that when earnest meditation begins , the Holy Spirit enters the soul of the meditator , " turns water into wine " and shows the path towards contemplation and a better understanding of God . 
 In the 19th century , Charles Spurgeon affirmed this belief within the Protestant tradition and wrote : " The Spirit has taught us in meditation to ponder its message , to put aside , if we will , the responsibility of preparing the message we 've got to give . Just trust God for that . " In the 20th century , Hans Urs von Balthasar paraphrased this teaching as follows : 
 The vistas of God 's Word unfold to the meditating Christian solely through the gift of the Divine Spirit . How could we understand what is within God and is disclosed to us except through the Spirit of God who is communicated to us ? 
 As a biblical basis for this teaching , von Balthasar referred to 1 Corinthians 2 : 9 @-@ 10 : " these are the things God has revealed to us by his Spirit . The Spirit searches all things , even the deep things of God " . : 
 = = = Distinction from non @-@ Christian meditations = = = 
 Christian meditation is different from the style of meditations performed in Eastern religions ( such as Buddhism ) or in the context of the New Age . While other types of meditation may suggest approaches to disengage the mind , Christian meditation aims to fill the mind with thoughts related to Biblical passages or Christian devotions . Although some mystics in both the Western and Eastern churches have associated feelings of ecstasy with meditation , ( e.g. St. Teresa of Avila 's legendary meditative ecstasy ) , St. Gregory of Sinai , one of the originators of Hesychasm , stated that the goal of Christian meditation is " seeking guidance from the Holy Spirit , beyond the minor phenomenon of ecstasy " . 
 Modern Christian teachings on meditation at times include specific criticism of the transcendental styles of meditation , e.g. John Bertram Phillips stated that Christian meditation involves the action of the Holy Spirit on Biblical passages and warned of approaches that " disengage the mind " from scripture . According to Edmund P. Clowney , Christian meditation contrasts with cosmic styles of oriental meditation as radically as the portrayal of God the Father in the Bible contrasts with discussions of Krishna or Brahman in Indian teachings . Unlike eastern meditations , most styles of Christian meditations are intended to stimulate thought and deepen meaning . Christian meditation aims to heighten the personal relationship based on the love of God that marks Christian communion . According to E. P. Clowney it is the search for wisdom , not ecstasy , that marks the path of Christian meditation , a wisdom sought in the " Christ of Scripture and the Scripture of Christ " . 
 A 1989 document generally known as Aspects of Christian meditation set forth the position of the Holy See with respect to the differences between Christian and eastern styles of meditation . The document , issued as a letter to all Catholic bishops , stresses the differences between Christian and eastern meditative approaches . It warns of the dangers of attempting to mix Christian meditation with eastern approaches since that could be both confusing and misleading , and may result in the loss of the essential <unk> nature of Christian meditation . The letter warned that euphoric states obtained through Eastern meditation should not be confused with prayer or assumed to be signs of the presence of God , a state that should always result in loving service to others . Without these truths , the letter said , meditation , which should be a flight from the self , can degenerate into a form of self @-@ absorption . 
 = = Old Testament references = = 
 In the Old Testament , there are two Hebrew words for meditation : hāgâ ( Hebrew : <unk> ) , which means to sigh or murmur , but also to meditate , and <unk> ( Hebrew : <unk> ) , which means to muse , or rehearse in one 's mind . When the Hebrew Bible was translated into Greek , hāgâ became the Greek <unk> which emphasized meditation 's movement in the depth of the human heart . <unk> was a reminder that one should never let meditation be a formality . The Latin Bible then translated hāgâ / <unk> into <unk> . 
 The Bible mentions meditate or meditation about twenty times , fifteen times in the Book of Psalms alone . When the Bible mentions meditation , it often mentions obedience in the next breath . An example is the Book of Joshua [ Joshua 1 : 8 ] : " Do not let this Book of the Law depart from your mouth ; meditate on it day and night . " 
 = = History = = 
 During the Middle Ages , the monastic traditions of both Western and Eastern Christianity moved beyond vocal prayer to Christian meditation . These progressions resulted in two distinct and different meditative practices : Lectio Divina in the West and hesychasm in the East . Hesychasm involves the repetition of the Jesus Prayer , but Lectio Divina uses different Scripture passages at different times and although a passage may be repeated a few times , Lectio Divina is not repetitive in nature . 
 The progression from Bible reading , to meditation , to loving regard for God , was first formally described by Guigo II , a Carthusian monk who died late in the 12th century . Guigo II 's book The Ladder of Monks is considered the first description of methodical prayer in the western mystical tradition . 
 In Eastern Christianity , the monastic traditions of " constant prayer " that traced back to the Desert Fathers and Evagrius <unk> established the practice of hesychasm and influenced John <unk> ' book The Ladder of Divine Ascent by the 7th century . These meditative prayers were promoted and supported by Saint Gregory Palamas in the 14th century . 
 The methods of " methodical prayer " as taught by the Devotio Moderna group in northern Europe had entered Spain and were known in the early 16th century . The book The Imitation of Christ which was known in Spain as <unk> mundi became known in Spain , and while Teresa probably did not initially know of Guigo II 's methods she was likely influenced by its teachings via the works of Francisco de Osuna which she studied . Teresa 's contemporary and collaborator , John of the Cross continued the tradition of Guigo II and taught the 4 stages of Lectio Divina . By the 19th century the importance of Biblical meditation had also been firmly established in the Protestant spiritual tradition . 
 During the 18th and early 19th centuries , some components of meditation had started to be de @-@ emphasized in some branches of Western Christianity . However , the early part of the 20th century witnessed a revival and books and articles on approaches such as Lectio divina aimed at the general public began to appear by the middle of the century . 
 In 1965 , one of the principal documents of the Second Vatican Council , the dogmatic constitution Dei verbum ( Latin for Word of God ) , emphasized the use of Lectio divina and on the 40th anniversary of Dei verbum in 2005 Pope Benedict XVI reaffirmed its importance . 
 = = Approaches to meditation = = 
 A number of saints and historical figures have followed and presented specific approaches to Christian meditation . Both Eastern and Western Christian teachings have emphasized the use of meditation as an element in increasing one 's knowledge of Christ . The Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola use meditative mental imagery , with the goal of knowing Christ more intimately and loving him more ardently . In The Way of Perfection , St. Theresa of Avila taught her nuns how to try to get to know Christ by using meditation and mental prayer . <unk> prayer and meditation continues to be used in the Eastern Orthodox tradition as a spiritual practice that facilitates the knowing of Christ . 
 = = = St. Ignatius of Loyola = = = 
 The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola ( 1491 – 1556 ) , the founder of the Jesuits , contain numerous meditative exercises . To this day , the Spiritual Exercises remain an integral part of the <unk> training period of the Roman Catholic religious order of Jesuits . 
 The exercises are intended as notes to guide a spiritual director who is leading someone else through an experience of Christian meditation . The entire experience takes about 30 days and often involves a daily interview with the director . The process begins with a consideration of the purpose of one 's life and the relationship with the rest of creation . It is followed by a week of meditation about sin and its consequences . Next comes a period of meditating on the events of the life of Jesus , and another for thinking about his suffering and death . The final week is to experience the joy of the resurrection , and in conclusion to reflect on God 's love and the response of love for God . 
 The exercises often involve imagery in which one enters a biblical scene . For example , the practitioner is encouraged to visualize and meditate upon scenes from the life of Christ , at times asking questions from Christ on the cross , during crucifixion . 
 = = = St. Teresa of Avila = = = 
 St. Teresa of Ávila ( 1515 – 1582 ) a Doctor of the Church , practiced contemplative prayer for periods of one hour at a time , twice a day . St. Teresa believed that no one who was faithful to the practice of meditation could possibly lose his soul . Her writings are viewed as fundamental teachings in Christian spirituality . 
 St. Teresa taught her nuns to meditate on specific prayers . Her prayers described in The Way of Perfection involve meditation on a mystery in the life of Jesus and are based on the faith that " God is within " , a truth that Teresa said she learned from St. Augustine . 
 In her Life , she wrote that she taught herself from the instructions given in the book , The Third Spiritual Alphabet - by Francisco de Osuna - which relates to Franciscan mysticism . Her starting point was the practice of " recollection " , i.e. keeping the senses and the intellect in check and not allowing them to stray . In her meditations , one generally restricts attention to a single subject , principally the love of God . In The Way of Perfection she wrote : " It is called recollection because the soul collects together all the faculties and enters within itself to be with God " . She would use devices such as short readings , a scene of natural beauty or a religious statue or picture to remind her to keep her focus . She wrote that in due course , the mind naturally learns to maintain focus on God almost effortlessly . 
 St. Theresa viewed Christian meditation as the first of four steps in achieving " union with God " , and used the analogy of watering the garden . She compared basic meditation to watering a garden with a bucket , Recollection to the water wheel , Quiet ( contemplation ) to a spring of water and Union to drenching rain . 
 = = = Saint Francis de Sales = = = 
 Saint Francis de Sales ( 1576 – 1622 ) used a four @-@ part approach to Christian meditation based on " preparation " , " consideration " , " affections and resolutions " and " conclusions " : 
 In the preparation part , one places oneself in the presence of God and asks the Holy Spirit to direct the prayer , as in the Epistle to the Romans [ 8 : 26 ] : " The Spirit helps us in our weakness , for we do not know what to pray for , but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with sighs too deep for words . " 
 In the consideration part , one focuses on a specific topic , e.g. a passage from the Bible . 
 In the affections and resolutions part , one focuses on feelings and makes a resolution or decision . For instance , when meditating on the Parable of the Good Samaritan one may decide to visit someone sick and be kind to them . 
 In the conclusion part , one gives thanks and praise to God for the considerations and asks for the grace to stand by the resolution . 
 = = Denominational issues = = 
 = = = Catholic Church = = = 
 Saint Thomas Aquinas ( 1225 – 1274 ) said that meditation is necessary for devotion , and the Second Vatican Council called for " faithful meditation on God 's word " as part of the spiritual formation of seminarians . 
 Saint John of the Cross ( 1542 – 1591 ) , a close friend of St. Teresa of Avila , viewed Christian meditation as a necessary step toward union with God , and wrote that even the most spiritually advanced persons always needed to regularly return to meditation . 
 Saint Padre Pio ( 1887 – 1968 ) , who was devoted to rosary meditations , said : 
 " The person who meditates and turns his mind to God , who is the mirror of his soul , seeks to know his faults , tries to correct them , moderates his impulses , and puts his conscience in order . " 
 The Catechism of the Catholic Church encourages meditation as a form of prayer : " Meditation is above all a quest . The mind seeks to understand the why and how of the Christian life , in order to adhere and respond to what the Lord is asking " ( Catechism section # <unk> ) and that Christians owe it to themselves to develop the desire to meditate regularly ( # 2707 ) . Emphasizing union with God , it states : " Meditation engages thought , imagination , emotion , and desire . This mobilization of faculties is necessary in order to deepen our convictions of faith , prompt the conversion of our heart , and strengthen our will to follow Christ . Christian prayer tries above all to meditate on the mysteries of Christ , as in <unk> divina or the rosary . This form of prayerful reflection is of great value , but Christian prayer should go further : to the knowledge of the love of the Lord Jesus , to union with him " ( # <unk> ) . <unk> prayer is different from contemplative prayer ( See CCC <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Eucharistic meditations = = = = 
 Christian meditation performed along with Eucharistic adoration outside of Mass has been associated with a large amount of Catholic writings and inspirations specially since the 18th century . The Eucharistic meditations of the two Saints Pierre Julien <unk> and Jean Vianney ( both promoters of the Eucharist ) were published as books . 
 Saint Thérèse of Lisieux was devoted to Eucharistic meditation and on February 26 , 1895 shortly before she died wrote from memory and without a rough draft her poetic masterpiece " To Live by Love " which had composed during Eucharistic meditation . 
 Significant portions of the writings of the Venerable Concepcion Cabrera de Armida were reported as having been based on her adorations of the Blessed Sacrament . Similarly , in her book Eucharist : true jewel of eucharistic spirituality Maria Candida of the Eucharist ( who was beatified by Pope John Paul II ) wrote about her own personal experiences and reflections on eucharistic meditation . 
 = = = = Rosary meditations = = = = 
 Meditation is an integral part of the rosary . This mode of meditation is the process of reflecting on the mysteries of the rosary . With practice , this may in time turn into contemplation on the mysteries . The practice of meditation during the praying of repeated Hail Marys dates back to 15th century Carthusian monks , and was soon adopted by the Dominicans at large . By the 16th century the practice of meditation during the rosary had spread across Europe , and the book <unk> del Rosario della Gloriosa Maria Virgine ( i.e. Meditations on the Rosary of the Glorious Virgin Mary ) printed in 1569 for the rosary confraternity of Milan provided an individual meditation to accompany each bead or prayer . 
 Saint Teresa of Avila 's meditative approach of focusing on " the favor which God bestowed upon us by giving us His only Son " can be viewed as the basis of most scriptural rosary meditations . In his 2002 encyclical <unk> Virginis Mariae , Pope John Paul II placed the rosary at the very center of Christian spirituality . Emphasizing that the final goal of Christian life is to be transformed , or " transfigured " , into Christ he stated that the rosary helps believers come closer to Christ by contemplating Christ . He stated that the rosary unites us with Mary 's own prayer , who , in the presence of God , prays with us and for <unk> and stated that : " To recite the rosary is nothing other than to contemplate with Mary the face of Christ . " 
 = = = Eastern Christianity = = = 
 During the Byzantine Empire , between the 10th and 14th centuries , a tradition of prayer called hesychasm developed , particularly on Mount Athos in Greece , and continues to the present . St. Gregory of Sinai is considered by most to be the founder of the hesychastic approach to prayer . This tradition uses a special posture and breathing rituals , accompanied by the repetition of a short prayer ( traditionally the ' Jesus Prayer ' ) giving rise to suggestions that it may have been influenced by Indian approaches . " While some might compare it [ hesychastic prayer ] with a mantra , to use the Jesus Prayer in such a fashion is to violate its purpose . One is never to treat it as a string of syllables for which the ' surface ' meaning is secondary . Likewise , hollow repetition is considered to be worthless ( or even spiritually damaging ) in the hesychast tradition . " Rather , it is to be in the spirit of a true mantra . This style of prayer was at first opposed as heretical by <unk> in Calabria , but was defended by Saint Gregory Palamas . Coming from <unk> ( " stillness , rest , quiet , silence " ) , hesychasm continues to be practiced in the Eastern Orthodox Church and some other Eastern Churches of the Byzantine Rite . Hesychasm has not gained significance in the Western churches . 
 In hesychasm , the Jesus prayer , consisting of the phrase : " Lord Jesus Christ , Son of God , have mercy on me " is repeated either for a set period of time or a set number of times . Hesychasm is contrasted with the more mental or imaginative forms of Christian meditation in which a person is encouraged to imagine or think of events from the life of Jesus or sayings from the Gospel . Sometimes hesychasm has been compared to the meditative techniques of oriental religions and it is possible that there were interactions between <unk> and Sufis , but this has not been proven . 
 = = = Other approaches = = = 
 John Main OSB ( 1926 – 1982 ) was a Benedictine monk and priest who presented a way of Christian meditation which used a prayer @-@ phrase or mantra . This approach was then used by groups which then become the World Community for Christian Meditation . 
 = California State Route 7 = 
 State Route 7 ( SR 7 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of California , running from the Calexico East Port of Entry on the U.S.-Mexico border east of Calexico north to its terminus at Interstate 8 ( I @-@ 8 ) , where Orchard Road continues the route north towards Holtville . The route provides convenient access to the country of Mexico from I @-@ 8 . The southern portion of the route opened in 1996 , and the rest of the route connecting to I @-@ 8 opened in 2005 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway begins at the Calexico East Border Station , which is open from 6 am to 10 pm , seven days a week . Just north of the border , the highway splits into two roads to pass through the customs checkpoints before the two roads merge back together ; the fork to the west is for cars , and the fork to the east is for commercial vehicles . SR 7 takes the western fork , which passes over the other fork at the northern end and merges into that highway . From here to I @-@ 8 , SR 7 is an expressway known as Orchard Road . Before reaching I @-@ 8 , SR 7 travels north and has an at @-@ grade intersection with SR 98 and a few other roads . At its northern end , SR 7 turns into County Route <unk> ( still Orchard Road ) as it intersects with I @-@ 8 . The entire route runs through the Sonoran Desert and is built to expressway standards . 
 The route was constructed to allow commercial traffic to travel between Mexico and the United States . SR 7 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , and is part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In 2013 , SR 7 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 2 @,@ 450 at the Calexico inspection station , and 15 @,@ 900 at <unk> Road along the spur , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 7 was added to the state highway system in 1990 , and to the Freeway and Expressway System in 1998 . The segment from the Mexican border to SR 98 was completed by March 1996 to expressway standards ; this cost $ 9 @.@ 1 million ( about $ 16 @.@ 9 million in 2015 dollars ) to complete . However , the border crossing was not opened until December 2 , 1996 , due to delays in constructing the Mexican portion of the border crossing . Because of the 1994 economic crisis in Mexico , there was not enough money to complete the construction of the road leading up to the border facility on the Mexican side , as well as the Mexican border facility itself . The segment from SR 98 to I @-@ 8 began construction in March 2004 at a cost of $ 64 @.@ 5 million ( about $ 85 @.@ 9 million in 2015 dollars ) ; however , it was completed in mid @-@ 2005 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Note : <unk> do not necessarily reflect current mileage . " S " refers to mileage on the spur route of SR 7 towards the border . The entire route is in Imperial County . 
 = Pill Hill ( play ) = 
 Pill Hill is a three @-@ act play by American dramatist Sam Kelley . Set in a neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago known informally as Pill Hill , the play examines the failures , successes , and relationships of six African American steel mill workers as they transition from blue @-@ collar jobs to white @-@ collar professions between 1973 and 1983 . The play is regarded as an allegory of economic progress related to the American Dream . 
 Pill Hill debuted at the 1990 Yale Repertory Theatre Winterfest series of plays in progress , and was subsequently performed in several venues across the United States . The play was published by Dramatic Publishing Company in 1995 . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Charlie , a 20 @-@ year steel mill veteran who seeks a promotion to machine operator , maintains a perfect attendance record and eventually lives on his steel mill pension . 
 Eddie , a full @-@ time student who has surrendered his job at the mill and becomes a lawyer 
 Al , a night school student working at the mill to provide for his family who becomes a real estate agent 
 Tony , an encyclopedias salesman who is exploited by his company but becomes engaged to a professor and attempts to buy a house in Pill Hill . 
 Scott , a worker at the mill who was dismissed from college who becomes a Chicago Transit Authority employee before pursuing other career opportunities . 
 Joe , a steel mill worker who plans to leave the mill when his car note is paid , but ends up out of work , homeless and penniless . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Pill Hill neighborhood was a popular residence for successful white physicians ( resulting in the nickname for the neighborhood ) . In the 1960s and 1970s , it was a symbol of affluence that represented the American Dream . For young blacks , this symbol was especially poignant , which provides for a subtext in this play . 
 The three @-@ act play examines the failures , successes , and relationships of six black steel mill workers in Chicago as they transition from blue @-@ collar jobs to the white @-@ collar professions . The time is 1973 , 1978 , and 1983 , and the scene is a Chicago basement apartment where the characters meet to socialize over cards and drinks . Racial themes relating to the disparity of life at the steel mill are presented , and dreams about possibilities represented by the upscale Pill Hill neighborhood in Chicago are examined . The conflicts are painful as the characters deal with leaving the comfortable life of the mill to embark on a road of uncertainty while pursuing professional aspirations . 
 = = Performance and publication history = = 
 The play debuted in the 1990 Yale Repertory Theatre Winterfest series of plays in progress . It was mounted as a full production in another Connecticut theater , before travelling as productions of the Philadelphia Theatre Company and the Penumbra Theatre Company in St. Paul , Minnesota . The play had a late @-@ 1992 production by the Hartford Stage Company , and a 2010 production at Coppin State University . Dramatic Publishing Company published the play on February 23 , 1995 . The publisher lists it as a full @-@ length drama intended for both high school and college / adult audiences . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 John Beer of Time Out Chicago attended a performance in 2009 and wrote , " At its best , Pill Hill draws a corrosive picture of individual lives caught within merciless social systems . Racism haunts the men 's periodic get @-@ togethers , most pointedly in a monologue about a Southern excursion gone terribly wrong . [ ... ] [ W ] <unk> at the height of the Reagan @-@ Bush years , Kelley saw clearly the impact of right @-@ wing policies on the urban working class . " He thought the individuality of the characters was undeveloped , but the play was " neatly structured to a fault " . He criticized what he perceived as a " heavy authorial hand " in the repetition of a conversation about one character 's self @-@ doubts throughout the play . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Pill Hill is an allegory of economic progress told as tales of various pursuits of the American Dream . Kelley uses a spectrum of sociological types that he develops into complex , recognizable personalities in order to deliver his message in natural idioms . When the play was performed in 2005 at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University , the website description noted that a good life in Pill Hill was a common goal that was difficult to reach and when achieved , it was at a cost that could be one 's soul . 
 The conflicts range from economic difficulties to the proverbial glass ceiling common to blacks climbing the ladder of success . The changing professional situations coincide with relationship transitions that occurred in America as the hippie generation transformed into the yuppie generation . Four of the six characters become successful by 1983 : Al is a real estate dealer , Tony is Mercedes Benz salesman , Ed is a groundbreaking black lawyer and Scott has achieved financial success in a suspicious and mysterious way . The other characters are less successful with Charlie , who is the oldest of the characters , having stayed in the mill without progressing up the ranks , but earning a secure life through hard and dangerous work . Joe 's troubles at the mill lead to unemployment and a destiny with the homeless shelter . A 1994 Chicago performance elicited the following character descriptions from the Chicago Reader : Joe is boisterous ; Charlie is fatherly ; Al is the eternal runner @-@ up ; Tony is <unk> amoral ; Scott is innocent and Eddie is the play 's " spokesman . " 
 = Amagi @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The Amagi class ( <unk> , Amagi @-@ gata ) was a series of four battlecruisers planned for the Imperial Japanese Navy as part of the Eight @-@ eight fleet . The ships were to be named Amagi , Akagi , Atago , and Takao ( initially named <unk> ) , after the mountains Amagi , Akagi , Atago , and Takao . The Amagi design was essentially a lengthened version of the Tosa @-@ class battleship , but with a thinner armored belt and deck and a modified secondary battery arrangement . 
 Limitations imposed by the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty prevented the class from being completed as designed . However , the treaty had a limited allowance for hulls already under construction to be converted into aircraft carriers . Amagi and Akagi were both intended for conversion , but an earthquake damaged the hull of Amagi so extensively that the ship was scrapped . Akagi was reconstructed as an aircraft carrier and served with distinction as part of the Kido Butai during the Second World War , participating in the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor before being sunk at the Battle of Midway . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Dimensions and machinery = = = 
 The ships had a planned displacement of 41 @,@ 217 tonnes ( 40 @,@ 566 long tons ; 45 @,@ 434 short tons ) and 47 @,@ 000 t ( 46 @,@ 000 long tons ; 52 @,@ 000 short tons ) at a full load . The class design was 250 m ( 820 ft ) long at the waterline , and 251 @.@ 8 m ( 826 ft ) overall . The ships would have had a beam of 30 @.@ 8 m ( 101 ft ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 5 m ( 31 ft ) and would have used four propeller shafts , powered by Gihon turbines . The design staff intended to use turbine engines , which were to be powered by 19 Kampon water @-@ tube boilers , eleven of which were oil @-@ fired , while the other eight were to have mixed oil and coal for fuel . This system was designed to provide 131 @,@ 200 shaft horsepower ( 97 @,@ 800 kW ) for a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . The planned fuel stores amounted to 3 @,@ 900 tons of oil and 2 @,@ 500 tons of coal . The ships had a planned cruising speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , and with full fuel stores , the ships would have had a maximum range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships were to be equipped with a main battery of ten 41 cm L / 45 guns guns in five twin turrets , although an L / 50 gun tested in 1920 might have been implemented instead . The guns fired 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles with a 224 kg ( 494 lb ) propellant charge at 790 m / s ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) , at a rate of fire between 1 @.@ 5 and 2 @.@ 5 rounds per minute . Each gun had 90 rounds and an approximate barrel life of 250 – 300 shots . The turrets would have been arranged along the centerline : two superfiring turrets fore , and three in line aft of the superstructure . The gun turrets weighed 1 @,@ 004 tons ( 1 @,@ 020 mt ) , and allowed for depression of − 5 degrees and elevation of 30 degrees . 
 The secondary battery was to have consisted of sixteen 14 cm L / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the center of the ship . These guns fired 38 kg ( 84 lb ) projectiles and used 10 @.@ 33 – 10 @.@ 97 kg ( 22 @.@ 8 – 24 @.@ 2 lb ) of propellant at a muzzle velocity of 850 – 855 m / s ( 2 @,@ 790 – 2 @,@ 810 ft / s ) . The guns had a maximum elevation of 25 degrees , which enabled a maximum range of 17 @.@ 5 km ( 10 @.@ 9 mi ) . Four , later increased to six , 12 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns were to have been mounted amidships , along with eight 61 cm ( 24 in ) above @-@ water torpedo tubes . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 It was planned that the Amagi class would be protected by a main belt 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) thick , sloped at 12 degrees , and a torpedo bulkhead 73 mm ( 2 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The main battery barbettes were designed to have between 230 – 280 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 – 11 @.@ 0 in ) of armor plating , and the conning tower would have had armor ranging in thickness from 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) to a maximum of 360 mm ( 14 in ) . Deck armor was to have been 95 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) thick . 
 = = Background = = 
 Experiences in the Russo @-@ Japanese War convinced naval war planners that more fast capital ships were needed , so on 4 April 1907 , the Imperial Defence Council approved an " Eight @-@ eight " policy . This plan originally called for a fleet of eight battleships and eight armored cruisers that would all be under ten years old ( later changed to eight battlecruisers and reduced to eight years old ) . However , the advent of the dreadnought battleship crippled this plan at the beginning ; given Japan 's weak and underdeveloped economy and the enormous strain that had been put on it during the Russo @-@ Japanese War ( Japan emerged from the war victorious , but bankrupt ) , the launch of HMS Dreadnought was a " disaster " for Japan . 
 In 1907 , Japan was halfway to the eight @-@ eight , with two newly delivered battleships ( the Katori class ) in the fleet and two more ( the Satsuma class ) and four armored cruisers authorized or under construction . In addition , three more battleships and four armored cruisers had been authorized , though not funded . However , naval technology was changing ; older battleships , including all of Japan 's battleships in commission or under construction , were quickly rendered obsolete with the commissioning of HMS Dreadnought ( hence the terms dreadnought and pre @-@ dreadnought ) , and armored cruisers were seemingly useless in the face of the new battlecruisers being laid down by Great Britain and Germany . The Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) recognized this , and proposed in 1909 that two battlecruisers be ordered from British plans , with one to be built in Great Britain and one to be built at home . These two ships became the Kongō class . 
 In 1910 , there was still authorization for one battleship and four armored cruisers . This battleship , a more heavily armored version of the Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers , became Japan 's first super @-@ dreadnought , Fusō . With these ships , Japan appeared to be getting closer to the eight @-@ eight goal ; however , these new ships represented a " new level of naval strength " for the IJN , and they made all previous Japanese capital ships obsolete . This meant that any naval planner aiming for an eight @-@ eight fleet would have to call for seven more battleships and four more battlecruisers at a time when Japan was trying to weather a worldwide economic depression . 
 After proposals from the IJN in 1911 and 1912 for massive shipbuilding programs , the Cabinet compromised down to a " four @-@ four " plan ; under this , three new battleships and no new battlecruisers were authorized . The Navy did not agree , and instead called for an " eight @-@ four " fleet , while the Imperial Defence Council called for the original eight @-@ eight . The Cabinet relented , and by July 1914 , it was decided to aim first for an eight @-@ four fleet , followed by the eight @-@ eight fleet . The eight @-@ four plan was presented to the Diet of Japan in 1915 ; it aimed to have the eight battleships and four battlecruisers by 1923 with the building of two Nagato @-@ class and two Tosa @-@ class battleships . The problem with this was that the old plan intended all of the ships of the eight @-@ eight fleet to be under eight years old ; by the time these new ships were completed , Fusō and the first two Kongō ships would be past their replacement age . 
 The plan was approved in 1917 , along with funding for two battlecruisers which became the Amagi class . In late 1917 , the Navy proposed to expand the eight @-@ four plan by adding two more battlecruisers ; this was approved , and two more Amagi @-@ class ships were ordered . However , having eight 41 cm ( 16 in ) gun ships ( four battleships and four battlecruisers ) on order put an enormous financial strain on Japan , which was spending about a third of its national budget on the Navy . The massive size and scale of its building program was rapidly driving up the cost of naval construction and armament . 
 = = Construction , cancellation , and conversion = = 
 Akagi was the first ship of the class to be laid down ; construction began on 6 December 1920 at the naval yard in Kure . Amagi followed ten days later at the Yokosuka naval yard . The projected completion dates for the first pair of ships were December and November 1923 , respectively . Atago was laid down in Kobe at the Kawasaki shipyard on 22 November 1921 , and was projected to be finished in December 1924 . Takao , the fourth and final ship of the class , was laid down at the Mitsubishi shipyard in Nagasaki on 19 December 1921 , and was also projected to be completed in December 1924 . 
 The Washington Naval Treaty , signed in February 1922 , greatly reduced the tonnage allowed for capital ships in the signatory nations . The treaty also instituted a moratorium on new warship construction ; battlecruisers canceled under this included one class each from Japan , the United States , and Great Britain : the Amagi class , the Lexington class and the G3 class , respectively . The treaty did allow for battleship and battlecruiser hulls currently under construction to be converted into aircraft carriers , but only if these new carriers were kept under a 27 @,@ 000 @-@ ton limit . Considering that the Amagi class were designed to displace 47 @,@ 000 t ( 46 @,@ 000 long tons ; 52 @,@ 000 short tons ) at full load in their battlecruiser configuration , this would have been a rather difficult displacement to obtain . However , the Americans also had the same problem when designing a conversion of their Lexington class , so an exception , spearheaded by US Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt , Jr . , was added to the treaty that gave the five signatories the option of converting up to two capital ships that were under construction to 33 @,@ 000 @-@ ton aircraft carriers . This resulted in the United States and Japan quickly reordering two ships each . Japan chose Amagi and Akagi , the two ships nearest to completion , for conversion . 
 The September 1923 Great Kantō earthquake in Tokyo caused significant stress damage to the hull of Amagi . The structure was too heavily damaged to be usable , and conversion work was abandoned . Amagi was stricken from the navy list and sold for scrapping , which began on 14 April 1924 . The other two ships , Atago and Takao , were officially canceled two years later ( 31 July 1924 ) and were broken up for scrap in their slipways . The incomplete Tosa @-@ class battleship Kaga , on which work had stopped on 5 February 1922 , was reordered as a carrier to replace Amagi . 
 = = = Akagi 's career as an aircraft carrier = = = 
 The conversion of Akagi began on 19 November 1923 , and was completed in March 1927 . However , the strange assortment of flight decks fitted on Akagi — a main landing deck superimposed over two short take @-@ off decks — proved unsatisfactory , and the ship was withdrawn from active service in 1935 for modernization . The lower two flight decks were removed , the main deck was lengthened to 250 m ( 820 ft ) , and a third elevator was added . Refitting was completed in 1938 . Akagi supported operations off China in early 1939 and 1940 , and underwent an overhaul in November 1940 . 
 Akagi served as Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo 's flagship in the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 . Nagumo 's Kido Butai — composed of the carriers Akagi , Kaga , Hiryū , Sōryū , Shōkaku , and Zuikaku , supported by escorts — launched two waves of airstrikes on the American base at Pearl Harbor in a devastating surprise attack . American losses included four battleships and two destroyers sunk and nearly 200 aircraft destroyed . 
 On 19 February 1942 , aircraft from Akagi , Hiryū , Sōryū , and Kaga participated in the bombing of Darwin , Australia . On 27 February , their bombers severely damaged the old American carrier USS Langley , which was subsequently scuttled by her escort . 
 Akagi and the carriers Hiryū and Sōryū were sent in March 1942 with a mixed force of battleships , cruisers , and destroyers to the Indian Ocean to engage the British fleet there and to support planned attacks on Ceylon . In the Easter Sunday Raid on 5 April , aircraft from the carriers struck the British base at Colombo , destroying a number of aircraft and sinking an armed merchant cruiser and the old destroyer HMS Tenedos in the harbor . The Japanese fleet also spotted the heavy cruisers HMS Dorsetshire and HMS Cornwall at sea ; both ships were sunk in an overwhelming air attack . On 9 April the carriers attacked British installations at Trincomalee , destroying aircraft and sinking the carrier HMS Hermes , the destroyer HMAS Vampire , and the corvette HMS Hollyhock . 
 = = = Battle of Midway = = = 
 In late May 1942 , in an effort to draw out and destroy the elusive American carriers , Japanese forces organized attacks on the Aleutian Islands in Alaska and Midway Atoll in the Western Pacific . Nagumo , aboard Akagi , led Kaga , Sōryū , and Hiryū and the support ships of the First Carrier Striking Force to Midway . In the initial attack , Japanese planes neutralized a small force of fighter aircraft and inflicted heavy damage to American installations . Torpedo planes and dive @-@ bombers sent from Midway to harry the Japanese fleet had little effect , but the Japanese attack plan had been deciphered by codebreakers , and the American carriers ' planes were already en route . Torpedo bombers from USS Hornet , USS Enterprise , and USS Yorktown joined the attack in succession , forcing the Japanese carriers to maneuver violently to avoid torpedoes and rendering them unable to launch additional aircraft . American dive @-@ bombers , arriving late after difficulty locating the fleet , soon landed fatal strikes on Akagi , Kaga , and Sōryū . Yorktown , handicapped by hits from Hiryū 's bombers , managed to return to the fight only to take two torpedo hits a couple of hours later . The burning Yorktown was abandoned , but her scouts pinpointed Hiryū 's location , and bombers from Enterprise put Hiryū out of action with four bomb strikes . Japan lost all four carriers of the First Carrier Striking Force at Midway . 
 = Simpsons Tall Tales = 
 " Simpsons Tall Tales " is the twenty @-@ first episode and season finale of The Simpsons ' twelfth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 20 , 2001 . In the episode , Homer refuses to pay a five dollar airport tax to fly to Delaware , which forces the family to ride in a livestock car of a train instead . There they meet a singing hobo who tells three tall tales which include Homer as Paul Bunyan , Lisa as Connie Appleseed ( a female version of Johnny Appleseed ) and Bart and Nelson as Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn respectively . 
 " Simpsons Tall Tales " was directed by Bob Anderson and written by John Frink , Don Payne , Bob Bendetson and Matt Selman . The idea for the episode was pitched while the series ' staff were coming up with story ideas for the twelfth season . The staff had noticed that viewers responded well to " Simpsons Bible Stories " , and decided to write another trilogy episode because of the warm response . 
 The singing hobo in the episode was voiced by Hank Azaria . He would originally be voiced by Jim Carrey , but he dropped out when he found out that he was too busy to record his lines . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 8 million viewers , finishing in 33rd place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its home video release , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the Simpsons win a trip to Delaware , Homer refuses to pay a $ 5 airport tax for his flight . After Homer violates the Anti @-@ Fist Shaking Law , the family jumps onto a freight train where they meet a singing hobo who tells them three stories . 
 = = = Paul Bunyan = = = 
 Homer portrays Paul Bunyan , a great burden on the local townspeople , as he crushes their houses and greedily eats all their food . Eventually , the townspeople drug him and drag him out of their town . Out of loneliness , Bunyan carves a block of stone from the mountains into a blue ox that he calls Babe , who is rendered alive by an electric shock . In his travels with Babe , Homer creates several landmarks . Bunyan later meets a young woman , ( played by Marge ) and though she is initially frightened of him , the two fall in love . When a meteor is soon to hit the town , the townspeople call Paul back to help them . Paul obliges and throws the meteor towards Chicago , starting the Great Fire there , but not before it hits him in the backside . 
 After the hobo has told this story , he asks them for a sponge bath as compensation . Disgusted , Homer is forced to oblige , as nobody else will do so , but the hobo does not mind anyone seeing his nakedness . 
 = = = Connie Appleseed = = = 
 The hobo 's second tall tale revolves around Lisa as Connie . Connie is part of a wagon train , and all of the travelers shoot and eat buffalo . Connie , who is against the practice , states " If you don 't stop this slaughter , you 'll wipe out the buffalo . " After which they all ridicule her she is worried that no one is eating a renewable source of food and finds some apples for the pioneers to eat , but they reject them . Eventually , she changes her last name to " Appleseed " , and leaves her family to journey across the United States and plant apple seeds wherever she goes . Meanwhile , the Simpsons change their surname to " <unk> " and they succeed in killing all the buffalo in the land . The travelers eventually starve , and just as they are about to cannibalize Homer , Connie returns and offers them apples instead . 
 = = = Tom and Huck = = = 
 The hobo 's third tale tells the story of Tom Sawyer , whom Bart portrays , and Huckleberry Finn , whom Nelson portrays . Tom is a rebellious trouble maker while Huck is a bully . Huck is caught holding hands with Becky ( Lisa ) and is forced to marry her by her father ( Homer ) . Huck dodges the marriage and goes on the run with Tom , leaving Missouri for <unk> . However , they are chased by townspeople led by Becky 's father and their families . Huck and Tom flee to a river boat , but are thrown into the Mississippi River and are caught by the townspeople . At their funeral , Tom and Huck are first revealed to not be in their caskets , seemingly watching the proceedings from the rafters which they have big smiles on their faces , until Reverend Lovejoy orders their bodies lowered into the caskets , revealing that Tom and Huck are in fact dead . 
 = = = Conclusion = = = 
 The family arrives in Delaware and disembarks the train , but the hobo reminds them that they owe him one more sponge bath as compensation . Homer promises to catch up with them in an hour and volunteers to stay behind to do the dirty work . 
 = = Production = = 
 On April 4 , 1999 , " Simpsons Bible Stories " aired in the United States . The episode , which contains three self @-@ contained segments in which the Simpsons play different characters from the Bible , was written after Fox requested a Bible @-@ themed episode that would air on Easter . The Simpsons ' staff enjoyed writing the episode and it was generally well received by viewers . When pitching stories for the twelfth season , the writers decided to make another episode based around three segments that are all related to a certain theme . 
 " Simpsons Tall Tales " was written by Matt Selman , John Frink , Don Payne , and Bob Bendetson . The idea for a trilogy episode based on tall tales was pitched by Frink and Payne , according to co @-@ executive producer Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham . While the episode 's introduction was written and conceived by Selman , the first segment was written by Frink and Payne . The second and third segments were written by Bendetson and Selman respectively . 
 Writing segments for " Simpsons Tall Tales " was much different from normal episodes ; for example , the writers only had one day to outline each segment 's plot , and three to four days to write the first draft of each script , which is much less time than the writers usually get for an episode . Still , Selman has said that working on the episode was " very fun " for the writers . While writing the third segment , Selman listened to Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , Tom Sawyer Abroad and Tom Sawyer , Detective on tape to " get some of the lingo " that Mark Twain used in his books . He found so many unusual words in the books that he compiled a " giant " list of them . " We wanted to cram in every single [ jargon from the books ] as we could " , Selman said in the episode 's DVD commentary . 
 " Simpsons Tall Tales " was directed by Bob Anderson and is one of his favorite episodes that he directed . Because the segments take place in different places and time periods , the animators had to create new designs for characters and backgrounds . Even though it took a lot of work , Anderson maintained that the episode was " fun to work on . " In a scene in the episode , Moe holds a giant pill that he made Homer sleep with . 
 At one point in the episode 's production , the pill would read " <unk> " , but it was eventually removed . Another scene that changed during production was the scene in which Homer uses Marge 's hair to clean him up for their date . After he takes Marge 's hair out of his ear , her hair would originally be covered with earwax , but it was removed when the animators looked over the episode 's storyboard . The second segment originally had many more shots of buffalo being shot , but some were changed so that the deaths were off @-@ camera . 
 The singing hobo was voiced by regular cast member Hank Azaria , who voices Moe and Comic Book Guy among other characters in the series . Originally , the part would be played by Canadian @-@ American actor and comedian Jim Carrey , who had asked for a role in an episode . Because Carrey was busy with other projects and did not have time to record any lines , the role was instead given to Azaria , who Scully said did a " great job " . While most of the hobo 's songs were written by Frink , the song that the hobo sings at the beginning of the episode was written by executive producer and former showrunner Mike Reiss . The dialog between Homer and the hobo at the end of the episode was ad @-@ libbed by Azaria and Dan Castellaneta , who portrays Homer in the series . 
 Like many other trilogy episodes , " Simpsons Tall Tales " ended up very long and the staff were obliged to cut some scenes in order to fit with the program 's maximum running time . The scene in which Homer first meets Babe was also cut short ; originally , it would show Babe kicking Homer in the crotch after Homer says that he will " whip [ Babe ] from dawn to dusk . " A similar joke was later used in The Simpsons Movie . The last removed scene was from the episode 's third segment . It would show Lenny and Carl eating buffalo meat , while Carl speaks like a stereotypical Native American . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Simpsons Tall Tales " has been described as a " skewed " retelling of old tales . The beginning of the episode shows the family winning a trip to Delaware . This is a reference to the end of " Behind the Laughter " , in which Homer is seen watching an episode of The Simpsons wherein the family is visiting Delaware . 
 The first segment is based on the mythological lumberjack Paul Bunyan , who carved Babe the Blue ox out of the Blue Mountains . The second segment shows Lisa as Connie Appleseed , a female version of the American pioneer nurseryman Johnny Appleseed who introduced apple trees to large parts of Ohio , Indiana , and Illinois . " Tom and Huck " features Bart as Tom Sawyer and Nelson as Huckleberry Finn , both of whom are characters in Mark Twain 's 1876 novel The Adventures of Tom Sawyer . Despite the episode 's title , only the first two segments are actually tall tales . 
 This is referenced in the episode , when Lisa says " That 's not tall tale , it 's a book by Mark Twain . " In the first segment , Paul Bunyan and Babe fight Rodan , a fictional Japanese mutated pterosaur introduced in the 1956 tokusatsu film Rodan . When showering Marge with stuffed animals , Bunyan accidentally drops a guard next to her . When noticing the guard , Bunyan tugs his collar in a similar way as American comedian Charles Nelson Reilly . In the third segment , Dr Hibbert can be heard singing the 1927 song " Ol ' Man River " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In order to boost ratings , two earlier broadcast episodes ( including Treehouse of Horror XI ) were shown before the episode . In its original American broadcast on May 20 , 2001 , " Simpsons Tall Tales " received a 7 @.@ 6 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 7 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode finished in 33rd place in the ratings for the week of May 14 @-@ 20 , 2001 . On August 18 , 2009 , the episode was released as part of a DVD set called The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season . Mike Scully , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , John Frink , Don Payne , Carolyn Omine , Matt Selman , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Bob Anderson and Joel H. Cohen participated in the audio commentary for the episode . 
 Since its home video release , " Simpsons Tall Tales " received mixed reviews from critics . In his review of The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide disliked the episode . He argued that the episode is similar to the season 10 episode " Simpsons Bible Stories " , in that they both " feel a little heavy on cutesy and low on comedic inspiration . " Although he found some parts of the episode amusing , he summarized it as overall being lackluster . 
 DVD Talk 's Casey Burchby described " Simpsons Tall Tales " as the season 's worst episode . As with most other trilogy episodes , " Simpsons Tall Tales " " did not work " for Burchby , who found that the gags were either boring or too far between . 
 He also argued that " Simpsons Tall Tales " and trilogy episodes in general are an excuse for the series ' writers to not have to come up with new stories for the characters . " It 's understandable that after eleven years , a show might have trouble continuing to come up with original material for the same five characters , but the anthology episodes come across as rather transparent attempts to avoid that challenge " , he wrote . On the other hand , DVD Verdict 's Mac MacEntire argued that " Simpsons Tall Tales " is one of the season 's best episodes . He wrote that the episode is " filled with great gags " , including the hobo 's sponge bath and Bart and Nelson 's discussion about " <unk> " and " <unk> " . 
 = Mellitus = 
 Mellitus ( died 24 April 624 ) was the first Bishop of London in the Saxon period , the third Archbishop of Canterbury , and a member of the Gregorian mission sent to England to convert the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity . He arrived in 601 AD with a group of clergy sent to augment the mission , and was consecrated as Bishop of London in 604 . Mellitus was the recipient of a famous letter from Pope Gregory I known as the Epistola ad Mellitum , preserved in a later work by the medieval chronicler Bede , which suggested the conversion of the Anglo @-@ Saxons be undertaken gradually , integrating pagan rituals and customs . In 610 , Mellitus returned to Italy to attend a council of bishops , and returned to England bearing papal letters to some of the missionaries . 
 Mellitus was exiled from London by the pagan successors to his patron , King Sæberht of Essex , following the latter 's death around 616 . King Æthelberht of Kent , Mellitus ' other patron , died at about the same time , forcing him to take refuge in Gaul . Mellitus returned to England the following year , after Æthelberht 's successor had been converted to Christianity , but he was unable to return to London , whose inhabitants remained pagan . Mellitus was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 619 . During his tenure , he was alleged to have miraculously saved the cathedral , and much of the town of Canterbury , from a fire . After his death in 624 , Mellitus was revered as a saint . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The medieval chronicler Bede described Mellitus as being of noble birth . In letters , Pope Gregory I called him an abbot , but it is unclear whether Mellitus had previously been abbot of a Roman monastery , or this was a rank bestowed on him to ease his journey to England by making him the leader of the expedition . The papal register , a listing of letters sent out by the popes , describes him as an " abbot in Frankia " in its description of the correspondence , but the letter itself only says " abbot " . The first time Mellitus is mentioned in history is in the letters of Gregory , and nothing else of his background is known . It appears likely that he was a native of Italy , along with all the other bishops consecrated by Augustine . 
 = = Journey to England = = 
 Pope Gregory I sent Mellitus to England in June 601 , in response to an appeal from Augustine , the first Archbishop of Canterbury . Augustine needed more clergy to join the Gregorian mission that was converting the kingdom of Kent , then ruled by Æthelberht , from paganism to Christianity . The new missionaries brought with them a gift of books and " all things which were needed for worship and the ministry of the Church . " Thomas of Elmham , a 15th @-@ century Canterbury chronicler , claimed that in his day there were a number of the books brought to England by Mellitus still at Canterbury . Examination of the remaining manuscripts has determined that one possible survivor of Mellitus ' books is the St. Augustine Gospels , now in Cambridge , as Corpus Christi College , MS ( manuscript ) 286 . Along with the letter to Augustine , the missionaries brought a letter for Æthelberht , urging the King to act like the Roman Emperor Constantine I and force the conversion of his followers to Christianity . The king was also encouraged to destroy all pagan shrines . 
 The historian Ian Wood has suggested that Mellitus ' journey through Gaul probably took in the bishoprics of Vienne , Arles , Lyons , Toulon , Marseilles , Metz , Paris , and Rouen , as evidenced by the letters that Gregory addressed to those bishops soliciting their support for Mellitus ' party . Gregory also wrote to the Frankish kings Chlothar II , Theuderic II , Theudebert II , along with <unk> of Austrasia , who was Theudebert and Theuderic 's grandmother and regent . Wood feels that this wide appeal to the Frankish episcopate and royalty was an effort to secure more support for the Gregorian mission . While on his journey to England , Mellitus received a letter from Gregory allowing Augustine to convert pagan temples to Christian churches , and to convert pagan animal sacrifices into Christian feasts , to ease the transition to Christianity . Gregory 's letter marked a sea change in the missionary strategy , and was later included in Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People . Usually known as the Epistola ad Mellitum , it conflicts with the letter sent to Æthelberht , which the historian R. A. Markus sees as a turning point in missionary history , when forcible conversion gave way to persuasion . This traditional view , that the Epistola represents a contradiction of the letter to Æthelberht , has been challenged by the historian and theologian George <unk> , who argues that the letter to Æthelberht was mainly meant to encourage the King in spiritual matters , while the Epistola was sent to deal with purely practical matters , and thus the two do not contradict each other . 
 = = Bishop of London = = 
 Exactly when Mellitus and his party arrived in England is unknown , but he was certainly in the country by 604 , when Augustine consecrated him as bishop in the province of the East Saxons , making Mellitus the first Bishop of London after the Roman departure ( London was the East Saxons ' capital ) . The city was a logical choice for a new bishopric , as it was a hub for the southern road network . It was also a former Roman town ; many of the Gregorian mission 's efforts were centred in such locations . Before his consecration , Mellitus baptised Sæberht , Æthelberht 's nephew , who then allowed the bishopric to be established . The episcopal church built in London was probably founded by Æthelberht , rather than Sæberht . Although Bede records that Æthelberht gave lands to support the new episcopate , a charter that claims to be a grant of lands from Æthelberht to Mellitus is a later forgery . 
 Although Gregory had intended London to be the southern archbishopric for the island , Augustine never moved his episcopal see to London , and instead consecrated Mellitus as a plain bishop there . After Augustine 's death in 604 , Canterbury continued to be the site of the southern archbishopric , and London remained a bishopric . It may have been that the Kentish king did not wish greater episcopal authority to be exercised outside his own kingdom . 
 Mellitus attended a council of bishops held in Italy in February 610 , convened by Pope Boniface IV . The historian N. J. Higham speculates that one reason for his attendance may have been to assert the English Church 's independence from the Frankish Church . Boniface had Mellitus take two papal letters back to England , one to Æthelbert and his people , and another to Laurence , the Archbishop of Canterbury . He also brought back the synod 's decrees to England . No authentic letters or documents from this synod remain , although some were forged in the 1060s and 1070s at Canterbury . During his time as a bishop , Mellitus joined with Justus , the Bishop of Rochester , in signing a letter that Laurence wrote to the Celtic bishops urging the Celtic Church to adopt the Roman method of calculating the date of Easter . This letter also mentioned the fact that Irish missionary bishops , such as Dagan , refused to eat with the Roman missionaries . 
 Both Æthelberht and Sæberht died around 616 or 618 , causing a crisis for the mission . Sæberht 's three sons had not converted to Christianity , and drove Mellitus from London . Bede says that Mellitus was exiled because he refused the brothers ' request for a taste of the sacramental bread . Whether this occurred immediately after Sæberht 's death or later is impossible to determine from Bede 's chronology , which has both events in the same chapter but gives neither an exact time frame nor the elapsed time between the two events . The historian N. J. Higham connects the timing of this episode with a change in the " <unk> " from the Christian Kentish Æthelberht to the pagan East Anglian Raedwald , which Higham feels happened after Æthelberht 's death . In Higham 's view , Sæberht 's sons drove Mellitus from London because they had passed from Kentish overlordship to East Anglian , and thus no longer needed to keep Mellitus , who was connected with the Kentish kingdom , in office . 
 Mellitus fled first to Canterbury , but Æthelberht 's successor Eadbald was also a pagan , so Mellitus , accompanied by Justus , took refuge in Gaul . Mellitus was recalled to Britain by Laurence , the second Archbishop of Canterbury , after his conversion of Eadbald . How long Mellitus ' exile lasted is unclear . Bede claims it was a year , but it may have been longer . However , Mellitus did not return to London , because the East Saxons remained pagan . Although Mellitus fled , there does not seem to have been any serious persecution of Christians in the East Saxon kingdom . The East Saxon see was not occupied again until Cedd was consecrated as bishop in about 654 . 
 = = Archbishop and death = = 
 Mellitus succeeded Laurence as the third Archbishop of Canterbury after the latter 's death in 619 . During his tenure as archbishop , Mellitus supposedly performed a miracle in 623 by diverting a fire that had started in Canterbury and threatened the church . He was carried into the flames , upon which the wind changed direction , thus saving the building . Bede praised Mellitus ' sane mind , but other than the miracle , little happened during his time as archbishop . Bede also mentioned that Mellitus suffered from gout . Boniface wrote to Mellitus encouraging him in the mission , perhaps prompted by the marriage of Æthelburh of Kent to King Edwin of Northumbria . Whether Mellitus received a pallium , the symbol of an archbishop 's authority , from the pope is unknown . 
 Mellitus died on 24 April 624 , and was buried at St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury that same day . He became revered as a saint after his death , and was allotted the feast day of 24 April . In the ninth century , Mellitus ' feast day was mentioned in the Stowe Missal , along with Laurence and Justus . He was still venerated at St Augustine 's in 1120 , along with a number of other local saints . There was also a shrine to him at Old St Paul 's Cathedral in London . Shortly after the Norman Conquest , Goscelin wrote a life of Mellitus , the first of several to appear around that time , but none contain any information not included in Bede 's earlier works . These later medieval lives do , however , reveal that during Goscelin 's lifetime persons suffering from gout were urged to pray at Mellitus ' tomb . Goscelin records that Mellitus ' shrine flanked that of Augustine , along with Laurence , in the eastern central chapel of the presbytery . 
 = Lethbridge = 
 Lethbridge / <unk> / is a city in the province of Alberta , Canada , and the largest city in southern Alberta . It is Alberta 's fourth @-@ largest city by population after Calgary , Edmonton and Red Deer , and the third @-@ largest by area after Calgary and Edmonton . The nearby Canadian Rockies contribute to the city 's warm summers , mild winters , and windy climate . Lethbridge lies southeast of Calgary on the Oldman River . 
 Lethbridge is the commercial , financial , transportation and industrial centre of southern Alberta . The city 's economy developed from drift mining for coal in the late 19th century and agriculture in the early 20th century . Half of the workforce is employed in the health , education , retail and hospitality sectors , and the top five employers are government @-@ based . The only university in Alberta south of Calgary is in Lethbridge , and two of the three colleges in southern Alberta have campuses in the city . Cultural venues in the city include performing art theatres , museums and sports centres . 
 = = History = = 
 Before the 19th century , the Lethbridge area was populated by several First Nations at various times . The Blackfoot referred to the area as <unk> ( " steep banks " ) , Mek @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " painted rock " ) , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " where we slaughtered the Cree " ) and Sik @-@ ooh @-@ <unk> ( " coal " ) . The Sarcee referred to it as <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " black / rocks " ) , the Cree as <unk> @-@ guni ( " black / rocks " ) , and the <unk> ( Stoney ) as <unk> @-@ saba @-@ <unk> ( " digging coal " ) . The <unk> people referred to it as <unk> • <unk> . 
 After the US Army stopped alcohol trading with the Blackfeet Nation in Montana in 1869 , traders John J. Healy and Alfred B. Hamilton started a whiskey trading post at Fort Hamilton , near the future site of Lethbridge . The post 's nickname became Fort Whoop @-@ Up . The whiskey trade led to the Cypress Hills Massacre of many native Assiniboine in 1873 . The North @-@ West Mounted Police , sent to stop the trade and establish order , arrived at Fort Whoop @-@ Up on 9 October 1874 . They managed the post for the next 12 years . 
 Lethbridge 's economy developed from drift mines opened by Nicholas <unk> in 1874 and the North Western Coal and Navigation Company in 1882 . North Western 's president was William Lethbridge , from whom the city derives its name . By the turn of the century , the mines employed about 150 men and producing 300 tonnes of coal each day . In 1896 , local collieries were the largest coal producers in the Northwest Territories , with production peaking during World War I. An internment camp was set up at the Exhibition Building in Lethbridge from September 1914 to November 1916 . After the war , increasing oil and natural gas production gradually replaced coal production , and the last mine in Lethbridge closed in 1957 . 
 The first rail line in Lethbridge was opened on 28 August 1885 by the Alberta Railway and Coal Company , which bought the North Western Coal and Navigation Company five years later . The rail industry 's dependence on coal and the Canadian Pacific Railway 's efforts to settle southern Alberta with immigrants boosted Lethbridge 's economy . After the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) moved the divisional point of its Crowsnest Line from Fort Macleod to Lethbridge in 1905 , the city became the regional centre for Southern Alberta . In the mid @-@ 1980s , the CPR moved its rail yards in downtown Lethbridge to nearby Kipp , and Lethbridge ceased being a rail hub . 
 Between 1907 and 1913 , a development boom occurred in Lethbridge , making it the main marketing , distribution and service centre in southern Alberta . Such municipal projects as a water treatment plant , a power plant , a streetcar system , and exhibition buildings — as well as a construction boom and rising real estate prices — transformed the mining town into a significant city . Between World War I and World War II , however , the city experienced an economic slump . Development slowed , drought drove farmers from their farms , and coal mining rapidly declined from its peak . After World War II , irrigation of farmland near Lethbridge led to growth in the city 's population and economy . Lethbridge College ( previously Lethbridge Community College ) opened in April 1957 and the University of Lethbridge in 1967 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The city of Lethbridge is located at 49 @.@ 7 ° north latitude and 112 @.@ 833 ° west longitude and covers an area of 127 @.@ 19 square kilometres ( 49 @.@ 11 sq mi ) . The city is divided by the Oldman River ; its valley has been turned into one of the largest urban park systems in North America at 16 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 000 acres ) of protected land . The city is Alberta 's fourth largest by population after Calgary , Edmonton , and Red Deer . It is the third largest in area after Calgary and Edmonton and is near the Canadian Rockies , 210 kilometres ( 130 mi ) southeast of Calgary . 
 Lethbridge is split into three geographical areas : north , south and west . The Oldman River separates West Lethbridge from the other two while the Crowsnest Highway and the Canadian Pacific Railway rail line separate North and South Lethbridge . The newest of the three areas , West Lethbridge ( pop . 36 @,@ 716 ) is home to the University of Lethbridge , opened at that site in 1971 , but the first housing was not completed until 1974 and the prime Whoop @-@ Up Drive access opened only in 1975 . Much of the city 's recent growth has been on the west side , and it has the youngest median age of the three . The north side ( pop . 26 @,@ 751 ) was originally populated by workers from local coal mines . It has the oldest population of the three areas , is home to multiple industrial parks and includes the former Hamlet of <unk> , which was annexed by Lethbridge in 1978 . South Lethbridge ( pop . 31 @,@ 337 ) is the commercial heart of the city . It contains the downtown core , the bulk of retail and hospitality establishments , and the Lethbridge College . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Lethbridge has a semi @-@ arid climate ( Köppen climate classification BSk ) with an average maximum temperature of 12 @.@ 3 ° C ( 54 @.@ 1 ° F ) and an average minimum temperature of − 1 @.@ 1 ° C ( 30 @.@ 0 ° F ) . With precipitation averaging 365 mm ( 14 @.@ 4 in ) – 386 @.@ 3 mm ( 15 @.@ 2 in ) , and 264 dry days on average , Lethbridge is the eleventh driest city in Canada . Mean relative humidity hovers between 69 – 78 % in the morning throughout the year , but afternoon mean relative humidity is more uneven , ranging from 38 % in August to 58 % in January . On average , Lethbridge has 116 days with wind speed of 40 km / h ( 24 @.@ 9 mph ) or higher , ranking it as the second city in Canada for such weather . 
 Its high elevation of 929 m ( 3 @,@ 047 @.@ 9 ft ) and close proximity to the Rocky Mountains provides Lethbridge with cooler summers than other locations in the Canadian Prairies . These factors protect the city from strong northwest and southwest winds and contribute to frequent chinook winds during the winter . Lethbridge winters have the highest temperatures in the prairies , reducing the severity and duration of winter cold periods and resulting in fewer days with snow cover . The average daytime temperature peaks by the end of July / beginning of August , when it reaches 26 @.@ 4 ° C ( 79 @.@ 5 ° F ) . The city 's temperature reaches a maximum high of 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) or greater on average once or twice a year . 
 The highest temperature ever recorded in Lethbridge was 40 @.@ 0 ° C ( 104 ° F ) on 12 July 1886 . The lowest temperature ever recorded was − 42 @.@ 8 ° C ( − 45 ° F ) on 7 January 1909 , 18 December 1924 , 3 January 1950 , and 29 December 1968 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The population of the City of Lethbridge according to its 2016 municipal census is 96 @,@ 828 , a 2 @.@ 1 % change from its 2015 municipal census population of 94 @,@ 804 . 
 In the 2011 federal census , the City of Lethbridge had a population of 83 @,@ 517 living in 34 @,@ 140 of its 37 @,@ 396 total dwellings , an 11 @.@ 8 % change from its 2006 adjusted population of 74 @,@ 685 . With a land area of 122 @.@ 36 km2 ( 47 @.@ 24 sq mi ) , it had a population density of 682 @.@ 6 / km2 ( 1 @,@ 767 @.@ 8 / sq mi ) in 2011 . 
 In 2006 , the federal census reported a population of 74 @,@ 637 in the city and 95 @,@ 196 in its census agglomeration . In 2006 , Lethbridge had a predominantly white population ; one out of eight people were non @-@ European , compared to one in ten in 2001 . Of those , 40 percent were aboriginal , most of whom came from the nearby <unk> and Kainai nations . Of the remaining 60 percent , Japanese , Chinese and Latin American made up the largest portion at over 1 @,@ 200 , 920 and 705 respectively . 
 The most commonly observed faith in Lethbridge is Christianity . According to the 2011 National Household Survey , 52 @,@ 595 residents , representing 65 percent of respondents , indicated they were Christian , down from 76 % in 2001 . Over 32 percent of <unk> reported no religious affiliation , a substantial increase from 22 % in 2001 . The number of residents reporting other religions , including Buddhists , Muslims , Hindus , Jews and Sikhs amounted to 3 percent . For specific denominations , Statistics Canada reported 16 @,@ 945 Roman Catholics who were 21 percent of the population , and 7 @,@ 335 members of the United Church of Canada who were about 9 percent of the population . 
 According to the 2011 census , more than 87 percent of residents spoke English as a first language . Nearly 2 percent spoke German ; just over 1 percent each spoke Spanish , Dutch , or French ; and almost 1 percent each spoke Chinese ( unspecified ) , Tagalog , Polish , or Hungarian their first language . The next most commonly spoken languages were Japanese , Italian , Ukrainian , Nepali , Cantonese , Vietnamese . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Lethbridge is southern Alberta 's commercial , distribution , financial and industrial centre ( although Medicine Hat plays a similar role in southeastern Alberta ) . It has a trading area population of 275 @,@ 000 , including parts of British Columbia and Montana , and provides jobs for up to 86 @,@ 000 people who commute to and within the city from a radius of 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) . 
 Lethbridge 's economy has traditionally been agriculture @-@ based ; however , it has diversified in recent years . Half of the workforce is employed in the health , education , retail and hospitality sectors , and the top five employers are government @-@ based . Several national companies are based in Lethbridge . From its founding in 1935 , Canadian <unk> based its head office there until moving operations to Calgary in 1948 , though its call centre remains in Lethbridge . Taco Time Canada was based in the city from 1978 – 1995 before moving to Calgary . Minute <unk> , which began in 1969 , is based in Lethbridge . International shipping company H & R Transport has been based in the city since 1955 . Braman Furniture , which has locations in Manitoba and Ontario , was headquartered in Lethbridge from 1991 – 2008 . 
 Lethbridge serves as a hub for commercial activity in the region by providing services and amenities . Many transport services , including Greyhound buses , four provincial highways , rail service and an airport , are concentrated in or near the city . In 2004 , the police services of Lethbridge and Coaldale combined to form the Lethbridge Regional Police Service . Lethbridge provides municipal water to Coaldale , <unk> , Diamond City , Iron Springs , Monarch , Shaughnessy and Turin . 
 In 2002 , the municipal government organized Economic Development Lethbridge , a body responsible for promoting and developing the city 's commercial interests . Two years later , the city joined in a partnership with 24 other local communities to create an economic development alliance called <unk> , representing a population of over 140 @,@ 000 . In 2006 , Economic Development Lethbridge partnered with <unk> Regional Initiative and Alberta SouthWest Regional Alliance to create the Southern Alberta Alternative Energy Partnership . This partnership promotes business related to alternative energy , including wind power , solar power and biofuel , in the region . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 Lethbridge was designated a Cultural Capital of Canada for the 2004 – 2005 season . The Southern Alberta Ethnic Association ( Multicultural Heritage Centre ) promotes multiculturalism and ethnic heritage in the community . 
 The city is home to venues and organizations promoting the arts . Founded in 1958 , the Allied Arts Council of Lethbridge is the largest organization in the city dedicated to preserving and enhancing the local arts . In the spring of 2007 , the Allied Arts Council Facilities Steering Committee initiated the Arts Re : Building Together Campaign , a grass roots campaign initiative to raise awareness and support for improving arts facilities in Lethbridge . The campaign identified three arts buildings : the Yates Memorial Centre , the Bowman Arts Centre , and the Southern Alberta Art Gallery as cornerstone facilities in the community requiring care and attention . On 14 July 2007 , the Finance Committee of City Council approved four arts capital projects for inclusion in the City ’ s Ten Year Capital Plan . Under the campaign to 2010 , the renovation and expansion of the Southern Alberta Art Gallery was completed , a new Community Arts Centre will be built in downtown Lethbridge , the City of Lethbridge has a Public Art Program , and a committee was formed to research the possibility of a new Performing Arts Centre in Lethbridge . 
 Lethbridge has a public library and three major museum / galleries . The Southern Alberta Art Gallery is a contemporary gallery ; the community arts centre Casa , administered by the Allied Arts Council ; and the University of Lethbridge Art Gallery produces contemporary exhibitions including works from its extensive collection of Canadian , American and European art . 
 The Lethbridge Symphony Orchestra has been performing in the city since 1961 . It has produced spin @-@ off music groups , the Lethbridge Musical Theatre and the Southern Alberta Chamber Orchestra . Vox Musica , which traces its roots back to 1968 , is a community choir based at the University of Lethbridge and has been performing since 1984 . Theatrical productions are presented by the University of Lethbridge 's theatre department and the New West Theatre , which produces seven shows annually . New West Theatre performs at the Genevieve E. Yates Memorial Centre using its two theatres : the 500 @-@ seat proscenium Yates Theatre and the 180 @-@ seat black box Sterndale Bennett Theatre . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 The city , which began as a frontier town , has several historical attractions . The Lethbridge Viaduct , commonly known as the High Level Bridge , is the longest and highest steel trestle bridge in North America . It was completed in 1909 on what was then the city 's western edge . Indian Battle Park , in the coulees of the Oldman River , commemorates the last battle between the Cree and the Blackfoot First Nations in 1870 . 
 Originally known as Fort Hamilton , Fort Whoop @-@ Up was a centre of illegal activities during the late 19th century . It was first built in 1869 by J.J. Healy and A.B. Hamilton as a whiskey post and was destroyed by fire a year later . A second , sturdier structure later replaced the fort . 
 As the cultural centre of southern Alberta , Lethbridge has notable cultural attractions . <unk> Yuko Japanese Garden in south Lethbridge was opened in 1967 as part of a Canadian centennial celebration attended by Japan ’ s Prince and Princess Takamatsu . Galt Museum & Archives is the largest museum in the Lethbridge area ; the building housing the museum served as the city 's main hospital during the late 19th century and early 20th centuries . 
 Several structures such as the post office are prominent on the skyline of Lethbridge . Less well @-@ known than the High Level Bridge , the post office is one of the most distinctive buildings in Lethbridge . Built in 1912 , the four @-@ storey structure is crowned by a functioning clock tower . Other prominent buildings include office towers ; the water tower , which was originally built in 1958 and sold to a private developer who converted it into a restaurant ; and the Alberta Terminals grain elevators . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 Lethbridge has designated 16 percent of the land within city boundaries as parkland , including the 755 hectares ( 1 @,@ 870 acres ) Oldman River valley parks system . It has facilities for field sports and baseball , a disc golf course , 2 skate parks , a BMX track , a climbing wall , a dozen tennis courts , and seven pools . It is home to five golf courses , including the award @-@ winning Paradise Canyon Golf Resort , and is within 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) of several others . 
 Built for the 1975 Canada Games , the ENMAX Centre is Lethbridge 's multipurpose arena . The 6 @,@ 500 @-@ seat facility has hosted concerts , three @-@ ring circuses , multicultural events , national curling championships , basketball events , banquets , skating events and the Lethbridge Hurricanes , a major Western Hockey League franchise . The arena has a running track , racquetball and squash courts , and a full @-@ size ice rink . An outdoor sports field with capacity for 2 @,@ 000 people is adjacent to the centre . In 1997 , the 58 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 5 @,@ 400 m2 ) Community Savings Place ( formerly the Lethbridge Soccer Centre ) was built directly south of the ENMAX Centre and added two regulation size indoor soccer pitches to the complex . 
 Several winter sports venues are in or near Lethbridge . The city has six indoor ice arenas with a total ice area of 11 @,@ 220 square metres ( 120 @,@ 800 sq ft ) and a total seating capacity of 8 @,@ 149 . Other than the ENMAX Centre , all ice surfaces are available from October to April only . Lethbridge is 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) east of the Castle Mountain ski resort . 
 = = Government = = 
 Eight councillors and a mayor make up the Lethbridge City Council . City voters elect a new government every four years . The last election was October 21 , 2013 . Lethbridge does not have a ward system , so the mayor and all councillors are elected at large . The 2009 – 2011 operating budget of the City of Lethbridge was C $ 250 – 278 million , more than half of which came from property tax . One Member of Parliament ( MP ) representing Lethbridge sits in the House of Commons in Ottawa , and two members of Alberta 's legislative assembly ( MLAs ) , representing Lethbridge @-@ East ( NDP ) and Lethbridge @-@ West ( NDP ) , sit in the legislative assembly in Edmonton . 
 Traditionally , political leanings in Lethbridge have been right @-@ wing . Federally , from 1917 to 1930 , Lethbridge voters switched between various federal parties , but from 1935 to 1957 , they voted Social Credit in each election . Progressive Conservatives held office from 1958 until 1993 , when the Reform Party of Canada was formed . The Reform party and its various subsequent incarnations such as the current Conservative Party of Canada have dominated the polls since . In contrast , the city 's two provincial electoral districts are both represented by the centre @-@ left Alberta New Democratic Party . 
 The Alberta government through Alberta Health Services administers public health services . Chinook Health oversees facilities in southwestern Alberta , such as the Chinook Regional Hospital and St. Michael 's Health Centre . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Mass transit in Lethbridge consists of 40 buses ( with an average age of 10 years ) operating on more than a dozen routes . Traditionally , bus routes in the city started and ended downtown . In the early 21st century , however , Lethbridge Transit introduced cross @-@ town and shuttle routes , such as University of Lethbridge to Lethbridge College , University of Lethbridge to the North Lethbridge terminal , and Lethbridge College to the North Lethbridge terminal . Several routes converge near the Chinook Regional Hospital , although it is not officially a terminal . 
 The Parks and Recreation department maintains the citywide , 30 @-@ kilometre ( 19 mi ) pedestrian / cyclist Coal Banks Trail system ( map ) . The system was designed to connect the Oldman River valley with other areas of the city , including Pavan Park in the north , Henderson Lake in the east , Highways 4 and 5 in the south and a loop in West Lethbridge ( including University Drive and McMaster Blvd ) . 
 Four provincial highways ( 3 , 4 , 5 , and 25 ) run through or terminate in Lethbridge . This has led to the creation of major arterial roads , including Mayor Magrath Drive , University Drive and Scenic Drive . This infrastructure and its location on the CANAMEX Corridor has helped make Lethbridge and its freight depots a major shipping destination . Lethbridge is 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) north of the United States border via Highways 4 and 5 and 210 kilometres ( 130 mi ) south of Calgary via Highways 2 and 3 . Highways 2 , 3 and 4 form part of the CANAMEX trade route between Mexico , the United States , and Canada . 
 Lethbridge is near the Lethbridge Airport and the CPR rail yards in Kipp , Alberta . The airport provides commercial flights to Calgary and Edmonton , as well as private and charter flights elsewhere . The airport provides customs services for flights arriving from the United States . The rail yards were moved to Kipp , just west of the city , from downtown Lethbridge in 1983 . The yards were planned for redevelopment with a mix of multi @-@ family residential , commercial and light industrial land uses . The Park Place Mall is now located on the portion of the former rail yards north of 1 Avenue South between Scenic Drive to the west and Stafford Drive to the east . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Lethbridge School District No. 51 and the separate Holy Spirit Roman Catholic School Division administer grades kindergarten through 12 locally . The Palliser School Division , which is based in Lethbridge , administers public primary and secondary education in the outlying areas . Lethbridge School District No. 51 administers four high schools ( Chinook High School , Lethbridge Collegiate Institute , Winston Churchill High School and Immanuel Christian High School ) , four middle schools , and 12 elementary schools in Lethbridge . 
 Lethbridge is home to Lethbridge College , founded in 1957 , and the University of Lethbridge , founded in 1967 . Red Crow Community College has a campus in the city . During the 2003 – 2004 school year , the University of Lethbridge and the Lethbridge College had a combined enrolment of 14 @,@ 000 , which was 20 percent of the city 's population . 
 = = Media = = 
 Lethbridge has two major newspapers : the daily Lethbridge Herald and the weekly Lethbridge Sun Times . The university and college each have a student @-@ run , weekly newspaper . There are 11 FM radio stations , including <unk> @-@ FM , a campus radio station located at the University of Lethbridge and the pop station , <unk> @-@ FM . 
 The city is also served by four broadcast television channels . Global Lethbridge ( <unk> @-@ DT ) and CTV Lethbridge ( <unk> @-@ DT ) air local newscasts along with their respective network programming . 
 = Saborsko massacre = 
 The Saborsko massacre ( Croatian : Pokolj u <unk> , Serbian : Operacija Saborsko ) was the killing of 29 Croat residents of the village of Saborsko on 12 November 1991 , following the seizure of the village in a Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) and Croatian Serb offensive during the Croatian War of Independence . The fall of the town occurred as part of a JNA and Croatian Serb operation to capture a Croatian @-@ held pocket centered on the town of Slunj , southeast of Karlovac . While the bulk of the civilian population fled with the surviving Croatian forces , those who remained in Saborsko were rounded up and either killed or expelled . The bodies of the victims were retrieved from two mass graves and several individual graves in 1995 . 
 The capture of Saborsko and the killing and expulsion of its civilian population was included in the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) indictments of Milan Babić and Milan Martić — high @-@ ranking officials of the Croatian Serb @-@ declared wartime breakaway region of SAO Krajina . Following the war , the ICTY convicted Babić and Martić for their role in the events . Saborsko was subsequently rebuilt . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions between Croats and Serbs worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana - TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt by Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . This was followed by two unsuccessful attempts by Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo to obtain the Yugoslav Presidency 's approval for a JNA operation to disarm Croatian security forces in January 1991 . 
 After a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March , the JNA itself , supported by Serbia and its allies , asked the Federal Presidency to give it wartime authority and declare a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March , and the JNA came under the control of Serbian President Slobodan Milošević . Milošević publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the Federal Presidency . By the end of the month , the conflict had escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . The JNA stepped in , increasingly supporting the Croatian Serb insurgents , and preventing Croatian police from intervening . In early April , the leaders of the Croatian Serb revolt declared their intention to integrate the area under their control , known as SAO Krajina , with Serbia . The Government of Croatia viewed this declaration as an attempt to secede . 
 In May , the Croatian government responded by forming the Croatian National Guard ( Zbor narodne garde - ZNG ) , but its development was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September . On 8 October , Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia , and a month later the ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska - HV ) . Late 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , as the Yugoslav campaign in Croatia culminated in the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Saborsko Independent Company , consisting of approximately 30 personnel , was stationed in the village by the Croatian police the day after the Plitvice Lakes incident on 1 April 1991 . The tensions worsened in July . That month the JNA distributed 1 @,@ 000 small arms to ethnic Serbs living in Gorski kotar region , including Plaški . Skirmishes took place near <unk> and Plaški . In June – August , Saborsko was targeted by artillery and mortars positioned at JNA barracks in Lička Jasenica , and the bulk of its civilian population fled by early August . However , approximately 400 returned to their homes the same month after 20 – 30 special police troops were deployed from Duga Resa to Saborsko along with 15 – 20 regular police drawn from Slunj as reinforcements . On 25 September , 100 – 200 police reservists arrived to Saborsko from Zagreb . The final Croatian reinforcements arrived in October , consisting of 20 – 50 police . By October , a pocket of Croatian @-@ controlled territory formed around the town of Slunj south of Karlovac , on the boundary of the regions of Kordun and Lika , hampering direct communications between SAO Krajina @-@ held areas in the two regions . The pocket was separated from the bulk of the Croatian Government @-@ controlled territory by the SAO Krajina @-@ controlled town of Plaški to the west . In turn , Plaški was inaccessible to the central SAO Krajina authorities as the road to Plaški ran through the village of Saborsko , situated within the Slunj pocket . 
 In early October , the JNA and the SAO Krajina TO launched a joint offensive which was aimed at capturing the peripheral areas of the Slunj pocket . The JNA also planned to airlift 44 truckloads of weapons from Željava Air Base to Gorski kotar and raise a combat brigade there in support of the operation and to extend their control into Gorski kotar . The airlift was cancelled after the Yugoslav Air Force refused to follow the orders . That month , the JNA captured the village of <unk> , 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) east of Saborsko , and turned it over to Serb paramilitaries . Most of the Croat civilians fled , although at least seven civilians were killed and the village looted and torched . Three more Croat civilians were killed in the nearby village of <unk> . The Croatian police and the ZNG , including the forces based in Saborsko , launched a failed attempt to capture the JNA base in Lička Jasenica on 4 – 8 November resulting in the deaths of a number of Serb civilians . During the attack , a force commanded by JNA officers and including the 63rd Parachute Battalion troops killed nine more Croat civilians in the village of <unk> near Saborsko on 7 November . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 In early November , the JNA and the SAO Krajina TO intensified their offensive aimed at capturing Saborsko and the Slunj pocket . The main axes of the advance radiated north and <unk> from the Plitvice Lakes — towards Slunj and Saborsko respectively . The JNA force assigned to the offensive was organised as the Tactical Group 2 ( TG @-@ 2 ) , under the command of Colonel <unk> Bulat . The TG @-@ 2 , whose bulk consisted of a reinforced motorised battalion detached from the 236th Motorised Brigade and a D @-@ 30 howitzer battalion , was supported by the 5th Partisan Brigade , both subordinated to the 13th JNA Corps as well as a police unit and a SAO Krajina TO brigade drawn from Plaški . The attacking force , supported by the Yugoslav Air Force , artillery and tanks , approached the village from three directions on the morning of 12 November , while the main force advancing towards Slunj reached Rakovica . According to SAO Krajina sources , the air strikes commenced at 9 a.m. and lasted for fifteen minutes . They were followed by a 30 @-@ minute artillery bombardment before ground forces were ordered to attack . 
 The defences of Saborsko were first breached at noon , and the attacking force reached the centre of the village at 3 : 30 p.m. According to SAO Krajina sources , resistance was light , with the defending force estimated to consist of only 150 armed troops . The village was secured by 5 p.m. with tanks attached to the attacking force withdrawn by 6 p.m. The assault resulted in the death of 50 Croatian troops , while the attacking forces suffered only four wounded . In the immediate aftermath of the fighting to control Saborsko , the village was looted and many houses were torched . 
 After the attack , the bulk of the civilian population and the remaining Croatian police and troops fled over snow @-@ covered terrain in poor weather to Karlovac , Ogulin , and to the nearby territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina . Approximately 30 – 60 civilians , largely elderly people , remained in Saborsko . The JNA and SAO Krajina troops forced those who remained behind to leave the village , killing or abusing the civilians . At least 25 civilians were murdered by the troops in the immediate aftermath of the capture of Saborsko . Some of the victims were shot , while others were beaten or burned to death . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The destruction of Saborsko continued and both churches in the village were demolished by mid @-@ December . By 1995 , the entire village had been completely destroyed except for two Serb @-@ owned houses , which were badly damaged . After its capture , the village was renamed Ravna Gora by the SAO Krajina authorities . Croatian forces subsequently lost control of Slunj on 16 November and the rest of the pocket fell to the TG @-@ 2 when it captured Cetingrad on 29 November . The Saborsko Independent Company , which unsuccessfully defended Saborsko , was subsequently attached to Ogulin Home Guard Battalion , which was in turn amalgamated with other HV units to form the 143rd Home Guard Regiment . 
 In the two months following the recapture of the area by Croatia in 1995 during Operation Storm , the bodies of 27 victims were recovered in two mass graves containing three and fourteen bodies respectively , and in ten individual graves . In its indictment of Milan Babić , leader of the SAO Krajina at the time when the killings in Saborsko took place , the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) specified that 29 Croat civilians were killed in Saborsko on 12 November 1991 . 
 The killings in the Slunj pocket , including those in Saborsko , were prosecuted by the ICTY . The ICTY charged Babić and Milan Martić , respectively the defence and interior ministers of the SAO Krajina , with persecution , extermination and murder of non @-@ Serb civilians in the area as well as deportations and forcible transfer of the civilian population , intentional plunder and destruction of property . Babić was tried at the ICTY in 2003 – 05 , convicted and sentenced to 13 years in prison . Martić was tried in 2002 – 08 , convicted and sentenced to 35 years in prison . His involvement in the killings , among other charges brought forward by the ICTY , was interpreted by the tribunal as part of a campaign of ethnic cleansing of non @-@ Serbs from SAO Krajina controlled areas . 
 Saborsko was rebuilt after the war with a total of 400 houses constructed , but the refugees returning to the village were mostly elderly due to a lack of employment options elsewhere . The site of one of the mass graves in Saborsko is marked with a monument to the victims . Three different commemorative plaques dedicated to Croatian policemen and troops killed in Saborsko in 1991 were placed at various sites in the village in 2009 , but two were stolen on 11 November 2010 . The missing commemorative plaques were replaced by November 2011 . 
 = Máni = 
 Máni ( Old Norse / Icelandic " moon " ) is the personification of the moon in Norse mythology . Máni , personified , is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . Both sources state that he is the brother of the personified sun , Sól , and the son of Mundilfari , while the Prose Edda adds that he is followed by the children Hjúki and Bil through the heavens . As a proper noun , Máni appears throughout Old Norse literature . Scholarly theories have been proposed about Máni 's potential connection to the Northern European notion of the Man in the Moon , and a potentially otherwise unattested story regarding Máni through skaldic kennings . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the poem Völuspá , a dead völva recounts the history of the universe and foretells the future to the disguised god Odin . In doing so , the völva recounts the early days of the universe : 
 In stanza 23 of the poem Vafþrúðnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as " Gagnráðr " ) tasks the jötunn Vafþrúðnir with a question about the origins of the sun and the moon , whom he describes as journeying over mankind . Vafþrúðnir responds that Mundilfari is the father of both Sól and Máni , and that they must pass through the heavens every day to count the years for mankind : 
 In stanza 39 of the poem Grímnismál , Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) says that both the sun and the moon are pursued through the heavens by wolves ; the sun , referred to as the " shining god " is pursued by Sköll to the " protecting woods " , while the moon is pursued by Hati Hróðvitnisson . In stanza 13 of the poem Alvíssmál , the god Thor questions the dwarf Alvíss about the moon , asking him what the moon is called in each of the worlds . Alvíss responds that it is called " moon " by mankind , " fiery one " by the gods , " the whirling wheel " in Hel , " the <unk> " by the jötnar , " the shiner " by the dwarves , and " the counter of years " by the elves . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Máni is referenced in three chapters . In chapter 8 , the enthroned figure of High quotes stanza 5 of Völuspá , and the figure of Third , also enthroned , adds that this occurred prior to the creation of the earth . In chapter 11 , High says that Máni and his sister Sól are the children of a man by the name of Mundilfari . The children were so fair that Mundilfari named them " moon " and " sun " , which was perceived as arrogance by the gods , and it so angered the gods that they placed the brother and sister in the heavens . There , Máni " guides the path of the moon and controls its waxing and waning . " 
 Additionally , Máni is followed through the heavens by the brother and sister children Hjúki and Bil " as can be seen from the earth " , whom he took from the earth while they fetched water from a well . In chapter 51 , High foretells the events of Ragnarök , including that Máni will be consumed by one of two wolves chasing the heavenly bodies . 
 In the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , Sól is referred to in chapter 26 as " sister of Máni " , and in chapter 56 names are given for the moon : " lune " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " year @-@ counter " , " clipped " , " shiner " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " and " <unk> " . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Kennings in the skaldic corpus for female jötnar have been identified ( such as " desired woman of Máni " used by the 10th century skald <unk> <unk> ) as pointing to a potential marriage or sexual union between Máni and a female jötunn . John Lindow states that if a story about Máni having such a relationship with a female jötunn existed , then " it has left no other trace in the extant mythology . Rudolf Simek states that in two skaldic kennings " Máni is apparently a gigantic being in a myth of which we otherwise know nothing " . 
 John Lindow theorizes on Máni 's fate at Ragnarök in that " as part of the creation of the <unk> , that is , the cosmos , Máni must be destroyed at Ragnarök , but this is not explicitly stated , except perhaps by Snorri , who tells about <unk> , who will swallow a heavenly body that may be the moon " . 
 Rudolf Simek connects the account of Máni , and Hjúki and Bil ( featuring , as Simek states , " a man with a pole and a woman with a bushel " ) found in chapter 11 of Gylfaginning with modern accounts of the Man in the Moon found in modern folklore in Scandinavia , England , and North Germany . Simek additionally points out that a stanza appearing early in the poem Völuspá states that the Æsir had set up the moon " in order to be able to reckon the year " , which Simek connects with Germanic computation of time having been directed towards the moon rather than the sun , and that shorter amounts of time were given in nights rather than days . 
 = Sein und Zeit ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Sein und Zeit " is the tenth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 6 , 2000 , in the United States . The episode was written by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Michael Watkins . The episode helped to explore the series ' overarching mythology . " Sein und Zeit " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 4 , being watched by 13 @.@ 95 million people in its initial broadcast . It received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder becomes obsessed with a number of children who have vanished while investigating the bizarre disappearance of a young girl from her home . In the meanwhile , Scully fears that he is emotionally involved due to his sister 's disappearance 27 years earlier . Her fears are heightened when Mulder 's mother dies , apparently of suicide . 
 " Sein und Zeit " was written as the first part of a two @-@ part arc that would eventually reveal what had happened to Samantha Mulder . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz later noted that the episode bore stylistic similarities to the fourth @-@ season episode " Paper Hearts " . Several production issues plagued the episode , including the arrest of one crew member who was accused of possible kidnap , and the lack of money needed for the faux newscast scene at the end of the episode . The episode 's title , Sein und Zeit , is a reference to Martin Heidegger 's best known work and means " Being and Time " in German . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) asks to be a part of the investigation looking for a little girl , Amber Lynn LaPierre , who disappeared from her home in Sacramento , California . Mulder 's superior , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , initially denies his request , noting that the investigation is not an X @-@ file , but simply a missing persons case . Mulder , however , convinces Skinner to allow him to investigate . The parents of Amber , Billie and Bud , tell Mulder that they found a note in the girl 's bedroom , but the teaser for the episode revealed that the note was written by Billie herself . The note contains a mention of Santa Claus , which everyone finds out of place . Although the family is held for questioning , Mulder does not believe they did it . Looking through previous cases , Mulder finds a similar note , with a reference to Santa Claus , from a missing person case in Idaho from 1987 . In the case , the mother was convicted and sentenced to twelve years . The file notes that she had a vision of her son dead before he disappeared , as did Bud on the night his daughter disappeared . 
 Meanwhile , Mulder 's mother Teena is found dead in her home . It is found she overdosed on sleeping pills after she burned all her pictures of Samantha and placed tape around her <unk> and turned the gas in the oven on . Mulder believes she was murdered and has Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) do an autopsy . Later , Mulder visits the mother who was convicted twelve years prior . She tells him that Samantha is a walk @-@ in , a kind spirit who takes children so that they may be shielded from potential harm in their life . The mother tells Mulder that the children are safe , but she has no idea where they are . After hearing this , Mulder believes his mother probably also wrote a note after his sister 's disappearance . He begins to think that the alien abduction never happened , and that his mother figured this out , which is why she was murdered . However , after performing the autopsy , Scully tells Mulder that it was definitely suicide , because she was ill with Paget 's carcinoma . 
 During the happenings of the episode , a man playing Santa at a Christmas @-@ themed ranch is shown videotaping the children at his ranch . Billie later tells Mulder that she saw a vision of her daughter in her room and that she said the number 74 . Mulder decides he cannot finish the case and wants to take time off because he 's too close to make any sound judgment . On their way to the airport , Scully comes across the Santa park ( situated off of California State Route 74 ) and decides to stop because of the reference to Santa Claus in the notes . Here they find the videotape setup and tapes dating all the way back to the ' 60s , including one of Amber Lynn LaPierre . The man who runs the park is promptly arrested , and Mulder finds graves of children all over his ranch . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Although both the season four episode " Paper Hearts " and the season five episode " Redux II " had dealt with possible explanations for Samantha Mulder 's fate , the issue had yet to be resolved when the series moved into its seventh season . Realizing that the season potentially could be the last , series creator Chris Carter decided to conclude the Samantha story @-@ arc . " The expectation was that if this were going to be the final season , that the finale would be about Mulder 's sister . We wanted to deal with that sooner rather than later . We wanted to wrap up Mulder 's emotion story with his sister and do it in such a way that would emphasize [ David Duchovny 's ] dramatic abilities . " 
 Executive producer Frank Spotnitz noted that the episode bore stylistic similarities to " Paper Hearts " . However , unlike the episode , " Sein und Zeit " , and its second part " Closure " , sets out to actually answer the question of Samantha 's disappearance . Spotnitz later explained , " it 's similar [ … ] in the sense that what you always thought happened to Samantha may not have actually happened . ' Paper Hearts ' never ultimately answers the question . We 've had people come up to us and say , ' Okay , so we know she 's really dead , so what happened ? ' So we decided in this one to answer the question . " The episode 's title , Sein und Zeit , is a reference to Martin Heidegger 's best known work and means " Being and Time " in German . 
 = = = Production issues = = = 
 Several incidents hindered the production of the episode . The prop department for The X @-@ Files initially made a fake ransom note for the scene wherein Mrs. LaPierre automatically writes the kidnappers message . A crew member for the show later took the note , along with a folder of other documents to one of the filming locations . Before arriving at the location , he stopped to make a phone call from a pay phone . A person , however , was watching him from their house and , being suspicious , called the police . Unfortunately for the crew member , he left the folder and note , which included the line " Don 't do anything or we 'll kill your baby " at the booth . When the individual went back to retrieve the note , he was promptly arrested . Director Kim Manners later called the situation a " mess " . 
 The second major event that hindered production involved lack of money needed for the final scene . Near the end of the filming , producer Paul Rabwin discovered that there was no money left for a small but necessary sequence created to mimic an actual TV news anchor giving a report . Rather than request extra funds , Rabwin located an Australian TV correspondent , Robert Penfold , who was based out of Los Angeles and asked him to " donate " the needed news report for a chance to be on The X @-@ Files . The individual was more than happy to comply . According to Rabwin , " we went to his studio setup , inserted a visual of a busy newsroom behind the correspondent , added some pictures of the kidnapped children , and we had our scene . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Sein und Zeit " first aired in the United States on February 6 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 4 , with a 12 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 12 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 13 @.@ 95 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on May 21 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 83 million viewers , making it the sixth most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " They go to bed . And they 're gone forever . " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist 's plans to take over the earth . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " and called it a " very , very good piece of television " . He was particularly pleased with the grimness of the story ; he noted that it was largely about the way in which Mulder 's " belief system [ is ] eradicated before his very eyes " after the suicide of his mom . VanDerWerff was also pleased with Duchovny 's performance , writing that he " brings the intense mania to Mulder that has always made the character work at his best . " Despite this , he was slightly critical of the concept of the " walk @-@ ins " , which he called " patently ridiculous " . Rich Rosell from DigitallyObsessed.com awarded the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that while " Chris Carter penned this episode , [ and ] his attempts at clarifying his own confounded mythology are often even more confusing than revelatory , ' Sein Und Zeit ' is a tense installment , and leads neatly to the supposed wrap @-@ up in the second half . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review , writing " ' Sein Und Zeit ' not only served as a reminder of Fox Mulder 's ongoing pain it provided yet another clue that , although its journey is nearing its completion , The X @-@ Files still knows how to make the ride an enjoyable one . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five . The two called the episode " a welcome return to an X @-@ Files we haven 't seen for awhile — hard , passionate , and with an urgent story to tell . From where I 'm sitting , in the middle of a lacklustre season , it smells strongly of a masterpiece . " 
 Other reviews were less complimentary . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris wrote , " there are some powerful and touching moments in ' Sein und Zeit ' , but others that miss the mark so widely that it hurts to think what this episode might have been . " Kenneth Silber from Space.com , although complimentary towards the focus on Samantha Mulder , was critical of the slowness of the episode , writing , " While the series ' reversion to its central theme is much appreciated , this episode unfolds with an unfortunate slowness that does little to satisfy the seven @-@ year itch many X @-@ Files viewers have come to feel in response to monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episodes and phony @-@ baloney mythology cliffhangers . " 
 = 2006 UEFA Champions League Final = 
 The 2006 UEFA Champions League Final was an association football match between Barcelona of Spain and Arsenal of England at the Stade de France in Saint @-@ Denis , Paris , France , on Wednesday , 17 May 2006 . It was the final match of the 2005 – 06 season of Europe 's primary cup competition , the UEFA Champions League . Barcelona were appearing in their fifth final , having won the competition once in 1992 , and lost the other three finals . Arsenal were appearing in the final for the first time and in doing so became the first club from London to feature in the final . 
 Each club needed to progress through the group stage and knockout rounds to reach the final , playing 12 matches in total . Barcelona won their group and progressed to the final after beating Chelsea , Benfica and Milan , respectively . Arsenal won their group to move into the knockout stage , and progressed without conceding a goal against Real Madrid , Juventus and Villarreal , respectively . 
 A crowd of 79 @,@ 500 watched Arsenal 's Jens Lehmann sent off early in the game . However they took the lead through Sol Campbell towards the end of the first half . The game turned with the 61st minute introduction of Henrik Larsson as a Barcelona substitute . Larsson provided two assists , one for each of Samuel Eto 'o and Juliano Belletti . The 2 – 1 victory was Barcelona 's second triumph in the competition 14 years after they won the European Cup in 1992 . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Teams qualified for the Champions League group stage , either directly or through three preliminary rounds , based on both their position in the preceding domestic league and the strength of that league . Both Arsenal and Barcelona entered the competition in the group stages : Arsenal by finishing second in the 2004 – 05 FA Premier League , and Barcelona by winning La Liga . The group stages were contested as eight double round robin groups of four teams , with the top two qualifying for the knockout stages . Knockout matches were decided based on home and away matches , with the away goals rule , extra time and penalty shootouts as tiebreakers if needed . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 UEFA awarded the right to host the final to the Stade de France in Saint @-@ Denis after considering its merits in terms of capacity , stadium infrastructure and dossiers including city and airport agreements and promotional plans . UEFA also conducted a variety of site visits . The Stade de France previously staged the 2000 UEFA Champions League Final between Real Madrid and Valencia , which Madrid won 3 – 0 and was the first time two clubs from the same country had faced each other in the final . Saint @-@ Denis was chosen to host the final in recognition of the 50th anniversary of the first European Cup final in 1956 , held in nearby Paris at the Parc des Princes , now home of Paris Saint @-@ Germain . The Parc des Princes also hosted the 1975 and 1981 European Cup finals , the 1978 and 1995 UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup finals , and the 1998 UEFA Cup Final . 
 Barcelona were to show the match live from their Mini Estadi on a 70 @-@ metre ( 230 ft ) television screen for an estimated audience of 15 @,@ 276 . Before the final an estimated 1 @.@ 2 million people converged on to the streets of Barcelona , as the team toured the city on two open @-@ top double @-@ decker buses to celebrate winning La Liga . Arsenal went into the match with the record for the longest time without a conceding a goal . They had gone 919 minutes without conceding since conceding against AFC Ajax in the group stages . Arsenal were featuring in their first European final six years to the day since their last final . They faced Galatasaray in the 2000 UEFA Cup Final ; the match had finished goalless after 90 minutes and extra time . Arsenal lost the subsequent penalty shootout 4 – 1 . Of the players who featured in that final , only Thierry Henry and Dennis Bergkamp remained at the club , whilst Sylvinho , who had featured for Arsenal in the final , was now a Barcelona player . 
 The 2006 final was the first time that Arsenal had reached the showpiece match ; in doing so they became the first club from London to feature in the final . Barcelona were appearing in the final for the fifth time ; their last appearance had been in a 4 – 0 loss to Milan in 1994 . Two more losses preceded the 1994 final ( 1961 and 1986 ) , and their only success in the competition came in 1992 when they beat Sampdoria . Barcelona went into the final as domestic league champions , having won La Liga a fortnight earlier . They were regarded as being the best side on the continent because they possessed players such as Ronaldinho and Samuel Eto 'o . Barcelona player Deco dismissed the notion of Barcelona being favourites , insisting they would not be complacent : " Milan were winning 3 – 0 last year against Liverpool and ended up losing in the end . We need to be serious , calm and fully concentrated so that we don 't make any errors " . 
 Neither side had been beaten en route to the final , with Arsenal only conceding two goals in their 12 matches before the final , including a record ten successive matches without conceding . Barcelona , on the other hand , had scored 114 goals in all competitions before the final . The two finalists were guaranteed a financial windfall from their progress to the final . Arsenal would receive a revenue of around € 37 @.@ 3 million if they won and approximately € 34 @.@ 7 million if they lost . Barcelona would earn € 31 @.@ 5 million from revenue if they won , and around € 28 @.@ 9 million if they were to lose . Included in the total for participating in the final , the UEFA Champions League winners would collect approximately € 6 @.@ 4 million , with the runners @-@ up receiving approximately € 3 @.@ 8 million . The final marked the appearance of a new trophy following Liverpool 's triumph over Milan the previous year . As Liverpool won the competition for the fifth time they were entitled to keep the trophy , creating the need for a new trophy . 
 Barcelona were expected to line up in a 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 formation , with Ronaldinho , Ludovic Giuly and Deco supporting Samuel Eto 'o who would be deployed as the lone striker . They had doubts about the fitness of Lionel Messi going into the final . He had pulled a thigh muscle during the second leg of their match with Chelsea , and had not played since , though he was included in the 22 man squad for the final . Barcelona coach Frank Rijkaard stated he would leave it late before deciding whether to select him . Despite being included in the squad Messi did not feature in the final . Arsenal were expected to line up in a 4 – 5 – 1 formation , with Thierry Henry as the sole striker . There was much discussion about whether José Antonio Reyes would take the place of Robert Pirès on the left of midfield . It had been announced before the match that this would be Pirès ' last match as he had agreed to join Villarreal next season . 
 On the morning of the final it emerged that the assistant referee for the game Ole Hermann <unk> had posed for photographs in a Barcelona shirt for <unk> Tidende , a Norwegian newspaper . After initially sticking by the official , UEFA eventually decided to replace him with fellow Norwegian Arild <unk> . Norway 's head of refereeing Rune Pedersen stated that " It is an unwritten rule that referees should not do anything that can doubt their impartial stance " . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Barcelona fielded a 4 – 3 – 3 formation with Mark van Bommel and Edmílson lining up in midfield alongside Deco , ahead of Xavi and Andrés Iniesta . Lionel Messi did not feature in the match day squad , despite returning from injury and featuring in the 22 @-@ man squad , whilst Henrik Larsson in potentially his last game for the club was among the substitutes . Arsenal fielded a 4 – 5 – 1 formation , which saw Emmanuel Eboué replace the injured Lauren , and Ashley Cole return at left @-@ back to make only his third appearance in the competition that season due to injury . Thierry Henry was deployed as the lone striker , with Fredrik Ljungberg playing off his shoulder . 
 As both teams ' first @-@ choice kits featured a shade of red , Arsenal wore their yellow away strip , while Barcelona wore their traditional blue and maroon striped kit . Arsenal won the coin toss and Barcelona kicked off . Barcelona almost immediately came under pressure when Thierry Henry shot straight at Barcelona goalkeeper Víctor Valdés , who conceded a corner . From the resulting corner Arsenal had another chance again courtesy of Henry , whose shot was again saved by Valdés . The next attack in the seventh minute resulted in Arsenal goalkeeper Jens Lehmann saving from Ludovic Giuly after he shot from a narrow angle . Four minutes later Barcelona were awarded a free @-@ kick 35 yards ( 32 m ) from goal ; Ronaldinho subsequently shot wide of the goal . With 18 minutes played , Lehmann became the first person to be sent off in a European Cup final after he brought down Samuel Eto 'o outside the Arsenal box . Giuly subsequently put the ball in the back of the net , but the goal was not allowed due to the foul . Arsenal subsequently substituted Robert Pirès for Manuel Almunia , their substitute goalkeeper . The free @-@ kick was sent wide by Ronaldinho . Following Lehmann 's dismissal Barcelona began to exert more pressure on Arsenal , to the point where Emmanuel Eboué was cautioned for a high tackle . Arsenal overcame their numerical disadvantage to score in the 37th minute when Sol Campbell headed in from a free @-@ kick following Carles Puyol 's foul on Emmanuel Eboué , although some observers believed that Eboué appeared to dive . Arsenal held onto their lead for the remainder of the half , as Barcelona 's best chance came courtesy of Eto 'o , whose shot hit the post via a save from Almunia . 
 Barcelona replaced Edmílson , who had picked up an injury in the first half , with Andrés Iniesta for the second half in an effort to equalise . The period immediately after half ‑ time saw few chances , but after six minutes of the second half Iniesta had a shot saved by Almunia . Just after an hour 's play , Barcelona substituted Mark van Bommel for striker Henrik Larsson . Minutes later , Alexander Hleb received a pass from Henry but shot wide of the goal . Arsenal began to press forward and both Henry and Fredrik Ljungberg saw shots saved ; Henry then had another chance to score after being put through by Hleb , but he shot straight at Valdés . Following this attack <unk> was replaced by Juliano Belletti , and Arsenal responded by replacing Cesc Fàbregas with Mathieu Flamini . Immediately following the substitutions , Iniesta sent a pass down the left flank for Larsson , who passed to Eto 'o , who equalised for Barcelona . Four minutes later Barcelona had another attack , as Larsson crossed to Belletti , who ran onto the ball and shot through Almunia 's legs to score at the near post . The remaining minutes saw Arsenal replace Hleb with Reyes in an attempt to equalise , but Barcelona had the best chance during this period , only for Giuly to hit his shot straight at Almunia . Following this , Larsson impeded the Arsenal goalkeeper and was cautioned as a result . 
 The match finished soon after with Barcelona winning 2 – 1 . Barcelona captain Carles Puyol collected the trophy from UEFA president Lennart Johansson as Barcelona celebrated their second European Cup triumph . As a result of winning the UEFA Champions League , Barcelona would face Sevilla , the winners of the UEFA Cup , in the UEFA Super Cup . The subsequent match , played on 25 August 2006 , was won 3 – 0 by Sevilla . Barcelona 's victory meant they would also participate in the FIFA Club World Cup . Receiving a bye in the first round , they beat Club América 4 – 0 in the semi @-@ finals to progress to the final where they faced Copa Libertadores champions Internacional , who won 1 – 0 . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Much of the discussion after the match centred around referee Terje Hauge 's decision to send off Lehmann . Football pundit Mark Lawrenson stated : " The game changed when Arsenal goalkeeper Jens Lehmann was sent off " . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger agreed : " When Jens Lehmann got sent off , that left us with 70 minutes to play with ten against eleven , against a team that retains the ball very well " . He refused to openly criticise this decision , although he did criticise the decision to award Barcelona 's first goal , as he felt that Samuel Eto 'o was offside . Wenger was also adamant that his young side would bounce back from the defeat . One person who did criticise the referee was Thierry Henry , stating : " I was kicked all over the place . I expected the referee to do his job . I don 't think he did " . There was much discussion after the match over whether Henry would remain with Arsenal or move to Barcelona , whom he had been linked with a move to over the past months . Arsène Wenger was asked post match if Henry would leave , to which the Arsenal manager replied : " I don 't know . I don 't think so " . However , on 19 May , Henry signed a new four @-@ year contract with Arsenal , ending the speculation about a possible move to Barcelona . 
 Thierry Henry paid tribute to Larsson 's contribution to Barcelona 's win after the game , saying , " People always talk about Ronaldinho , Eto 'o , Giuly and everything , but I didn 't see them today , I saw Henrik Larsson . He came on , he changed the game , that is what killed the game . Sometimes you talk about Ronaldinho and Eto 'o and people like that ; you need to talk about the proper footballer who made the difference , and that was Henrik Larsson tonight . " Henry also remarked , " You have to remember that Barcelona is a team . It 's not Eto 'o , it 's not Ronaldinho . On Wednesday , the man who made the difference was Henrik Larsson . You have to give him credit for that because when he came on he made some amazing runs around the box and he showed he is a team player . You saw two times he fed the ball back to people and that 's what I always talk about , he is a team player . He did that against us , even though the first goal was a close offside decision . " Larsson 's addition giving Barcelona the cutting edge required to overcome Arsenal was noted by international press . 
 Henrik Larsson , who provided the two assists for the goals , was delighted with the triumph and had no regrets over deciding to leave Barcelona after the match : " I want to play football . I feel I haven 't played as much as I would love to because of the great players we have at Barcelona " . Fellow Barcelona player Giovanni van Bronckhorst was emotional as he won against his former club : " It 's special to win the final , and even more special to do it against your old team " . Samuel Eto 'o , scorer of Barcelona 's first goal , cited Liverpool 's comeback against Milan as inspiration for Barcelona 's victory : " After having seen what Liverpool did last year , we told ourselves not to throw in the towel . We followed Liverpool 's example " . Barcelona manager Frank Rijkaard praised the role of goalkeeper Victor Valdés in their victory , stating that he made a number of important saves to keep them in the match : " Valdes played a decisive role . He saved us at crucial moments " . 
 = Novum Instrumentum omne = 
 Novum Instrumentum omne was the first published New Testament in Greek ( 1516 ) . It was prepared by Desiderius Erasmus ( 1469 – 1536 ) and printed by Johann Froben ( 1460 – 1527 ) of Basel . Although the first printed Greek New Testament was the Complutensian Polyglot ( 1514 ) , it was the second to be published ( 1522 ) . Erasmus used several Greek manuscripts housed in Basel , but some a few verses in Revelation he translated from the Latin Vulgate . 
 Five editions of Novum Instrumentum omne were published , though its title was changed to Novum Testamentum omne with the second edition , and the name continued . Erasmus issued editions in 1516 , 1519 , 1522 , 1527 , and 1536 . Notable amongst these are the second edition ( 1519 ) , used by Martin Luther for his translation of the New Testament into German , the so @-@ called " September Testament , " and the third edition ( 1522 ) , which was used by Tyndale for the first English New Testament ( 1526 ) and later by translators of the Geneva Bible and the King James Version . With the third edition , the Comma Johanneum was included . The Erasmian edition was the basis for the majority of modern translations of New Testament in the 16 – 19th centuries . 
 = = First edition = = 
 In 1512 Erasmus had been in negotiation with <unk> <unk> of Paris to publish the Vulgate of Jerome and a new edition of Adagia . It did not happen , and Erasmus did not continue contacts with <unk> . At that time Erasmus did not think about a Greek New Testament . It is uncertain when Erasmus decided to prepare his edition of the Greek New Testament , but on a visit to Basel in August 1514 he contacted Johann Froben . Many scholars believe that Froben had heard about the forthcoming Spanish Polyglot Bible , and tried to overtake the project of Alcala ( e.g. S. P. Tregelles ) . Some scholars doubt this motivation of Froben ( e.g. Bruce Metzger ) , because there is no evidence to support it . Most likely he included the Greek text to prove the superiority of his Latin version . 
 The next meeting took the place in April 1515 at the University of Cambridge . As a result , in July 1515 Erasmus came to Basel and started his work . Johannes Oecolampadius served as his editorial assistant and Hebrew consultant . Erasmus did not take any Greek manuscripts to Basel , hoping to find some there . He borrowed some manuscripts from the Dominican Library at the Basel . He used seven manuscripts , they were identified : 
 Manuscripts <unk> and <unk> Erasmus borrowed from Johannes Reuchlin . The rest of the manuscripts he borrowed from Dominicans . It is significant that he did not use the Codex Basilensis , which was held at the Basel University Library , and was available for him . Erasmus had three manuscripts of the Gospels and Acts , four manuscripts of the Pauline epistles , but only one manuscript with the Book of Revelation . In every book of the New Testament he compared three or four manuscripts , except the last book , Book of Revelation . Unfortunately , this manuscript was not complete , it lacked the final leaf , which contained the last six verses of the book . Instead of delaying the publication , on account of the search for another manuscript , he decided to translate the missing verses from the Latin Vulgate into Greek . He used a corrupted manuscript of Vulgate with textual variant libro vitae ( book of life ) instead <unk> vitae ( tree of life ) in Rev 22 : 19 . Even in other parts of the Book of Revelation and other books of the New Testament Erasmus occasionally introduced self @-@ created Greek text material taken from the Vulgate . F. H. A. Scrivener remarked , that in Rev 17 : 4 he created a new Greek word : <unk> ( instead τὰ <unk> ) . There is no such word in Greek language as <unk> . In Rev 17 : 8 he used <unk> εστιν ( and yet is ) instead of και <unk> ( and shall come ) . In Acts 9 : 6 the question that Paul asks at the time of his conversion on the Damascus road , <unk> τε καὶ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " And he trembling and astonished said , Lord , what will you have me to do ? " ) was incorporated from the Vulgate . 
 The printing began on 2 October 1515 , and in very short time was finished ( 1 March 1516 ) . It was produced in great hurry , with typographical errors , and was unusually titled : 
 Novum Instrumentum omne , <unk> ab Erasmo Rot . <unk> et <unk> , non <unk> ad <unk> <unk> verum <unk> ad <unk> <unk> ; linguae <unk> <unk> ; <unk> <unk> et <unk> <unk> , <unk> ad <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> et <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , una cum <unk> , quae <unk> <unk> , quid qua ratione <unk> sit . 
 This title , especially words : Novum Instrumentum ... <unk> et <unk> , means New Testament ... Revised and Improved . This title must refer to the Latin text of Vulgate , not to any Greek text , because at that time there was not a printed edition of the Greek New Testament in circulation . In his dedication to Pope Leo X , Erasmus says : 
 I perceived that that teaching which is our salvation was to be had in a much purer and more lively form if sought at the fountain @-@ head and drawn from the actual sources than from pools and <unk> . And so I have revised the whole New Testament ( as they call it ) against the standard of the Greek original ... I have added annotations of my own , in order in the first place to show the reader what changes I have made , and why ; second , to disentangle and explain anything that may be complicated , ambiguous , or obscure . 
 It was a bilingual edition , the Greek text was in a left column , Latin in a right column , and it is clear , the Greek text was not the first target of this edition , it was the Latin text of Vulgate . 
 = = Second edition = = 
 The reception of the first edition was mixed , but within three years a second was made . The second edition used the more familiar term Testamentum instead of Instrumentum . In the second edition ( 1519 ) Erasmus also used Minuscule 3 ( entire NT except Revelation ; 12th century ) . The text was changed in about 400 places , with most — though not all — of the typographical errors corrected . Some new error readings were added to the text . In this edition the text of Jerome 's Vulgate Erasmus replaced by his own more elegant translation . The Latin translation had a good reception . After this edition , Erasmus was involved in many polemics and controversies . Particularly objectionable were the annotations from the universities of Cambridge and Oxford . 
 López de Zúñiga , known as <unk> , one of the editors of Ximenes Complutensian Polyglot , reproached Erasmus that his text lacked part of the 1 John 5 : 7 @-@ 8 ( Comma Johanneum ) . Erasmus replied that he had not found it in any Greek manuscript . <unk> answered that Latin manuscripts are more reliable than Greek . In 1520 Edward Lee accused Erasmus of encouraging Arianism . Erasmus replied that he had not found any Greek manuscript that contained these words , he answered that this was a case not of omission , but simply of non @-@ addition . He showed that even some Latin manuscripts did not contain these words . 
 Another attack was made in 1521 by Paulus Bombasius , the prefect of the Vatican Library , because in Greek text Erasmus departed from the common readings of the Vulgate . He informed Erasmus that in the Vatican Library is held an extremely ancient copy of the Scriptures ( i.e. Codex Vaticanus ) . He sent two extracts from this manuscript containing 1 John 4 : 1 @-@ 3 and 1 John 5 : 7 @-@ 11 ( it did not include Comma ) . 
 The second edition became the basis for Luther 's German translation . 
 = = Third edition = = 
 With the third edition of Erasmus 's Greek text ( 1522 ) the Comma Johanneum was included . An often repeated story is that Erasmus included it , because he felt bound by a promise to include it if a manuscript was found that contained it . When a single 16th @-@ century Greek manuscript subsequently had been found to contain it ( Codex <unk> ) , Erasmus included it , though he expressed doubt as to the authenticity of the passage in his Annotations . Henk Jan de Jonge , a specialist in Erasmian studies , stated that there are no explicit evidence that supports this frequently made assertion concerning a specific promise made by Erasmus . The real reason to include the Comma by Erasmus , was his care for his good name and for the success of his Novum Testamentum . 
 In this edition Erasmus , after using Codex <unk> , misprinted <unk> for εν <unk> in Apocalypse 2 : 13 . 
 The third edition differed in 118 places from the second . 
 Oecolampadius and <unk> , Erasmus ' subeditors , insisted that he introduce more readings from the minuscule 1 in the third edition . But according to Erasmus the text of this codex was altered from the Latin manuscripts , and had a secondary value . 
 This edition was used by William Tyndale for the first English New Testament ( 1526 ) , by Robert Estienne as a base for his editions of the Greek New Testament from 1546 and 1549 , and by the translators of Geneva Bible and King James Version . 
 = = Fourth edition = = 
 Shortly after the publication of his third edition , Erasmus had seen the Complutensian Polyglot , and used its text for improvement of his own text . In the Book of Revelation he altered his fourth edition ( 1527 ) in about 90 passages on the basis of the Complutensian text . Unfortunately Erasmus had forgotten what places of the Apocalypse he translated from Latin and he did not correct all of them . Except in the Revelation , the fourth edition differed only in about 20 places from his third ( according to Mill about 10 places ) . The fourth edition was printed in three parallel columns , they contain the Greek , Erasmus ' own Latin version , and the Vulgate . 
 In November 1533 , before the appearance of the fifth edition , Sepúlveda sent Erasmus a description of the ancient Vatican manuscript , informing him that it differed from the text which he had edited in favour of the Vulgate in 365 places . We do not know anything about these 365 readings except for one . Erasmus in <unk> to Acts 27 : 16 wrote that according to the Codex from the Library <unk> ( i.e. Codex Vaticanus ) name of the island is καυδα ( Cauda ) , not <unk> ( <unk> ) as in his Novum Testamentum ( <unk> si quidam <unk> in codice Graeco <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , καυδα , id est , cauda ) . In another letter sent to Erasmus in 1534 Sepúlveda informed him , that Greek manuscripts were altered from the Vulgate . 
 = = Final edition = = 
 The fifth edition of Erasmus , published in 1535 , the year before his death , discarded the Vulgate . According to Mill the fifth edition differed only in four places from the fourth . 
 Editions four and five were not so important as the third edition in the history of the Text of the New Testament . 
 Popular demand for Greek New Testaments led to a flurry of further authorized and unauthorized editions in the early sixteenth century ; almost all of which were based on Erasmus 's work and incorporated his particular readings , although typically also making a number of minor changes of their own . Tregelles gives Acts 13 : 33 as an example of the places in which commonly received text did not follow Erasmian text ( εν τω <unk> τω <unk> → εν τω <unk> τω <unk> ) . 
 = Oregon Supreme Court = 
 The Oregon Supreme Court ( OSC ) is the highest state court in the U.S. state of Oregon . The only court that may reverse or modify a decision of the Oregon Supreme Court is the Supreme Court of the United States . The OSC holds court at the Oregon Supreme Court Building in Salem , Oregon , near the capitol building on State Street . The building was finished in 1914 and also houses the state 's law library , while the courtroom is also used by the Oregon Court of Appeals . 
 Tracing its heritage to 1841 when Oregon pioneers selected a supreme judge with probate powers , the court has grown from a single judge to its current make up of seven justices . Justices of the court serve six @-@ year terms upon election , however vacancies are filled by appointments of the Governor of Oregon until the next general election when any qualified candidate may run for the position , including the appointee . These seven justices then select one member to serve a six @-@ year term as Chief Justice . The court ’ s Chief Justice is not only responsible for assigning cases to the other justices to write the court ’ s opinions , but is also the chief executive of the Oregon Judicial Department . 
 Primarily an appeals court , the Oregon Supreme Court is also the court of last resort in Oregon . Although most oral arguments before the court are held in the Oregon Supreme Court Building , the court does travel around the state holding sessions in various schools . All cases are heard en banc by the court . It receives appeals from the Oregon Tax Court , the Oregon Court of Appeals , and some select cases such as death penalty appeals . Decisions of the court are published in the Oregon Reporter published by the Oregon Judicial Department . The Territorial Supreme Court was created in 1848 when the Oregon Territory was formed out of the old Oregon Country region , followed by the creation of the State Supreme Court in 1859 when Oregon was admitted to the Union on February 14 . 
 = = Selection = = 
 The court is composed of seven elected justices , each of whom serves a six @-@ year term after winning a nonpartisan election . Justices , like other Oregon state court judges , must be United States citizens , Oregon residents for at least three years , and lawyers admitted to practice in the state of Oregon . The newest justice receives the smallest office ( nicknamed “ the broom closet ” ) and is responsible for opening the door when a conference is interrupted . When a state court judge retires , resigns , or dies before completing a term , the Governor may appoint another qualified person to the position . To retain that position , the appointed person must run for election for a full six @-@ year term at the next general election . 
 On occasion , a judge will leave office at the end of a term , in which case a general election determines their replacement . If the Supreme Court needs an additional judge on a temporary basis due to illness , an unfilled position , or a justice is disqualified from sitting on a case due to a conflict of interest , the court can appoint a senior judge to serve as a judge pro tempore . Senior judges are all former , qualified judges ( a minimum of 12 years on the bench ) that have retired from a state court . Only former Supreme Court justices , elected Oregon circuit court judges , or elected Oregon Court of Appeals judges can be assigned to temporary service on the Supreme Court . 
 = = Administrative = = 
 The court can appoint retired judges , lawyers , and other judges to serve temporarily as judges at any level in Oregon . They can also appoint senior judges to serve on any state court at or below the highest level of court that judge had served on before retirement or resignation . The state supreme court is responsible for admitting new lawyers to practice in Oregon , disciplining attorneys , and appointing members to the Board of Bar Examiners . This board of a minimum of fourteen members is responsible for administering the bar exam and screening prospective lawyers before admitting applicants to practice law in Oregon . Oversight of state judges is also in the hands of the Supreme Court . The Commission on Judicial Fitness and Disability investigates all reports of abuses and makes recommendations to the Supreme Court on any actions that may need to occur . The Supreme Court can then suspend judges , censure them , remove them from office , or take no action . 
 = = = Chief Justice = = = 
 One justice of the court is elected by the court to serve a six @-@ year term as Chief Justice . The Chief Justice is then responsible for all administration of the Supreme Court . Under a law enacted in 1981 the chief is not only the titular head of the Supreme Court , but also is the chief executive officer of the Oregon Judicial Department . In that role the Chief Justice supervises all of the Oregon courts , appoints the Chief Judge of the Oregon Court of Appeals , assigns presiding judges for the trial level state courts , makes court rules , and is in charge of the department ’ s budget . As administrator the chief is also the recipient of many reports from the court system including non @-@ legal employees of the department . The first Chief Justice of the Oregon Supreme Court was William P. Bryant , while the longest serving chief was Wallace P. Carson , Jr. who held the position for 15 years . 
 = = = Oregon Reports = = = 
 Beginning in 1853 , the official court reporter for the publication of all Supreme Court decisions was the Oregon Reports , abbreviated <unk> or <unk> in case citations . These bound editions are published under the authority of the Oregon Supreme Court as authorized by state law . 
 Joseph G. Wilson started in 1853 as the clerk for the court and was responsible for the Oregon Reports until 1870 , though he also served as a justice on the court from 1862 to 1870 . Later federal judge Charles B. Bellinger then took over editing the reports , and served as clerk until 1880 . He was followed by T. B. <unk> , J. A. Stratton , and W. H. Holmes , until 1889 when a law was passed that included a provision that the Chief Justice take over this responsibility . This arrangement only lasted a few years , as in 1891 a new law allowed the court to hire an official reporter , with later Chief Justice George H. Burnett serving as the first official reporter . 
 The first reported opinion in the Oregon Reports was Thompson v. <unk> , involving a case about trespassing . In the case , Justice George Henry Williams wrote the opinion , Justice Thomas Nelson had served as the judge at the trial level due to circuit riding , while future justice Reuben P. Boise served as counsel for the defense , and fellow future justice Aaron E. Waite provided counsel for the plaintiff . 
 = = Powers and jurisdiction = = 
 The powers of the OSC derive from the Oregon Constitution ’ s Article VII . Like other supreme courts in the United States , the Oregon Supreme Court acts primarily as a court of appeals . They choose cases that are of legal significance or to unify lower court decisions . In this aspect the court has discretionary review over many of the cases appealed to the high court . Discretionary review allows the court to choose which cases it will hear on appeal . With those cases that are denied an appeal to the Supreme Court , the decision of the lower court becomes final and binding . As of 1995 , the court only accepted one in eight appeals that were discretionary . The justices meet once per week in a formal conference in which only the justices are involved to determine rulings . Once a case is accepted , the court hears the case en banc . That is the court is not divided into panels , and instead all justices participate in all the cases , unless a justice recuses themselves due to a conflict of interest or other concern . 
 The court also reviews death penalty cases , state tax court appeals , and items regarding legal discipline on direct review . Direct review means that the Supreme Court hears cases directly upon appeal without the case first going to the Court of Appeals . Other direct review items include state agency decisions such as the placement of prisons , placement of energy production facilities , locations of sites for solid waste disposal , and some labor law injunctions . Additionally , the court has original jurisdiction in , writs of mandamus , writs quo warranto , writs of habeas corpus , reapportionment of state legislative districts , and challenges to ballot measures such as their titles , the fiscal impact statement , and the explanatory statement as listed in the Voter ’ s Pamphlet . 
 Oregon ’ s state courts are courts of general jurisdiction , unlike federal courts . That is , the state courts can hear all cases regardless of whether the dispute is based on state law , federal law , or a combination of both , with a few exceptions . Thus the Oregon Supreme Court can hear appeals for cases based on both federal and state law . Although the U.S. Supreme Court is the only court that can overturn decisions of the Oregon court , Oregon Supreme Court decisions as to federal law are only binding on other Oregon state level courts . Federal courts are not required to follow the decisions of the Oregon Supreme Court for decisions based on federal law , regardless as to if the federal court is located within the state . However , federal courts are bound to follow Oregon law and decisions of the Oregon Supreme Court for cases that involve disputes based on Oregon law , even when those federal courts are not based in Oregon , per the Erie Doctrine developed by the U.S. Supreme Court . For this reason federal courts , and courts from other states , can certify questions about Oregon law to the Oregon Supreme Court in order to clarify what the law in Oregon is in regards to the specific fact pattern that the federal court has before it in their case ( see ORS 28 @.@ 200 to 28 @.@ 255 and <unk> 12 @.@ 20 ) . 
 Although only the United States Supreme Court can overturn the decisions of the Oregon Supreme Court , they cannot overturn decisions exclusively based on the Oregon law , though other mechanisms exist that effectively overturn decisions of the Oregon Supreme Court . The U.S. Supreme Court can only accept cases from the Oregon Supreme Court if the decision involves issues of federal law and interpretation of federal law might change the outcome of the case . The Oregon Supreme Court is the final authority on Oregon law , and absent extraordinary circumstances the U.S. Supreme Court cannot overrule its interpretation of Oregon law ( see adequate and independent state ground ) . Although only the U.S. Supreme Court can reverse or overturn decisions of the Oregon Supreme Court , decisions of the court can be effectively overturned by changing the law . Thus later outcomes of the court can be affected by legislation passed by the Oregon Legislative Assembly or through the initiative and referendum process . Also , in most criminal decisions Oregon ’ s Governor or the President of the United States may issue a pardon ( some crimes require the Oregon Legislature to concur ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Following the journey of the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 1805 , the region known as Oregon Country experienced increased activity and exploration by Europeans and Americans . Beginning with the fur trade , settlement by Euro @-@ Americans began as early as 1811 with the founding of Fort Astoria and slowly increased until the 1830s . In the 1830s additional settlement occurred , agricultural production increased , and missionaries started religious missions in the region . In 1835 , the first trial in the region was held with John Kirk Townsend presiding as magistrate over a murder charge . Pioneer settlers continued to immigrate to the region , with larger wagon trains crossing the Oregon Trail in the 1840s bringing more immigrants and a need for courts . 
 = = = Pre @-@ statehood = = = 
 The Oregon Supreme Court traces its roots back to the early settlement period of Oregon Country . In 1841 , pioneer Ewing Young died without an heir or will in the unorganized lands of what are now the states of Idaho , Washington , and Oregon . In February of that year , settlers met at Champoeg to discuss the creation of a government , including a judiciary to deal with the execution of Young ’ s estate . Although the overall government plans fell through , the group of pioneers and mountain men did elect a supreme judge to exercise probate powers . The first judge was Dr. Ira L. Babcock , serving from February 18 , 1841 , to May 1 , 1843 . 
 In 1843 , a later set of meetings at Champoeg created the Provisional Government of Oregon with a judiciary consisting of a supreme judge and two justices of the peace for trial level courts . Albert E. Wilson was the first judge chosen as the supreme judge under this new government , but never severed . Other judges were appointed or elected during this pre @-@ territory period over the next six years . Until 1846 with the settlement of the Oregon boundary dispute , the region was not under the jurisdiction of any foreign power . With the resolution of the boundary issue , Britain retained the territory north of the 49th degree of latitude , with the United States taking the land south to the border of Mexican control California . 
 In 1848 , when the Oregon Territory was created by the United States Congress , William P. Bryant was appointed as the first judge of the Oregon Supreme Court . Justices in the territorial period were appointed by the President of the United States . In those early days of the court , the justices would “ ride circuit ” in addition to their appellate court functions . Riding circuit involved acting as appeals court judges around the state in addition to the supreme court functions of ultimate appeal , a common practice in early American courts . 
 = = = Oregon State Supreme Court = = = 
 Beginning with statehood in 1859 , the court had just four justices , one for each judicial district in the state . The constitution created by the Oregon Constitutional Convention in 1857 called for these justices to serve as both circuit court judges and supreme court justices . This was set to remain until the population of the state reached 100 @,@ 000 people . Each justice was assigned one district , and then all justices would gather at set intervals to confer on appeals , which would occur at least once per year and were authorized to meet more frequently if needed . On appeals , the justice who presided over the lower court case would not participate in the proceedings . 
 Then in 1862 the court was expanded to five justices with the addition of a fifth judicial district . Also that year the Court hired its first clerk after the legislature authorized that position . In 1878 , the legislature passed an act to separate the circuit and supreme courts after the population reached 100 @,@ 000 . With the creation of a separate Circuit Court and Supreme Court , riding circuit was abandoned and the Supreme Court was reduced to three members , with members of each court elected separately . Governor Thayer then appointed James K. Kelly , Reuben P. Boise , and Paine Page Prim to the court as temporary justices until elections could be held . During these early years of the court the selection of the Chief Justice was governed by the Oregon Constitution , with the senior justice or the justice with their term was next to expire was designated as the Chief Justice . This meant that a new chief would be selected at least every two years , and in general meant someone elected would serve their first four years on the bench as an associate justice and the last two years as the Chief Justice . 
 Mary Leonard became the first woman admitted to the state bar on April 13 , 1886 , when the court admitted her after a year @-@ long battle that included the state legislature passing a new law to allow women to be admitted . In 1906 , the Oregon court upheld a maximum hour law for women in State v. Muller , 48 Or . 252 , 85 P. 855 ( 1906 ) . Due partly to a brief by future U.S. Supreme Court justice Louis Brandeis , the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Oregon law in Muller v. Oregon , 208 U.S. 412 ( 1908 ) despite ruling in 1905 in Lochner v. New York that a maximum hour law for bakers was unconstitutional . Then in 1910 , the state legislature expanded the court back to five justices , and lastly , in 1913 the court expanded to the current seven justices . 
 The next important case came in 1935 when the state 's top court ruled in State v. De Jonge , 152 Or . 315 , 51 P.2d 674 ( 1935 ) that the 14th Amendment did not protect Communist Party organizers from prosecution under Oregon ’ s criminal syndicate law . However , the U.S. Supreme Court would overturn this decision in DeJonge v. Oregon , 299 U.S. 353 ( 1937 ) . Another important case came in 1960 as the Oregon court ruled against the United States government in State Land Board v. United States , 222 Or . 40 , 352 P.2d 539 ( 1960 ) . In that case the court ruled that state estate laws trumped a federal statute concerning the property of U.S. Veterans who died at Veterans Administration hospitals without a valid will . The U.S. Supreme Court then overturned the Oregon Supreme Court 's decision in United States v. Oregon , 366 U. S. 643 ( 1961 ) . 
 On the administrative end of the court , the Oregon Court of Appeals was created in 1969 as an intermediate appellate court in Oregon . With this change , the Supreme Court now generally does not hear appeals directly from the trial level courts of the state , with some exceptions such as death penalty cases . Other changes came in 1981 when the Oregon Legislature and justice Arno <unk> reformed the chief justice position from a simple head of the court in title only , to the administrative head of the entire Oregon judicial system . The following year , 1982 , the court received its first female member when Governor Vic <unk> appointed Betty Roberts as an associate justice . Then from 1991 to 2005 Wallace P. Carson , Jr. served as chief justice of the court for a record 14 years . 
 The next landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court involving the Oregon Supreme Court was Dolan v. City of Tigard , 512 U.S. 374 ( 1994 ) . In that land use case the Oregon court found the requirements placed on the business owner as conditions to approve an expansion were not a taking under the United States Constitution ’ s takings clause . However , the U.S. Supreme Court disagreed and overturned the Oregon court . Then the Oregon court ruled in February 2006 that Oregon ’ s land use law , Measure 37 , was constitutional . Macpherson v. Department of Administrative Services , 340 Or . 117 , 130 <unk> 308 ( 2006 ) allowed people to make claims against the government forcing the government to either pay compensation when land use regulations reduced the value of a property owners land or waive the regulation . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 In the early years of the Supreme Court , business was conducted at a variety of locations in downtown Salem . The first public building to house the court was the Territorial Capitol Building in Salem that was built between 1854 and 1855 . In that building the courtroom was in a chamber measuring 20 feet by 27 feet on the first floor . On December 29 , 1855 , after the building was partially occupied , it burned to the ground . In 1876 , the state finished construction on a second capitol building where the court was located on the third floor . This courtroom measured 54 feet by 46 feet , while the state law library was 75 feet by 70 feet . A separate building was built by the state in 1914 to house the Supreme Court , and this is now the oldest building on the Capitol Mall after the second capitol building burned down on April 25 , 1935 . 
 In addition to holding court in the Supreme Court Building 's third floor courtroom , the court also travels around the state to hold sessions . This includes sessions at colleges , high schools , and the state ’ s three law schools . These three law schools , Willamette University College of Law , University of Oregon Law School , and Lewis & Clark Law School , use the visits as educational tools . 
 = = Current justices = = 
 Further information : List of Oregon Supreme Court Justices 
 The court has had a total of 103 individuals serve on the court since its creation during the territorial period . This has ranged from a membership of three justices to seven justices . Since 1913 , the number of positions on the bench has been seven . Of the current membership , five are men and two are women . Overall , the court has had five women compared to ninety @-@ four men serve on the court . Additionally , two current justices are the first two openly gay judges on the court . 
 Thomas A. Balmer is the most senior of the seven justices , starting service in 2001 . The newest member of the court is Lynn Nakamoto , who joined the court in 2016 . Four of the seven justices first joined the court as appointees of the Governor of Oregon to fill mid @-@ term vacancies . 
 = = Notable Supreme Court cases = = 
 Over the course of its history the Oregon Supreme Court has made a number decisions as the highest court in Oregon . These cases cover a wide range of topics from the constitutionality of various ballot measures to contract law to torts and even to the location of the capital when Oregon was still a territory . Although small in comparison to the total number of cases the court has decided , some cases have been appealed to the United States Supreme Court . Below are some of the cases that have had scholarly discussion , some of which were later decided by the U.S. Supreme Court . 
 = Horatio Bottomley = 
 Horatio William Bottomley ( 23 March 1860 – 26 May 1933 ) was an English financier , journalist , editor , newspaper proprietor , swindler , and Member of Parliament . He is best known for his editorship of the popular magazine John Bull , and for his patriotic oratory during the First World War . His career came to a sudden end when , in 1922 , he was convicted of fraud and sentenced to seven years imprisonment . 
 Bottomley spent five years in an orphanage before beginning his career , aged 14 , as an errand boy . Subsequent experience as a solicitor 's clerk gave him a useful knowledge of English law , which he later put to effective use in a number of court appearances . After working as a shorthand writer and court reporter , at 24 he founded his own publishing company which launched numerous magazines and papers including , in 1886 , the Financial Times . He over @-@ reached himself with an ambitious public flotation of his company , which led to his first arraignment on fraud charges in 1893 . Despite evidence of malpractice , Bottomley , who defended himself , was acquitted . He subsequently amassed a fortune as a promoter of shares in gold @-@ mining companies . 
 In 1906 Bottomley entered parliament as Liberal Party member for Hackney South . In the same year he founded the popular magazine John Bull , which became a platform for Bottomley 's trenchant populist views . Financial extravagance and mismanagement continued to blight his career , and in 1912 he had to resign from parliament after being declared bankrupt . The outbreak of war in 1914 revived his fortunes ; as a journalist and orator Bottomley became a leading propagandist for the war effort , addressing well over 300 public meetings . His influence was such that it was widely expected that he would enter the War Cabinet , although he received no such offer . 
 In 1918 , having been discharged from bankruptcy , Bottomley re @-@ entered parliament as an Independent member . In the following year he launched his fraudulent " Victory Bonds " scheme which , when exposed , led to his conviction , imprisonment and expulsion from parliament . Released in 1927 , he attempted unsuccessfully to relaunch his business career , and eked a living by lecturing and appearances in music halls . His final years before his death in 1933 were spent in poverty . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family background and childhood = = = 
 Bottomley was born on 23 March 1860 , at 16 , St Peter 's Street , Bethnal Green in London , the second child and only son of William Bottomley , a tailor 's cutter , and Elizabeth , née Holyoake . William Bottomley 's background is obscure , but Elizabeth belonged to a family of well @-@ known radical agitators — her brother George Jacob Holyoake was a founder of the <unk> movement and in later life a leading figure in the growth of Co @-@ operative societies . Among Holyoake 's close associates was Charles Bradlaugh , who founded the National Republican League and became a controversial Member of Parliament . A longstanding friendship between Bradlaugh and Elizabeth Holyoake led to rumours that he , not William Bottomley , was Horatio 's biological father — a suggestion that Bottomley , in later life , was prone to encourage . The evidence is circumstantial , mainly based on the marked facial resemblance between Bradlaugh and Bottomley . 
 William Bottomley died in 1864 and Elizabeth a year later . Horatio and his elder sister , Florence , were initially looked after by their uncle William Holyoake , an artist living in the London district of Marylebone . After a year they were boarded out to foster @-@ parents , at their uncle George Jacob 's expense . This arrangement lasted until 1869 , when Florence was formally adopted by her foster @-@ family . At this point Holyoake felt unable to continue supporting Horatio financially , and arranged for him to be admitted to Josiah Mason 's orphanage in Erdington , Birmingham . This was Horatio 's home for the following five years . Some biographers have emphasised the cruelty and humiliation of his time there ; however , while discipline was certainly harsh , Horatio received a useful basic education , and won prizes for sporting activities . In later life he showed no resentment towards the institution , which he often visited , telling the children that " any success I have achieved in life started at this place . " 
 In 1874 , when Horatio was 14 and due to leave the orphanage , he ran away without waiting for the formalities . His aunt Caroline <unk> — his mother 's sister — who lived in nearby Edgbaston , gave him a home , while he worked as an errand boy in a Birmingham building firm . This arrangement lasted only a few months before Horatio , impatient to be reunited with his sister from whom he had been separated for six years , went to London where he began an apprenticeship with a wood engraver . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 = = = = First steps = = = = 
 Bottomley soon gave up his apprenticeship , and after a series of humdrum jobs found work in the offices of a City firm of solicitors . Here he picked up a working knowledge of English legal procedures , and was soon carrying a workload far exceeding the normal duties of an office junior . With his uncle 's encouragement he learned shorthand at Pitman 's College , a skill which helped him to get a better job with a larger legal firm . He also came into closer contact with the Holyoake circle , where he acted as an unpaid assistant in the group 's publishing activities . He met Bradlaugh , who encouraged the young man to read more widely and introduced him to the ideas of Charles Darwin , Thomas Huxley and John Stuart Mill . Bottomley was strongly influenced by Bradlaugh , whom he considered his political and spiritual mentor . 
 In 1880 Bottomley married Eliza Norton , the daughter of a debt collector . Bottomley 's biographers have tended to regard this early , unambitious marriage as a mistake on his part ; she was not equipped , intellectually or socially , to help him advance in the world . In the same year , Bottomley left his job to become a full @-@ time shorthand writer for Walpole 's , a firm that provided recording and transcription services for the law courts . His competence impressed his employers sufficiently for them , in 1883 , to offer him a partnership , and the firm became Walpole and Bottomley . As Bottomley emerged from adolescence to maturity he began to show signs of the characteristics that would be much in evidence in his later life : greed for fleshly pleasures , a thirst for fame , spontaneous generosity , combined with a charm that , according to his biographer Julian Symons , could " tempt the banknotes out of men 's pockets " . 
 = = = = Publishing entrepreneur = = = = 
 Bottomley 's association with Bradlaugh had awakened his interests in publishing and politics , and in 1884 he launched his first entrepreneurial venture , a magazine called the Hackney Hansard . This journal recorded the business of Hackney 's local " parliament " — essentially a debating society that mirrored the proceedings at Westminster . Advertisements from local tradesmen kept the paper mildly profitable . Bottomley produced a sister @-@ paper , the Battersea Hansard , covering that borough 's local parliament , before merging the two into The Debater . In 1885 he formed the Catherine Street Publishing Association and , using borrowed capital , acquired or started several magazines and papers . These included , among others , the Municipal Review , a prestigious local government publication ; Youth , a boy 's paper on which Alfred Harmondsworth , the future press magnate Lord Northcliffe , worked as a sub @-@ editor ; and the Financial Times . The last @-@ named was set up to rival the Financial News , London 's first specialist business paper , which had been started in 1884 by Harry Marks , a former sewing @-@ machine salesman . In 1886 Bottomley 's company acquired its own printing works through a merger with the printing firm of MacRae and Co . , and after the absorption of another advertising and printing firm , became MacRae , Curtice and Company . 
 At the age of 26 , Bottomley became the company 's chairman . His advance in the business world was attracting wider notice , and in 1887 he was invited by the Liberal Party in Hornsey to be their candidate in a parliamentary by @-@ election . He accepted , and although defeated , fought a strong campaign which won him a congratulatory letter from William Gladstone . His business affairs were proceeding less serenely ; he quarrelled with his partner Douglas MacRae , and the two decided to separate . Bottomley described the " Quixotic impulse " that led him to let MacRae divide the assets : " He was a printer , and I was a journalist — but he took the papers and left me the printing works " . 
 = = = = Hansard Publishing Union = = = = 
 <unk> by the loss of his papers , Bottomley embarked on an ambitious expansion scheme . On the basis of a lucrative contract to print the Hansard reports of debates in the Westminster parliament , at the beginning of 1889 he founded the Hansard Publishing Union Limited , floated on the London Stock Exchange with a capital of £ 500 @,@ 000 . Bottomley boosted the company 's credentials by persuading several notable City figures to join the company 's board of directors . These included Sir Henry Isaacs , the Lord Mayor @-@ elect of London , Coleridge Kennard , co @-@ founder ( with Harry Marks ) of the London Evening News , and Sir Roper Lethbridge , the Conservative MP for Kensington North . This board approved the purchase by Bottomley of several printing businesses — he used intermediaries to disguise his considerable personal profits from these transactions . He also persuaded the board to give him £ 75 @,@ 000 as a down payment for some publishing firms in Austria for which he was negotiating , although the firms were not acquired . These <unk> and other expenses absorbed the Union 's capital , and with few significant revenue streams it quickly ran out of money . Nonetheless , without any statement of accounts , in July 1890 Bottomley announced a profit for the year of £ 40 @,@ 877 , and declared a dividend of eight per cent . 
 The funds for the dividend payment were raised by a debenture of £ 50 @,@ 000 . By the end of 1890 many City figures were suspicious of the Hansard Union , and were calling it " Bottomley 's swindle " . Despite Bottomley 's outward optimism , in December 1890 the company defaulted on the payment of debenture interest and in May 1891 , amid growing rumours of insolvency , the debenture holders petitioned for the company 's compulsory winding @-@ up . In the same month Bottomley , who had taken at least £ 100 @,@ 000 from the company , filed a petition for bankruptcy . Under examination by the Official Receiver , he could not say where the money had gone , and professed total ignorance of the company 's book @-@ keeping . After further enquiries , the Board of Trade instituted prosecutions for fraud against Bottomley , Isaacs and two others . 
 The trial began in the High Court of Justice on 30 January 1893 , before Sir Henry Hawkins ; Bottomley conducted his own defence . To most observers the case against him seemed impregnable . It was established that , through his nominees , Bottomley had repeatedly bought companies for far less than the prices approved by the Hansard Union directors , and had pocketed the difference . Bottomley did not deny this , insisting that use of nominees was an accepted commercial practice , and that his actual profits had been much smaller than reported ; his expenses , he said , had been enormous . He was helped in his case by the slackness with which the prosecution presented its evidence , and their failure to call key witnesses . He was further helped by the indulgence which Hawkins showed him , and by his own convincing oratory . The essence of his argument was that he was the victim of machinations by the Official Receiver and the <unk> Corporation , who had been determined to win prestige by bringing Bottomley down and wrecking his company . On 26 April , after Hawkins had summed up massively in his favour , Bottomley was acquitted , along with the other defendants . 
 = = = Company promoter , newspaper proprietor , would @-@ be politician = = = 
 The Hansard Union case , far from damaging Bottomley 's reputation , had left a general impression that he was a financial genius . He avoided the stigma of bankruptcy by arranging a scheme of repayment with his creditors , and swiftly embarked on a new career promoting Western Australian gold mining shares . The discovery of gold in Kalgoorlie and adjoining areas in the early 1890s had created an easily exploitable investment boom ; as Bottomley 's biographer Alan Hyman observes , " A hole in the ground ... could be boosted into a very promising gold @-@ mine , and investors only found that they had backed a loser after the mine had been floated as a public company and they had paid hard cash for their shares " . By 1897 , through skilful exploitation of demand and by frequent reconstruction of failing companies , Bottomley had accumulated a considerable personal fortune . It was , the historian <unk> Morris asserts , " a truly amazing success story , the product of reckless audacity , astonishing energy , and extreme good fortune " . Bottomley won plaudits when he announced that he would pay £ 250 @,@ 000 to the creditors of the Hansard Union ; the bulk of this payment , however , was offered in shares in one or other of his mining promotions . 
 As his wealth increased , Bottomley adopted an increasingly ostentatious lifestyle . In London he lived in a luxurious apartment in Pall Mall . He took numerous mistresses , whom he visited in a number of discreet flats in different districts of London . He owned several racehorses , who achieved prestigious victories — the Stewards ' Cup at Goodwood , and the Cesarewitch at Newmarket — but he often lost large sums through unwise bets . Quite early in his rise to wealth he bought a modest property in Upper Dicker , near Eastbourne in East Sussex . He called it " The Dicker " , and over the years extended and developed it into a large country mansion , where he entertained extravagantly . 
 Bottomley had retained his parliamentary ambitions and in 1890 , before the Hansard Union crash , had been adopted as the Liberal candidate for North Islington . According to Symons , when he resigned the candidature on the commencement of bankruptcy proceedings , he had the constituency in his pocket . By 1900 his star was again in the ascendant , and he was invited by the South Hackney Liberals to be their candidate in that year 's general election . He lost by only 280 votes , after a bitterly fought campaign in which Bottomley was described in a newspaper article as a " bare @-@ faced swindler ... [ whose ] ... place is at the Old Bailey , not at Westminster " . He was subsequently awarded £ 1 @,@ 000 libel damages against the writer , Henry Hess . 
 By the turn of the 19th – 20th centuries the boom in speculative shares had abated ; some of Bottomley 's fellow promoters , such as Whitaker Wright , were facing charges of fraud and misrepresentation . Bottomley ceased his operations , and resumed his earlier role of newspaper proprietor . In 1902 he bought a failing London evening paper , The Sun , to which he contributed a regular column , " The World , the Flesh and the Devil " . Another feature was Bottomley 's employment of celebrity guest editors for special edition ; among these were the comedian Dan Leno , the cricketer Kumar Shri Ranjitsinhji and the labour leader Ben Tillett . The paper was not a financial success , and Bottomley sold it in 1904 . He had not given up altogether on speculative money @-@ making schemes , and in 1905 he began an association with the financier Ernest Hooley . Among their joint enterprises was the promotion of the defunct , dry Basingstoke Canal as a major inland waterway , the " London and South @-@ Western Canal " . Bottomley later made a substantial out @-@ of @-@ court settlement of an action brought by investors who had bought worthless shares in the canal . 
 = = = Parliament , John Bull , bankruptcy = = = 
 In the general election of January 1906 Bottomley was again the Liberal candidate for Hackney South . After a vigorous campaign he defeated his Conservative opponent by more than 3 @,@ 000 — the largest Liberal majority in London , he informed the House of Commons in his maiden speech on 20 February 1906 . According to Hyman , this speech was received in " chilling silence " by a House that was well aware of Bottomley 's chequered reputation . Over the following months and years he overcame much of the initial hostility , partly by his self @-@ deprecating good humour ( as when he described himself as " more or less honourable " ) but also because his populist approach to legislation was attractive . He proposed rational reforms of the betting industry and of licensing hours , and the introduction of state Old Age Pensions . Extra revenues could be raised , he suggested , by stamp duty on share transfers , taxes on foreign investment , and by appropriating dormant bank balances . He drew the government 's attention to the long hours worked by domestic servants , and introduced a private bill limiting the working day to eight hours . He privately confided to the journalist Frank Harris that his ambition was to become Chancellor of the Exchequer . 
 Alongside his parliamentary duties , Bottomley was engaged in launching his biggest and boldest publishing venture , the weekly news magazine John Bull , half of the initial capital for which was provided by Hooley . From its first issue on 12 May 1906 John Bull adopted a tabloid style that , despite occasional lapses in taste , proved immensely popular . Among its regular features , Bottomley revived his " The World , the Flesh and the Devil " column from The Sun , and also adapted that paper 's slogan : " If you read it in John Bull , it is so " . Bottomley persuaded Julius Elias , managing director of Odhams Limited , to handle the printing , but chaotic financial management meant that Odhams were rarely paid . This situation was resolved when the entire management of the magazine , including the handling of all receipts and payments , was transferred to Elias , leaving Bottomley free to concentrate on editing and journalism . Circulation rose rapidly , and by 1910 had reached half a million copies . 
 In June 1906 Bottomley announced the John Bull Investment Trust , in which , for a minimum subscription of £ 10 , investors could share " that special and exclusive information which is obtainable only as the result of extensive City experience " . However , Bottomley 's earlier City activities were coming under scrutiny , particularly the multiple reconstructions of his now @-@ bankrupt Joint Stock Trust Company . After a long investigation , which Bottomley did all he could to frustrate , in December 1908 he was summoned to appear at the Guildhall Justice Room , before a court of aldermen . As with the Hansard prosecution , the case against Bottomley appeared overwhelming ; share issues in the Joint Stock Trust had been repeatedly re @-@ issued , perhaps as many as six times . Once again , however , Bottomley succeeded in obscuring the details and , by the power of his courtroom oratory , persuaded the court that the summons should be dismissed . 
 One of the prosecuting team at the Guildhall observed that it would be a long time before anyone risked another prosecution against Bottomley : " But he might ... grow careless , and then he will fail " . Despite the adverse publicity , Bottomley was returned by the electors of Hackney South at each of the two 1910 general elections ; his tactics included recruiting men in boots tipped and heeled with iron , who marched outside his opponent 's meetings and rendered the speeches inaudible . In June 1910 he founded the John Bull League , with a mission to promote " commonsense business methods " into government ; readers of the magazine could join the League for a shilling ( 5p ) a year . Although still nominally a Liberal , Bottomley had become a trenchant critic of his party , and often aligned himself with the Conservative opposition in attacking Asquith 's government . 
 Bottomley 's parliamentary ambitions were suddenly halted in 1912 , when he was successfully sued for £ 49 @,@ 000 by one of his Joint Stock Trust victims . Unable to pay , and with massive debts , he was bankrupted with liabilities totalling £ 233 @,@ 000 . Since bankrupts are ineligible to sit in the House of Commons , he had to resign his seat ; after his departure the future Lord Chancellor , F.E. Smith wrote that " [ h ] is absence from the House of Commons has impoverished the public stock of gaiety , of cleverness , of common sense " . Prior to his bankruptcy , Bottomley had ensured that his main assets were legally owned by relatives or nominees , and was thus able to continue his extravagant lifestyle . John Bull remained an ample source of funds , and Bottomley boasted that although nominally bankrupt , " I never had a better time in my life — plenty of money and everything else I want as well " . 
 = = = Sweepstakes and lotteries = = = 
 After leaving the House of Commons , Bottomley denounced parliament in the pages of John Bull as a " musty , rusty , corrupt system " that urgently needed replacement . Through his newly formed Business League he addressed large crowds as he called for government run by businessmen not politicians . As always , Bottomley 's lifestyle required fresh sources of income , and in 1912 John Bull began to organise competitions for cash prizes . Bottomley successfully sued the secretary of the Anti @-@ Gambling League for suggesting that many of the <unk> were John Bull nominees or employees , but received only a farthing in damages . These competitions helped to raise the magazine 's circulation to 1 @.@ 5 million ; . In 1913 Bottomley met a Birmingham businessman , Reuben Bigland , and together they began running large @-@ scale sweepstakes and lotteries , operated from Switzerland to circumvent English law . Again doubts arose about the genuineness of declared winners ; the winner of the £ 25 @,@ 000 sweepstake for the 1914 Derby proved on enquiry to be the sister @-@ in @-@ law of one of Bottomley 's close associates . Bottomley insisted this was a coincidence ; years later , it was revealed that all but £ 250 of the prize had been paid into a bank account controlled by Bottomley . 
 = = = First World War : orator and propagandist = = = 
 Bottomley initially misread the international crisis that developed during the summer of 1914 . After the murder of the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June in Sarajevo , allegedly with Serbian complicity , John Bull described Serbia as " a hotbed of cold @-@ blooded conspiracy and subterfuge " , and called for it to be wiped from the map of Europe . When Britain declared war on the Central Powers on 4 August , Bottomley quickly reversed his position , and within a fortnight was demanding the elimination of Germany . John Bull campaigned relentlessly against the " <unk> " , and against British citizens carrying German @-@ sounding surnames — the danger of " the enemy within " was a persistent Bottomley theme . On 14 September 1914 he addressed a large crowd at the London Opera House , the first of many mass meetings at which he deployed his trademark phrase , " the Prince of Peace , ( pointing to the Star of Bethlehem ) that leads us on to God " — words which according to Symons moved many hearts . At the " Great War Rally " at the Royal Albert Hall on 14 January 1915 , Bottomley was fully in tune with the national temper when he proclaimed : " We are fighting all that is worst in the world , the product of a debased civilisation " . 
 During the war , in his self @-@ appointed role as spokesman for the " man in the street " , Bottomley addressed more than 300 public meetings , in all parts of the country . For recruitment rallies he provided his services free ; for others , he took a percentage of the takings . His influence was enormous ; the writer D.H. Lawrence , who detested Bottomley , thought that he represented the national spirit and that he might become prime minister . In March 1915 Bottomley began a regular weekly column for the Sunday Pictorial . On 4 May , after the sinking of the Lusitania , he used this column to label the Germans as " unnatural freaks " , and called for their extermination . Britain 's war effort , he maintained , was being hampered by squeamish politicians ; he reserved particular venom for the Labour Party leaders , Keir Hardie and Ramsay Macdonald , who opposed the war , and demanded they be tried for high treason . Macdonald 's riposte — to label Bottomley " a man of doubtful parentage who had lived all his life on the threshold of jail " — backfired when the latter published Macdonald 's birth certificate which showed that the Labour leader was himself illegitimate . 
 Although the government was wary of Bottomley it was prepared to make use of his influence and popularity . In April 1915 the then Chancellor of the Exchequer , David Lloyd George asked him to speak to <unk> on the River Clyde , who were threatening industrial action . After Bottomley 's intervention the strike was averted . In 1917 he visited the front in France , where after dining with Field @-@ Marshal Haig he was a considerable success with the troops , as he was later when he visited the Grand Fleet at Scapa Flow . He hoped that these morale @-@ boosting activities would lead to a formal government position , but although from time to time there were rumours of a Cabinet post , no appointment was announced . In the later stages of the war Bottomley was a regular critic of the National War Aims Committee ( NWAC ) , a cross @-@ party parliamentary body formed in 1917 to revitalise Britain 's commitment to victory and to underline the justice of its cause . Bottomley described the committee as " a dodge for doctoring public opinion " , and in January 1918 told Lloyd George , who had become prime minister in December 1916 , that NWAC had failed in its purpose and should be replaced by a Director of Propaganda — but to no avail . 
 = = = Postwar career = = = 
 = = = = Parliament again = = = = 
 Although in 1912 Bottomley had expressed contempt for parliament , he privately hankered to return . When the war ended in November 1918 and a general election was announced , he knew that to be a candidate in that election he needed a discharge from his bankruptcy . A payment of £ 34 @,@ 000 in cash and bonds , and some hasty reorganisation of outstanding debts , was sufficient for an acquiescent Official Receiver to grant the discharge just in time for Bottomley to hand in his nomination papers in South Hackney . In the general election on 14 December 1918 he stood as an Independent , under the slogan " Bottomley , Brains and Business " , and achieved a massive victory , with almost 80 per cent of the votes cast . " I am now prepared to proceed to Westminster to run the show " , he informed a local newspaper . He would be , he said , the " unofficial prime minister ... watching the government 's every move " to ensure that it acted in the interests of " our soldiers , sailors and citizens " . 
 The 1918 parliament was dominated by Lloyd George 's Liberal @-@ Conservative coalition , which faced a fragmented and unorganised opposition . In May 1919 Bottomley announced the formation of his " People 's League " , which he hoped would develop into a fully @-@ fledged political party with a programme opposing both organised labour and organised capital . No mass movement emerged , but Bottomley joined with other Independent MPs to form the Independent Parliamentary Group , with a distinct policy stance including the enforcement of war reparations , the superiority of Britain over the League of Nations , exclusion of undesirable aliens , and " the introduction of business principles into government " . The group was reinforced through by @-@ election victories of other Independents — including Charles Frederick Palmer , John Bull 's deputy editor , until his premature death in October 1920 . Bottomley was , at least for a year or so , a diligent parliamentarian who spoke on a range of issues , and from time to time teased the government as when , during the Irish Troubles , he asked whether , " in view of the breakdown of British rule in Ireland , the government will approach America with a view to her accepting the mandate for the government of that country " . On other occasions he helped the government , as when in January 1919 , he was called upon in his role of " Soldier 's Friend " to help pacify troops in Folkestone and Calais who were in a state of mutiny over delays in their demobilisation . 
 = = = = Downfall = = = = 
 In July 1919 Bottomley announced his " Victory Bonds Club " , based on the government 's latest issue of Victory Bonds . Normally , these bonds cost £ 5 ; in Bottomley 's club , subscribers bought units for a minimum payment of £ 1 , and participated in an annual draw for prizes — up to £ 20 @,@ 000 , he said — funded from accrued interest . Contrary to Bottomley 's public statements , not all the money subscribed was used to buy bonds . He had ambitions to become a press baron , to rival such as the Lords Rothermere and Beaverbrook . In October 1919 he used War Bonds funds to buy two obscure newspapers , the National News and the Sunday Evening Telegram . The papers were not financially successful , and in 1921 Bottomley closed the Telegram and changed the name of the National News to Sunday Illustrated . To bolster its fortunes , he transferred his Sunday Pictorial column to the Illustrated , and mounted an expensive promotional campaign , but with little benefit . The paper languished , while Bottomley lost the large income and readership that went with the Pictorial . His fortunes declined further when , in 1920 , Odhams revoked the pre @-@ war partnership agreement and took full control of John Bull . Bottomley was made editor for life , but a year later Odhams terminated this arrangement with a final pay @-@ off of £ 25 @,@ 000 , which ended Bottomley 's connection with the paper . 
 Meanwhile , dogged by poor administration and inadequate accounting , the Victory Bonds Club was sliding into chaos . Public unease grew , and soon hundreds of subscribers were demanding their money back — slipshod record @-@ keeping meant that some were repaid several times over . Bottomley 's position worsened when he fell out with Bigland , after refusing to finance his former associate 's scheme for turning water into petrol . The two had quarrelled during the war , when Bigland had attacked Bottomley in print . They had later reconciled , but after their second dispute Bigland turned vengeful . In September 1921 he published a leaflet describing the War Bond Club as Bottomley 's " latest and greatest swindle " . Against the advice of his lawyers , Bottomley sued for criminal libel , and brought other charges against Bigland of blackmail and extortion . The preliminary hearing , at Bow Street Magistrates ' Court in October 1921 , at which Bottomley 's methods were revealed , proved disastrous to his credibility . Nevertheless , Bigland was committed for trial at the Old Bailey on the libel charge , and to Shropshire Assizes on charges of attempted extortion . The libel trial began on 23 January 1922 ; to prevent further damaging disclosures in court , Bottomley 's lawyers offered no evidence , and Bigland was discharged . The extortion case went ahead in Shrewsbury on 18 February 1922 , at the end of which it took the jury only three minutes to find Bigland not guilty . Bottomley , himself now under police investigation , was ordered to pay the costs of the trial . A few days afterwards , he was summoned to appear at Bow Street , on charges of fraudulent conversion of Victory Bond Club funds . After a brief hearing he was committed for trial at the Old Bailey . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Bottomley 's trial began on 19 May 1922 , before Mr Justice Salter . As the case was beginning , Bottomley secured the agreement of the prosecuting counsel , Travers Humphreys , to a 15 @-@ minute adjournment each day so that he , Bottomley , could drink a pint of champagne , ostensibly for medicinal purposes . He faced 24 fraud charges , involving amounts totalling £ 170 @,@ 000 . The prosecution produced evidence that he had regularly used Victory Bonds Club funds to finance business ventures , private debts and his expensive lifestyle . Bottomley , who defended himself , claimed that his legitimate expenses in connection with the club , and repayments made to Victory Bonds Club members , exceeded total receipts by at least £ 50 @,@ 000 : " I swear I have never made a penny out of it . I swear before God that I have never fraudulently converted a penny of the Club 's money " . The weight of evidence suggested otherwise ; Salter 's summing up , described by a biographer as " masterly ; lucid and concise , yet complete " , went heavily against Bottomley , and the jury required only 28 minutes to convict him on all but one of the charges . He was sentenced to seven years ' penal servitude . Humphreys commented later : " It was not I that floored him , but Drink " . 
 After the dismissal of his appeal in July , Bottomley was expelled from the House of Commons . The Leader of the House , Sir Austen Chamberlain , read out a letter in which Bottomley insisted that , however unorthodox his methods , he had not been guilty of conscious fraud ; he accepted , however , that his predicament was entirely his own fault . Chamberlain then moved Bottomley 's expulsion , which was carried without dissent . One member expressed regret , " remembering the remarkable position which he [ had ] occupied in the country " . Bottomley spent the first year of his sentence in Wormwood Scrubs where he sewed <unk> , and the remainder in Maidstone prison where , although conditions were squalid , he was given lighter work . He was released on 29 July 1927 , after serving just over five years , and returned to The Dicker , still his family home . 
 Although now 67 years old and in indifferent health , Bottomley tried to resurrect his business career . He raised sufficient capital to start a new magazine , John Blunt , as a rival to John Bull , but the new venture lasted little more than a year before closing , having lost money from the start . In September 1929 he began an overseas lecture tour , which failed utterly , as did an attempt at a British tour during which he was received with indifference or hostility . By 1930 he was again bankrupt ; his wife Eliza died that year , after which Bottomley 's former son @-@ in @-@ law Jefferson Cohn evicted him from The Dicker . For the remaining years of his life he lived with his long @-@ time mistress , the actress Peggy Primrose , whom Bottomley , in his years of riches , had vainly tried to promote to stardom . 
 Bottomley 's last public venture was an engagement at the Windmill Theatre in September 1932 , where he performed a monologue of reminiscences that , according to Symons , puzzled rather than amused his audience . Following a health breakdown , he lived with Primrose in quiet poverty until his final illness . He died in the Middlesex Hospital on 26 May , and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium a few days later . A large crowd heard the Revd Basil Bourchier express the hope that " no one here today will forget what Mr Bottomley did to revive the spirits of our men at the Front " . Four years later , in accordance with Bottomley 's wishes , Primrose scattered the ashes on the Sussex Downs . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Bottomley 's obituaries dwelt on the common theme of wasted talent : a man of brilliant natural abilities , destroyed by greed and vanity . " He had personal magnetism , eloquence , and the power to convince " , wrote his Daily Mail obituarist . " He might have been a leader at the Bar , a captain of industry , a great journalist . He might have been almost anything " . The Straits Times of Singapore thought that Bottomley could have rivalled Lloyd George as a national leader : " Though he deserved his fate , the news of his passing will awaken the many regrets for the good which he did when he was Bottomley the reformer and crusader and the champion of the bottom dog " . A later historian , Maurice Cowling , pays tribute to Bottomley 's capacity and industry , and to his forceful campaigns in support of liberty . In his sketch for the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Morris delivers a different judgement : " [ H ] e claimed to serve the interests of others , but sought only his own gratification " . 
 Among Bottomley 's principal biographers , Hyman suggests that his financial fecklessness and disregard for consequences may have originated from his deprived background and sudden acquisition of wealth in the 1890s . " Success went to his head and he started spending money like a drunken sailor and could never break the habit . " It was a wonder , says Hyman , that he stayed out of prison as long as he did . Searle speculates that Bottomley was protected from prosecution because of his knowledge of wider scandals in the government , particularly after Lloyd George 's coalition assumed power in 1916 . Symons acknowledges Bottomley 's " wonderfully rich public personality " but suggests that there was no substance behind the presentation : throughout his adult life , Bottomley was " more a series of public attitudes than a person " . Matthew Engel in The Guardian notes his ability to charm the public even while swindling them ; one victim , cheated of £ 40 @,@ 000 , apparently insisted : " I am not sorry I lent him the money , and I would do it again " . If London had had a mayor in those days , says Engel , Bottomley would have won in a landslide . 
 Bottomley was the subject of an episode in the 1972 – 73 BBC television series The Edwardians , transmitted on 28 November 1972 . The part of Bottomley was played by Timothy West , with Mitzi Rogers as Peggy Primrose and John Welsh as Mr Justice Hawkins . 
 = Rudolf Frank = 
 Rudolf Frank ( 19 August 1920 – 27 April 1944 ) was a German Luftwaffe military aviator during World War II , a night fighter ace credited with 45 enemy aircraft shot down in 183 combat missions . All of his victories were claimed over the Western Front in nocturnal Defense of the Reich missions against the Royal Air Force 's Bomber Command . 
 Born in Karlsruhe @-@ Grünwinkel , Frank volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich in 1939 after finishing school . Following flight training , he was posted to Nachtjagdgeschwader 3 ( NJG 3 — 3rd Night Fighter Wing ) in 1941 . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 6 April 1944 following his 42nd aerial victory . Three weeks later , on 27 April 1944 , he and his crew attacked an Avro Lancaster , which exploded and fatally damaged their own aircraft . Frank ordered his crew to bail out but was unable to save himself . He received posthumous promotion to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) and was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Frank was born on 19 August 1920 in Karlsruhe @-@ Grünwinkel in what was the Republic of Baden of the Weimar Republic ; Grünwinkel is now a borough located in the southwest suburbs of Karlsruhe . Frank was the older of two sons of a shoemaker . He attended the Volksschule ( elementary school ) in Grünwinkel from 1926 to 1930 , when he was enrolled in the Realgymnasium — a secondary school built on the mid @-@ level Realschule — where he attained his <unk> <unk> ( school leaving certificate ) in 1939 . 
 Even as a boy , Frank had wanted to become a pilot . World War II had begun on 1 September 1939 and he volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe . Following his basic military training , he took flying instruction at the pilot school in Zeltweg . Here he qualified to fly the Bücker Bü 131 , Bü 133 and Bü 181 , the Klemm Kl 35 , the Arado Ar 66 , Ar 68 and Ar 96 , the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 58 , and the Junkers W 34 and Junkers Ju 52 . In October 1940 he transferred to Nachtjagdschule 1 ( 1st Night Fighter School ) at Schleißheim near Munich , formerly the Zerstörerschule 1 ( ZS 1 — 1st Destroyer School ) . There he specialized as a night fighter pilot in the 2nd Squadron under the command of Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) Oberleutnant ( First Lieutenant ) Günther Specht . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Frank was posted to the 1 . Ergänzungsstaffel ( 1st Supplemental Training Squadron ) of Nachtjagdgeschwader 3 ( NJG 3 — 3rd Night Fighter Wing ) on 5 February 1941 . The unit was stationed at Stuttgart @-@ <unk> ( now Stuttgart Airport ) . Initially he flew with radio operator ( Bordfunker ) Gefreiter ( Private ) <unk> before Hans @-@ Georg Schierholz was assigned as his permanent radio operator . Frank and Schierholz had already formed a crew at the Nachtjagdschule 1 at Schleißheim . The two were then assigned to 1 . Staffel ( 1st Squadron ) of NJG 3 stationed at Vechta . 1 . Staffel was under the command of Staffelkapitän Oberleutnant Walter Milius . This unit was equipped with the C @-@ variant of the Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighter . Both Frank and Schierholz were promoted to the rank of Gefreiter on 1 March 1941 . 
 = = = Night fighter pilot = = = 
 Frank and Schierholz flew Bf 110 C @-@ 4 " L1 + GH " on their first operational combat mission on 9 May 1941 , without success . They flew their second mission on 12 May and another nine missions before claiming their first aerial victory during the night of 3 / 4 July . The mission started at 22 : 45 from Oldenburg and intercepted a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Vickers Wellington at 00 : 54 , which crashed 10 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) north of <unk> / Oldenburg . For this achievement , Frank and Schierholz were awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 2 . Klasse ) . On 15 July , they claimed their second victory , a Handley Page Halifax that they shot down at 01 : 05 northwest of Meppen . The victory was , however , credited to the anti @-@ aircraft artillery . 
 By 13 August 1941 , Frank had flown 20 night fighter missions . For this achievement , he was awarded the Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Night Fighters in Bronze ( Frontflugspange für Nachtjäger in Bronze ) and was promoted to Unteroffizier ( sergeant ) . He was credited with his second victory on 15 September 1941 , a Wellington shot down at 23 : 30 northwest of Meppen . This was also his last claim in 1941 . He achieved his third victory , a Handley Page Hampden he shot down at 21 : 03 on 21 January 1942 near Berge in northeast Lingen . Five days later he claimed an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley Mk V , shot down at 20 : 36 west of <unk> . 
 Frank was awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 1 . Klasse ) on 15 April 1942 and two months later , on 18 June 1942 , the Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Night Fighters in Silver ( Frontflugspange für Nachtjäger in Silber ) . On 30 June 1942 at 01 : 29 , he and Schierholz took off from Vechta on their 64th combat mission . While attacking a British bomber , either a Wellington or Halifax , their aircraft was hit by the defensive fire from the tail gun position at 02 : 40 . With both radiators destroyed , they bailed out from their aircraft . 
 Frank 's Gruppe ( group ) relocated to Rheine in Westphalia on 28 July 1942 , when he flew further missions with Dornier Do 217 J " D5 + G5 " , a night fighter variant of the Do 217 . He claimed a Wellington shot down at 02 : 05 on 14 September 1942 ; it crashed in the vicinity of Osnabrück , and was his only victory while flying a Do 217 . On this mission , the Dornier suffered engine problems and Frank made a forced landing at Bad <unk> , damaging the aircraft . He ended the year 1942 with seven confirmed victories to his credit . 
 The first victory Frank claimed in 1943 occurred on 3 March . Again flying a Bf 110 , he shot down a Short Stirling south of Delmenhorst . Contact with three other enemy bombers did not lead to any victories . Frank flew further missions in Do 217 " D5 + LK " on a target practice mission on 9 April 1943 . The right landing gear collapsed during the landing , causing 10 % damage to the aircraft . Three days later he made an error during the landing approach , crashing Do 217 " D5 + IK " and causing 30 % damage . Frank avoided an official reprimand for either crash . 
 On 1 April 1943 , Frank and Schierholz were transferred to the 2 . Staffel of NJG 3 , which was located at <unk> . Here they underwent conversion training to the Junkers Ju 88 C @-@ 6 , which was designed for long @-@ distance night fighter operations . While Frank was training , his old unit was relocated to Gilze @-@ Rijen in the Netherlands . His unit also received the newer G @-@ version of the Bf 110 ; these were equipped with SN @-@ 2 Lichtenstein radar . When Frank and Schierholz returned from conversion training , they were assigned Bf 110 G @-@ 4 " D5 + CH " to fly as their personal aircraft . They claimed a Lancaster ( <unk> ) near Antwerp on 15 June 1943 . Two days later , on 17 June , they intercepted and shot down three more Lancasters from a force returning from a mission against Cologne . The three Lancasters came down within 41 minutes of each other over the Scheldt Estuary . 
 Frank claimed his 13th victory , a Wellington , on 22 June . While attempting another attack , both radiators were shot out and the crew was again forced to bail out . On 4 July they shot down a Halifax bomber north of Antwerp ; this was his 14th victory overall . The unit relocated to <unk> , France , on 16 July 1943 . Frank was awarded the Honor Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ) on 9 August 1943 . Now flying Ju 88 C @-@ 6 " D5 + EK " , again from <unk> , he claimed three aircraft shot down on 24 August 1944 , but only received credit for the Short Stirling shot down at 00 : 47 over Berlin . Following his 110th operational mission , he was awarded the Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Night Fighters in Gold ( Frontflugspange für Nachtjäger in Gold ) on 18 August 1943 . 
 Around this time in 1943 , the two @-@ man Bf 110 crew was augmented by a third member , sometimes referred to as <unk> ( air mechanic ) or <unk> ( air gunner ) . On 31 August , Frank shot down two British bombers , a Halifax northwest of Venlo and a Lancaster east of <unk> , during separate combat missions . On 2 September , his aircraft was hit in the right engine by enemy fire and he was forced to belly @-@ land the Ju 88 " D5 + DK " at Wilhelmshaven , suffering 20 % damage to the aircraft . He claimed his 20th victory on the night of 23 / 24 September 1943 . He added two more victories and on 17 October 1943 received the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) . The next day his aircraft was hit by German anti @-@ aircraft artillery and Frank was forced to make a landing at Vechta on one engine . He was posted to the 3 . Staffel on 14 December and ended the year with 26 aerial victories to his credit . A British intruder night @-@ fighter shot Frank and his crew down over Berlin in a Junkers Ju 88 C @-@ 6 , " D5 + HP " , on 24 December 1943 , but they all managed to bail out unharmed . 
 = = = Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross = = = 
 Frank claimed his first victories of 1944 , a Lancaster and a Wellington , on 21 January 1944 near Magdeburg . Having been promoted to Feldwebel ( staff sergeant ) , Frank was assigned to the Stab ( headquarters unit ) of NJG 3 , under the command of Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Helmut Lent . Frank 's previous 6 . Staffel had been transferred to Nachtjagdgeschwader 1 ( NJG 1 — 1st Night Fighter Wing ) , where it continued operations under the designation of 12 . Staffel . 
 On 20 February 1944 , between 01 : 53 to 05 : 04 , Frank became an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " , shooting down five Lancaster bombers on their way to attack Leipzig . He was sent on a mission against intruding de Havilland Mosquito night @-@ fighters on 7 March , but did not achieve any victories . He claimed his next victories on 22 March , a Lancaster shot down near Osnabrück and a Halifax near Gütersloh . On the same mission , while attacking a third bomber , his Messerschmitt Bf 110 " D5 + BL " was damaged . An incendiary bomb , probably released by the bomber , penetrated the right wing and damaged the engine . Frank managed to bring the aircraft down at Gießen . 
 Three more bombers shot down on 25 March took Frank 's total to 39 aerial victories . The Luftwaffe had its most successful night of the war on 30 March 1944 . The entire night @-@ fighter force was credited with the destruction of 132 enemy aircraft that night ; Frank , who was credited with a further three bombers , brought his total to 42 . For this achievement Oberfeldwebel ( Senior Staff Sergeant ) Frank was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 6 April 1944 . The presentation was made by Generalleutnant Joseph Schmid , commander of the I. Jagdkorps , at his headquarters in Braunschweig @-@ Waggum on 10 April 1944 . Frank then went on a short vacation at home with his wife Lisa , a <unk> ( female air force helper ) . 
 Following his vacation , Frank claimed two victories on 23 April 1944 , a Halifax shot down at 02 : 11 north of <unk> and , later that day , a Short Stirling at 23 : 47 over Lolland . The Stirling was on a minelaying operation . 
 = = = Death and posthumous honors = = = 
 Frank was assigned Junkers Ju 88 ( Werknummer 751 095 — factory number ) on 17 April 1944 . He never flew this aircraft operationally . Ten days later , on the night of 26 / 27 April , he and his crew of radio operator Oberfeldwebel Schierholz and air mechanic Feldwebel Heinz Schneider took off in Messerschmitt Bf 110 G @-@ 4 " D5 + CL " ( Werknummer <unk> ) from Vechta . The mission was to intercept incoming bombers heading for the Ruhr Area . 
 The crew spotted and attacked an Avro Lancaster bomber over the vicinity of Eindhoven in the Netherlands . The bomber , severely hit by cannon fire at 01 : 58 , exploded and became Frank 's 45th and last aerial victory . Debris from the Lancaster tore off the Messerschmitt 's right wing and Frank lost control of the aircraft . He gave the order to bail out . Schierholz and Schneider parachuted to safety but Frank failed to get out in time . He was killed when the Bf 110 crashed at <unk> , 9 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) southeast of Eindhoven . 
 Frank was buried at the German War Cemetery Ysselsteyn ( Block Z — Row 6 — Grave 149 ) at <unk> . The funeral was attended by his parents , his crew Schierholz and Schneider , his Gruppenkommandeur Hauptmann Werner <unk> , the fighter operations leader for the Holland and Ruhr area Generalleutnant Walter <unk> , and Generalmajor Ernst <unk> , the airfield sector commander . 
 On 20 July 1944 , Frank was posthumously awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) , the 531st soldier or officer of the Wehrmacht to receive this award . On 27 April Lent submitted a request to the I. Jagdkorps , recommending Frank for a promotion to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) . The commander of the 2nd Fighter Division Generalmajor Max Ibel as well as Schmid were supportive of the request . Frank was posthumously promoted Leutnant , backdated to 1 April 1944 . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Frank was credited with 45 aerial victories claimed in 183 combat missions . 
 This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those aerial victories which made Frank an ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Aviator badge 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 4 July 1941 ) 
 1st Class ( 15 April 1942 ) 
 Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe on 9 August 1943 as Unteroffizier and pilot 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe 
 in Silver ( 18 June 1942 ) 
 in Gold ( 14 January 1944 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 17 October 1943 as Unteroffizier in the 2 . / Nachtjagdgeschwader 3 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves 
 Knight 's Cross on 6 April 1944 as Feldwebel and pilot in the 2 . / Nachtjagdgeschwader 3 
 531st Oak Leaves on 20 July 1944 as Oberfeldwebel and pilot in the 2 . / Nachtjagdgeschwader 3 
 = Races of StarCraft = 
 Blizzard Entertainment 's bestselling real @-@ time strategy game series StarCraft revolves around interstellar affairs in a distant sector of the galaxy , with three species and multiple factions all vying for supremacy in the sector . The playable species of StarCraft include the Terrans , humans exiled from Earth who excel at adapting to any situation ; the Zerg , a race of insectoids obsessed with assimilating other races in pursuit of genetic perfection ; and the Protoss , a humanoid species with advanced technology and psionic abilities , attempting to preserve their civilization and strict philosophical way of living from the Zerg . Each of these races has a single campaign in each StarCraft real @-@ time strategy game . In addition to these three , various non @-@ playable races have also been part of the lore of the StarCraft series ; the most notable of these is the Xel 'Naga , a race which features prominently in the fictional histories of the Protoss and Zerg races . 
 The original game has sold over 10 million copies internationally , and remains one of the most popular games in the world . One of the main factors responsible for StarCraft 's positive reception is the attention paid to the three unique playable races , for each of which Blizzard developed completely different characteristics , graphics , backstories and styles of gameplay , while keeping them balanced in performance against each other . Previous to this , most real @-@ time strategy games consisted of factions and races with the same basic play styles and units with only superficial differences . The use of unique sides in StarCraft has been credited with popularizing the concept within the real @-@ time strategy genre . Contemporary reviews of the game have mostly praised the attention to the gameplay balance between the species , as well as the fictional stories built up around them . 
 = = Design = = 
 Across the course of the game 's development , the races and graphics of StarCraft have changed drastically from Chris Metzen 's original concept art . In particular , since their initial public debut at E3 1996 , the Zerg have seen extensive changes to their visual design . This was primarily due to Blizzard 's attempt to steer the game away from the visual appearance , unveiled at the 1996 E3 , that had earned the game a derisive label of " Warcraft in space " . The Zerg were originally known as the " nightmarish invaders " , later becoming the " Zurg " , and then renamed again to its current spelling to avoid any potential trademark conflicts with Pixar 's Toy Story character of Emperor Zurg . In the early alpha versions built by Bob Fitch , the Zerg still showed their insect @-@ inspired base , but their appearance was heavily dominated by spikes and bright shades of blue and purple . Early Protoss concept art showed a green and blue color scheme in their mechanical armor . Closely hewing to the familiar visual style of Warcraft II : Tides of Darkness , the build received much criticism from industry press , prompting a redesign of the game engine and an overhaul of the races ' respective visual designs . 
 This new version , unveiled in early 1997 , still used the Warcraft II engine as its base , but with distinct changes . The Terrans and the Protoss were detailed to a much greater extent than at E3 1996 , revealing many of the game 's units in forms similar to those of the final product . Blizzard Entertainment also began the careful task of balancing the game 's three races . However , in February 1997 , Bob Fitch declared that , despite these efforts , the game engine was simply incapable of delivering features requested by the developers : cloaking , burrowing and many other special effects . The development team therefore embarked upon a two @-@ month overhaul of the graphics engine . This new beta version was far closer to the release version , as the races took on their now @-@ recognisable graphical styles : the brown insectoid design of the Zerg , the sleek yellow armour of the Protoss , and the grey machinery of the Terrans . Most of the unit designs were established at this point , their graphics only undergoing minor changes . Several game features were also added at this stage in the development that never made it into the final release , such as ships banking as they turned , transport ships landing on the ground to pick up and drop off passengers , and efficiency ranks , although Terran units would retain ranks as a purely <unk> feature . The Terran Valkyrie @-@ class missile frigate also appeared in this build of the game , although it was removed before the final release , only to be reintroduced later in the Brood War expansion . 
 = = Protoss = = 
 The Protoss are a race in the StarCraft series . They are composed of two societies , the conservative Khalai Protoss and the exiled dark templar . The Protoss are depicted as a physically strong species with access to advanced psionic abilities . The Protoss are considered the most technologically advanced race of the series and are the focus of two episodes within StarCraft and its expansion Brood War , as well as featuring in campaigns in the authorized add @-@ ons Insurrection and Retribution . Protoss strategy in @-@ game is usually built around the quality of units the player controls rather than the quantity . Originating from Aiur , a planet on the fringe of the galaxy , the Protoss are normally shown in the games and the novels of the series as the nemesis of the Zerg . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 = = = = Society = = = = 
 Protoss society is shown in the background of the series to have been tribal with a strong warrior culture , until a planet @-@ wide civil war allowed a mystic , Khas , to access a natural psionic link shared by all Protoss . Khas ' discovery and teachings , labelled the Khala , are then used as a base for a new caste @-@ based society . The <unk> caste forms the Conclave , the ruling body of the Khalai Protoss . The Templar caste constitutes the military , and the Khalai caste includes all other Protoss . The player controls a Templar character in the Protoss campaigns of all the video games to date . Khalai Protoss society is depicted as collectivism , being stubbornly conservative while maintaining the warrior culture and honor values of the tribal system . 
 The backstory presented in StarCraft 's manual and in the novel Shadow Hunters also shows the rise of a second society of Protoss known as the Nerazim . They are a sizeable minority of the Protoss who reject the Khala out of fear of losing their individuality inside the psychic link . The Nerazim are treated as heretics by the Khalai Protoss and are forcibly evicted from Aiur . Despite their persecution , the majority of Dark Templar do not hold anything against their estranged brethren , seeking to defend Aiur in any way they can . The Nerazim are presented as nomadic , liberal society , only settling on the planet Shakuras to study a Xel 'Naga temple there . During the Brood War event , the Protoss lose their homeworld of Aiur to the Zerg ( even with the Overmind being destroyed by Tassadar ) and the Khalai Protoss are forced to escape and seek refuge on Shakuras , by then the homeworld of the Nerazim Protoss . After the conclusion of StarCraft , the two groups begin to reconcile , but the reconciliation is marred by mutual distrust . 
 StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty also depicts a third faction of Protoss , known as the Tal 'Darim . Left behind on Aiur during the Zerg invasion , the splinter group lost their connection to the Khalai society and regressed to a state of aggression and fanaticism . During the events of Heart of the Swarm and Legacy of the Void the Tal 'Darim society is further explained to worship Amon , a Fallen Xel 'Naga who seeks to extinguish all life and recreate the universe in his image . The Tal 'Darim follow a hierarchy known as the ' Chain of Ascension ' which they believe , the higher up the chain , the closer they come to Amon . Tal 'Darim warriors can challenge other Tal 'darim in higher ranks to ascend in the chain through a rite called Rak 'Shir . 
 Starcraft II : Legacy of the Void introduces a fourth <unk> of the Protoss race , the Purifiers . The Purifiers are synthetic <unk> created by the Protoss which house the preserved spirits of fallen Protoss warriors . The Purifiers rebelled against the Khalai Protoss in ' ancient ' times because they weren 't viewed as equals , but rather as tools used by the Protoss . The Purifiers were deactivated and sealed away in a large vessel known as the ' Cybros ' and brought to a planet known as <unk> where they were supposed to be buried . 
 Both the Tal 'Darim and the Purifiers are sought out by Artanis in Legacy of the Void to unite all Protoss factions to fight Amon . The Daelaam are the unified protoss of the Khalai , Nerazim , Tal 'darim , and Purifiers ; their armed forces are named likewise . 
 = = = = Depiction = = = = 
 The Protoss are humanoids , with two luminous eyes , typically gold , green , or blue . With two fingers flanked by two opposable thumbs on each hand , two large toes on each foot ( four small toes in earlier games ) , digitigrade legs , broad chests and shoulders with narrow waists , Protoss are very agile and physically strong . A bony crest extends back from the crown of the head , with long neural strands sprouting from the back of the head . These strands facilitate the basic psychic communal link all Protoss naturally share . Each Protoss has a different skin shade that corresponds to the tribe from which they are descended . The Protoss do not possess any visible ears ( but they can hear , as when Terrans speak to them or hear what they are thinking ) , mouths or noses , but are able to communicate telepathically and possess strong olfactory sensitivities . Protoss do not need to eat or drink , but are shown in The Dark Templar Saga to instead absorb energy from a form of photosynthesis . The average life expectancy for a Protoss is about one thousand years . Little is known of the internal anatomy of the Protoss . 
 In contrast to the other two species , Protoss units and buildings display smooth and elegant designs , usually emphasising gold and blue colors on armor and vehicles / ships and feature blue energy highlights . The dark templar units tend to display silver rather than gold and have green energy highlights . In Starcraft II Protoss are also featured in dark shades with green energy highlights . These Protoss were corrupted by the Hybrids . The Protoss Tal 'Darim faction sports black / grey with red colors and also features red energy highlights . Last but not least the Purifiers sport generally white with black accents and feature orange energy highlights . Protoss units are generally more expensive and slower to produce in @-@ game compared to Zerg or Terran units , but are conversely also more powerful and efficient in combat . All Protoss units and buildings are covered by a regenerating energy shield , further increasing the amount of damage that they can endure , although the Protoss previously had no way of healing or repairing their units . By <unk> in the StarCraft timeline , specifically in the Legacy of the Void expansion to StarCraft II , the Protoss develop a new method to restore their energy shields , by using one of their " spellcaster " units , Sentries . 
 = = = Appearances = = = 
 The Protoss are the focus of the third campaign of StarCraft . In the events immediately preceding the beginning of the game , the Khalai Protoss have become aware of a Zerg invasion of Terran worlds , and respond by dispatching a fleet commanded by the high Templar Tassadar to destroy infested Terran worlds . Tassadar instead disregards his orders to massacre the Terran populations , attempting to destroy the Zerg by conventional means . Tassadar later meets a Dark Templar , Zeratul , and embraces the Dark Templar culture , prompting the Khalai Protoss to brand Tassadar as a traitor . Zeratul unwittingly reveals the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur to the Zerg , leading to a Zerg invasion that devastates the planet . At the end of StarCraft , Tassadar sacrifices himself to save his people and their Terran allies by destroying the Zerg Overmind by crashing his carrier , the " <unk> " , directly into the hivemind . 
 The Protoss return in Episode IV of Brood War , the expansion to StarCraft . Following immediately on from the conclusion of StarCraft , Zeratul and a ranking templar Artanis evacuate the surviving Khalai Protoss from Aiur to the Dark Templar world of Shakuras . After the Zerg follow them to Shakuras , Zeratul and Artanis harness the energy of a resident Xel 'Naga temple , scouring the planet of all the Zerg . The Protoss attempt to rebuild their lives on Shakuras , but are interrupted by a Zerg raid commanded by Sarah Kerrigan that kidnaps the dark templar leader Raszagal . Using Raszagal as leverage , Kerrigan coerces Zeratul into killing a new Overmind in incubation . Zeratul complies , but later kills Raszagal after it is revealed she has been brainwashed by the Zerg . Zeratul disappears while Artanis takes leadership and tries to reconstruct his people 's civilization . 
 StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty introduces the fanatical Tal 'Darim , who are at odds with Jim Raynor while he attempts to find Xel 'Naga artifacts for the Moebius Foundation . More significantly , Zeratul discovers that some force has successfully combined Protoss and Zerg genetic material , creating a race of incredibly powerful hybrids . Zeratul travels to Aiur to probe the corpse of the Zerg Overmind for information on an apocalyptic prophecy , and unexpectedly finds Tassadar in an ethereal form . Memories found in the Overmind 's cortex depict a vision of a future in which Kerrigan is killed , whereupon the hybrids ( led by an entity known only as the Dark Voice ) take control of the Swarm , destroy all other forms of life , then obliterate the Zerg as well . The Protoss are the last society left standing against the Dark Voice 's armies . Zeratul finds Raynor , knowing his intent to track down and defeat the Queen of Blades , and tells him to spare her life . 
 They also have minor appearances in StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm , shown as antagonists to Kerrigan . 
 Zeratul is the early protagonist until his death at the hands of Artanis , who later became a player character in StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void . Zeratul reveals what the prophecies further after giving his memory onto Raynor . He was shocked upon learning the worst truth , an ancient race tries to destroy all life in the Universe and recreate it to his will . He tried to warn Artanis , leader of the Protoss , but was set aside when the Protoss launches an attack on Aiur to reclaim it . But the invasion is a trap set by the ancient one who corrupts the protoss , save for anyone who has no connection to Khala . Zeratul was killed trying to save Artanis by severing his nerve cords . Wracked with guilt , Artanis regrouped all survivors and set off to find survivors . Shakuras was overran by Zerg and Hybrid and the surviving Dark Templar Protoss , chose to destroy Shakuras by overloading the temple . They also ended Hybrid production by destroying the facilities , along with the Terrans that served Amon , the Ancient Xel 'Naga . They also find an ancient and sealed race named Purifiers and the former Xel 'Naga 's minions , the Tal 'Darim sided with him , with the condition that he help a rogue Ascendant to kill the leader in a duel to the death . They later reclaim Aiur again , this time successfully liberating the corrupted Protoss . Kerrigan and Raynor appears later , when another Xel 'Naga calls them to the Void , Kerrigan absorbed the Xel 'Naga 's powers and used it to kill Amon once and for all . 
 = = Terrans = = 
 The Terrans are a fictional future version of humanity in the StarCraft series . The Terrans are the most splintered of the StarCraft species , consisting of multiple factions that not only fight the other races but each other as well . Considered an adaptive and mobile species , the Terrans are noted in the lore of the series for their ability to quickly access and drain a planet 's resources . The Terrans have been dedicated a full campaign in each real @-@ time strategy video game installment to date , and are defined in @-@ game by their specialization of units and tactics of defense and mobility . In the series ' storyline , the Terrans are usually displayed as being caught in @-@ between the conflict between the Protoss and Zerg while also dealing with frequent civil wars . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 = = = = Society = = = = 
 The Terrans are shown to be the most fragmented of the races in StarCraft , with multiple factions all vying for dominance over each other . Numerous factions are used throughout the series , ranging from national governments and corporations to rebels and criminals , although only four factions exhibit any major influence on the overall story arc . The first faction referred to in the backstory of the series is the United Earth Directorate ( UED ) . A unified government of almost all the nations of Earth and several colonies both within and outside the solar system , the UED claims to operate under a policy of " enlightened socialism " but is noted for its harsh methods of public order and media censorship . It is also seen as an advocate for eugenics , resulting in the mass murder of millions and exile of other unwanted criminals and genetic mutants for colonization of the distant Koprulu Sector of the galaxy in which the series takes place . The UED remains outside the events of the series until Brood War , where it takes interest in the discovery of the Protoss and Zerg , the first contact between humanity and aliens . The player controls the UED faction in Episode V of Brood War . 
 The exiled prisoners from Earth form the Confederacy of Man in the Koprulu Sector . A de facto oligarchy , the Confederacy 's inner workings are elaborated on in the novels Liberty 's Crusade , Speed of Darkness and Nova . Taking the role of the primary antagonistic faction in StarCraft 's Episode I , the Confederacy is shown as the most powerful faction in the sector at the beginning of StarCraft ; in the novels , it is depicted as being brutal towards the public and corrupt at the highest levels on its capital Tarsonis . The player gets to control a division of the Confederate Security Forces in the prequel shareware campaign for StarCraft . Due to the brutality of the regime , it is opposed by a variety of rebel groups and is eventually overthrown by the Sons of Korhal . The Sons of Korhal , a rebel group led by Arcturus Mengsk that the player controls during Episode I of StarCraft , form the Terran Dominion to replace the destroyed Confederacy , with the planet Korhal IV as the capital . The Dominion is an autocracy with Mengsk as its emperor . The Dominion 's operations are built on in The Dark Templar Saga series of novels . Although Mengsk sees himself as a benevolent dictator , he is shown to be just as harsh as his predecessors . 
 Mengsk 's actions during his campaign against the Confederacy make an enemy of Jim Raynor , one of the Sons of Korhal commanders . After Mengsk betrays other members of his command staff and reveals his real objectives of obtaining ultimate power , Raynor deserts and forms a resistance movement to the Dominion , labeled Raynor 's Raiders . Described in the novels as a small army primarily consisting of members from Raynor 's former colonial militia , the Raiders use the hijacked former flagship of the Sons of Korhal , the Hyperion , as their base of operations . In Queen of Blades , the group is described as being amongst the most wanted fugitives and rebels of the Dominion . The player assumes the role of Raynor in leading the group in StarCraft II Wings of Liberty . 
 = = = = Depiction = = = = 
 The Terrans are displayed as standard humans , and are often seen in @-@ game in powered combat suits and with other war machines such as futuristic tanks and space battlecruisers in use by their militaries . Some Terrans are displayed with cybernetic implants . Human behavior in the fictional history presented in StarCraft 's manual also points to the Terrans having the ability to access and deplete a planet 's natural resources at an " alarming " rate . The Terrans are also noted in the backstory of the series as having a developing psionic potential . This psionic potential is what entices the Zerg to attack the Terrans , in hope of incorporating these traits into the Zerg gene pool . This psionic element is shown in Terran military technology through Assassins known as Ghosts . Established as one of the iconic parts of StarCraft , Ghosts are Terrans who are born with ranging psionic abilities — from simple telepathy to advanced powers such as telekinesis or a special ability shown by Nova , where she can kill an entire skyscraper of people in a single thought known as a mind blast . These agents are cultivated by the military after being abducted from their former lives and put through an espionage training regime that can cost them their lives . In @-@ game , the Ghost unit is equipped with a cloaking device and is designed for scouting and designating targets for nuclear strike , and has been developed further through the lore of the series to the extent that the StarCraft : Ghost sub @-@ series was once planned , specifically focusing on the life of a Ghost , Nova . 
 In @-@ game , Terrans tend to favor traditional modes of warfare , often utilizing combined arms tactics with tanks , aircraft or other combat vehicles in combination with regular infantry . Using light ballistics , large calibre weapons and even tactical nuclear warheads , many Terran units are reminiscent of present @-@ day designs . Terrans are considered to be more adaptive than the other two races and are able to produce units at an average expense . Primary base structures can even lift off and fly to other locations , allowing players to move buildings for quicker troop deployments , access to new resource locations or to save the structures from destruction by the enemy . Terran buildings and mechanized units can be repaired if damaged , and combat medics can heal wounded organic units . 
 = = = Appearances = = = 
 The player is first fully introduced to the Terrans in Episode I of StarCraft . For a number of years before the game begins , the Confederacy is shown to be fighting a slowly losing war against the Sons of Korhal . When the Zerg and Protoss make their existence known , the pace of the war quickly changes . The player , accompanied by Jim Raynor , joins up with Arcturus Mengsk and the Sons of Korhal , and helps bring about the fall of the Confederacy by using Confederate technology to lure the Zerg into destroying the Confederate capital Tarsonis . In the process however , Mengsk abandons his second @-@ in @-@ command , Sarah Kerrigan , to the Zerg on Tarsonis . As a result of the brutal tactics used by Mengsk and his needless sacrifice of Kerrigan to the Zerg , Raynor abandons Mengsk and his newly formed Dominion to search for the lost Kerrigan . When Raynor finally finds her on the planet Char it is revealed that she had been captured and infested by the Zerg Overmind . He then meets Zeratul and Tassadar and consequently becomes an ally to the Protoss . Raynor 's forces assist the Protoss in defending their homeworld from the Zerg and in destroying the Zerg Overmind in the game 's conclusion . 
 In Brood War 's Episode V , the player takes the role of a captain in a UED expeditionary force , sent to pacify the <unk> sector after news of the discovery of the Zerg and Protoss makes its way to Earth . The UED force meets success in its initial battles , quickly bringing the Dominion to its knees and taking captive a new Overmind growing to replace the one killed by Tassadar . However , the UED fails to capture Mengsk , who allies with Raynor , Kerrigan and the Protoss templar Fenix . The UED is slowly beaten back by this mutual alliance , and although Kerrigan betrays her new allies , her Zerg forces eventually annihilate the UED fleet . Regrouping his surviving forces , Mengsk begins to reconstruct his empire , although he is still opposed by Raynor and his troops . 
 Raynor is the protagonist and player character of StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty . Over the course of the campaign Raynor 's Raiders ( as his army is known ) fight the Zerg and Mengsk 's empire simultaneously . At the behest of a group known as the Moebius Foundation , the Raiders gather the pieces of a Xel 'Naga artifact , until it is revealed that the foundation is actually led by Valerian Mengsk , Arcturus 's son . Valerian intends to use the artifact 's power to destroy the Queen of Blades , proving to the empire 's citizens that he will be a worthy successor to the throne . Raynor begrudgingly finishes assembling the artifact and joins the imperial army in an assault on the Zerg homeworld of Char , but not before uncovering proof of Mengsk 's treachery on Tarsonis and broadcasting it across the sector . The Terran forces on Char use the artifact to partially restore Kerrigan 's humanity , significantly weakening her , but Raynor refuses to kill her . 
 = = Zerg = = 
 The Zerg Swarm is a race of <unk> " hyper @-@ evolutionary " superorganisms ; they are the overriding antagonists of the StarCraft series . Unlike the Protoss and the Terrans , the Zerg are not " tool @-@ makers " , lacking technological inclination ; instead , they " force @-@ evolve " genetic traits by directed mutation in order to match such technology . Operating as a hive mind @-@ linked ' chain of command ' , the Zerg strive for genetic perfection by assimilating the unique genetic adaptations of " worthy " races into their own , creating numerous different strains of Zerg . Despite being notoriously cunning and ruthlessly efficient , the majority of Zerg species have low intelligence ; becoming mindless beasts if not connected to a " hive @-@ cluster " or a " command entity " . 
 As with the other two primary races , the Zerg are the subject of a full campaign in each of the series ' real @-@ time strategy video games . Zerg units are designed to be cheap and fast to produce , encouraging players to overwhelm their opponents with sheer numerical advantage . Since the release of StarCraft the Zerg have become a video gaming icon , described by PC Gamer UK as " the best race in strategy history " . The term " Zerg Rush " or " <unk> " has entered video gaming lexicon to describe sacrificing economic development in favour of using many low @-@ cost fast / weak units to rush and overwhelm an enemy by attrition or sheer numbers . The tactic is infamous , with most experienced real @-@ time strategy players being familiar with the tactic in one form or another . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 = = = = Society = = = = 
 The Zerg are a collective consciousness of a variety of different races assimilated into the Zerg genome . The Zerg were originally commanded by the Zerg Overmind , a manifestation of this hive mind , and under the Overmind 's control the Zerg strove for genetic perfection by assimilating the favorable traits of other species . After a species has been assimilated into the Swarm , it is mutated towards a different function within its hierarchy , from being a hive worker to a warrior strain . StarCraft 's manual notes that some species bear little resemblance to their original forms after just a short time into assimilation ( An example would be the formerly peaceful <unk> species , which was assimilated and mutated into the vicious <unk> strain and so on ) . The Overmind controls the Swarm through secondary agents called cerebrates . Cerebrates command an individual brood of Zerg , each with a distinct tactical role within the hierarchy . Cerebrates further delegate power through the use of overlords for battlefield direction and queens for hive watch . 
 The quest for ' genetic perfection ' is a pseudo @-@ religious concept to Zerg that drives them on a steady state of evolution and conflict ; the zerg believed there was a state that the zerg could reach where they no longer needed to evolve , that their evolutionary form would never have to change again because they could already adapt to any situation . Abathur , an evolution master , doubted that this was possible , but reasoned that " chasing the illusion of perfection " was , regardless , tactically sound . 
 The vast majority of the Zerg do not have any free will as they are genetically forced to obey the commands of those further up the Zerg hierarchy , although they are sufficiently intelligent to form strategies and work as a team on the battlefield . Despite this , the average Zerg has no sense of self preservation . Along with the Overmind , the cerebrates are the only Zerg with full sapience , each with its own personality and methods , although they too are genetically incapable of disobeying the Overmind . The Overmind also possesses the ability to reincarnate its cerebrates should their bodies be killed , although Protoss dark templar energies are capable of disrupting this process . If a cerebrate is completely dead and cannot be reincarnated , the Overmind loses control of the cerebrate 's brood , causing it to mindlessly rampage and attack anything . As a result of the Overmind 's death in StarCraft and the subsequent destruction of a new Overmind in Brood War , the remaining cerebrates perished , as they could not survive without an Overmind . Sarah Kerrigan replaced the cerebrates with " brood mothers " . These creatures fulfil much the same purpose , but are loyal to Kerrigan and could survive her temporary departure during the events of Starcraft 2 . 
 An exception to all of this would be the Primal Zerg , who inhabit the original Zerg homeworld of Zerus ( as seen in Heart of the Swarm ) . The Zerg Hive Mind was created to control the Zerg , and eventually put them under the control of the main antagonist of the series , the fallen Xel 'Naga Amon . Some Zerg , however , managed to avoid being subsumed . These are the Primal Zerg , who have much the same genetic abilities but are not bound to the Overmind . These creatures are each independently sapient , and if they follow a leader it is because they choose to . Their lack of a Hive Mind also shields them from specific psionic attacks engineered to counter the Zerg Hive Mind . 
 = = = = Depiction = = = = 
 The Zerg were created from the native lifeforms of Zerus , who had the natural ability to absorb the " essence " of creatures they killed , transforming their bodies to gain new adaptations . The Xel 'Naga created the Overmind and bound the primal Zerg to its will . They gave the Overmind a powerful desire to travel across the stars and absorb useful lifeforms into the Swarm , particularly the Protoss , their previous creation , so as to become the ultimate lifeform . 
 The Zerg are a completely organic race , making no use of lifeless technology and instead using specialized organisms for every function . Their buildings are living creatures , as are the Leviathans that carry them across space . Zerg colonies produce a carpet of bio @-@ matter referred to as the " creep " , which essentially provides nourishment for Zerg structures and creatures . The visual aesthetic of the Zerg greatly resembles that of invertebrates such as crustaceans and insects ( and certainly draws inspiration from the creatures from the Alien movies ) . The Zerg are shown to be highly dependent on their command structure : if a Zerg should lose its connection to the hive mind , it may turn passive and incapable of action , or become completely uncontrollable and attack allies and enemies alike . 
 Zerg buildings and units are entirely organic in @-@ game , and all Zerg can regenerate slowly without assistance ( though not as quickly as Protoss shields ) . Zerg production is far more centralized than with the Terrans and Protoss ; a central hatchery must be utilized to create new Zerg , with other structures providing the necessary technology tree assets , whereas the other two races can produce units from several structures . Zerg units tend to be weaker than those of the other two races , but are also cheaper , allowing for rush tactics to be used . Some Zerg units are capable of infesting enemies with various parasites that range from being able to see what an enemy unit sees to spawning Zerg inside an enemy unit . In addition , Zerg can infest some Terran buildings , allowing for the production of special infested Terran units . 
 = = = Appearances = = = 
 In StarCraft , the Zerg are obsessed with the pursuit of genetic purity , and are the focus of the game 's second episode . With the Xel 'Naga – empowered Protoss targeted as the ultimate lifeform , the Zerg invade the Terran colonies in the Koprulu Sector to assimilate the Terrans ' psionic potential and give the Zerg an edge over the Protoss . Through the actions of the Sons of Korhal , the Zerg are lured to the Confederate capital Tarsonis , where they capture the psionic ghost agent Sarah Kerrigan and infest her . Returning to the Zerg base of operations on Char , the Zerg are attacked by the dark templar Zeratul , who accidentally gives the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur to the Zerg Overmind . With victory in sight , the Overmind launches an invasion of Aiur and manifests itself on the planet . However , at the end of the game , the Protoss high templar Tassadar sacrifices himself to destroy the Overmind , leaving the Zerg to run rampant and leaderless across the planet . 
 The Zerg return in Brood War initially as uncontrolled indiscriminate killers without the will of the Overmind to guide them . Through the early portions of Brood War , Sarah Kerrigan is at odds with the surviving cerebrates , who have formed a new Overmind to restore control of the Swarm . Through allying herself with the Protoss , Kerrigan strikes at the cerebrates , causing disruption of their plans . Eventually , the UED fleet takes control of Char and pacifies the new Overmind with drugs , putting the cerebrates and most of the Zerg under their control . Kerrigan retaliates by forming a tenuous alliance with the remnants of the Dominion and the forces of Jim Raynor and Fenix , their subsequent victories turning the tide against the UED . However , she later betrays the alliance by dealing long @-@ term damage to the infrastructures of her allies and killing Fenix . Proceeding to blackmail Zeratul into killing the new Overmind , Kerrigan 's forces destroy the remnants of the UED fleet , giving her full control of the Zerg and establishing the Swarm as the most powerful faction in the sector . 
 In StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty , Jim Raynor and the rebel forces who oppose both the Dominion and the Zerg , manage to secure an ancient Xel 'Naga artifact and after successfully infiltrating Char , they use it to subjugate the Zerg and restore Kerrigan 's human form . Once again without a unified leadership , the Zerg get divided into multiple broods feuding over control of the Swarm . This situation persists until the events of StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm . Kerrigan , believing Raynor to have been killed in a Dominion surprise attack , enters the original Zerg spawning pool to become the Queen of Blades again . This time she is no longer motivated to destroy humanity , having kept more of her original mindset due to the non @-@ interference of the Zerg Hive Mind , and by extension , the Dark Voice , Amon . 
 Kerrigan is the protagonist and player character of StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm . After being deinfested , she was taken in Valerian Mengsk 's hideout to research on her , until the Dominion attacks the facility , she escaped along with the rest of the facility , except Raynor , who was captured by Nova . She later learned that Raynor was executed and seeks revenge on Arcturus . As she enters a Leviathan , she controls the local Swarm inside , and starts rebuilding her forces from scratch . She later evolved into a Primal Zerg after a confrontation with Zeratul , leading her to the origins of the Zerg . She became a Primal , after absorbing the spawning pool and killing Primal Leaders to collect essence . With her newfound power , she initially takes the fight to the Dominion after subduing countless Queens . She was later shocked after she knows that Raynor survived and held by Dominion as a bargaining chip . She organizes a raid , rescuing Raynor but the man fell into disbelief that the one he saved , returns to being a monster . She also confronted an ancient Shapeshifter creating Hybrids at the behest of her former rival named Alexei Stukov . She later prepared to end Arcturus Mengsk 's reign by killing him in his palace in Korhal . She later left to confront the Shapeshifter 's master . 
 = = Xel 'Naga = = 
 The Xel 'Naga ( whose name , according to the original StarCraft manual , means " Wanderers from Afar " ) are an ancient race that has to date only been featured in the lore of the StarCraft series ; their only appearances have been in the form of relics . The Xel 'Naga play important roles in the backstories to both the Protoss and Zerg , being responsible for manipulating the evolution of the two races , along with an unknown number of other species . It was speculated that a player could control the Xel 'Naga in StarCraft II and although this has been firmly denied by Blizzard Entertainment , they have confirmed the Xel 'Naga will contribute to the game 's storyline " in a rather epic tale " . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 In the manual to StarCraft , the Xel 'Naga are described as a race determined to create the perfect lifeform . The Xel 'Naga are also stated to have come from another galaxy and to have " seeded and cultivated thousands of various species " in their time . The Xel 'Naga guided the evolution of the Protoss , a species the Xel 'Naga believed possessed purity of form . However , after revealing themselves to their seemingly successful experiment , their presence caused the Protoss to devolve into a fearful and <unk> mindset . Believing their experiment a failure , the Xel 'Naga were shunned and eventually attacked by the Protoss while departing Aiur . 
 The Xel 'Naga then discovered the Zerg , small parasitic larvae that could control the nervous systems of other species . The Xel 'Naga saw this as purity of essence , and guided the evolution of the Zerg as well . However , the Zerg were animals , concerned only with self @-@ preservation . To help further the Zerg as a species , the Xel 'Naga created the Overmind , a central consciousness to organize the Zerg . They hid their existence from the Overmind , however . On becoming aware of their existence ( after being filled with an overriding directive it could not fight off ) , the Overmind attacked the Xel 'Naga , infesting and destroying the greater whole of the race . In StarCraft II Wings of Liberty , Xel 'Naga watchtowers provide vision in a large circular radius around the tower . 
 = = = Appearances = = = 
 Although the Xel 'Naga rarely appear during the novels and the video games , various relics left behind from their legacy are scattered throughout the series . One such relic appears in Brood War , a large temple on the planet Shakuras containing the power to wipe the planet clear of other species . During the course of Brood War , the Protoss activate the temple and use it to destroy all of the Zerg on Shakuras . In addition , other structures have been shown in the series . In the novel Shadow of the Xel 'Naga , the three main species fight for control of a large Xel 'Naga artifact on the planet Bhekar Ro , but accidentally activate it . The artifact releases a creature incubating in the structure , which proceeds to convert the nearby Xel 'Naga @-@ empowered Protoss and Zerg forces into energy for nourishment , before disappearing into space . After this , the novel Firstborn reveals that numerous other similar artifacts are discovered by the Terran Dominion within its borders . The Dominion heir Valerian Mengsk consequently sends an archaeological team under Emil Narud to investigate these relics . StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty also features a Xel 'Naga relic that was broken into pieces . James Raynor and Valerian Mengsk reunite the pieces and , during a bloody invasion of the volcanic Zerg planet of Char , use the relic to restore Sarah Kerrigan back into her human form ; the artifact also plays a significant role in Starcraft II : Legacy of the Void . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The species of StarCraft have been popular enough to inspire the creation of several collectable statues and toys based on in @-@ game units . The first series of action figures was released by ToyCom in 2003 and included the Terran heavy infantry firebat with markings similar to some original StarCraft concept art for the firebat and a hydralisk , the Zerg medium assault warrior strain . A series of toys were also made available in 1998 , featuring two colour variations of the Terran marine , another hydralisk and a Protoss zealot , the basic Protoss infantry ground unit . In addition , 1 / 30 scale model kits for the marine and hydralisk were released in 1999 by Academy Hobby Model Kits . A second series of collectable statues , which included one based on the Terran ghost , a Terran espionage agent with psychic powers , was in development but appears to have been cancelled . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Before StarCraft , most real @-@ time strategy games consisted of factions and races with the same basic play styles and units with mostly superficial differences . Thus , the uniqueness and variety of the species in the StarCraft series has been well received by many of the industry 's critics . In their review for StarCraft , IGN 's Tom Chick stated that the balance and difference between the races was " remarkable " , continuing to praise the game 's " radical " approach to different races and its high degree of success when compared with other games in the genre . IGN was also positive about the unit arrangements for the three races , crediting Blizzard Entertainment for not letting units become obsolete during extended play and for showing an " extraordinary amount of patience in balancing them . " GameSpot was complimentary of the species in its review for StarCraft , describing the races as being full of personality . Stating that the use of distinct races allowed for the game " to avoid the problem [ of equal sides ] that has plagued every other game in the genre " , GameSpot praised Blizzard Entertainment for keeping it " well balanced despite the great diversity . " 
 Other reviews have echoed much of this positive reception . The site The Gamers ' Temple described the species as " very diverse but well @-@ balanced , " stating that this allowed for " a challenging and fun gaming experience . " Allgame stated that the inclusion of three " dynamic " species " raises the bar " for real @-@ time strategy games , complimenting the game for forcing the player to " learn how [ the aliens ' ] minds work and not think like a human " . Commentators have also praised the aesthetic design of the three races ; in particular , the powered armor worn by the Terran Marine was rated eleventh on in a Maxim feature on the top armor suits in video games , and ninth in a similar feature by Machinima.com. 
 This positive view , however , is not universally held . For example , Computer and Video Games , while describing the game as " highly playable , " nevertheless described a " slight feeling of déjà vu " between the three races . 
 = The Truman Show = 
 The Truman Show is a 1998 American satirical comedy @-@ drama film directed by Peter Weir , produced by Scott Rudin , Andrew Niccol , Edward S. Feldman , and Adam Schroeder , and written by Niccol . 
 The film stars Jim Carrey as Truman Burbank , an orphan raised by a corporation inside a simulated television show revolving around his life , until he knows and decides to escape ; additional roles are provided by Laura Linney , Noah Emmerich , Natascha McElhone , Holland Taylor , and Ed Harris . 
 The Truman Show was originally a spec script by Niccol , inspired by an episode of The Twilight Zone called " Special Service " . Unlike the finished product , it was more of a science @-@ fiction thriller , with the story set in New York City . Scott Rudin purchased the script , and set up production at Paramount Pictures . Brian De Palma was to direct before Weir signed as director , making the film for $ 60 million — $ 20 million less than the original estimate . Niccol <unk> rewrote the script while the crew was waiting for Carrey to sign . The majority of filming took place at Seaside , Florida , a master @-@ planned community located in the Florida Panhandle . 
 The film was a financial success and debuted to critical acclaim , and earned numerous nominations at the 71st Academy Awards , 56th Golden Globe Awards , 52nd British Academy Film Awards and The Saturn Awards . The Truman Show has been analyzed as a thesis on Christianity , <unk> , simulated reality , existentialism and reality television . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As told through interviews and footages used through the film , Truman Burbank is the unsuspecting star of The Truman Show , a reality television program which is broadcast live around the clock and across the globe . His entire life has taken place within a giant <unk> dome in Hollywood , fashioned to create the seaside town of Seahaven , Florida , and equipped with thousands of cameras to monitor all aspects of Truman 's life . All of Seahaven 's residents are actors , otherwise going about their life to present the illusion to Truman . Creator and executive producer Christof wanted to capture Truman 's real emotion and human behavior when put in certain situations , creating the show around this . 
 The producers have discouraged Truman from wanting to travel beyond Seahaven by instilling him with aquaphobia through the " death " of his father in a boating accident , and by constantly broadcasting and printing messages of the dangers of traveling . Despite Christof 's controls , Truman manages to act in unexpected ways . During his college years , Truman was set to fall in love and marry Meryl , but another actress , Sylvia , caught his eye . Sylvia manages to bring Truman out of the sight of cameras long enough to warn him that he is on a show before she is taken away and off @-@ set , with the actor playing her father claiming they are returning to Fiji . Since then , while Truman went on to marry Meryl , he continues to fantasize about Sylvia , using scraps from magazines to recreate her face in secret , and seeks travel to Fiji . Outside of the show , Sylvia became part of a " Free Truman " campaign that believe that Truman is being held prisoner by Christof and demand the end of the show . 
 The film 's present begins during the thirtieth year of the show . Truman notices aspects of his life seems too perfect , and odd events all seem centered on him . One day , while going to work , Truman spots a disheveled man and recognizes him as his father , who had snuck back in on set , but the other actors quickly drag the man away . Despite efforts by Meryl and Truman 's best friend Marlon to reassure Truman , Truman becomes even more suspicious about his life . One day , he takes Meryl by surprise by going on an impromptu road trip , but their way is blocked by apparent emergencies created by Christof . Meryl begins to break down from the stress , and during one argument with Truman , breaks character and is later taken off the show . Truman , depressed and confused , is consoled by Marlon , and Christof uses the opportunity to re @-@ introduce Truman 's father to the show proper , hoping to bring Truman back to some emotional stability . 
 Truman seems to recover , but one night , the producers find Truman sleeping in his home 's basement . They send Marlon to check on Truman , only to find Truman has disappeared through a makeshift tunnel . Marlon discovers this on camera , breaking character , and Christof orders their transmission halted ( for the first time ) while they launch a city @-@ wide search for Truman . Audiences around the world are drawn to this sudden change . They find Truman sailing out on Seahaven 's water despite his fear , and Christof restarts the broadcast as he sends a man @-@ made storm to try to capsize the boat . Christof 's bosses fear that they may be witnessing the murder of a human being on live television and warn Christof to stop , but he defends himself by stating that Truman was born on live television . Truman manages to hang on , calling out to the skies if that is the best they can do . Realizing he cannot dissuade Truman any further , Christof ends the storm . 
 Truman continues to sail until his boat punctures the wall of the dome , to his surprise . Exploring the wall , he finds an exit door . Christof , speaking directly to Truman through a speaker system , tries to convince him to stay by stating that there 's " no more truth " out in the real world and that by staying in his artificial world , he would have nothing to fear . Truman considers this , then says his catchphrase , " In case I don 't see you ... good afternoon , good evening , and good night " , takes a bow , and leaves via the door . The audiences celebrate , and Sylvia races to go meet Truman . Christof 's supervisors end the show for the last time , much to Christof 's dismay , as audiences now start looking for something else to watch . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jim Carrey as Truman Burbank : Chosen out of six unwanted pregnancies and the first child to be legally adopted by a corporation , he is unaware that his daily life is broadcast continuously around the world . He has a job in the insurance business and a lovely wife , but he eventually notices that his environment is not what it seems to be . Robin Williams was considered for the role , but Weir cast Carrey after seeing him in Ace Ventura : Pet Detective because Carrey 's performance reminded him of Charlie Chaplin . Carrey took the opportunity to proclaim himself as a dramatic actor , rather than being typecast in comedic roles . Carrey , who was then normally paid $ 20 million per film , agreed to do The Truman Show for $ 12 million . Carrey and Weir initially found working together on set difficult ( Carrey 's contract gave him the power to demand rewrites ) , but Weir was impressed with Carrey 's improvisational skills , and the two became more interactive . The scene in which Truman declares " this planet <unk> of the Burbank galaxy " to the bathroom mirror was Carrey 's idea . 
