 Laura Linney as Hannah Gill playing Meryl Burbank , Truman 's wife , a nurse at the local hospital . Since the show relies on product placement for revenue , Meryl regularly shows off various items she has recently " purchased , " one of the many oddities that makes Truman question his life . Her role is essentially to act the part of Truman 's wife and ultimately to have a child by him , despite her reluctance to accomplish either . Linney explains that Gill " was a child actress who never made it , and now she 's really ambitious . Mostly she 's into negotiating her contract . Every time she sleeps with Truman she gets an extra $ 10 @,@ 000 . " Linney heavily studied Sears catalogs from the 1950s to develop her character 's poses . 
 Ed Harris as Christof : The creator of The Truman Show . Christof remains dedicated to the program at all costs , often overseeing and directing its course in person ( rather than through aides ) , but at the climax / resolution , he speaks to Truman over a loudspeaker , revealing the nature of Truman 's situation . Dennis Hopper was originally cast in the role , but he left in April 1997 ( during filming ) over " creative differences . " Harris was a last @-@ minute replacement . A number of other actors had turned down the role after Hopper 's departure . Harris had an idea of making Christof a hunchback , but Weir did not like the idea . 
 Noah Emmerich as Louis Coltrane playing Marlon , Truman 's best friend since early childhood . Marlon is a vending machine operator for the company Goodies , who promises Truman he would never lie to him , despite the latest events in Truman 's life . Emmerich has said , " My character is in a lot of pain . He feels really guilty about deceiving Truman . He 's had a serious drug addiction for many years . Been in and out of rehab . " His name is an amalgam of two jazz musicians , Louis Armstrong and John Coltrane , and in one scene he plays trumpet . 
 Natascha McElhone as Sylvia playing Lauren Garland ( Truman 's college schoolmate ) : Sylvia was hired to play a background extra , a fellow student at Truman 's college , named Lauren . She became romantically involved with Truman and tried to reveal to him the truth about his life , but was thrown out of the show before she could do so . She then becomes a protester against The Truman Show , urging Christof to release its lead . 
 Brian <unk> as Walter Moore playing Kirk Burbank , Truman 's father . When Truman was a boy , his character on the show was killed off to instill a fear of water in his son that would prevent Truman from leaving the set ; however , he sneaks back onto the set when Truman is an adult . This causes Truman to begin questioning his staged life , and as he tries to get away from it the writers are forced to write a plot in which Kirk had not drowned but had suffered from amnesia . 
 Holland Taylor as Alanis Montclair playing Angela Burbank , Truman 's mother : Christof orders that she attempt to persuade Truman to have children . 
 Harry Shearer ( cameo appearance ) as Mike Michaelson ( news anchor ) : Michaelson hosts <unk> , an entertainment @-@ news program about The Truman Show that broadcasts early in the morning . 
 Paul Giamatti as Simeon ( control room director ) . 
 Peter Krause as Laurence ( Truman 's boss ) : At Truman 's office , Laurence often interrupts Truman when he talks about his dreams of moving to Fiji . 
 Philip Glass , who composed and performed some of the film 's soundtrack , makes a cameo appearance as the incidental keyboard player . 
 = = Production = = 
 Andrew Niccol completed a one @-@ page film treatment titled The Malcolm Show in May 1991 . The original draft was more in tone of a science fiction thriller , with the story set in New York City . Niccol stated , " I think everyone questions the authenticity of their lives at certain points . It 's like when kids ask if they 're adopted . " In the fall of 1993 , producer Scott Rudin purchased the script for slightly over $ 1 million . Paramount Pictures instantly agreed to distribute . Part of the deal called for Niccol to have his directing debut , though Paramount felt the estimated $ 80 million budget would be too high for him . In addition , Paramount wanted to go with an A @-@ list director , paying Niccol extra money " to step aside . " Brian De Palma was under negotiations to direct before he left United Talent Agency in March 1994 . Directors who were considered after De Palma 's departure included Tim Burton , Terry Gilliam , Barry Sonnenfeld and Steven Spielberg before Peter Weir signed on in early 1995 , following a recommendation of Niccol . Bryan Singer wanted to direct but Paramount decided to go with the more experienced Weir . 
 Paramount was cautious about The Truman Show which they dubbed " the most expensive art film ever made " because of its $ 60 million budget . They wanted the film to be funnier and less dramatic . Weir also shared this vision , feeling that Niccol 's script was too dark , and declaring " where he [ Niccol ] had it depressing , I could make it light . It could convince audiences they could watch a show in this scope 24 / 7 . " Niccol wrote sixteen drafts of the script before Weir considered the script ready for filming . Later on in 1995 , Jim Carrey signed to star , but because of commitments with The Cable Guy and Liar Liar , he would not be ready to start filming for at least another year . Weir felt Carrey was perfect for the role and opted to wait for another year rather than recast the role . Niccol rewrote the script twelve times , while Weir created a fictionalized book about the show 's history . He envisioned backstories for the characters and encouraged actors to do the same . 
 Weir scouted locations in Eastern Florida but was unsatisfied with the landscapes . Sound stages at Universal Studios were reserved for the story 's setting of Seahaven before Weir 's wife introduced him to Seaside , Florida , a " master @-@ planned community " located in the Florida Panhandle . Pre @-@ production offices were immediately opened in Seaside , where the majority of filming took place . Other scenes were shot at Paramount Studios in Los Angeles , California . Norman Rockwell paintings and 1960s postcards were used as inspiration for the film 's design . Weir , Peter <unk> and Dennis Gassner researched surveillance techniques for certain shots . 
 The overall look was influenced by television images , particularly commercials : Many shots have characters leaning into the lens with their eyeballs wide open , and the interior scenes are heavily lit , because Weir wanted to remind viewers that " in this world , everything was for sale . " Those involved in visual effects work found the film somewhat difficult to make , because 1997 was the year many visual effects companies were trying to convert to computer @-@ generated imagery . CGI was used to create the upper halves of some of the larger buildings in the film 's downtown set . Craig Barron , one of the effects supervisors , said that these digital models did not have to look as detailed and weathered as they normally would in a film because of the artificial look of the entire town , although they did imitate slight blemishes found in the physical buildings . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Religious analogy = = = 
 Benson Y. Parkinson of the Association for Mormon Letters noted that Christof represented Jesus as an " off @-@ Christ " ( " Christ @-@ off " ) or Antichrist , comparing the megalomaniacal Hollywood producer to Lucifer . The conversation between Truman and Marlon at the bridge can be compared to one between Moses and God in the Book of Exodus . 
 In C.S. Lewis and Narnia for Dummies by Rich Wagner , Christof is compared with Screwtape , the eponymous character of The Screwtape Letters by C. S. Lewis . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 In 2008 , Popular Mechanics named The Truman Show as one of the 10 most prophetic science fiction films . Journalist Erik <unk> argued that the story reflects the falseness of reality television . " Truman simply lives , and the show 's popularity is its straightforward voyeurism . And , like Big Brother , Survivor , and every other reality show on the air , none of his environment is actually real . " He deemed it an eerie coincidence that Big Brother made its debut a year after the film 's release , and he also compared the film to the 2003 program The Joe <unk> Show : " Unlike Truman , Matt Gould could see the cameras , but all of the other contestants were paid actors , playing the part of various reality @-@ show stereotypes . While Matt eventually got all of the prizes in the rigged contest , the show 's central running joke was in the same existential ballpark as The Truman Show . " Weir declared , " There has always been this question : Is the audience getting dumber ? Or are we filmmakers patronizing them ? Is this what they want ? Or is this what we 're giving them ? But the public went to my film in large numbers . And that has to be encouraging . " 
 Ronald Bishop 's paper in the Journal of Communication Enquiry suggests The Truman Show showcased the power of the media . Truman 's life inspires audiences around the world , meaning their lives are controlled by his . Bishop commented , " In the end , the power of the media is affirmed rather than challenged . In the spirit of Antonio Gramsci 's concept of hegemony , these films and television programs co @-@ opt our enchantment ( and disenchantment ) with the media and sell it back to us . " 
 Simone Knox , in her essay " Reading The Truman Show inside out " argues that the film itself tries to blur the objective perspective and the show @-@ within @-@ the @-@ film . Knox also draws a floor plan of the camera angles of the first scene . 
 = = = Psychological and psychoanalytic interpretation = = = 
 An essay published in the International Journal of Psychoanalysis analyzed Truman as 
 [ A ] prototypical adolescent at the beginning of the movie . He feels trapped into a familial and social world to which he tries to conform while being unable to entirely identify with it , believing that he has no other choice ( other than through the fantasy of fleeing to a far @-@ way island ) . Eventually , Truman gains sufficient awareness of his condition to " leave home " — developing a more mature and authentic identity as a man , leaving his child @-@ self behind and becoming a True @-@ man . 
 = = = Utopia = = = 
 Parallels can be drawn from Thomas More 's 1516 book Utopia , in which More describes an island with only one entrance and only one exit . Only those who belonged to this island knew how to navigate their way through the treacherous openings safely and unharmed . This situation is similar to The Truman Show because there are limited entryways into the world that Truman knows . Truman does not belong to this utopia into which he has been implanted , and childhood trauma rendered him frightened of the prospect of ever leaving this small community . Utopian models of the past tended to be full of like @-@ minded individuals who shared much in common , comparable to More 's Utopia and real @-@ life groups such as the Shakers and the Oneida Community . It is clear that the people in Truman 's world are like @-@ minded in their common effort to keep him oblivious to reality . The suburban " picket fence " appearance of the show 's set is reminiscent of the " American Dream " of the 1950s . The " American Dream " concept in Truman 's world serves as an attempt to keep him happy and ignorant . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film 's theatrical release date was originally set for August 8 , 1997 , but Paramount Pictures pushed it back to the subsequent summer . NBC purchased broadcast rights in December 1997 , roughly eight months before the film 's release . In March 2000 , Turner Broadcasting System purchased the rights and now often airs the film on TBS . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Truman Show received critical acclaim . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 94 % , based on 125 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 4 / 10 , with the site 's critical consensus reading , " A funny , tender , and thought @-@ provoking film , The Truman Show is all the more noteworthy for its remarkably prescient vision of runaway celebrity culture and a nation with an insatiable thirst for the private details of ordinary lives . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 90 out of 100 , based on 30 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Giving the film a perfect four star score , Roger Ebert compared it to Forrest Gump , claiming that the film had a right balance of comedy and drama . He was also impressed with Jim Carrey 's dramatic performance . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " The Truman Show is emotionally involving without losing the ability to raise sharp satiric questions as well as get numerous laughs . The rare film that is disturbing despite working beautifully within standard industry norms . " He would name it the best movie of 1998 . In June 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named Truman one of the 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years . 
 James Berardinelli liked the film 's approach of " not being the casual summer blockbuster with special effects , " and he likened Carrey 's " [ charismatic ] , understated and effective " performance to those of Tom Hanks and James Stewart . Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader wrote , " Undeniably provocative and reasonably entertaining , The Truman Show is one of those high @-@ concept movies whose concept is both clever and dumb . " Tom Meek of Film Threat said the film was not funny enough but still found " something rewarding in its quirky demeanor . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 71st Academy Awards , The Truman Show was nominated for three awards but did not win in any category . Peter Weir received the nomination for Best Director , while Ed Harris was nominated for Best Supporting Actor and Andrew Niccol was nominated for Best Original Screenplay . Many believed Carrey would be nominated for Best Actor , as well as the film itself for Best Picture , but both were not . In addition , The Truman Show earned nominations at the Golden Globe Awards for Best Motion Picture – Drama , Weir for Best Director – Motion Picture and Niccol for ( Screenplay ) . Jim Carrey and Ed Harris both won Golden Globes as Best Actor – Drama and Best Supporting Actor , respectively , as did Burkhard Dallwitz and Philip Glass for Best Original Score . 
 At the 52nd British Academy Film Awards , Weir ( Direction ) , Niccol ( Original Screenplay ) and Dennis Gassner ( Production Design ) received awards . In addition , the film was nominated for Best Film and Best Visual Effects . Harris was nominated for Best Supporting Actor , and Peter <unk> was nominated for Best Cinematography . The Truman Show was a success at The Saturn Awards , where it won the Best Fantasy Film and the Best Writing ( Niccol ) . Carrey ( Best Actor ) , Harris ( Best Supporting Actor ) and Weir ( Direction ) also received nominations . Finally , the film won speculative fiction 's Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . 
 = = The Truman Show delusion = = 
 Joel Gold , a psychiatrist at the Bellevue Hospital Center , revealed that by 2008 , he had met five patients with schizophrenia ( and heard of another twelve ) who believed their lives were reality television shows . Gold named the syndrome " The Truman Show delusion " after the film and attributed the delusion to a world that had become hungry for publicity . 
 Gold stated that some patients were rendered happy by their disease , while " others were tormented . " One traveled to New York to check whether the World Trade Center had actually fallen — believing the 9 / 11 attacks to be an elaborate plot twist in his personal storyline . Another came to climb the Statue of Liberty , believing that he would be reunited with his high @-@ school girlfriend at the top and finally be released from the show . 
 In August 2008 , the British Journal of Psychiatry reported similar cases in the United Kingdom . The delusion has informally been referred to as " Truman syndrome , " according to an Associated Press story from 2008 . 
 After hearing about the condition , writer of The Truman Show Andrew Niccol said : " You know you 've made it when you have a disease named after you . " 
 = Great Britain at the 2008 Summer Paralympics = 
 Great Britain competed at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , People 's Republic of China . Great Britain sent a delegation of around 400 , of which 212 were athletes , to compete in eighteen sports at the Games . The team was made up of athletes from the whole United Kingdom ; athletes from Northern Ireland , who may elect to hold Irish citizenship under the pre @-@ 1999 article 2 of the Irish constitution , are able to be selected to represent either Great Britain or Ireland at the Paralympics . Additionally some British overseas territories compete separately from Britain in Paralympic competition . 
 Britain finished second in the medal table , behind host nation China , winning 42 gold medals and 102 total medals , equalling the team 's position in the medal table at the 2004 Athens Games . The number of medals won was an increase on the 94 medals and 35 golds in Athens . The team was the most successful in two decades , with 80 different athletes winning at least one medal . The United Kingdom was the next host of the Summer Paralympics , holding the 2012 Games in London . 
 = = Disability classifications = = 
 Every participant at the Paralympics has their disability grouped into one of five disability categories ; amputation , the condition may be congenital or sustained through injury or illness ; cerebral palsy ; wheelchair athletes , there is often overlap between this and other categories ; visual impairment , including blindness ; Les autres , any physical disability that does not fall strictly under one of the other categories , for example dwarfism or multiple sclerosis . Each Paralympic sport then has its own classifications , dependent upon the specific physical demands of competition . Events are given a code , made of numbers and letters , describing the type of event and classification of the athletes competing . Some sports , such as athletics , divide athletes by both the category and severity of their disabilities , other sports , for example swimming , group competitors from different categories together , the only separation being based on the severity of the disability . 
 = = Medallists = = 
 The following British competitors won medals at the games , all dates are September 2008 . In the ' by discipline ' sections below , medallists ' names are in bold . 
 † Shelly Woods was initially awarded the silver medal in the athletics , women 's 5000 m T54 . However a re @-@ run of the race was ordered by the International Paralympic Committee after the result was protested . 
 = = = Multiple medallists = = = 
 The following competitors won multiple medals at the 2008 Paralympic Games . 
 = = Targets = = 
 In July 2008 , UK Sport , the body responsible for the distribution of National Lottery funding to elite sport , published its expectations for the Games . It identified a 112 " stretch " medal target and expected to win 95 of them , including around 35 gold medals in order to finish second in the medal table . 
 The athletes met the expectations of UK Sport for total medals , gold medals and medal table position , finishing second behind hosts China with 42 gold and 102 total medals . It should be noted that the medals claimed were not all ones that had been targeted , the team fell short of targets in some sports whilst it exceeded them in others ; out of the fifteen sports set a target eight succeeded in meeting them . 
 = = Archery = = 
 Great Britain 's archery squad for the Games included twelve athletes . In all , four archery medals , two gold , one silver and one bronze , were won by British archers , which meant that they finished second in the archery medal table . John Stubbs , a former England disabled cricketer , set a new world record score of 691 in the ranking round on the route to victory in the men 's individual compound open . In the <unk> women 's event Danielle Brown beat compatriot , and eventual bronze medallist , Mel Clarke before going on to win the gold . 
 Men 
 Women 
 Legend : WR – World record ; W – Won ; L – Lost ; N / A – Round not applicable for the event ; 
 = = Athletics = = 
 The GB Paralympic team included thirty – five competitors in the sport of athletics , amongst them reigning champions Kenny Churchill , Danny Crates , Daniel Greaves and Stephen Miller . David Weir failed in his attempts to win five gold medals at the Games after suffering from a virus , but did win four medals ; two gold , one silver , one bronze ; before pulling out of his final event . 
 British participants were involved in a number of controversies regarding the reallocation of medals during the Games . Shelly Woods was initially awarded the silver medal in the women 's 5000 m T54 , but a rerun was ordered by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) after the Australian , US and Swiss teams protested the result because six competitors were involved in a crash on the penultimate lap . When the race was rerun Woods won the bronze medal . David Weir believed he had won the gold medal in the men 's 800 m T54 but a rerun of the race was ordered after it was discovered that the Australian silver medallist , Kurt Fearnley , had begun the race in the wrong lane . Following a letter from Fearnley and the Australian authorities to the IPC , which asked that the result not be overturned in the spirit of sportsmanship , the rerun was cancelled and Weir 's medal reinstated . Discus thrower Rebecca Chin was originally awarded the silver medal in the women 's F37 – 38 , but her classification was challenged and Chin was deemed ineligible for the event , stripped of her medal , and her results were erased . The decision was particularly controversial given that Chin had already been assessed earlier in the Games whilst she competed in the women 's F37 – 38 shot put final . 
 Men — Track 
 Men — Field 
 Women — Track 
 Women — Field 
 * Originally awarded the silver medal but stripped of medal and results following a challenge to her classification . 
 Key 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 Britain qualified teams in both the men 's and women 's events . The women 's team finished eighth out of ten competing teams , whilst the men , matching their achievement at 2004 Athens Games , won the bronze medal . 
 = = = Men = = = 
 Pool B 
 Legend : PTS – Points ; Pld – Played ; W – Games won ; D – Games drawn ; L – Games lost ; PF – Points for ; PA – Points against ; PD – Points difference ; – Qualified for quarterfinals ; 
 = Love in This Club Part II = 
 " Love in This Club Part II " is a song recorded by American R & B singer Usher , and features fellow R & B singer Beyoncé and rapper Lil Wayne . " Love in This Club Part II " was released by LaFace Records on April 28 , 2008 , as the second single from Usher 's fifth studio album , Here I Stand ( 2008 ) . It is a sequel to the album 's lead single " Love in This Club " which features Young Jeezy . Originally , vocalist Mariah Carey and rapper Plies were intended to feature on the record . Usher acclaimed the additions of Beyoncé and Wayne , and called it " a really special record " . Produced by Soundz , the track samples the 1971 song " You Are Everything " by The Stylistics . 
 It received a mixed response from critics , who praised Beyoncé 's vocals , but criticized the tune for being bland . The song appeared on the US Billboard Hot 100 , the Canadian Hot 100 and the Australian ARIA Singles Chart . " Love in This Club Part II " also reached the top ten on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , and its master tone received a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The original song , " Love in This Club " , was sung by Usher , with guest vocals from rapper Young Jeezy also present . It was written by Usher , Polow da Don , Lamar Taylor , Young Jeezy , Ryon Lovett , Keith Thomas and Darnell Dalton , with da Don producing the track . The remix features additional writing from Lil Wayne , with Soundz producing the track . Usher said in an interview with MTV of the song , " I wanted it to be something that would be a surprise , be a shock . Have shock value . That 's what the remix is all about . " On working with Beyoncé , he said , " It 's a treat for me . I 've been wanting for years to do a record with Beyoncé . Even though it 's a remix , it 's a really special record for me " . He also spoke highly of Wayne , dubbing him " one of the <unk> in the game " . The song was originally intended to be sung by Usher with Mariah Carey and rapper Plies . While Plies had recorded two verses for the song , he and Carey did not appear on the final cut , with Beyoncé and Wayne featuring instead . Rumours also surfaced that R & B singer Keri Hilson would make an appearance on the tune . The song , one of the last additions to Here I Stand , was recorded at <unk> Studios in Alpharetta and The Record Plant in Los Angeles . 
 " Love in This Club Part II " was added for urban contemporary radio airplay in the United States on the week of April 28 , 2008 . A version without Wayne 's verse appeared as a B @-@ side to the CD single of " Moving Mountains " , released on July 22 , 2008 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The tempo of " Love in This Club Part II " is much slower than that of the original song . Idolator compared the slowing @-@ down to the remixing of R. Kelly 's " Ignition " ( 2002 ) . Usher has said that he likes Part II more than the original . The tune samples The Stylistics ' 1971 number " You Are Everything " , written by Thom Bell and Linda Creed . The lyrics and theme of the song are similar to those of Part I , with Serena Kim of The Washington Post describing it as " mighty pressure coming from ... male voices to persuade one woman to succumb to spontaneous sex " , while Beyoncé portrays herself as a " hesitant but willing " voice of reason . Wayne 's lyrics , modified through the use of a vocoder to make him sound intoxicated , are wily seductions to have his love interest have intercourse with him in the club 's bathroom . During Wayne 's verse , Usher sings breathy ad @-@ libs . In the song , Usher refers to Beyoncé as " Queen B " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Shaheem Reid of MTV News praised Wayne 's vocals as a repeat of his melodic success on " Lollipop " . <unk> also appreciated Wayne 's effort , saying " aside from sounding like he 's dying , he delivers an entertaining verse . " Stuff liked the way that his presence offered relief from the ballads on Here I Stand . About.com 's Mark Nero lauded the song as being " much better than the original version " , noting Beyoncé 's appearance as " regal " , while Idolator also praised the collaboration with Beyoncé and Wayne as " much better " than that with Young Jeezy , who appeared on the original track . Steve Jones of USA Today picked " Love in This Club Part II " as a standout track of Here I Stand . 
 However , Josh Eells of Blender was not impressed , writing that the song " manages to make two of the most desirable people on the planet [ Usher and Beyoncé ] sound chaste " , while IGN 's Chad Grischow called the record " bland " and " lacking at best " . Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson from Entertainment Weekly criticized Usher 's pick @-@ up lines , describing them as more ridiculous than in the original song , as well as Wayne 's reusing of lyrics from both " Lollipop " and his remix of " Crying Out for Me " ( 2007 ) by Mario . On the other hand , Vozick @-@ Levinson commended Beyoncé 's vocal performance on the track . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle said that Beyoncé 's vocal was the clear standout on the song . The song was listed as 36 in the Rolling Stone 's The 100 Best Song of 2008 . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Love in This Club Part II " debuted on the United States Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy @-@ nine on the issue dated May 10 , 2008 , due to high radio airplay and digital sales . It climbed the chart , reaching its peak position of number eighteen three weeks later . " Love in This Club Part II " slipped off the chart after twenty @-@ two weeks . On the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , the song debuted at number fourteen the same week . It peaked on the chart at number seven on June 21 , 2008 , gaining the ' Digital Gainer ' honor the same week . It gave Usher his thirteenth top ten song on the component chart and lasted thirty @-@ four weeks on the chart . The song appeared on the Pop 100 , where it peaked at number thirty @-@ five . " Love in This Club Part II " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on October 8 , 2008 , for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 master tones . As of October 3 , 2010 , it has sold 366 @,@ 000 digital music downloads in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . On May 31 , 2008 , the song debuted and peaked on the Canadian Hot 100 at number sixty @-@ nine , and fell off the chart four weeks later . In Australia , " Love in This Club Part II " debuted and peaked on the ARIA Singles Chart at number ninety @-@ six on the chart dated June 9 , 2008 . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Source : 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = SMS Westfalen = 
 SMS Westfalen was one of the Nassau @-@ class battleships , the first four dreadnoughts built for the German Imperial Navy . Westfalen was laid down at AG Weser in Bremen on 12 August 1907 , launched nearly a year later on 1 July 1908 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 16 November 1909 . The ship was equipped with a main battery of twelve 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns in six twin turrets in an unusual hexagonal arrangement . 
 The ship served with her sister ships for the majority of World War I , seeing extensive service in the North Sea , where she took part in several fleet sorties . These culminated in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , where Westfalen was heavily engaged in night @-@ fighting against British light forces . Westfalen led the German line for much of the evening and into the following day , until the fleet reached Wilhelmshaven . On another fleet advance in August 1916 , the ship was damaged by a torpedo from a British submarine . 
 Westfalen also conducted several deployments to the Baltic Sea against the Russian Navy . The first of these was during the Battle of the Gulf of Riga , where Westfalen supported a German naval assault on the gulf . Westfalen was sent back to the Baltic in 1918 to support the White Finns in the Finnish Civil War . The ship remained in Germany while the majority of the fleet was interned in Scapa Flow after the end of the war . In 1919 , following the scuttling of the German fleet in Scapa Flow , Westfalen was ceded to the Allies as a replacement for the ships that had been sunk . She was then sent to ship @-@ breakers in England , who broke the ship up for scrap by 1924 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) ordered Westfalen under the provisional name Ersatz Sachsen as a replacement for SMS Sachsen , the lead ship of the elderly Sachsen @-@ class ironclads . The Reichstag secretly approved and provided funds for Nassau and Westfalen at the end of March 1906 , but construction on Westfalen was delayed while arms and armor were procured . She was laid down on 12 August 1907 at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen . As with her sister Nassau , construction proceeded swiftly and secretly ; detachments of soldiers guarded both the shipyard and the major contractors who supplied building materials , such as Krupp . The ship was launched on 1 July 1908 , underwent an initial fitting @-@ out , and then in mid @-@ September 1909 was transferred to Kiel by a crew composed of dockyard workers for a final fitting @-@ out . However , the water level in the Weser River was low at this time of year , so six pontoons had to be attached to the ship to reduce her draft . Even so , it took two attempts before the ship cleared the river . 
 Westfalen was 146 @.@ 1 m ( 479 ft 4 in ) long , 26 @.@ 9 m ( 88 ft 3 in ) wide , and had a draft of 8 @.@ 9 m ( 29 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 18 @,@ 873 t ( 18 @,@ 575 long tons ) with a standard load , and 20 @,@ 535 t ( 20 @,@ 210 long tons ) fully laden . The ship design retained 3 @-@ shaft triple expansion engines instead of the more advanced turbine engines . Steam was provided to the engines by twelve coal @-@ fired boilers , with the addition in 1915 of supplementary oil firing . This machinery was chosen at the request of Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz and the Navy 's construction department . The department stated in 1905 that the " use of turbines in heavy warships does not recommend itself . " 
 Westfalen carried twelve 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 45 guns in an unusual hexagonal configuration . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns and sixteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns , all of which were mounted in casemates . The ship was also armed with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One tube was mounted in the bow , another in the stern , and two on each broadside , on either end of the torpedo bulkhead . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 16 October 1909 , before Westfalen was commissioned into the fleet , the ship took part in a ceremony for the opening of the third set of locks in the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal in Kiel . Exactly one month later , Westfalen was commissioned for sea trials , which were interrupted only by fleet training exercises in February 1910 . At the completion of the trials on 3 May , Westfalen was added to the I Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet ; two days later , she became the squadron flagship , replacing the pre @-@ dreadnought SMS Hannover . The navy had intended to transfer the ship to the II Battle Squadron , but this plan was discarded after the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Westfalen participated in most of the fleet advances into the North Sea throughout the war . The first operation was conducted primarily by Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers ; the ships bombarded the English coastal towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . A German battlefleet of 12 dreadnoughts , including Westfalen , her three sisters and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts sailed in support of the battlecruisers . On the evening of 15 December , they came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced the German fleet commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , that the entire Grand Fleet was deployed before him . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battlefleet back towards Germany . In late March 1915 the ship went into drydock for periodic maintenance . 
 = = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = = 
 In August 1915 , the German fleet attempted to clear the Russian @-@ held Gulf of Riga in order to assist the German army , which was planning an assault on Riga itself . To do so , the German planners intended to drive off or destroy the Russian naval forces in the Gulf , which included the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Slava and a number of smaller gunboats and destroyers . The German battle fleet was accompanied by several mine @-@ warfare vessels , tasked first with clearing Russian minefields and then laying a series of their own minefields in the northern entrance to the Gulf to prevent Russian naval reinforcements from reaching the area . The assembled German fleet included Westfalen and her three sister ships , the four Helgoland @-@ class battleships , the battlecruisers Von der Tann , Moltke , and Seydlitz , and several pre @-@ dreadnoughts . The force operated under the command of Franz von Hipper , who had by now been promoted to vice admiral . The eight battleships were to provide cover for the forces engaging the Russian flotilla . The first attempt on 8 August was broken off , as it took too long to clear the Russian minefields . 
 On 16 August 1915 , a second attempt was made to enter the Gulf : Nassau and Posen , four light cruisers , and 31 torpedo boats managed to breach the Russian defenses . On the first day of the assault , two German light craft — the minesweeper T46 and the destroyer V99 — were sunk . The following day , Nassau and Posen battled Slava , scoring three hits on the Russian ship that forced her to retreat . By 19 August , the Russian minefields had been cleared and the flotilla entered the Gulf . However , reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted the Germans to call off the operation the following day . Admiral Hipper later remarked that " to keep valuable ships for a considerable time in a limited area in which enemy submarines were increasingly active , with the corresponding risk of damage and loss , was to indulge in a gamble out of all proportion to the advantage to be derived from the occupation of the Gulf before the capture of Riga from the land side . " In fact , the battlecruiser Moltke had been torpedoed that morning . 
 = = = = Return to the North Sea = = = = 
 By the end of August Westfalen and the rest of the High Seas Fleet had returned to their anchorages in the North Sea . The next operation conducted was a sweep into the North Sea on 11 – 12 September , though it ended without any action . Another sortie followed on 23 – 24 October during which the German fleet did not encounter any British forces . Another uneventful advance into the North Sea took place on 21 – 22 April 1916 . A bombardment mission followed two days later ; Westfalen joined the battleship support for Hipper 's battlecruisers while they attacked Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . During this operation , the battlecruiser Seydlitz was damaged by a British mine and had to return to port prematurely . Due to poor visibility , the operation was soon called off , leaving the British fleet no time to intercept the raiders . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Admiral Reinhard Scheer , who had succeeded Admirals von Ingenohl and Hugo von Pohl as the fleet commander , immediately planned another attack on the British coast . However , the damage to Seydlitz and condenser trouble on several of the III Battle Squadron dreadnoughts delayed the plan until the end of May 1916 . The German battlefleet departed the Jade at 03 : 30 on 31 May . Westfalen was assigned to the II Division of the I Battle Squadron , under the command of Rear Admiral W. Engelhardt . Westfalen was the last ship in the division , astern of her three sisters . The II Division was the last unit of dreadnoughts in the fleet ; they were followed by only the elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron . 
 Between 17 : 48 and 17 : 52 , eleven German dreadnoughts , including Westfalen , engaged and opened fire on the British 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , though the range and poor visibility prevented effective fire , which was soon checked . At 18 : 05 , Westfalen began firing again ; her target was a British light cruiser , most probably the Southampton . Despite the short distance , around 18 @,@ 000 metres ( 19 @,@ 690 yd ) , Westfalen scored no hits . Scheer had by this time called for maximum speed in order to pursue the British ships ; Westfalen made 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . By 19 : 30 when Scheer signaled " Go west " , the German fleet had faced the deployed Grand Fleet for a second time and was forced to turn away . In doing so , the order of the German line was reversed ; this would have put the II Squadron in the lead , but Captain Redlich of Westfalen noted that II Squadron was out of position and began his turn immediately , assuming the lead position . 
 Around 21 : 20 , Westfalen and her sister ships began to be engaged by the battlecruisers of the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron ; several large shells straddled ( fell to either side of ) the ship and rained splinters on her deck . Shortly thereafter , two torpedo tracks were spotted that turned out to be imaginary . The ships were then forced to slow down in order to allow the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group to pass ahead . Around 22 : 00 , Westfalen and Rheinland observed unidentified light forces in the gathering darkness . After flashing a challenge via searchlight that was ignored , the two ships turned away to starboard in order to evade any torpedoes that might have been fired . The rest of I Battle Squadron followed them . During the brief encounter , Westfalen fired seven of her 28 cm shells in the span of about two and a half minutes . Westfalen again assumed a position guiding the fleet , this time because Scheer wanted lead ships with greater protection against torpedoes than the pre @-@ dreadnoughts had . 
 At about 00 : 30 , the leading units of the German line encountered British destroyers and cruisers . A violent firefight at close range ensued ; Westfalen opened fire on the destroyer HMS Tipperary with her 15 cm and 8 @.@ 8 cm guns at a distance of about 1 @,@ 800 m ( 2 @,@ 000 yd ) . Her first salvo destroyed Tipperary 's bridge and forward deck gun . In the span of five minutes , Westfalen fired ninety @-@ two 15 cm and forty @-@ five 8 @.@ 8 cm rounds at Tipperary before turning 90 degrees to starboard to evade any torpedoes that might have been fired . Nassau and several cruisers and destroyers joined in the attack on Tipperary ; the ship was quickly turned into a burning wreck . The destroyer nevertheless continued to fire with her stern guns and launched her two starboard torpedoes . One of the British destroyers scored a hit on Westfalen 's bridge with its 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) guns , killing two men and wounding eight ; Captain Redlich was slightly wounded . At 00 : 50 , Westfalen spotted HMS Broke and briefly engaged her with her secondary guns ; in about 45 seconds she fired thirteen 15 cm and thirteen 8 @.@ 8 cm shells before turning away . Broke was engaged by other German warships , including the cruiser Rostock ; she was hit at least seven times and suffered 42 dead , six missing , and 34 wounded crew members . An officer aboard the light cruiser Southampton described Broke as " an absolute shambles . " Despite the serious damage inflicted , Broke managed to withdraw from the battle and reach port . Just after 01 : 00 , Westfalen 's searchlights fell on the destroyer Fortune , which was wrecked and set ablaze in a matter of seconds by Westfalen and Rheinland . She also managed to sink the British destroyer , HMS Turbulent 
 Despite the ferocity of the night fighting , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British destroyer forces and reached Horns Reef by 4 : 00 on 1 June . With Westfalen in the lead , the German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later , where the battleship and two of her sisters took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead . Over the course of the battle , the ship had fired fifty @-@ one 28 cm shells , one @-@ hundred and seventy @-@ six 15 cm rounds , and one hundred and six 8 @.@ 8 cm shells . Repair work followed immediately in Wilhelmshaven and was completed by 17 June . 
 = = = = Raid of 18 – 19 August = = = = 
 Another fleet advance followed on 18 – 22 August , during which the I Scouting Group battlecruisers were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . As only two of the four German battlecruisers were still in fighting condition , three dreadnoughts were assigned to the Scouting Group for the operation : Markgraf , Grosser Kurfürst ( or Großer Kurfürst ) , and the newly commissioned Bayern . The High Seas Fleet , including Westfalen at the rear of the line , would trail behind and provide cover . However , at 06 : 00 on 19 August , Westfalen was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E23 , some 55 nautical miles ( 102 km ; 63 mi ) north of Terschelling . The ship took in approximately 800 metric tons ( 790 long tons ; 880 short tons ) of water , but the torpedo bulkhead held . Three torpedo @-@ boats were detached from the fleet to escort the damaged ship back to port ; Westfalen made 14 kn ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) on the return trip . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Admiral Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . Repairs to Westfalen lasted until 26 September . 
 Following the repair work , Westfalen briefly went into the Baltic Sea for training , before returning to the North Sea on 4 October . The fleet then advanced as far as the Dogger Bank on 19 – 20 October . The ship remained in port for the majority of 1917 . The ship did not actively take part in Operation Albion in the Baltic , though she was stationed off <unk> to prevent a possible British incursion into the area . 
 = = = = Expedition to Finland = = = = 
 On 22 February 1918 , Westfalen and Rheinland were tasked with a mission to Finland to support German army units to be deployed there . The Finns were engaged in a civil war ; the White Finns sought a conservative government free from influence from the newly created Soviet Union , while the Red Guards preferred Soviet @-@ style communism . On 23 February , the two ships took on the 14th Jäger Battalion , and early on 24 February they departed for the Åland Islands . Åland was to be a forward operating base , from which the port of Hanko would be secured , following an assault on the capital of Helsinki . The task force reached the Åland Islands on 5 March , where they encountered the Swedish coastal defense ships Sverige , Thor , and Oscar II . Negotiations ensued , which resulted in the landing of the German troops on Åland on 7 March ; Westfalen then returned to Danzig . 
 Westfalen remained in Danzig until 31 March , when she departed for Finland with Posen ; the ships arrived at Russarö , which was the outer defense for Hanko , by 3 April . The German army quickly took the port . The task force then proceeded to Helsingfors ; on 9 April Westfalen stood off Reval , organizing the invasion force . Two days later the ship passed into the harbor at Helsingfors and landed the soldiers ; she supported their advance with her main guns . The Red Guards were defeated within three days . The ship remained in Helsingfors until 30 April , by which time the White government had been installed firmly in power . 
 Following the operation , Westfalen returned to the North Sea where she rejoined the I Battle Squadron . On 11 August , Westfalen , Posen , Kaiser , and Kaiserin steamed out towards Terschelling to support German patrols in the area . While en route , Westfalen suffered serious damage to her boilers that reduced her speed to 16 kn ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . After returning to port , she was decommissioned and employed as an artillery training ship . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the German collapse in November 1918 , a significant portion of the High Seas Fleet was interned in Scapa Flow under the terms of the Armistice . Westfalen and her three sisters — the oldest dreadnoughts in the German navy @-@ were not among the ships listed for internment , so they remained in German ports . During the internment , a copy of The Times informed the German commander , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , that the Armistice was to expire at noon on 21 June 1919 , the deadline by which Germany was to have signed the peace treaty . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships after the Armistice expired . To prevent this , he decided to scuttle his ships at the first opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers ; at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . 
 As a result of the scuttling at Scapa Flow , the Allies demanded replacements for the ships that had been sunk . Westfalen was struck from the German naval list on 5 November 1919 and subsequently handed over to the Allies under the contract name " D " on 5 August 1920 . The ship was then sold to ship @-@ breakers in Birkenhead , where she was broken up for scrap by 1924 . 
 = Magic Johnson = 
 Earvin " Magic " Johnson Jr . ( born August 14 , 1959 ) is an American retired professional basketball player who played point guard for the Los Angeles Lakers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) for 13 seasons . After winning championships in high school and college , Johnson was selected first overall in the 1979 NBA draft by the Lakers . He won a championship and an NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award in his rookie season , and won four more championships with the Lakers during the 1980s . Johnson retired abruptly in 1991 after announcing that he had contracted HIV , but returned to play in the 1992 All @-@ Star Game , winning the All @-@ Star MVP Award . After protests from his fellow players , he retired again for four years , but returned in 1996 , at age 36 , to play 32 games for the Lakers before retiring for the third and final time . 
 Johnson 's career achievements include three NBA MVP Awards , nine NBA Finals appearances , twelve All @-@ Star games , and ten All @-@ NBA First and Second Team nominations . He led the league in regular @-@ season assists four times , and is the NBA 's all @-@ time leader in average assists per game , at 11 @.@ 2 . Johnson was a member of the 1992 United States men 's Olympic basketball team ( " The Dream Team " ) , which won the Olympic gold medal in 1992 . After leaving the NBA in 1992 , Johnson formed the Magic Johnson All @-@ Stars , a barnstorming team that travelled around the world playing exhibition games . Johnson was honored as one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History in 1996 . 
 Johnson became a two @-@ time inductee into the Basketball Hall of Fame — being enshrined in 2002 for his individual career , and again in 2010 as a member of the " Dream Team " . He was rated the greatest NBA point guard of all time by ESPN in 2007 . His friendship and rivalry with Boston Celtics star Larry Bird , whom he faced in the 1979 NCAA finals and three NBA championship series , are well documented . 
 Since his retirement , Johnson has been an advocate for HIV / AIDS prevention and safe sex , as well as an entrepreneur , philanthropist , broadcaster and motivational speaker . His public announcement of his HIV @-@ positive status in 1991 helped dispel the stereotype , still widely held at the time , that HIV was a " gay disease " that heterosexuals need not worry about ; his bravery in making this announcement was widely commended . Named by Ebony Magazine as one of America 's most influential black businessmen in 2009 , Johnson has numerous business interests , and was a part @-@ owner of the Lakers for several years . Johnson also is part of a group of investors that purchased the Los Angeles Dodgers in 2012 and the Los Angeles Sparks in 2014 . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Earvin Johnson Jr. was born in Lansing , Michigan to Earvin Sr. , a General Motors assembly worker , and Christine , a school custodian . Johnson , who had six siblings , was influenced by his parents ' strong work ethic . Johnson 's mother spent many hours after work each night cleaning their home and preparing the next day 's meals , while his father did janitorial work at a used car lot and collected garbage , all while never missing a day at General Motors . Earvin Jr. would often help his father on the garbage route , and he was teased by neighborhood children who called him " Garbage Man . " 
 Johnson grew up in Lansing , and came to love basketball as a youngster . His favorite basketball player was Bill Russell , whom he admired more for his many championships than his athletic ability . He also idolized players such as Earl Monroe and Marques Haynes , and practiced " all day . " Magic Johnson came from an athletic family . His father played high school basketball in his home state of Mississippi , and Johnson learned the finer points about the game from him . Johnson 's mother , originally from North Carolina , had also played basketball as a child , and she grew up watching her brothers play the game . 
 By the time he had reached the eighth grade , Johnson had begun to think about a future in basketball . He had become a dominant junior high player , once scoring 48 points in a game . Johnson looked forward to playing at Sexton High School a school with a very successful basketball team and a great tradition that also happened to be only five blocks from his home . His plans underwent a dramatic change when he learned that he would be bused to predominately white Everett High School instead of going to Sexton , which was predominately black . Johnson 's sister Pearl and his brother Larry had bused to Everett the previous year and did not have a pleasant experience . There were incidents of racism , with rocks being thrown at buses carrying black students , and white parents refusing to send their children to school . Larry was kicked off the basketball team after a confrontation during practice , prompting him to beg Earvin not to play . Johnson did join the basketball team but became angry after several days when his new teammates ignored him during practice , not even passing the ball . He nearly got into a fight with another player before head coach George Fox intervened . Eventually Johnson accepted his situation , and the small group of black students looked to him as their leader . When recalling the events in his autobiography , My Life , he talked about how his time at Everett had changed him : 
 As I look back on it today , I see the whole picture very differently . It 's true that I hated missing out on Sexton . And the first few months , I was miserable at Everett . But being bused to Everett turned out to be one of the best things that ever happened to me . It got me out of my own little world and taught me how to understand white people , how to communicate and deal with them . 
 Johnson was first dubbed " Magic " as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old sophomore playing for Everett High School , when he recorded a triple @-@ double of 36 points , 18 rebounds and 16 assists . After the game , Fred <unk> Jr . , a sports writer for the Lansing State Journal , gave him the moniker despite the belief of Johnson 's mother , a Christian , that the name was sacrilegious . In his final high school season , Johnson led Lansing Everett to a 27 – 1 win – loss record while averaging 28 @.@ 8 points and 16 @.@ 8 rebounds per game , and took his team to an overtime victory in the state championship game . Johnson dedicated the championship victory to his best friend Reggie Chastine , who was killed in a car accident the previous summer . He gave Chastine much of the credit for his development as a basketball player and as a person , saying years later , " I doubted myself back then . " Johnson and Chastine were almost always together , playing basketball or riding around in Chastine 's car . Upon learning of Chastine 's death , Magic ran from his home , crying uncontrollably . Johnson , who finished his high school career with two All @-@ State selections , was considered at the time to be the best high school player ever to come out of Michigan and was also named to the 1977 McDonald 's All @-@ American team . 
 = = = Michigan State University = = = 
 Although Johnson was recruited by several top @-@ ranked colleges such as Indiana and UCLA , he decided to play close to home . His college decision came down to Michigan and Michigan State in East Lansing . He ultimately decided to attend Michigan State when coach Jud Heathcote told him he could play the point guard position . The talent already on Michigan State 's roster also drew him to the program . 
 Johnson did not initially aspire to play professionally , focusing instead on his communication studies major and on his desire to become a television commentator . Playing with future NBA draftees Greg Kelser , Jay Vincent and Mike Brkovich , Johnson averaged 17 @.@ 0 points , 7 @.@ 9 rebounds , and 7 @.@ 4 assists per game as a freshman , and led the Spartans to a 25 – 5 record , the Big Ten Conference title , and a berth in the 1978 NCAA Tournament . The Spartans reached the Elite Eight , but lost narrowly to eventual national champion Kentucky . 
 During the 1978 – 79 season , Michigan State again qualified for the NCAA Tournament , where they advanced to the championship game and faced Indiana State , which was led by senior Larry Bird . In what was the most @-@ watched college basketball game ever , Michigan State defeated Indiana State 75 – 64 , and Johnson was voted Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four . After two years in college , during which he averaged 17 @.@ 1 points , 7 @.@ 6 rebounds , and 7 @.@ 9 assists per game , Johnson entered the 1979 NBA draft . After the 1994 – 95 season , Heathcote stepped down as coach of the Spartans , and on June 8 , 1995 , Johnson returned to the Breslin Center to play in the Jud Heathcote All @-@ Star Tribute Game . He led all scorers with 39 points . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Rookie season in the NBA ( 1979 – 80 ) = = = 
 Johnson was drafted first overall in 1979 by the Los Angeles Lakers . Johnson said that what was " most amazing " about joining the Lakers was the chance to play alongside Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , the team 's 7 ft 2 in ( 2 @.@ 18 m ) center who became the leading scorer in NBA history . Despite Abdul @-@ Jabbar 's dominance , he had failed to win a championship with the Lakers , and Johnson was expected to help them achieve that goal . Johnson averaged 18 @.@ 0 points , 7 @.@ 7 rebounds , and 7 @.@ 3 assists per game for the season , was selected to the NBA All @-@ Rookie Team , and was named an NBA All @-@ Star Game starter . 
 The Lakers compiled a 60 – 22 record in the regular season and reached the 1980 NBA Finals , in which they faced the Philadelphia 76ers , who were led by forward Julius Erving . The Lakers took a 3 – 2 lead in the series , but Abdul @-@ Jabbar , who averaged 33 points a game in the series , sprained his ankle in Game 5 and could not play in Game 6 . Paul Westhead decided to start Johnson at center in Game 6 ; Johnson recorded 42 points , 15 rebounds , 7 assists , and 3 steals in a 123 – 107 win , while playing guard , forward , and center at different times during the game . Johnson became the only rookie to win the NBA Finals MVP award , and his clutch performance is still regarded as one of the finest in NBA history . He also became one of four players to win NCAA and NBA championships in consecutive years . 
 = = = Ups and downs ( 1980 – 83 ) = = = 
 Early in the 1980 – 81 season , Johnson was sidelined after he suffered torn cartilage in his left knee . He missed 45 games , and said that his rehabilitation was the " most down " he had ever felt . Johnson returned before the start of the 1981 playoffs , but the Lakers ' then @-@ assistant and future head coach Pat Riley later said Johnson 's much @-@ anticipated return made the Lakers a " divided team " . The 54 @-@ win Lakers faced the 40 – 42 Houston Rockets in the first round of playoffs , where Houston upset the Lakers 2 – 1 after Johnson <unk> a last @-@ second shot in Game 3 . 
 In 1981 , after the 1980 – 81 season , Johnson signed a 25 @-@ year , $ 25 @-@ million contract with the Lakers , which was the highest @-@ paying contract in sports history up to that point . Early in the 1981 – 82 season , Johnson had a heated dispute with Westhead , who Johnson said made the Lakers " slow " and " predictable " . After Johnson demanded to be traded , Lakers owner Jerry Buss fired Westhead and replaced him with Riley . Although Johnson denied responsibility for Westhead 's firing , he was booed across the league , even by Laker fans . However , Buss was also unhappy with the Lakers offense and had intended on firing Westhead days before the Westhead – Johnson altercation , but assistant GM Jerry West and GM Bill Sharman had convinced Buss to delay his decision . Despite his off @-@ court troubles , Johnson averaged 18 @.@ 6 points , 9 @.@ 6 rebounds , 9 @.@ 5 assists , and a league @-@ high 2 @.@ 7 steals per game , and was voted a member of the All @-@ NBA Second Team . He also joined Wilt Chamberlain and Oscar Robertson as the only NBA players to tally at least 700 points , 700 rebounds , and 700 assists in the same season . The Lakers advanced through the 1982 playoffs and faced Philadelphia for the second time in three years in the 1982 NBA Finals . After a triple @-@ double from Johnson in Game 6 , the Lakers defeated the Sixers 4 – 2 , as Johnson won his second NBA Finals MVP award . During the championship series against the Sixers , Johnson averaged 16 @.@ 2 points on .533 shooting , 10 @.@ 8 rebounds , 8 @.@ 0 assists , and 2 @.@ 5 steals per game . Johnson later said that his third season was when the Lakers first became a great team , and he credited their success to Riley . 
 During the 1982 – 83 NBA season , Johnson averaged 16 @.@ 8 points , 10 @.@ 5 assists , and 8 @.@ 6 rebounds per game and earned his first All @-@ NBA First Team nomination . The Lakers again reached the Finals , and for a third time faced the Sixers , who featured center Moses Malone as well as Erving . With Johnson 's teammates Norm Nixon , James Worthy and Bob McAdoo all hobbled by injuries , the Lakers were swept by the Sixers , and Malone was crowned the Finals MVP . In a losing effort against Philadelphia , Johnson averaged 19 @.@ 0 points on .403 shooting , 12 @.@ 5 assists , and 7 @.@ 8 rebounds per game . 
 = = = Battles against the Celtics ( 1983 – 87 ) = = = 
 Prior to Johnson 's fifth season , West — who had become the Lakers general manager — traded Nixon to free Johnson from sharing the ball @-@ handling responsibilities . Johnson that season averaged a double @-@ double of 17 @.@ 6 points and 13 @.@ 1 assists , as well as 7 @.@ 3 rebounds per game . The Lakers reached the Finals for the third year in a row , where Johnson 's Lakers and Bird 's Celtics met for the first time in the post @-@ season . The Lakers won the first game , and led by two points in Game 2 with 18 seconds to go , but after a layup by Gerald Henderson , Johnson failed to get a shot off before the final buzzer sounded , and the Lakers lost 124 – 121 in overtime . In Game 3 , Johnson responded with 21 assists in a 137 – 104 win , but in Game 4 , he again made several crucial errors late in the contest . In the final minute of the game , Johnson had the ball stolen by Celtics center Robert Parish , and then missed two free throws that could have won the game . The Celtics won Game 4 in overtime , and the teams split the next two games . In the decisive Game 7 in Boston , as the Lakers trailed by three points in the final minute , opposing point guard Dennis Johnson stole the ball from Johnson , a play that effectively ended the series . Friends Isiah Thomas and Mark Aguirre consoled him that night , talking until the morning in his Boston hotel room amidst fan celebrations on the street . During the Finals , Johnson averaged 18 @.@ 0 points on .560 shooting , 13 @.@ 6 assists , and 7 @.@ 7 rebounds per game . Johnson later described the series as " the one championship we should have had but didn 't get " . 
 In the 1984 – 85 regular season , Johnson averaged 18 @.@ 3 points , 12 @.@ 6 assists , and 6 @.@ 2 rebounds per game and led the Lakers into the 1985 NBA Finals , where they faced the Celtics again . The series started poorly for the Lakers when they allowed an NBA Finals record 148 points to the Celtics in a 34 @-@ point loss in Game 1 . However , Abdul @-@ Jabbar , who was now 38 years old , scored 30 points and grabbed 17 rebounds in Game 2 , and his 36 points in a Game 5 win were instrumental in establishing a 3 – 2 lead for Los Angeles . After the Lakers defeated the Celtics in six games , Abdul @-@ Jabbar and Johnson , who averaged 18 @.@ 3 points on <unk> shooting , 14 @.@ 0 assists , and 6 @.@ 8 rebounds per game in the championship series , said the Finals win was the highlight of their careers . 
 Johnson again averaged a double @-@ double in the 1985 – 86 NBA season , with 18 @.@ 8 points , 12 @.@ 6 assists , and 5 @.@ 9 rebounds per game . The Lakers advanced to the Western Conference Finals , but were unable to defeat the Houston Rockets , who advanced to the Finals in five games . In the next season , Johnson averaged a career @-@ high of 23 @.@ 9 points , as well as 12 @.@ 2 assists and 6 @.@ 3 rebounds per game , and earned his first regular season MVP award . The Lakers met the Celtics for the third time in the NBA Finals , and in Game 4 Johnson hit a last @-@ second hook shot over Celtics big men Parish and Kevin McHale to win the game 107 – 106 . The game @-@ winning shot , which Johnson dubbed his " junior , junior , junior sky @-@ hook " , helped Los Angeles defeat Boston in six games . Johnson was awarded his third Finals MVP title after averaging 26 @.@ 2 points on <unk> shooting , 13 @.@ 0 assists , 8 @.@ 0 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 33 steals per game . 
 = = = Repeat and falling short ( 1987 – 91 ) = = = 
 Before the 1987 – 88 NBA season , Lakers coach Pat Riley publicly promised that they would defend the NBA title , even though no team had won consecutive titles since the Celtics did so in the 1969 NBA Finals . Johnson had another productive season with averages of 19 @.@ 6 points , 11 @.@ 9 assists , and 6 @.@ 2 rebounds per game . In the 1988 playoffs , the Lakers survived two 4 – 3 series against the Utah Jazz and the Dallas Mavericks to reach the Finals and face Thomas and the Detroit Pistons , known as the " Bad Boys " for their physical style of play . Johnson and Thomas greeted each other with a kiss on the cheek before the opening tip of Game 1 , which they called a display of brotherly love . After the teams split the first six games , Lakers forward and Finals MVP James Worthy had his first career triple @-@ double of 36 points , 16 rebounds , and 10 assists , and led his team to a 108 – 105 win . Despite not being named MVP , Johnson had a strong championship series , averaging 21 @.@ 1 points on .550 shooting , 13 @.@ 0 assists , and 5 @.@ 7 rebounds per game . It was the fifth and final NBA championship of his career . 
 In the 1988 – 89 NBA season , Johnson 's 22 @.@ 5 points , 12 @.@ 8 assists , and 7 @.@ 9 rebounds per game earned him his second MVP award , and the Lakers reached the 1989 NBA Finals , in which they again faced the Pistons . However , after Johnson went down with a hamstring injury in Game 2 , the Lakers were no match for the Pistons , who swept them 4 – 0 . 
 Playing without Abdul @-@ Jabbar for the first time , Johnson won his third MVP award after a strong 1989 – 90 NBA season in which he averaged 22 @.@ 3 points , 11 @.@ 5 assists , and 6 @.@ 6 rebounds per game . However , the Lakers bowed out to the Phoenix Suns in the Western Conference semifinals , which was the Lakers ' earliest playoffs elimination in nine years . Mike Dunleavy became the Lakers ' head coach in 1990 – 91 , when Johnson had grown to be the league 's third @-@ oldest point guard . He had become more powerful and stronger than in his earlier years , but was also slower and less nimble . Under Dunleavy , the offense used more half @-@ court sets , and the team had a renewed emphasis on defense . Johnson performed well during the season , with averages of 19 @.@ 4 points , 12 @.@ 5 assists , and 7 @.@ 0 rebounds per game , and the Lakers reached the 1991 NBA Finals . There they faced the Chicago Bulls , led by shooting guard Michael Jordan , a five @-@ time scoring champion regarded as the finest player of his era . Although the series was portrayed as a matchup between Johnson and Jordan , Bulls forward Scottie Pippen defended effectively against Johnson . Despite two triple @-@ doubles from Johnson during the series , finals MVP Jordan led his team to a 4 – 1 win . In the last championship series of his career , Johnson averaged 18 @.@ 6 points on .431 shooting , 12 @.@ 4 assists , and 8 @.@ 0 rebounds per game . 
 = = = HIV announcement and Olympics ( 1991 – 92 ) = = = 
 After a physical before the 1991 – 92 NBA season , Johnson discovered that he had tested positive for HIV . In a press conference held on November 7 , 1991 , Johnson made a public announcement that he would retire immediately . He stated that his wife Cookie and their unborn child did not have HIV , and that he would dedicate his life to " battle this deadly disease " . Johnson initially said that he did not know how he contracted the disease , but later acknowledged that it was through having multiple sexual partners during his playing career . At the time , only a small percentage of HIV @-@ positive American men had contracted it from heterosexual sex , and it was initially rumored that Johnson was gay or bisexual , although he denied both . Johnson later accused Isiah Thomas of spreading the rumors , a claim Thomas denied . Johnson 's HIV announcement became a major news story in the United States , and in 2004 was named as ESPN 's seventh @-@ most memorable moment of the past 25 years . Many articles praised Johnson as a hero , and former U.S. President George H. W. Bush said , " For me , Magic is a hero , a hero for anyone who loves sports . " 
 Despite his retirement , Johnson was voted by fans as a starter for the 1992 NBA All @-@ Star Game at Orlando Arena , although his former teammates Byron Scott and A. C. Green said that Johnson should not play , and several NBA players , including Utah Jazz forward Karl Malone , argued that they would be at risk of contamination if Johnson suffered an open wound while on court . Johnson led the West to a 153 – 113 win and was crowned All @-@ Star MVP after recording 25 points , 9 assists , and 5 rebounds . The game ended after he made a last @-@ minute three @-@ pointer , and players from both teams ran onto the court to congratulate Johnson . 
 Johnson was chosen to compete in the 1992 Summer Olympics for the US basketball team , dubbed the " Dream Team " because of the NBA stars on the roster . The Dream Team , which along with Johnson included fellow Hall of Famers such as Michael Jordan , Charles Barkley , and Larry Bird , was considered unbeatable . The Dream Team dominated the competition , winning the gold medal with an 8 – 0 record , beating their opponents by an average of 43 @.@ 8 points per game . Johnson averaged 8 @.@ 0 points per game during the Olympics , and his 5 @.@ 5 assists per game was second on the team . Johnson played infrequently because of knee problems , but he received standing ovations from the crowd , and used the opportunity to inspire HIV @-@ positive people . 
 = = = Post @-@ Olympics and later life = = = 
 Before the 1992 – 93 NBA season , Johnson announced his intention to stage an NBA comeback . After practicing and playing in several pre @-@ season games , he returned to retirement before the start of the regular season , citing controversy over his return sparked by opposition from several active players . In an August , 2011 interview Johnson said that in retrospect , he wished that he had never retired after being diagnosed with HIV , saying , " If I knew what I know now , I wouldn 't have retired . " Johnson said that despite the physical , highly competitive practices and scrimmages leading up to the 1992 Olympics , some of those same teammates still expressed concerns about his return to the NBA . He said that he retired because he " didn 't want to hurt the game . " 
 During his retirement , Johnson has written a book on safe sex , run several businesses , worked for NBC as a commentator , and toured Asia , Australia and New Zealand with a basketball team of former college and NBA players . In 1985 , Johnson created " A Midsummer Night 's Magic " , a yearly charity event which included a celebrity basketball game and a black tie dinner . The proceeds went to the United Negro College Fund , and Johnson held this event for twenty years , ending in 2005 . " A Midsummer Night 's Magic " eventually came under the umbrella of the Magic Johnson Foundation , which he founded in 1991 . The 1992 event , which was the first one held after Johnson 's appearance in the 1992 Olympics , raised over $ 1 @.@ 3 million for <unk> . Magic Johnson joined Shaquille O 'Neal and celebrity coach Spike Lee to lead the blue team to a 147 – 132 victory over the white team , which was coached by Arsenio Hall . 
 = = = = Return to the Lakers as coach and player ( 1994 , 1996 ) = = = = 
 Johnson returned to the NBA as coach of the Lakers near the end of the 1993 – 94 NBA season , replacing Randy Pfund , and Bill <unk> , who served as an interim coach for two games . Johnson , who took the job at the urging of owner Jerry Buss , admitted " I 've always had the desire ( to coach ) in the back of my mind . " He insisted that his health was not an issue , while downplaying questions about returning as a player , saying , " I 'm retired . Let 's leave it at that . " Amid speculation from general manager Jerry West that he may only coach until the end of the season , Johnson took over a team that had a 28 – 38 record , and won his first game as head coach , a 110 – 101 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks . He was coaching a team that had five of his former teammates on the roster : Vlade Divac , Elden Campbell , Tony Smith , Kurt Rambis , James Worthy , who would retire after the season , and Michael Cooper , who was brought in as an assistant . Johnson , who still had a guaranteed player contract that would pay him $ 14 @.@ 6 million during the 1994 – 95 NBA season , signed a separate contract to coach the team that had no compensation . The Lakers played well initially , winning five of their first six games under Johnson , but after losing the next five games , Johnson announced that he was resigning as coach after the season . The Lakers finished the season on a ten @-@ game losing streak , and Johnson 's final record as a head coach was 5 – 11 . Stating that it was never his dream to coach , he chose instead to purchase a 5 % share of the team in June 1994 . 
 At the age of 36 , Johnson attempted another comeback as a player when he re @-@ joined the Lakers during the 1995 – 96 NBA season . During his retirement , Johnson began intense workouts to help his fight against HIV , raising his bench press from 135 to 300 pounds , and increasing his weight to 255 pounds . He officially returned to the team on January 29 , 1996 , and played his first game the following day against the Golden State Warriors . Coming off the bench , Johnson had 19 points , 8 rebounds , and 10 assists to help the Lakers to a 128 – 118 victory . On February 14 , Johnson recorded the final triple @-@ double of his career , when he scored 15 points , along with 10 rebounds and 13 assists in a victory against the Atlanta Hawks . Playing power forward , he averaged 14 @.@ 6 points , 6 @.@ 9 assists , and 5 @.@ 7 rebounds per game in 32 games , and finished tied for 12th place with Charles Barkley in voting for the MVP Award . The Lakers had a record of 22 – 10 in the games Johnson played , and he considered his final comeback " a success . " While Johnson played well in 1996 , there were struggles both on and off the court . Cedric Ceballos , upset over a reduction in his playing time after Johnson 's arrival , left the team for several days . He missed two games and was stripped of his title as team captain . Nick Van Exel received a seven @-@ game suspension for bumping referee Ron Garretson during a game on April 9 . Johnson was publicly critical of Van Exel , saying his actions were " inexcusable . " Ironically Johnson was himself suspended five days later , when he bumped referee Scott Foster , missing three games . He also missed several games due to a calf injury . Despite these difficulties , the Lakers finished with a record of 53 – 29 and fourth seed in the NBA Playoffs . Although they were facing the defending NBA champion Houston Rockets , the Lakers had home court advantage in the five @-@ game series . The Lakers played poorly in a Game 1 loss , prompting Johnson to express frustration with his role in coach Del Harris ' offense . Johnson led the way to a Game 2 victory with 26 points , but averaged only 7 @.@ 5 points per game for the remainder of the series , which the Rockets won three games to one . 
 After the Lakers lost to the Houston Rockets in the first round of the playoffs , Johnson initially expressed a desire to return to the team for the 1996 – 97 NBA season , but he also talked about joining another team as a free agent , hoping to see more playing time at point guard instead of power forward . A few days later Johnson changed his mind and retired permanently , saying , " I am going out on my terms , something I couldn 't say when I aborted a comeback in 1992 . " 
 = = = = Magic Johnson All @-@ Stars = = = = 
 Determined to play competitive basketball despite being out of the NBA , Johnson formed the Magic Johnson All @-@ Stars , a barnstorming team composed of former NBA and college players . In 1994 Johnson joined with former pros Reggie <unk> , John Long , Earl Cureton , and Lester Conner , as his team played games in Australia , Israel , South America , Europe , New Zealand , and Japan . They also toured the United States , playing five games against teams from the CBA . In the final game of the CBA series , Magic Johnson had 30 points , 17 rebounds , and 13 assists , leading the All @-@ Stars to a 126 – 121 victory over the Oklahoma City Cavalry . By the time he returned to the Lakers in 1996 , the Magic Johnson All @-@ Stars had amassed a record of 55 – 0 , and Johnson was earning as much as $ 365 @,@ 000 per game . Johnson played with the team frequently over the next several years , with possibly the most memorable game occurring in November , 2001 . Magic , at the age of 42 , played with the All @-@ Stars against his alma mater , Michigan State . Although he played in a celebrity game to honor coach Jud <unk> in 1995 , this was Johnson 's first meaningful game played in his hometown of Lansing in 22 years . Playing in front of a sold out arena , Johnson had a triple @-@ double and played the entire game , but his all @-@ star team lost to the Spartans by two points . Johnson 's half court shot at the buzzer would have won the game , but it fell short . On November 1 , 2002 Johnson returned to play a second exhibition game against Michigan State . Playing with the Canberra Cannons of Australia 's National Basketball League instead of his usual group of players , Johnson 's team defeated the Spartans 104 – 85 , as he scored 12 points , with 10 assists and 10 rebounds . 
 = = = = Brief period in Scandinavia = = = = 
 In 1999 , Johnson joined the Swedish squad M7 Borås ( now known as ' Borås Basket ' ) , and was undefeated in five games with the team . Johnson also became a co @-@ owner of the club ; however , the project failed after one season and the club was forced into reconstruction . He later joined the Danish team The Great Danes . 
 = = Off the court = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Johnson first fathered a son in 1981 , when Andre Johnson was born to Melissa Mitchell . Although Andre was raised by his mother , he visited Johnson each summer , and as of October 2005 was working for Magic Johnson Enterprises as a marketing director . In 1991 , Johnson married <unk> " Cookie " Kelly in a small wedding in Lansing which included guests Thomas , Aguirre , and Herb Williams . Johnson and Cookie have one son , Earvin III ( EJ ) , who is openly gay and a star on the reality show Rich Kids of Beverly Hills . The couple adopted a daughter , Elisa , in 1995 . Johnson resides in Dana Point , California . 
 Johnson is a Christian and has said his faith is " the most important thing " in his life . 
 In 2010 , Magic Johnson and current and former NBA players such as LeBron James , Dwyane Wade , and Bill Russell , as well as Maya Moore from the WNBA , played a basketball game with President Barack Obama as an exhibition for a group of military troops who had been injured in action . The game was played at a gym inside Fort McNair , and reporters covering the President were not allowed to enter . The basketball game was part of festivities organized to celebrate Obama 's 49th birthday . 
 = = = Media figure and business interests = = = 
 In 1998 , Johnson hosted a late night talk show on the Fox network called The Magic Hour , but the show was canceled after two months because of low ratings . Shortly after the cancellation of his talk show , Magic Johnson started a record label . The label , initially called Magic 32 Records , was renamed Magic Johnson Music when Johnson signed a joint venture with MCA in 2000 . Magic Johnson Music signed R & B artist Avant as its first act . Johnson also co @-@ promoted Janet Jackson 's Velvet Rope Tour through his company <unk> . He has also worked as a motivational speaker , and was an NBA commentator for Turner Network Television for seven years , before becoming a studio analyst for ESPN 's NBA Countdown in 2008 . 
 Johnson runs Magic Johnson Enterprises , a conglomerate company that has a net worth of $ 700 million ; its subsidiaries include Magic Johnson Productions , a promotional company ; Magic Johnson Theaters , a nationwide chain of movie theaters ; and Magic Johnson Entertainment , a film studio . In addition to these business ventures , Johnson has also created the Magic Card , a pre @-@ paid MasterCard aimed at helping low @-@ income people save money and participate in electronic commerce . In 2006 , Johnson created a contract food service with Sodexo USA called Sodexo @-@ Magic . In 2004 , Johnson and his partner Ken Lombard , sold Magic Johnson Theaters to Loews <unk> Entertainment in 2004 . The first Magic Johnson Theater located in the Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza , closed in 2010 and re @-@ opened in 2011 as Rave Cinema 15 . 
 Johnson began thinking of life after basketball while still playing with the Lakers . He wondered why so many athletes had failed at business , and sought advice . During his seventh season in the NBA , he had a meeting with Michael Ovitz , CEO of Creative Artists Agency . Ovitz encouraged him to start reading business magazines and to use every connection available to him . Johnson learned everything he could about business , often meeting with corporate executives during road trips . Johnson 's first foray into business , a high @-@ end sporting goods store named Magic 32 , failed after only one year , costing him $ 200 @,@ 000 . The experience taught him to listen to his customers and find out what products they wanted . Johnson has become a leading voice on how to invest in urban communities , creating redevelopment opportunities in underserved areas , most notably through his movie theaters and his partnership with Starbucks . He went to Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz with the idea that he could successfully open the coffee shops in urban areas . After showing Schultz the tremendous buying power of minorities , Johnson was able to purchase 125 Starbucks stores , which reported higher than average per capita sales . The partnership , called Urban Coffee Opportunities , placed Starbucks in locations such as Detroit , Washington , D.C. , Harlem , and the Crenshaw District of Los Angeles . Johnson sold his remaining interest in the stores back to the company in 2010 , ending a successful twelve @-@ year partnership . Johnson has also invested in urban California real estate and financial service companies catering to America 's underserved markets via his Canyon @-@ Johnson and Yucaipa @-@ Johnson funds . Another major project is with Chicago @-@ based Aon Corp. , an insurance services company is designed to promote minority businesses . 
 In 1994 , Johnson became a minority owner of the Lakers , having reportedly paid more than $ 10 million for part ownership . He also held the title of team vice president . Johnson sold his ownership stake in the Lakers in October 2010 to Patrick Soon @-@ Shiong , a Los Angeles surgeon and professor at UCLA , but continued as an unpaid vice president for the team . 
 In the wake of the Donald Sterling controversy , limited media reports indicated that Johnson had expressed an interest in purchasing the Los Angeles Clippers franchise . 
 In 2015 , Johnson completed its planned acquisition for a " majority , controlling interest " in <unk> Life Insurance Company , which manages $ 14 @.@ 5 billion in annuities , life insurance and other financial products . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers = = = 
 In January 2012 , Johnson joined with Guggenheim Partners and Stan Kasten in a bid for ownership of the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team . In March 2012 , Johnson 's ownership group was announced as the winner of the proceedings to buy the Dodgers . The Johnson @-@ led group , which also includes movie executive Peter Guber , paid $ 2 billion for the Dodgers , the largest amount paid for a professional sports team . While Magic Johnson is considered the leader of the ownership group , the controlling owner is Mark Walter , chief executive officer for Guggenheim Partners . Peter Guber , who is co @-@ owner of the Golden State Warriors , owns a small stake in the Dodgers along with Johnson . Johnson and Guber are also partners in the Dayton Dragons , a minor league baseball team that has sold out 844 consecutive games , a record for professional sports . 
 = = = Los Angeles Sparks = = = 
 Together with Guggenheim , Johnson was also involved in the February 2014 purchase of the Los Angeles Sparks team in the WNBA . As such , in 2014 Johnson was named one of <unk> 's Impact 25 . 
 = = = Los Angeles Football Club = = = 
 Johnson announced his co @-@ ownership of a future Major League Soccer expansion franchise based in Los Angeles on October 30 , 2014 . The temporary name is Los Angeles Football Club while the ownership group explores a permanent name . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Johnson is a supporter of the Democratic Party — in 2006 , he publicly endorsed Phil <unk> for governor of California , in 2007 he supported Hillary Clinton in her presidential campaign , and in 2010 he endorsed Barbara Boxer in her race for re @-@ election to the US Senate . In 2012 , he endorsed Barack Obama for President . He endorsed and appeared in campaign ads for unsuccessful Los Angeles mayoral candidate Wendy <unk> in 2013 . In 2015 , he once again endorsed Hillary Clinton in her second presidential campaign . 
 = = = HIV activism = = = 
 After announcing his infection in November 1991 , Johnson created the Magic Johnson Foundation to help combat HIV , although he later diversified the foundation to include other charitable goals . In 1992 , he joined the National Commission on AIDS , a committee appointed by members of Congress and the Bush Administration . Johnson left after eight months , saying that the White House had " utterly ignored " the work of the panel , and had opposed the commission 's recommendations , which included universal healthcare and the expansion of Medicaid to cover all low @-@ income people with AIDS . He was also the main speaker for the United Nations ( UN ) World AIDS Day Conference in 1999 , and has served as a United Nations Messenger of Peace . 
 HIV had been associated with drug addicts and homosexuals , but Johnson 's campaigns sought to show that the risk of infection was not limited to those groups . Johnson stated that his aim was to " help educate all people about what [ HIV ] is about " and teach others not to " discriminate against people who have HIV and AIDS " . Johnson was later criticized by the AIDS community for his decreased involvement in publicizing the spread of the disease . 
 To prevent his HIV infection from progressing to AIDS , Johnson takes a daily combination of drugs . He has advertised GlaxoSmithKline 's drugs , and partnered with Abbott Laboratories to publicize the fight against AIDS in African American communities . 
 = = Career achievements = = 
 In 905 NBA games , Johnson tallied 17 @,@ 707 points , 6 @,@ 559 rebounds , and 10 @,@ 141 assists , translating to career averages of 19 @.@ 5 points , 7 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 11 @.@ 2 assists per game , the highest assists per game average in NBA history . Johnson shares the single @-@ game playoff record for assists ( 24 ) , holds the Finals record for assists in a game ( 21 ) , and has the most playoff assists ( 2 @,@ 346 ) . He is the only player to average 12 assists in an NBA Finals series , achieving it six times . He holds the All @-@ Star Game single @-@ game record for assists ( 22 ) , and the All @-@ Star Game record for career assists ( 127 ) . 
 Johnson introduced a fast @-@ paced style of basketball called " Showtime " , described as a mix of " no @-@ look passes off the fastbreak , pin @-@ point alley @-@ oops from halfcourt , spinning feeds and overhand bullets under the basket through triple teams . " Fellow Lakers guard Michael Cooper said , " There have been times when [ Johnson ] has thrown passes and I wasn 't sure where he was going . Then one of our guys catches the ball and scores , and I run back up the floor convinced that he must 've thrown it through somebody . " Johnson could dominate a game without scoring , running the offense and distributing the ball with flair . In the 1982 NBA Finals , he was named the Finals MVP averaging just 16 @.@ 2 points , the lowest average of any Finals MVP award recipient in the three @-@ point shot era . 
 Johnson was exceptional because he played point guard despite being 6 ft 9 in ( 2 @.@ 06 m ) , a size reserved normally for frontcourt players . He combined the size of a power forward , the one @-@ on @-@ one skills of a swingman , and the ball handling talent of a guard , making him one of the most dangerous triple @-@ double threats of all time ; his 138 triple @-@ double games are second only to Oscar Robertson 's 181 . Johnson is the only player in NBA Finals history to have triple @-@ doubles in multiple series @-@ clinching games . 
 For his feats , Johnson was voted as one of the 50 Greatest Players of All Time by the NBA in 1996 , and was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2002 . ESPN 's SportsCentury ranked Johnson # 17 in their " 50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th Century " In 2006 , ESPN.com rated Johnson the greatest point guard of all time , stating , " It could be argued that he 's the one player in NBA history who was better than Michael Jordan . " Several of his achievements in individual games have also been named among the top moments in the NBA . 
 = = = Rivalry with Larry Bird = = = 
 Johnson and Larry Bird were first linked as rivals after Johnson 's Michigan State squad defeated Bird 's Indiana State team in the 1979 NCAA finals . The rivalry continued in the NBA , and reached its climax when Boston and Los Angeles met in three out of four NBA Finals from 1984 to 1987 . Johnson asserted that for him , the 82 @-@ game regular season was composed of 80 normal games , and two Lakers – Celtics games . Similarly , Bird admitted that Johnson 's daily box score was the first thing he checked in the morning . 
 Several journalists hypothesized that the Johnson – Bird rivalry was so appealing because it represented many other contrasts , such as the clash between the Lakers and Celtics , between Hollywood flashiness ( " Showtime " ) and Boston / Indiana blue collar grit ( " Celtic Pride " ) , and between blacks and whites . The rivalry was also significant because it drew national attention to the faltering NBA . Prior to Johnson and Bird 's arrival , the NBA had gone through a decade of declining interest and low TV ratings . With the two future Hall of Famers , the league won a whole generation of new fans , drawing both traditionalist adherents of Bird 's dirt court Indiana game and those appreciative of Johnson 's public park flair . According to sports journalist Larry Schwartz of ESPN , Johnson and Bird saved the NBA from bankruptcy . 
 Despite their on @-@ court rivalry , Johnson and Bird became close friends during the filming of a 1984 Converse shoe advertisement that depicted them as enemies . Johnson appeared at Bird 's retirement ceremony in 1992 , and described Bird as a " friend forever " ; during Johnson 's Hall of Fame ceremony , Bird formally inducted his old rival . 
 = = Relationship with Jerry Buss = = 
 Magic Johnson had an extremely close relationship with Lakers owner Jerry Buss , whom he saw as a mentor and a father figure . Calling Buss his " second father " and " one of [ his ] best friends " , Johnson spent five hours visiting Buss at the hospital just a few months before his death from cancer . Speaking to media just hours after Buss had died , Johnson was emotional , saying , " Without Dr. Jerry Buss , there is no Magic . " Buss acquired the team from Jack Kent Cooke in 1979 , shortly before he drafted Johnson with the # 1 pick in the 1979 NBA draft . In addition to playing 13 seasons for the Lakers and coaching the team briefly in 1994 , Johnson also had an ownership stake in the team for nearly twenty years . Buss took a special interest in Johnson , introducing him to important Los Angeles business contacts and showing him how the Lakers organization was run , before eventually selling Johnson a stake in the team in 1994 . Johnson credits Buss with giving him the business knowledge that enabled him to become part owner of the Los Angeles Dodgers . 
 Buss supported Johnson as he revealed his diagnosis of HIV in 1991 , and he never hesitated to keep Johnson close to the organization , bringing him in as part @-@ owner , and even as a coach . Johnson had never seriously considered coaching , but he agreed take the head coaching position with the Lakers in 1994 at Buss ' request . In 1992 , Buss had given Johnson a contract that paid him $ 14 million a year , as payback for all the years he was not the league 's highest paid player . Although Johnson 's retirement prior to the 1992 – 93 NBA season voided this contract , Buss insisted that he still be paid . It was this arrangement that allowed Johnson to coach the team without receiving any additional salary . After Johnson ended his coaching stint , Buss sold him a 4 % stake in the Lakers for $ 10 million , and Johnson served as a team executive . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Books = = 
 = = = Biographies = = = 
 Johnson 's autobiography is Johnson , Earvin ( 1992 ) . Magic Johnson : My Life . Random House . ISBN 0 @-@ 449 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . Other biographies include : 
 Haskins , James ( 1981 ) . Magic : A Biography of Earvin Johnson . Hillside , New Jersey : <unk> Publishers . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 044 @-@ 7 . 
 Gutman , Bill ( 1991 ) . Magic : More Than a Legend . New York : Harper Paperbacks . ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Morgan , Bill ( 1991 ) . The Magic : Earvin Johnson . ISBN 0 @-@ 606 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Gutman , Bill ( 1992 ) . Magic Johnson : Hero On and Off the Court . Brookfield , Connecticut : Millbrook Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 287 @-@ 5 . 
 Johnson , Rick L. ( 1992 ) . Magic Johnson : Basketball 's Smiling Superstar . New York : Dillon Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 553 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Laurie ( 1993 ) . Magic Johnson : Basketball Immortal . Vero Beach , Florida : Rourke Enterprises . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 025 @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Martin ( 1993 ) . Magic Johnson ( Junior World Biographies ) . New York : Chelsea Juniors . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2038 @-@ X. 
 Bork , Günter ( 1994 ) . Die <unk> Basketball Stars . <unk> @-@ Verl . ISBN 3 @-@ 7679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . ( German ) 
 Frank , Steven ( 1994 ) . Magic Johnson ( Basketball Legends ) . New York : Chelsea House Publishers . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Bork , Günter ( 1995 ) . Basketball : <unk> . <unk> @-@ Verl . ISBN 3 @-@ 7679 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. ( German ) 
 Blatt , Howard ( 1996 ) . Magic ! Against The Odds . New York : Pocket Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Rosner , Mark ( 1999 ) . Michael MacCambridge , ed . Earvin " Magic " Johnson : The Star of Showtime . New York : Hyperion ESPN Books. pp. 251 – 52 . ( In ESPN SportsCentury ) 
 Gottfried , Ted ( 2001 ) . Earvin Magic Johnson : Champion and Crusader . New York : F. Watts . ISBN 0 @-@ 531 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Instructional = = = 
 Johnson , Earvin " Magic " ( 1992 ) . Magic 's Touch : From Fundamentals to Fast Break With One of Basketball 's All @-@ Time Greats . Reading , Massachusetts : Addison @-@ Wesley Pub . Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Johnson , Earvin " Magic " ( 1996 ) . What You Can Do to Avoid AIDS . New York : Times Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 8129 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Updated version of Johnson , Earvin " Magic " ( 1992 ) . Unsafe Sex in the Age of AIDS . New York : Times Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 8129 @-@ 2063 @-@ 5 . 
 = Henry Moore = 
 Henry Spencer Moore OM CH FBA ( 30 July 1898 – 31 August 1986 ) was an Anglo @-@ Irish sculptor and artist . He was best known for his semi @-@ abstract monumental bronze sculptures which are located around the world as public works of art . 
 His forms are usually abstractions of the human figure , typically depicting mother @-@ and @-@ child or reclining figures . Moore 's works are usually suggestive of the female body , apart from a phase in the 1950s when he sculpted family groups . His forms are generally pierced or contain hollow spaces . Many interpreters liken the undulating form of his reclining figures to the landscape and hills of his birthplace , Yorkshire . 
 Moore was born in Castleford , the son of a coal miner . He became well @-@ known through his carved marble and larger @-@ scale abstract cast bronze sculptures , and was instrumental in introducing a particular form of modernism to the United Kingdom . His ability in later life to fulfill large @-@ scale commissions made him exceptionally wealthy . Despite this , he lived frugally ; most of the money he earned went towards endowing the Henry Moore Foundation , which continues to support education and promotion of the arts . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moore was born in Castleford , West Riding of Yorkshire , England , to Mary Baker and Raymond Spencer Moore . His father was of Irish origin and became pit deputy and then under @-@ manager of the Wheldale colliery in Castleford . He was an autodidact with an interest in music and literature . Determined that his sons would not work in the mines , he saw formal education as the route to their advancement . Henry was the seventh of eight children in a family that often struggled with poverty . He attended infant and elementary schools in Castleford , where he began modelling in clay and carving in wood . He professed to have decided to become a sculptor when he was eleven after hearing of Michelangelo 's achievements at a Sunday School reading . 
 On his second attempt he was accepted at Castleford Grammar School , which several of his siblings had attended , where his headmaster soon noticed his talent and interest in medieval sculpture . His art teacher broadened his knowledge of art , and , with her encouragement , he determined to make art his career ; first by sitting for examinations for a scholarship to the local art college . 
 Despite his early promise , Moore 's parents had been against him training as a sculptor , a vocation they considered manual labour with few career prospects . After a brief introduction as a student teacher , Moore became a teacher at the school he had attended . Upon turning eighteen , Moore volunteered for army service . He was the youngest man in the Prince of Wales 's Own Civil Service Rifles regiment and was injured in 1917 in a gas attack , on 30 November at <unk> Wood , during the Battle of Cambrai . After recovering in hospital , he saw out the remainder of the war as a physical training instructor , only returning to France as the Armistice was signed . He recalled later , " for me the war passed in a romantic haze of trying to be a hero . " This attitude changed as he reflected on the destructiveness of war and in 1940 he wrote that , " a year or two after [ the war ] the sight of a khaki uniform began to mean everything in life that was wrong and wasteful and anti @-@ life . And I still have that feeling . " 
 = = Beginnings as a sculptor = = 
 After the war Moore received an ex @-@ serviceman 's grant to continue his education and in 1919 he became a student at the Leeds School of Art ( now Leeds College of Art ) , which set up a sculpture studio especially for him . At the college , he met Barbara Hepworth , a fellow student who would also become a well @-@ known British sculptor , and began a friendship and gentle professional rivalry that lasted for many years . In Leeds , Moore also had access to the modernist works in the collection of Sir Michael Sadler , the University Vice @-@ Chancellor , which had a pronounced effect on his development . In 1921 , Moore won a scholarship to study at the Royal College of Art in London , along with Hepworth and other Yorkshire contemporaries . While in London , Moore extended his knowledge of primitive art and sculpture , studying the ethnographic collections at the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum . 
 The student sculptures of both Moore and Hepworth followed the standard romantic Victorian style , and included natural forms , landscapes and figurative modelling of animals . Moore later became uncomfortable with classically derived ideals ; his later familiarity with primitivism and the influence of sculptors such as Constantin Brâncuși , Jacob Epstein , Henri Gaudier @-@ Brzeska and Frank Dobson led him to the method of direct carving , in which imperfections in the material and marks left by tools became part of the finished sculpture . Having adopted this technique , Moore was in conflict with academic tutors who did not appreciate such a modern approach . During one exercise set by Derwent Wood ( the professor of sculpture at the Royal College ) , Moore was asked to reproduce a marble relief of Domenico Rosselli 's The Virgin and Child by first modelling the relief in plaster , then reproducing it in marble using the mechanical aid known as a " pointing machine " , a technique called " pointing " . Instead , he carved the relief directly , even marking the surface to simulate the prick marks that would have been left by the pointing machine . 
 In 1924 , Moore won a six @-@ month travelling scholarship which he spent in Northern Italy studying the great works of Michelangelo , Giotto di Bondone , Giovanni Pisano and several other Old Masters . During this period he also visited Paris , took advantage of the timed @-@ sketching classes at the Académie <unk> , and viewed , in the Trocadero , a plaster cast of a Toltec @-@ Maya sculptural form , the Chac <unk> , previously seen in book illustrations . The reclining figure was to have a profound effect upon Moore 's work , becoming the primary motif of his sculpture . 
 = = Hampstead = = 
 On returning to London , Moore undertook a seven @-@ year teaching post at the Royal College of Art . He was required to work two days a week , which allowed him time to spend on his own work . His first public commission , West Wind ( 1928 – 29 ) , was one of the eight reliefs of the ' four winds ' high on the walls of London Underground 's headquarters at 55 Broadway . The other ' winds ' were carved by contemporary sculptors including Eric Gill with the ground @-@ level pieces provided by Epstein . In July 1929 , Moore married Irina <unk> , a painting student at the Royal College . Irina was born in Kyiv in 1907 to Ukrainian – Polish parents . Her father did not return from the Russian Revolution and her mother was evacuated to Paris where she married a British army officer . Irina was smuggled to Paris a year later and went to school there until she was 16 , after which she was sent to live with her stepfather 's relatives in Buckinghamshire . 
 Irina found security in her marriage to Moore and was soon posing for him . Shortly after they married , the couple moved to a studio in Hampstead at 11a Parkhill Road <unk> , joining a small colony of avant @-@ garde artists who were taking root there . Shortly afterward , Hepworth and her second husband Ben Nicholson moved into a studio around the corner from Moore , while Naum Gabo , Roland Penrose , Cecil Stephenson and the art critic Herbert Read also lived in the area ( Read referred to the area as " a nest of gentle artists " ) . This led to a rapid cross @-@ fertilization of ideas that Read would publicise , helping to raise Moore 's public profile . The area was also a stopping @-@ off point for many refugee artists , architects and designers from continental Europe en route to America — some of whom would later commission works from Moore . 
 In 1932 , after six year 's teaching at the Royal College , Moore took up a post as the Head of the Department of Sculpture at the Chelsea School of Art . Artistically , Moore , Hepworth and other members of The Seven and Five Society would develop steadily more abstract work , partly influenced by their frequent trips to Paris and their contact with leading progressive artists , notably Pablo Picasso , Georges Braque , Jean Arp and Alberto Giacometti . Moore flirted with Surrealism , joining Paul Nash 's modern art movement " Unit One " , in 1933 . In 1934 , Moore visited Spain ; he visited the cave of Altamira ( which he described as the " Royal Academy of Cave Painting " ) , Madrid , Toledo and Pamplona . 
 Moore and Nash were on the organising committee of the International Surrealist Exhibition , which took place in London in 1936 . In 1937 , Roland Penrose purchased an abstract ' Mother and Child ' in stone from Moore that he displayed in the front garden of his house in Hampstead . The work proved controversial with other residents and the local press ran a campaign against the piece over the next two years . At this time Moore gradually transitioned from direct carving to casting in bronze , modelling preliminary maquettes in clay or plaster rather than making preparatory drawings . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War the Chelsea School of Art was evacuated to Northampton and Moore resigned his teaching post . During the war , Moore produced powerful drawings of Londoners sleeping in the London Underground while sheltering from the Blitz . Kenneth Clark , the chairman of the War Artists ' Advisory Committee , WAAC , had previously tried to recruit Moore as a full @-@ time salaried war artist and now agreed to purchase some of the shelter drawings and issued contracts for further examples . The shelter drawings WAAC acquired were completed between the autumn of 1940 and the spring of 1941 and are regarded as among the finest products of the WAAC scheme . In August 1941 WAAC commissioned Moore to draw miners working underground at the Wheldale Colliery in Yorkshire , where his father had worked at the start of the century . Moore drew the people in the shelters as passively waiting the all @-@ clear while miners aggressively worked the coal @-@ faces . These drawings helped to boost Moore 's international reputation , particularly in America where examples were included in the WAAC Britain at War exhibition which toured North America throughout the war . 
 After their Hampstead home was hit by bomb shrapnel in September 1940 , Moore and Irina moved out of London to live in a farmhouse called <unk> in the hamlet of Perry Green near Much Hadham , Hertfordshire . This was to become Moore 's home and workshop for the rest of his life . Despite acquiring significant wealth later in life , Moore never felt the need to move to larger premises and , apart from the addition of a number of outbuildings and studios , the house changed little over the years . In 1943 he received a commission from the Church of St. Matthew , Northampton , to carve a Madonna and Child ; this sculpture was the first in an important series of family @-@ group sculptures . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After the war and following several earlier miscarriages , Irina gave birth to their daughter , Mary Moore , in March 1946 . The child was named after Moore 's mother , who had died two years earlier . Both the loss of his mother and the arrival of a baby focused Moore 's mind on the family , which he expressed in his work by producing many " mother @-@ and @-@ child " compositions , although reclining and internal / external figures also remained popular . In the same year , Moore made his first visit to America when a retrospective exhibition of his work opened at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City . From the late 1930s Kenneth Clark became an unlikely but influential champion of Moore 's work , and through his position as member of the Arts Council of Great Britain he secured exhibitions and commissions for the artist . 
 Before the war , Moore had been approached by educator Henry Morris , who was trying to reform education with his concept of the Village College . Morris had engaged Walter Gropius as the architect for his second village college at <unk> near Cambridge , and he wanted Moore to design a major public sculpture for the site . The County Council , however , could not afford Gropius 's full design , and scaled back the project when Gropius emigrated to America . Lacking funds , Morris had to cancel Moore 's sculpture , which had not progressed beyond the maquette stage . Moore was able to reuse the design in 1950 for a similar commission outside a secondary school for the new town of Stevenage . This time , the project was completed and Family Group became Moore 's first large @-@ scale public bronze . 
 In the 1950s , Moore began to receive increasingly significant commissions , including a reclining figure for the UNESCO building in Paris in 1958 . With many more public works of art , the scale of Moore 's sculptures grew significantly and he started to employ an increasing number of assistants to work with him at Much Hadham , including Anthony Caro and Richard Wentworth . 
 On the campus of the University of Chicago in December 1967 , 25 years to the minute after the team of physicists led by Enrico Fermi achieved the first controlled , self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction , Moore 's Nuclear Energy was unveiled on the site of what was once the university 's football field stands , in the rackets court beneath which the experiments had taken place . This 12 @-@ foot @-@ tall piece in the middle of a large , open plaza is often thought to represent a mushroom cloud topped by a massive human skull , but Moore 's interpretation was very different . He once told a friend that he hoped viewers would " go around it , looking out through the open spaces , and that they may have a feeling of being in a cathedral . " In Chicago , Illinois , Moore also commemorated science with a large bronze sundial , locally named Man Enters the Cosmos ( 1980 ) , which was commissioned to recognise the space exploration program . 
 The last three decades of Moore 's life continued in a similar vein ; several major retrospectives took place around the world , notably a very prominent exhibition in the summer of 1972 in the grounds of the Forte di Belvedere overlooking Florence . Following the pioneering documentary ' Henry Moore ' , produced by John Read in 1951 , he appeared in many films . In 1964 , for instance , Moore was featured in the documentary " 5 British Sculptors ( Work and Talk ) " by American filmmaker Warren Forma . By the end of the 1970s , there were some 40 exhibitions a year featuring his work . The number of commissions continued to increase ; he completed Knife Edge Two Piece in 1962 for College Green near the Houses of Parliament in London . According to Moore , " When I was offered the site near the House of Lords ... I liked the place so much that I didn 't bother to go and see an alternative site in Hyde Park — one lonely sculpture can be lost in a large park . The House of Lords site is quite different . It is next to a path where people walk and it has a few seats where they can sit and contemplate it . " 
 As his wealth grew , Moore began to worry about his legacy . With the help of his daughter Mary , he set up the Henry Moore Trust in 1972 , with a view to protecting his estate from death duties . By 1977 , he was paying close to a million pounds a year in income tax ; to mitigate his tax burden , he established the Henry Moore Foundation as a registered charity with Irina and Mary as trustees . The Foundation was established to encourage the public appreciation of the visual arts and especially the works of Moore . It now runs his house and estate at Perry Green , with a gallery , sculpture park and studios . 
 In 1979 , Henry Moore became abruptly known in Germany when his sculpture Large Two Forms was installed in the forecourt of the German Chancellery in Bonn ( which was the capital city of West Germany prior to German reunification in October 1990 ) . 
 Henry Moore died on 31 August 1986 , at the age of 88 , in his home in Much Hadham , Hertfordshire where his body is interred in Perry Green churchyard . 
 = = Style = = 
 The aftermath of World War II , The Holocaust , and the age of the atomic bomb instilled in the sculpture of the mid @-@ 1940s a sense that art should return to its pre @-@ cultural and pre @-@ rational origins . In the literature of the day , writers such as Jean @-@ Paul Sartre advocated a similar reductive philosophy . At an introductory speech in New York City for an exhibition of one of the finest modernist sculptors , Alberto Giacometti , Sartre spoke of " The beginning and the end of history " . Moore 's sense of England emerging undefeated from siege led to his focus on pieces characterised by endurance and continuity . 
 Moore 's signature form is a reclining figure . Moore 's exploration of this form , under the influence of the Toltec @-@ Mayan figure he had seen at the Louvre , was to lead him to increasing abstraction as he turned his thoughts towards experimentation with the elements of design . Moore 's earlier reclining figures deal principally with mass , while his later ones contrast the solid elements of the sculpture with the space , not only round them but generally through them as he pierced the forms with openings . 
 Earlier figures are pierced in a conventional manner , in which bent limbs separate from and rejoin the body . The later , more abstract figures are often penetrated by spaces directly through the body , by which means Moore explores and alternates concave and convex shapes . These more extreme piercings developed in parallel with Barbara Hepworth 's sculptures . Hepworth first pierced a torso after misreading a review of one of Henry Moore 's early shows . The plaster Reclining Figure : Festival ( 1951 ) in the Tate , is characteristic of Moore 's later sculptures : an abstract female figure intercut with voids . As with much of the post @-@ War work , there are several bronze casts of this sculpture . When Moore 's niece asked why his sculptures had such simple titles , he replied , 
 " All art should have a certain mystery and should make demands on the spectator . Giving a sculpture or a drawing too explicit a title takes away part of that mystery so that the spectator moves on to the next object , making no effort to ponder the meaning of what he has just seen . Everyone thinks that he or she looks but they don 't really , you know . " 
 Moore 's early work is focused on direct carving , in which the form of the sculpture evolves as the artist repeatedly whittles away at the block . In the 1930s , Moore 's transition into modernism paralleled that of Barbara Hepworth ; the two exchanged new ideas with each other and several other artists then living in Hampstead . Moore made many preparatory sketches and drawings for each sculpture . Most of these sketchbooks have survived and provide insight into Moore 's development . He placed great importance on drawing ; in old age , when he had arthritis , he continued to draw . 
 After the Second World War , Moore 's bronzes took on their larger scale , which was particularly suited for public art commissions . As a matter of practicality , he largely abandoned direct carving , and took on several assistants to help produce the larger forms based on maquettes . By the end of the 1940s , he produced sculptures increasingly by modelling , working out the shape in clay or plaster before casting the final work in bronze using the lost wax technique . These maquettes often began as small forms shaped by Moore 's hands — a process which gives his work an organic feeling . They are from the body . At his home in Much Hadham , Moore built up a collection of natural objects ; skulls , driftwood , pebbles , rocks and shells , which he would use to provide inspiration for organic forms . For his largest works , he usually produced a half @-@ scale , working model before scaling up for the final moulding and casting at a bronze foundry . Moore often refined the final full plaster shape and added surface marks before casting . 
 Moore produced at least three significant examples of architectural sculpture during his career . In 1928 , despite his own self @-@ described " extreme reservations " , he accepted his first public commission for West Wind for the London Underground Building at 55 Broadway in London , joining the company of Jacob Epstein and Eric Gill . In 1953 , he completed a four @-@ part concrete screen for the Time @-@ Life Building in New Bond Street , London , and in 1955 Moore turned to his first and only work in carved brick , " Wall Relief " at the <unk> in Rotterdam . The brick relief was sculpted with 16 @,@ 000 bricks by two Dutch bricklayers under Moore 's supervision . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Most sculptors who emerged during the height of Moore 's fame , and in the aftermath of his death , found themselves cast in his shadow . By the late 1940s , Moore was a worldwide celebrity ; he was the voice of British sculpture , and of British modernism in general . The next generation was constantly compared against him , and reacted by challenging his legacy , his " establishment " credentials and his position . At the 1952 Venice Biennale , eight new British sculptors produced their Geometry of Fear works as a direct contrast to the ideals behind Moore 's idea of Endurance , Continuity . 
 Yet Moore had a direct influence on several generations of sculptors of both British and international reputation . Among the artists who have acknowledged Moore 's importance to their work are Sir Anthony Caro , Phillip King and Isaac Witkin , all three having been assistants to Moore . Other artists whose work was influenced by him include Helaine Blumenfeld , Drago Marin <unk> , Lynn Chadwick , Eduardo Paolozzi , Bernard Meadows , Reg Butler , William Turnbull , Robert Adams , Kenneth Armitage , and Geoffrey Clarke . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 His work has frequently been subject to vandalism , especially in Europe and America . His King and Queen ( 1952 – 1953 ) were decapitated in Dumfries in 1995 and daubed with blue paint in Leeds . His <unk> Figure had her head chopped off on a wartime loan to the Museum of Modern Art in New York , his <unk> Piece ( 1968 – 69 ) was vandalised with metal chains in Houston , and his Draped Seated Woman 1957 – 58 at Von der Heydt Museum ended up tarred and feathered in the Ruhr . 
 In December 2005 , the two ton Reclining Figure ( 1969 – 70 ) – insured for £ 3 million – was lifted by crane from the grounds of the Henry Moore Foundation on to a lorry and has not been recovered . Two men were jailed for a year in 2012 for stealing a sculpture called Sundial ( 1965 ) and the bronze plinth of another work , also from the foundation 's estate . In October 2013 Standing Figure ( 1950 ) , one of four Moore pieces in <unk> Sculpture Park , estimated to be worth £ 3 million , was stolen . 
 In 2012 , the council of the London Borough of Tower Hamlets announced its plans to sell another version of Draped Seated Woman 1957 – 58 , a 1 @.@ 6 @-@ tonne bronze sculpture . Moore , a well @-@ known socialist , had sold the sculpture at a fraction of its market value to the former London County Council on the understanding that it would be displayed in a public space and might enrich the lives of those living in a socially deprived area . Nicknamed Old Flo , it was installed on the <unk> council estate in 1962 but was vandalised and moved to the Yorkshire Sculpture Park in 1997 . Tower Hamlets Council later had considered moving Draped Seated Woman to private land in Canary Wharf but instead chose to " explore options " for a sale . In response to the announcement an open letter was published in The Guardian , signed by Mary Moore , the artist 's daughter , by Sir Nicholas Serota , Director of the Tate Gallery , by filmmaker Danny Boyle , and by artists including Jeremy Deller . The letter said that the sale " goes against the spirit of Henry Moore 's original sale " of the work . 
 = = = Popular interest = = = 
 Today , the Henry Moore Foundation manages the artist 's former home at Perry Green in Hertfordshire as a visitor destination , with 70 acres of sculpture grounds as well as his restored house and studios . It also runs the Henry Moore Institute in Leeds which organises exhibitions and research activities in international sculpture . Popular interest in Moore 's work was perceived by some to have declined for a while in the UK but has been revived in recent times by exhibitions including Henry Moore at Tate Britain in 2010 and Moore at Kew and Hatfield in 2007 and 2011 respectively . The Foundation he endowed continues to play an essential role in promoting contemporary art in the United Kingdom and abroad through its grants and exhibitions programme . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 Moore 's first solo sculpture exhibition was held at Warren Gallery in London in 1928 . His first retrospective took place at Temple Newsam , Leeds , in 1941 . Moore was given his first major retrospective abroad by the Museum of Modern Art , New York , in 1946 . In 1948 , Moore was one of the featured artists of the Festival of Britain in 1951 and <unk> 1 in 1955 . His sculpture and drawings have since been the subject of many museum exhibitions and retrospectives , including the Whitechapel Gallery , London ( 1957 ) ; Tate Gallery , London ( 1968 ) ; Forte di Belvedere , Florence ( 1972 ) ; Tate Gallery and the Serpentine Gallery , London for the occasion of Moore 's eightieth birthday ( 1978 ) ; Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York ( 1983 ) ; Yorkshire Sculpture Park , Alex Rosenberg , in dialogue with Helaine Blumenfeld New York ( 1985 ) , Wakefield ( 1987 ) ; Kent Fine Art , New York ( 1986 ) ; Royal Academy of Arts , London ( 1988 ) ; Shanghai Art Museum ( 2001 ) ; National Gallery of Art , Washington D.C. ( 2001 ) ; <unk> , Barcelona , ( 2008 ) ; Kunsthal , Rotterdam ( 2006 , travelled to <unk> Art Museum , Helsinki in 2008 ) ; Kew Botanical Gardens , London ( 2007 – 08 ) ; Tate Britain ( 2010 ) ; and the Kremlin Museum , Moscow ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Collections = = 
 = = = England = = = 
 The world 's largest collection of Moore 's work is open to the public and is housed in the house and grounds of the 40 @-@ acre estate , that was Moore 's home for forty years , in Perry Green , Hertfordshire . The site and the collection are now owned by the Henry Moore Foundation . 
 In December 2005 , thieves entered a courtyard at the Henry Moore Foundation and stole a cast of Reclining Figure 1969 @-@ 70 ( LH 608 ) , a bronze sculpture . Closed @-@ circuit @-@ television footage showed that they used a crane to lower the piece onto a stolen flatbed truck . The 1969 – 70 work , known as is 3 @.@ 6 metres long , 2 metres high by 2 metres wide , and weighs 2 @.@ 1 tonnes . A substantial reward was offered by the Foundation for information leading to its recovery . By May 2009 , after a thorough investigation , British officials said they believe the work , once valued at £ 3 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 3 million ) , was probably sold for scrap metal , fetching about £ 5 @,@ 000 . In July 2012 the 22 inches ( 56 cm ) bronze Sundial 1965 , valued at £ 500 @,@ 000 , was stolen from the Moore Foundation . Later in the year , and following the details of the theft being publicised on the BBC Crimewatch television programme , the work was <unk> the culprits were sentenced to twelve months custody . 
 Moore presented 36 sculptures , as well as drawings , maquettes and other works to the Tate Gallery in 1978 . 
 = = = Toronto = = = 
 The Henry Moore Sculpture Centre in the Art Gallery of Ontario , Toronto , opened in 1974 . It comprises the world 's largest public collection of Moore 's work , most of it donated by him between 1971 and 1974 . Moore 's Three Way Piece No. 2 ( The Archer ) has also been on display in Nathan Phillips Square at Toronto City Hall since 1966 . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1948 , Moore won the International Sculpture Prize at the Venice Biennale . He turned down a knighthood in 1951 because he felt that the bestowal would lead to a perception of him as an establishment figure and that " such a title might tend to cut me off from fellow artists whose work has aims similar to mine " . He was , however , awarded the Companion of Honour in 1955 , the Order of Merit in 1963 and Erasmus Prize in 1968 . 
 He was a trustee of both the National Gallery and Tate Gallery . His proposal that a wing of the latter should be devoted to his sculptures aroused hostility among some artists . In 1975 , he became the first President of the Turner Society , which had been founded to campaign for a separate museum in which the whole Turner Bequest might be reunited , an aim defeated by the National Gallery and Tate Gallery . 
 Given to the ' City of London ' by Moore and the Contemporary Art Society in 1967 , Knife Edge Two Piece 1962 – 65 is displayed in Abingdon Street Gardens , opposite the Houses of Parliament , where its regular appearance in the background of televised news reports from Westminster makes it Moore 's most prominent piece in Britain . The ownership of Knife Edge Two Piece 1962 – 65 was disputed until its 2011 acquisition by the Parliamentary Art Collection . 
 = = Art market = = 
 By the end of his career , Moore was the world 's most successful living artist at auction . In 1982 , four years before his death , Sotheby 's in New York sold a 6 ft Reclining Figure ( 1945 ) , for $ 1 @.@ 2 million to collector Wendell Cherry . Although a first record of $ 4 @.@ 1 million was set in 1990 , Moore 's market slumped during the recession that followed . His eight @-@ foot bronze , Reclining Figure : Festival ( 1951 ) sold for a record £ 19 @.@ 1 million at Christie 's , making him the second most expensive 20th @-@ century British artist after Francis Bacon . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Tommy James ( American football ) = 
 Thomas Laverne " Tommy " James , Jr . ( September 16 , 1923 – February 7 , 2007 ) was an American football defensive halfback who played for Ohio State University and the Cleveland Browns in the 1940s and 1950s . He was born near Massillon , Ohio and attended Massillon Washington High School , where he played as a back on the football team under head coach Paul Brown . James was a key part of a Massillon team that went undefeated in 1940 . After graduating , he followed Brown to Ohio State and played there as a halfback . Ohio State won its first national championship in 1942 when James was on the team . 
 After a three @-@ year stint in the U.S. Army during World War II , James returned to play a final season at Ohio State in 1946 . He then signed with the Detroit Lions of the National Football League ( NFL ) , where he stayed for a year before rejoining Brown , who had become head coach of the Cleveland Browns in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . James spent eight seasons in Cleveland , playing as a defensive halfback on five championship teams , including two in the AAFC in the late 1940s and three in the NFL in the 1950s . He left football after playing briefly for the Baltimore Colts in 1956 . Later in life , he worked as a salesman at a trucking company . He died in 2007 . 
 = = High school and college = = 
 James grew up in Genoa , a small community in between Canton , Ohio and Massillon , Ohio . The oldest of five children , one of his younger brothers included Don James , a Hall of Fame coach for Kent State and the University of Washington . He attended grammar school there through the eighth grade , but the town did not have a high school and students could choose to attend either Massillon Washington High School or the rival Canton McKinley High School . James at first decided to attend Canton , but Bud Houghton , an assistant coach of Massillon 's football team , saw him playing in an informal scrimmage on a street corner and convinced him to come to Massillon . He played football there for three years under head coach Paul Brown . Playing as a back , James was part of a Massillon team that went undefeated in 1940 . He scored a touchdown in a 28 – 0 victory over Toledo 's Waite High School , the biggest game of the year ; Massillon came into the matchup having won 30 games in a row , while Waite had won 18 straight . 
 James attended Ohio State University starting in 1941 , the same year Brown was hired as the school 's head football coach . He played on the freshman team in his first year , moving to the varsity team in 1942 . Ohio State finished the season with a 9 – 1 win – loss record and won its first @-@ ever college football national championship . James , who played as a halfback , was injured in a late @-@ season game against the University of Illinois . This caused him to miss Ohio State 's annual game against arch @-@ rival Michigan , but he returned for the final game of the season against Iowa Pre @-@ Flight , a military squad . James ran for a 54 @-@ yard touchdown on that game 's first play and later added a punt return for a touchdown as Ohio State won 41 – 12 . 
 James enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1943 and served for three years during World War II . He returned to Ohio State in 1946 and played on the varsity team again . The Buckeyes finished with a 4 – 3 – 2 record under coach Paul Bixler . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 James signed with the National Football League 's ( NFL ) Detroit Lions in 1947 . He was still eligible to play in college at the time , but wartime rules allowed him to skip to the professional ranks and play for the Lions , who had selected him in the 1947 NFL Draft . James broke his arm in the second game of the season , and he sat on the sidelines for the rest of the year . Detroit did not renew his contract , and the Cleveland Browns of the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , a team coached by Paul Brown , picked him up . He started at right defensive halfback in 1948 opposite Tommy Colella and intercepted four passes as the Browns went 15 – 0 and won the All @-@ America Football Conference championship . Brown was pleasantly surprised by his abilities on defense . " Tommy always was a pretty good man on defense at Massillon and Ohio State , " he said in 1948 . " But his play this year has even surprised those of us who knew him in high school and college . I think we 're definitely improved at defensive right half over last year . " 
 James continued to be a key defensive player for the Browns in 1949 , when the team won another AAFC championship behind a staunch defense and an offense led by quarterback Otto Graham and fullback Marion Motley . The AAFC dissolved after the season , however , and the Browns moved to the NFL . Cleveland 's first year in the NFL was the best of James 's career : he intercepted nine passes , setting a club record that stood until 1978 . The team finished the season with a 10 – 2 record and beat the Los Angeles Rams to win the NFL championship . James made an interception in the game . He also held the ball for placekicker Lou Groza on the game @-@ winning field goal with under a minute to play . 
 Cleveland reached the championship in each of the ensuing three years , but lost each time , once to the Rams and twice to the Detroit Lions . James intercepted five passes and recovered two fumbles in 1953 and was selected for the Pro Bowl , the NFL 's annual all @-@ star game . The Browns went on to win the NFL championship again in 1954 and 1955 . James was moved from defensive halfback to safety in 1955 later in his career and was hampered by injuries . 
 Brown released the 33 @-@ year @-@ old James on waivers before the 1956 season , which allowed other teams to pick up his contract . Brown said it was " one of the toughest things I 've had to do in football " because of the effort James put out . James had worked in the offseason as a sporting goods salesman and had an offer to join a trucking firm , but said he wanted to continue his football career for one more year . He was picked up by the Baltimore Colts but left the team in October after injuring his shoulder . He ended his NFL career with 26 interceptions , all with the Browns , tying him for eighth place in team history . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his football career , James worked in the trucking business as a salesman , retiring at age 69 . He had three sons , one of whom became the head track coach at Massillon Washington . James died in 2007 of congestive heart failure . 
 = 2 @,@ 3 @,@ 7 @,@ 8 @-@ <unk> = 
 2 @,@ 3 @,@ 7 @,@ 8 @-@ <unk> @-@ p @-@ dioxin ( TCDD ) is a polychlorinated <unk> @-@ p @-@ dioxin ( sometimes shortened , though inaccurately , to simply " dioxin " ) with the chemical formula C 
 12H 
 4Cl 
 4O 
 2 . TCDD is a colorless solid with no distinguishable odor at room temperature . It is usually formed as a side product in organic synthesis and burning of organic materials . 
 TCDD is the most potent compound ( congener ) of its series ( polychlorinated <unk> , known as <unk> or simply dioxins ) and became known as a contaminant in Agent Orange , an herbicide used in the Vietnam War . TCDD was released into the environment in the Seveso disaster . It is a persistent environmental contaminant usually present in a complex mixture of dioxin @-@ like compounds , and is a carcinogen . 
 = = Health effects = = 
 The Expert Group of the World Health Organization considered developmental toxicity as the most pertinent risk of dioxins to human beings . Because people are usually exposed simultaneously to a number of dioxin @-@ like chemicals , a more detailed account is given at dioxins and dioxin @-@ like compounds . 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 TCDD was classified in 1997 by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as a carcinogen for humans ( group 1 ) . In the occupational cohort studies available for the classification , the risk , even at very high exposures , was weak and borderline detectable . Therefore , human data were not deemed sufficient , and the classification was , in essence , based on animal experiments and mechanistic considerations . This has been criticized as a deviation from IARC classification rules . It is much debated whether TCDD is carcinogenic only at high doses which also cause toxic damage of tissues . Moreover , a recent review concludes that , after 1997 , further studies do not support an association between TCDD exposure and cancer risk . New studies include the update of Vietnam veteran studies from Ranch Hand operation , which concluded that after 30 years the results do not provide evidence of disease . 
 There is also direct epidemiological evidence that TCDD is not carcinogenic at low doses , and in some studies cancer risk has even decreased . This is called a J @-@ shape dose @-@ response , low doses decrease the risk , and only higher doses increase the risk . 
 = = = Mechanism of action = = = 
 TCDD and dioxin @-@ like compounds act via a specific receptor present in all cells : the aryl hydrocarbon ( AH ) receptor . This receptor is a transcription factor which is involved in expression of genes ; in fact it has been shown that high doses of TCDD either increase or decrease the expression of several hundred genes in rats . Genes of enzymes activating the breakdown of foreign and often toxic compounds are classic examples of such genes . TCDD increases the enzymes breaking down , e.g. , carcinogenic polycyclic hydrocarbons such as benzo ( a ) pyrene . 
 These polycyclic hydrocarbons also activate the AH receptor , but less than TCDD and only temporarily . Even many natural compounds present in vegetables cause some activation of the AH receptor . This phenomenon can be viewed as adaptive and beneficial , because it protects the organism from toxic and carcinogenic substances . Excessive and persistent stimulation of AH receptor , however , leads to a multitude of adverse effects . 
 The physiological function of the AH receptor has been the subject of continuous research . One obvious function is to increase the activity of enzymes breaking down foreign chemicals or normal chemicals of the body as needed . There may be other functions , however , related to growth of various organs or other regulatory functions . The AH receptor is phylogenetically highly conserved transcription factor with a history of at least 500 million years , and found in all vertebrates , and its ancient analogs are important regulatory proteins even in more primitive species . In fact , knock @-@ out animals with no AH receptor are prone to illness and developmental problems . Taken together , this implies the necessity of a basal degree of AH receptor activation to achieve normal physiological function . 
 While the mutagenic and genotoxic effects of TCDD are sometimes disputed and sometimes confirmed it does foster the development of cancer . Its main action in causing cancer is cancer promotion ; it promotes the carcinogenicity initiated by other compounds . Very high doses may , in addition , cause cancer indirectly ; one of the proposed mechanisms is oxidative stress and the subsequent oxygen damage to DNA . There are other explanations such as endocrine disruption or altered signal transduction . The endocrine disrupting activities seem to be dependent on life stage , being anti @-@ estrogenic when estrogen is present ( or in high concentration ) in the body , and estrogenic in the absence of estrogen . 
 = = = <unk> effects = = = 
 In Vietnam and the USA teratogenic or birth defects were observed in children of persons that were exposed to Agent Orange or 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 5 @-@ T that contained TCDD as an impurity out of the production process . However the scientific data supporting a causal link between Agent Orange / dioxin exposure and birth defects is controversial and weak , in part due to poor methodology . In 2006 Anh Duc Ngo and colleagues , of the University of Texas Health Science Center in Austin , published a meta @-@ analysis that exposed a large amount of heterogeneity / ( different findings ) between studies , a finding consistent with a lack of consensus on the issue . Despite this , statistical analysis of the studies they examined resulted in data that the increase in birth defects / relative risk ( RR ) from exposure to agent orange / dioxin " appears " to be on the order of 3 in Vietnamese funded studies but 1 @.@ 29 in the rest of the world . With a casual relationship near the threshold of statistical significance in still @-@ births , cleft palate , and neural tube defects , with spina bifida being the most statistically significant defect . The large discrepancy in RR between Vietnamese studies and those in the rest of the world have been suggested to be due to bias in the Vietnamese studies . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 By far most information on toxicity of dioxin @-@ like chemicals is based on animal studies utilizing TCDD . Almost all organs are affected by high doses of TCDD . In short @-@ term toxicity studies in animals the typical effects are anorexia and wasting , and even after a huge dose animals die only 1 to 6 weeks after the TCDD administration . Seemingly similar species have varying sensitivities to acute effects : lethal dose for a guinea pig is about 1 µg / kg , but to a hamster it is more than 1 @,@ 000 µg / kg . A similar difference can be seen even between two different rat strains . Various hyperplastic ( overgrowth ) or atrophic ( wasting away ) responses are seen in different organs , thymus atrophy is very typical in several animal species . TCDD also affects the balance of several hormones . In some species , but not in all , severe liver toxicity is seen . Taking into account the low doses of dioxins in the present human population , only two types of toxic effects have been considered to cause a relevant risk to humans : developmental effects and cancer . 
 = = = Developmental effects = = = 
 Developmental effects occur at very low doses in animals . They include frank <unk> such as cleft palate and hydronephrosis . Development of some organs may be even more sensitive : very low doses perturb the development of sexual organs in rodents , and the development of teeth in rats . The latter is important in that tooth deformities were also seen after the Seveso accident and possibly after a long breast @-@ feeding of babies in the 1970s and 1980s when the dioxin concentrations in Europe were about ten times higher than at present . 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 Cancers can be induced in animals at many sites . At sufficiently high doses TCDD has caused cancer in all animals tested . The most sensitive is liver cancer in female rats , and this has long been a basis for risk assessment . Dose @-@ response of TCDD in causing cancer does not seem to be linear , and there is a threshold below which it seems to cause no cancer . TCDD is not mutagenic or genotoxic , in other words , it is not able to initiate cancer , and the cancer risk is based on promotion of cancer initiated by other compounds or on indirect effects such as disturbing defense mechanisms of the body e.g. by preventing apoptosis or programmed death of altered cells . <unk> is associated with tissue damage , and it is often viewed now as secondary to tissue damage . 
 TCDD may in some conditions <unk> the carcinogenic effects of other compounds . An example is benzo ( a ) pyrene that is metabolized in two steps , oxidation and conjugation . Oxidation produces epoxide carcinogens that are rapidly detoxified by conjugation , but some molecules may escape to the nucleus of the cell and bind to DNA causing a mutation , resulting in cancer initiation . When TCDD increases the activity of oxidative enzymes more than conjugation enzymes , the epoxide intermediates may increase , increasing the possibility of cancer initiation . Thus a beneficial activation of detoxifying enzymes may lead to deleterious side effects . 
 = = Cases of exposure = = 
 There have been a number of incidents where people have been exposed to high doses of TCDD or with a combination of TCDD and other dioxin @-@ like chemicals , including : 
 In 1976 , thousands of inhabitants of Seveso , Italy were exposed to TCDD after an accidental release of several kilograms of TCDD from a pressure tank . A number of animals died , and high concentrations of TCDD , up to 56 @,@ 000 pg / g of fat , were noted especially in children playing outside and eating local food . The acute effects were limited to about 200 cases of chloracne . Long @-@ term effects seem to include a slight excess of multiple myeloma and myeloid leukaemia , as well as some developmental effects such as disturbed development of teeth and excess of girls born to fathers who were exposed as children . Several other long @-@ term effects have been suspected , but the evidence is not very strong . 
 In Vienna , two women were poisoned at their workplace in 1997 , and the measured concentrations in one of them were the highest ever measured in a human being , 144 @,@ 000 pg / g of fat . This is about one hundred thousandfold compared with TCDD concentrations in most people today , and about ten thousandfold compared with the sum of all dioxin @-@ like compounds in young people today . She survived but suffered from difficult chloracne for several years . The poisoning likely happened in October 1997 , but was not discovered until April 1998 . At the institute where the women worked as secretaries , high concentrations of TCDD were found in one of the labs , suggesting that the compound had been produced there . The police investigation failed to find clear evidence and no one was ever prosecuted . Aside from malaise and amenorrhea there were surprisingly few other symptoms or abnormal laboratory findings . 
 In 2004 , then @-@ presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine was poisoned with a large dose of TCDD . His blood TCDD concentration was measured 108 @,@ 000 pg / g of fat , which is the second highest ever measured . This concentration implies a dose exceeding 2 mg , or 25 μg / kg of body weight . Also he suffered from chloracne for many years , but again after initial malaise , other symptoms or abnormal laboratory findings were few . 
 An area of polluted land in Italy , known as the Triangle of death , is contaminated with TCDD due to years of illegal waste disposal by organized crime . 
 = Period 1 element = 
 A period 1 element is one of the chemical elements in the first row ( or period ) of the periodic table of the chemical elements . The periodic table is laid out in rows to illustrate recurring ( periodic ) trends in the chemical behaviour of the elements as their atomic number increases : a new row is begun when chemical behaviour begins to repeat , meaning that elements with similar behaviour fall into the same vertical columns . The first period contains fewer elements than any other row in the table , with only two : hydrogen and helium . This situation can be explained by modern theories of atomic structure . In a quantum mechanical description of atomic structure , this period corresponds to the filling of the 1s orbital . Period 1 elements obey the duet rule in that they need two electrons to complete their valence shell . The maximum number of electrons that these elements can accommodate is two , both in the 1s orbital . Therefore , period 1 can have only two elements . 
 = = Periodic trends = = 
 All other periods in the period table contain at least 8 elements , and it is often helpful to consider periodic trends across the period . However , period 1 contains only two elements , so this concept does not apply here . 
 In terms of vertical trends down groups , helium can be seen as a typical noble gas at the head of Group 18 , but as discussed below , <unk> 's chemistry is unique and it is not easily assigned to any group . 
 = = Position of period 1 elements in the periodic table = = 
 Although both hydrogen and helium are in the s @-@ block , neither of them behaves similarly to other s @-@ block elements . Their behaviour is so different from the other s @-@ block elements that there is considerable disagreement over where these two elements should be placed in the periodic table . 
 Hydrogen is sometimes placed above lithium , above carbon , above fluorine , above both lithium and fluorine ( appearing twice ) , or left floating above the other elements and not assigned to any group in the periodic table . 
 Helium is almost always placed above neon ( which is in the p @-@ block ) in the periodic table as a noble gas , although it is occasionally placed above beryllium due to their similar electron configuration . 
 = = Elements = = 
 = = = Hydrogen = = = 
 Hydrogen ( H ) is the chemical element with atomic number 1 . At standard temperature and pressure , hydrogen is a colorless , odorless , nonmetallic , tasteless , highly flammable diatomic gas with the molecular formula H2 . With an atomic mass of 1 @.@ <unk> amu , hydrogen is the lightest element . 
 Hydrogen is the most abundant of the chemical elements , constituting roughly 75 % of the universe 's elemental mass . Stars in the main sequence are mainly composed of hydrogen in its plasma state . Elemental hydrogen is relatively rare on Earth , and is industrially produced from hydrocarbons such as methane , after which most elemental hydrogen is used " <unk> " ( meaning locally at the production site ) , with the largest markets almost equally divided between fossil fuel upgrading , such as hydrocracking , and ammonia production , mostly for the fertilizer market . Hydrogen may be produced from water using the process of electrolysis , but this process is significantly more expensive commercially than hydrogen production from natural gas . 
 The most common naturally occurring isotope of hydrogen , known as protium , has a single proton and no neutrons . In ionic compounds , it can take on either a positive charge , becoming a cation composed of a bare proton , or a negative charge , becoming an anion known as a hydride . Hydrogen can form compounds with most elements and is present in water and most organic compounds . It plays a particularly important role in acid @-@ base chemistry , in which many reactions involve the exchange of protons between soluble molecules . As the only neutral atom for which the Schrödinger equation can be solved analytically , study of the energetics and spectrum of the hydrogen atom has played a key role in the development of quantum mechanics . 
 The interactions of hydrogen with various metals are very important in metallurgy , as many metals can suffer hydrogen embrittlement , and in developing safe ways to store it for use as a fuel . Hydrogen is highly soluble in many compounds composed of rare earth metals and transition metals and can be dissolved in both crystalline and amorphous metals . Hydrogen solubility in metals is influenced by local distortions or impurities in the metal crystal lattice . 
 = = = Helium = = = 
 Helium ( He ) is a colorless , odorless , tasteless , non @-@ toxic , inert monatomic chemical element that heads the noble gas series in the periodic table and whose atomic number is 2 . Its boiling and melting points are the lowest among the elements and it exists only as a gas except in extreme conditions . 
 Helium was discovered in 1868 by French astronomer Pierre Janssen , who first detected the substance as an unknown yellow spectral line signature in light from a solar eclipse . In 1903 , large reserves of helium were found in the natural gas fields of the United States , which is by far the largest supplier of the gas . The substance is used in cryogenics , in deep @-@ sea breathing systems , to cool superconducting magnets , in helium dating , for inflating balloons , for providing lift in airships , and as a protective gas for industrial uses such as arc welding and growing silicon wafers . Inhaling a small volume of the gas temporarily changes the timbre and quality of the human voice . The behavior of liquid helium @-@ 4 's two fluid phases , helium I and helium II , is important to researchers studying quantum mechanics and the phenomenon of superfluidity in particular , and to those looking at the effects that temperatures near absolute zero have on matter , such as with superconductivity . 
 Helium is the second lightest element and is the second most abundant in the observable universe . Most helium was formed during the Big Bang , but new helium is being created as a result of the nuclear fusion of hydrogen in stars . On Earth , helium is relatively rare and is created by the natural decay of some radioactive elements because the alpha particles that are emitted consist of helium nuclei . This radiogenic helium is trapped with natural gas in concentrations of up to seven percent by volume , from which it is extracted commercially by a low @-@ temperature separation process called fractional distillation . 
 = Japanese submarine I @-@ 179 = 
 The Japanese submarine I @-@ 179 ( originally I @-@ 79 ) was a Kaidai type cruiser submarine of the KD7 sub @-@ class built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during the 1940s . She was lost with all hands when a valve was accidentally left open during her sea trials in July 1943 . Her wreck was later salvaged and scrapped in 1957 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The submarines of the KD7 sub @-@ class were medium @-@ range attack submarines developed from the preceding <unk> sub @-@ class . They displaced 1 @,@ 862 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 833 long tons ) surfaced and 2 @,@ 644 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 602 long tons ) submerged . The submarines were 105 @.@ 5 meters ( 346 ft 2 in ) long , had a beam of 8 @.@ 25 meters ( 27 ft 1 in ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 6 meters ( 15 ft 1 in ) . The boats had a diving depth of 80 m ( 260 ft ) and a complement of 86 officers and crewmen . 
 For surface running , the boats were powered by two 4 @,@ 000 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 2 @,@ 983 kW ) diesel engines , each driving one propeller shaft . When submerged each propeller was driven by a 900 @-@ horsepower ( 671 kW ) electric motor . They could reach 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) on the surface and 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) underwater . On the surface , the <unk> had a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) ; submerged , they had a range of 50 nmi ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 The boats were armed with six internal 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , all in the bow . They carried one reload for each tube ; a total of a dozen torpedoes . They were originally intended to be armed with two twin @-@ gun mounts for the 25 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) Type 96 anti @-@ aircraft gun , but a 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) deck gun for combat on the surface was substituted for one 25 mm mount during construction . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Built by the Kawasaki Dockyard Co. at their shipyard in Kobe , I @-@ 179 was laid down on 21 August 1941 under the name of Submarine No. 157 and renamed I @-@ 179 on 1 November 1941 . The boat was launched on 16 July 1942 and completed on 18 June 1943 . While conducting her sea trials in the Inland Sea on 14 July , she sank with the loss of all 85 officers and crewmen . Her wreck was located four days later at a depth of 81 meters ( 265 ft ) at 32 ° 29 ′ N 131 ° 54 ′ W with several hatches and her bow buoyancy tank vent valve open . I @-@ 179 was struck from the Navy List on 15 April 1944 . Her wreck was salvaged from April 1956 to 1 March 1957 and scrapped at Kure . 
 = Eurostar = 
 Eurostar is a high @-@ speed railway service connecting London with Avignon , Brussels , Lille , Lyon , Marseille and Paris . All its trains traverse the Channel Tunnel between the United Kingdom and France , owned and operated separately by Eurotunnel . 
 The London terminus is St Pancras International , with the other British calling points being Ebbsfleet International and Ashford International in Kent . Calling points in France are Calais @-@ Fréthun and Lille @-@ Europe , with trains to Paris terminating at Gare du Nord . Trains to Belgium terminate at Midi / Zuid station in Brussels . In addition , there are limited services from London to Disneyland Paris at Marne @-@ la @-@ Vallée – <unk> , services to southern France as of 1 May 2015 and seasonal services to the Alps in winter . 
 The service is operated by 27 eighteen @-@ coach Class 373 / 1 trains which run at up to 300 kilometres per hour ( 186 mph ) on a network of high @-@ speed lines . The LGV Nord line in France opened before Eurostar services began in 1994 , and newer lines enabling faster journeys were added later — HSL 1 in Belgium and High Speed 1 in southern England . The French and Belgian parts of the network are shared with Paris – Brussels Thalys services and also with TGV trains . In the United Kingdom the two @-@ stage Channel Tunnel Rail Link project was completed on 14 November 2007 and renamed High Speed 1 , when the London terminus of Eurostar transferred from Waterloo International to St Pancras International . 
 Eurostar was until 2010 operated jointly by the national railway companies of France and Belgium , SNCF and SNCB / NMBS , and Eurostar ( UK ) Ltd ( EUKL ) , a subsidiary of London and Continental Railways ( LCR ) , which also owned the high @-@ speed infrastructure and stations on the British side . Eurostar has become the dominant operator on the routes that it operates , carrying more passengers than all airlines combined . Other operators have expressed an interest in starting competing services following deregulation in 2010 . On 1 September 2010 , Eurostar was incorporated as a single corporate entity called Eurostar International Limited ( <unk> ) , replacing the joint operation between EUKL , SNCF and SNCB / NMBS . <unk> is owned by SNCF ( 55 % ) , LCR ( 40 % ) and SNCB / NMBS ( 5 % ) . 
 In June 2014 , the UK shareholding in Eurostar International Limited was transferred from London and Continental Railways / Department for Transport to HM Treasury . In October 2014 , it was announced that the UK government planned to raise £ 300 million by selling that stake . In March 2015 , the UK government announced that it will be selling its 40 % share to an Anglo @-@ Canadian consortium . If the sale goes ahead , the ownership of Eurostar International will be SNCF ( 55 % ) , Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec ( 30 % ) , Hermes Infrastructure ( 10 % ) and SNCB ( 5 % ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Conception and planning = = = 
 The history of Eurostar can be traced to the 1986 choice of a rail tunnel to provide a cross @-@ channel link between Britain and France . A previous attempt at constructing a tunnel between the two nations had begun in 1974 , but was quickly aborted . In 1988 construction began on a new basis . Eurotunnel was created to manage and own the tunnel , which was finished in 1993 , the official opening taking place in May 1994 . 
 In addition to the tunnel 's shuttle trains carrying cars and lorries between Folkestone and Calais , the decision to build a railway tunnel opened up the possibility of through passenger and freight train services between places further afield . British Rail and SNCF contracted with Eurotunnel to use half the tunnel 's capacity for this purpose . In 1987 Britain , France and Belgium set up an International Project Group to specify a train to provide an international high @-@ speed passenger service through the tunnel . France had been operating high @-@ speed TGV services since 1981 , and had begun construction of a new high @-@ speed line between Paris and the Channel Tunnel , LGV Nord ; French TGV technology was chosen as the basis for the new trains . An order for 30 trainsets , to be manufactured in France but with some British and Belgian components , was placed in December 1989 . On 20 June 1993 , the first Eurostar test train travelled through the tunnel to the UK . Various technical difficulties in running the new trains on British tracks were quickly overcome . 
 = = = Launch of service = = = 
 On 14 November 1994 Eurostar services began between Waterloo International station in London , Gare du Nord in Paris and Brussels @-@ South railway station in Brussels . In 1995 Eurostar was achieving an average end @-@ to @-@ end speed of 171 @.@ 5 km / h ( 106 @.@ 6 mph ) between London and Paris . On 8 January 1996 Eurostar launched services from a second railway station in the UK when Ashford International was opened . Journey times between London and Brussels were reduced by the opening of HSL 1 on 14 December 1997 . 
 On 23 September 2003 passenger services began running on the first completed section of High Speed 1 . Following a high @-@ profile glamorous opening ceremony and a large advertising campaign , on 14 November 2007 Eurostar services in London transferred from Waterloo to the extended and extensively refurbished St Pancras International . 
 = = = Records achieved = = = 
 The Channel Tunnel used by Eurostar services holds the record for having the longest undersea section anywhere in the world , and it is the second longest rail tunnel in the world . A Eurostar train set a new British speed record of 334 @.@ 7 km / h ( 208 @.@ 0 mph ) on the first section of High Speed 1 on 30 July 2003 , two months before services began running upon the first section of High Speed 1 . 
 On 16 May 2006 Eurostar set a new record for the longest non @-@ stop high @-@ speed journey , a distance of 1 @,@ 421 kilometres ( 883 mi ) from London to Cannes taking 7 hours 25 minutes . On 4 September 2007 a record @-@ breaking train left Paris Gare du Nord at 10 : 44 ( 09 : 44 BST ) and reached London St Pancras in 2 hours 3 minutes 39 seconds ; carrying journalists and railway workers . The train was the first passenger @-@ carrying arrival at St Pancras International station . On 20 September 2007 , Eurostar broke another record when it completed the journey from Brussels to London in 1 hour , 43 minutes . 
 = = = Regional Eurostar and <unk> = = = 
 The original proposals for Eurostar included direct services to Paris and Brussels from cities north of London ( NoL ) : Manchester via Birmingham on the West Coast Main Line and Glasgow via Edinburgh , Newcastle and York on the East Coast Main Line . Seven shorter NoL Eurostar trains for these Regional Eurostar services were built , but these services never ran . Predicted journey times of almost nine hours for Glasgow to Paris at the time of growth of low @-@ cost air travel during the 1990s made the plans commercially unviable against the cheaper and quicker airlines . Other reasons that have been suggested for these services having never been run were both government policies and the disruptive privatisation of British Rail . Three of the Regional Eurostar units were leased by Great North Eastern Railway ( GNER ) to increase domestic services from London King 's Cross to York and later Leeds . The leases ended in December 2005 , and most of the NoL sets have since been transferred to SNCF for TGV services in northern France . 
 An international <unk> sleeper train was also planned ; this would have travelled the same routes as Regional Eurostar , plus the Great Western Main Line to Cardiff . These were also deemed commercially unviable , and the scheme was abandoned with no services ever operated . In 2000 the coaches were sold to Via Rail in Canada . 
 = = = Ashford International station = = = 
 Ashford International station was the original station for Eurostar services in Kent . Once Ebbsfleet International railway station , also designed to serve the Kent region , had opened , only three trains a day to Paris and one to Disneyland Paris called at Ashford for a considerable amount of time . There were fears that services at Ashford International might be further reduced or withdrawn altogether as Eurostar planned to make Ebbsfleet the new regional hub instead . However , after a period during which no Brussels trains served the station , to the dissatisfaction of the local communities , on 23 February 2009 Eurostar re @-@ introduced a single daily Ashford @-@ Brussels service . 
 = = Mainline routes = = 
 = = = LGV Nord = = = 
 LGV Nord is a French 333 @-@ kilometre ( 207 mi ) -long high @-@ speed rail line that connects Paris to the Belgian border and the Channel Tunnel via Lille . It opened in 1993 . Its extensions to Belgium and towards Paris , as well as connecting to the Channel Tunnel , have made LGV Nord a part of every Eurostar journey undertaken . A Belgian high @-@ speed line , HSL 1 , was added to the end of LGV Nord , at the Belgian border , in 1997 . Of all French high @-@ speed lines , LGV Nord sees the widest variety of high @-@ speed rolling stock and is quite busy ; a proposed cut @-@ off bypassing Lille , which would reduce Eurostar journey times to Paris , is called LGV Picardie . 
 = = = Channel Tunnel = = = 
 The Channel Tunnel is a crucial part of the route as it is the only rail connection between Great Britain and the European mainland . It joins LGV Nord in France with High Speed One in Britain . Tunnelling began in 1988 , and the 50 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 31 @.@ 4 mi ) tunnel was officially opened by the British sovereign Queen Elizabeth II and the French President François Mitterrand at a ceremony in Calais on 6 May 1994 . It is owned by Eurotunnel , which charges a significant toll to Eurostar for its use . In 1996 the American Society of Civil Engineers identified the tunnel as one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World . Along the current route of the Eurostar service , line speeds are 300 kilometres per hour ( 186 mph ) except within the Channel Tunnel , where a reduced speed of 160 kilometres per hour ( 100 mph ) applies for safety reasons . Since the launch of Eurostar services , severe disruptions and cancellations have been caused by fires breaking out within the Channel Tunnel , such as in 1996 , 2006 ( minor ) , 2008 and 2015 . 
 = = = HSL 1 = = = 
 Journey times between London and Brussels were improved when an 88 @-@ kilometre ( 55 mi ) Belgian high @-@ speed line , HSL 1 , opened on 14 December 1997 . It links with LGV Nord on the border with France , allowing Eurostar trains heading to Brussels to make the transition between the two without having to reduce speed . A further four @-@ minute improvement for London – Brussels trains was achieved in December 2006 with the opening of the 435 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 427 ft ) Brussels South Viaduct . Linking the international platforms of Brussels @-@ South railway station with the high @-@ speed line , the viaduct separates Eurostar ( and Thalys ) from local services . 
 = = = High Speed 1 = = = 
 High Speed 1 ( HS1 ) , formerly known as the Channel Tunnel Rail Link ( CTRL ) , is a 108 @-@ kilometre ( 67 mi ) high @-@ speed railway line running from London through Kent to the British end of the Channel Tunnel . It was built in two stages . The first section between the tunnel and Fawkham Junction in north Kent opened in September 2003 , cutting London – Paris journey times by 21 minutes to 2 hours 35 minutes , and London – Brussels to 2 hours 20 minutes . On 14 November 2007 , commercial services began over the whole of the new HS1 line . The redeveloped St Pancras International station became the new London terminus for all Eurostar services . The completion of High Speed 1 has brought the British part of Eurostar 's route up to the same standards as the French and Belgian high @-@ speed lines . Non @-@ stop journey times were reduced by a further 20 minutes to 2 hours 15 minutes for London – Paris and 1 hour 51 minutes for London – Brussels . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Frequency = = = 
 Eurostar offers up to sixteen weekday London – Paris services ( eighteen on Fridays ) including ten non @-@ stop ( twelve on Fridays ) . There used to be ten London – Lille and Brussels services , including five running non @-@ stop as far as Lille , but this has now been reduced to seven each way . In addition , there is a return trip from London to Marne @-@ la @-@ Vallée - <unk> for Disneyland Paris which runs at least 4 times a week with increased frequency during school holidays and an up to 5 times a week service to Marseille via Lyon and Avignon . There are also seasonal services in the winter . " Snow trains " , aimed at skiers , to Bourg @-@ Saint @-@ Maurice , Aime @-@ la @-@ Plagne and <unk> in the Alps ; these run twice @-@ weekly , one overnight and one during the daytime . Intermediate stations are Ebbsfleet International in northwest Kent , Ashford International in southeast Kent , and Calais @-@ Fréthun and Lille @-@ Europe in Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais . 
 Since 14 November 2007 , all Eurostar trains have been routed via High Speed 1 to or from the redeveloped London terminus at St Pancras International , which at a cost of £ 800 million was extensively rebuilt and extended to cope with 394 @-@ metre ( 431 yd ) long Eurostar trains . It had originally been intended to retain some Eurostar services at Waterloo International terminal , but this was ruled out on cost grounds . Completion of High Speed 1 has increased the potential number of trains serving London . Separation of Eurostar from British domestic services through Kent meant that timetabling was no longer affected by peak @-@ hour restrictions . 
 = = = Fares = = = 
 Eurostar 's fares were significantly higher in its early years ; the cheapest fare in 1994 was £ 99 return . In 2002 , Eurostar was planning cheaper fares , an example of which was an offer of £ 50 day returns from London to Paris or Brussels . By March 2003 , the cheapest fare from the UK was £ 59 return , available all year around . In June 2009 it was announced that one @-@ way single fares would be available at £ 31 at the cheapest . Competition between Eurostar and airline services was a large factor in ticket prices being reduced from the initial levels . Business Premier fares also slightly undercut air fares on similar routes , targeted at regular business travellers . In 2009 , Eurostar greatly increased its budget ticket availability to help maintain and grow its dominant market share . The Eurostar ticketing system is very complex , being distributed through no fewer than 48 individual sales systems . Eurostar is a member of the Amadeus CRS distribution system , making its tickets available alongside those of airlines worldwide . 
 First class on Eurostar is called Business Premier ; benefits include guaranteed faster checking @-@ in and meals served at @-@ seat , as well as the improved furnishings and interior of Business Premier carriages . The rebranding is part of Eurostar 's marketing drive to attract more business professionals . Increasingly , business people in a group have been chartering private carriages as opposed to individual seats on the train . 
 = = = Service connections = = = 
 Without the operation of Regional Eurostar services using the North of London trainsets across the rest of Britain , Eurostar has developed its connections with other transport services instead , such as integrating effectively with traditional UK rail operators ' schedules and routes , making it possible for passengers to use Eurostar as a quick connection to further destinations on the continent . All three main terminals used by the Eurostar service – St Pancras International , Paris Gare du Nord , and Brussels Midi / Zuid – are served by domestic trains and by local urban transport networks such as the London Underground and the Paris Metro . Standard Eurostar tickets no longer include free onward connections to or from any other station in Belgium : this is now available for a flat @-@ rate supplement , currently £ 5 @.@ 50 . 
 Eurostar has announced several partnerships with other rail services , most notably Thalys connections at Lille and Brussels for passengers to go beyond current Eurostar routes towards the Netherlands and Germany . In 2002 , Eurostar initiated the Eurostar @-@ Plus program , offering connecting tickets for onward journeys from Lille and Paris to dozens of destinations in France . Through fares are also available from 68 British towns and cities to destinations in France and Belgium . In May 2009 Eurostar announced that a formal connection to Switzerland had been established in a partnership between Eurostar and <unk> , which will operate TGV services from Lille to the Swiss Alps for Eurostar connection . 
 = = = Controls and security = = = 
 Because the UK is not part of the Schengen Area , and because Belgium and France are not part of the Common Travel Area , all Eurostar passengers must go through border controls . Both the British Government and the Schengen governments concerned ( Belgium and France ) have legal obligations to check the travel documents of those entering their respective countries ( as well as those leaving , in the case of Belgium and France ) . 
 To allow passengers to walk off the train on arrival in most cases , passport controls ordinarily take place at the embarkation station . 
 In order to comply with special UK legislation , there are full security checks similar to those at airports , scanning both bags and people 's pockets . Security checks at Eurostar are comparable to those at a small airport and generally much quicker than at London Heathrow . The recommended check @-@ in time is 30 minutes except for business class where it is 10 minutes . 
 Eurostar passengers travelling inside the Schengen Area ( mainly from Brussels to Lille , but also from Brussels to Calais ) are also checked by the UK Border Force within Belgian territory , since there is no way of separating them out from Brussels – London passengers . When the tripartite agreements were signed , the Belgian Government said that it had serious questions about the compatibility of this agreement with the Schengen Convention and the principle of free movement of people enshrined in various European Treaties . On 30 June 2009 Eurostar raised concerns at the UK House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee that it was illegal under French law for the collection of information desired by the UK government under the e @-@ Borders scheme , and they would be unable to cooperate . 
 Where there is no facility for security checks , for example on the northbound Provence service , passengers must leave the train at Lille and undergo security and passport checks there before <unk> the train . 
 On several occasions , people have illegally tried to stow away on board the train , sometimes in large groups , trying to enter the UK ; border monitoring and security is therefore extremely tight . Eurostar claims to have good and well @-@ funded security measures . 
 = = = Operational performance = = = 
 Eurostar 's punctuality has fluctuated from year to year , but usually remains over 90 % ; in the first quarter of 1999 , 89 % of services operated were on time , and in the second quarter it reached 92 % . Eurostar 's best punctuality record was 97 @.@ 35 % , between 16 and 22 August 2004 . In 2006 , it was 92 @.@ 7 % , and in 2007 , 91 @.@ 5 % were on time . In the first quarter of 2009 , 96 % of Eurostar services were punctual compared with rival air routes ' 76 % . 
 An advantage held by Eurostar is the convenience and speed of the service : with shorter check @-@ in times than at most airports and hence quicker boarding and less queueing and high punctuality , it takes less time to travel between central London and central Paris by high @-@ speed rail than it does by air . Eurostar now has a dominant share of the combined rail – air market on its routes to Paris and Brussels . In 2004 , it had a 66 % share of the London – Paris market , and a 59 % share of the London – Brussels market . In 2007 , it achieved record market shares of 71 % for London – Paris and 65 % for London – Brussels routes . 
 Eurostar 's passenger numbers initially failed to meet predictions . In 1996 , London and Continental Railways forecast that passenger numbers would reach 21 @.@ 4 million annually by 2004 , but only 7 @.@ 3 million was achieved . 82 million passengers used Waterloo International Station from its opening in 1994 to its closure in 2007 . 2008 was a record year for Eurostar , with a 10 @.@ 3 % rise in passenger use , which was attributed to the use of High Speed 1 and the move to St Pancras . The following year , Eurostar saw an 11 @.@ 5 % fall in passenger numbers during the first three months of 2009 , attributed to the 2008 Channel Tunnel fire and the 2009 recession . 
 As a result of the poor economic conditions , Eurostar received state aid in May 2009 to cancel out some of the accumulated debt from the High Speed 1 construction programme . Later that year , during snowy conditions in the run @-@ up to Christmas , thousands of passengers were left stranded as several trains broke down and many more were cancelled . In an independent review commissioned by Eurostar , the company came in for serious criticism about its handling of the incident and lack of plans for such a scenario . 
 In 2006 , the Department for Transport predicted that , by 2037 , annual cross @-@ channel passenger numbers would probably reach 16 million , considerably less optimistic than London and Continental Railways 's original 1996 forecast . In 2007 Eurostar set a target of carrying 10 million passengers by 2010 . The company cited several factors to support this objective , such as improved journey times , punctuality and station facilities . Passengers in general , it stated , are becoming increasingly aware of the environmental effects of air travel , and Eurostar services emit much less carbon <unk> and that its remaining carbon emissions are now offset , making its services carbon neutral . Further expansion of the high @-@ speed rail network in Europe , such as the HSL @-@ Zuid line between Belgium and the Netherlands , continues to bring more destinations within rail @-@ competitive range , giving Eurostar the possibility of opening up new services in future . 
 The following chart presents the estimated number of passengers annually transported by the Eurostar service since 1995 , in millions : 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Eurostar has been hailed as having set new standards in international rail travel and has won praise several times over , recognising its high standards . Eurostar won the Train Operator of the Year award in the HSBC Rail Awards for 2005 . It was declared the Best Train Company in the joint Guardian / Observer Travel Awards 2008 . Eurostar had previously struggled with its reputation and brand image . One commentator had defined the situation at the time as : 
 In June 2003 , Eurostar was battling to recover from the worst period in its 10 @-@ year history . Negative media coverage combined with poor sales and the general public 's low opinion of the British rail industry , created a major challenge ... Eurostar was finding it difficult to pick itself up from one of the worst periods in its decade @-@ long history . The period post 9 / 11 had sent the business into a downturn . Passenger numbers were drying up due to worries over international travel . Several management changes had led to a pause in strategy . <unk> had suffered badly because of wider problems with the UK 's rail infrastructure . 
 By 2008 , Eurostar 's environmental credentials had become highly developed and promoted . In 2006 Eurostar 's Environment Group was set up , with the aim of making changes in the Eurostar services ' daily running to decrease the environmental impact , the organisation setting itself a target of reducing carbon emissions per passenger journey by 25 % by 2012 . Drivers are trained in techniques to achieve maximum energy efficiency , and lighting has been minimised ; the provider of the bulk of the energy for the Channel Tunnel has been switched to nuclear power stations in France . 
 Eurostar 's current target is to reduce emissions by 35 percent per passenger journey by 2012 , putting itself beyond the efforts of other railway companies in this field and thereby winning the 2007 Network Rail Efficiency Award . In the grand opening ceremony of St Pancras International , one of the Eurostar trains was given the name ' Tread Lightly ' , said to symbolise their smaller impact on the environment compared to planes . 
 = = = Organisation = = = 
 Since 2010 , Eurostar is owned by Eurostar International Limited , a company jointly owned by London & Continental Railways , SNCF and SNCB / NMBS . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Eurostar is a member of <unk> , a marketing alliance formed in July 2007 of seven European high @-@ speed rail operators , including Thalys . The alliance plans to allow tickets to be booked from one end of Europe to the other on a single website . In June 2009 London and Continental Railways , and the Eurostar UK operations they held ownership of , became fully nationalised by the UK government . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 = = = Fleet details = = = 
 In addition to its multiple unit fleet units , Eurostar operates a single Class 08 diesel shunter as the pilot at Temple Mills depot . 
 = = = Current fleet = = = 
 = = = = Class 373 = = = = 
 Built between 1992 and 1996 , Eurostar 's fleet consists of 38 EMU trains , designated Class 373 in the United Kingdom and TGV <unk> in France . The units have also been branded as the Eurostar <unk> by Eurostar since 2015 . There are two variants : 
 31 " Inter @-@ Capital " sets consisting of two power cars and eighteen passenger carriages . These trains are 394 metres ( 1 @,@ 293 ft ) long and can carry 750 passengers : 206 in first class , 544 in standard class . 
 7 shorter " North of London " sets which have two power cars and fourteen passenger carriages and are 320 metres ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) long . These sets have a capacity of 558 seats : 114 first class , 444 standard and which were designed to operate the aborted Regional Eurostar services . 
 The trains are essentially modified TGV sets , and can operate at up to 300 kilometres per hour ( 186 mph ) on high @-@ speed lines , and 160 kilometres per hour ( 99 mph ) in the Channel Tunnel . It is possible to exceed the 300 @-@ kilometre @-@ per @-@ hour speed limit , but only with special permission from the safety authorities in the respective country . Speed limits in the Channel Tunnel are dictated by air @-@ resistance , energy ( heat ) dissipation and the need to fit in with other , slower trains . The trains were designed with Channel Tunnel safety in mind , and consist of two independent " half @-@ sets " each with its own power car . In the event of a serious fire on board while travelling through the tunnel , passengers would be transferred into the undamaged half of the train , which would then be detached and driven out of the tunnel to safety . If the undamaged part were the rear half of the train , this would be driven by the Chef du Train , who is a fully authorised driver and occupies the rear driving cab while the train travels through the tunnel for this purpose . 
 As 27 of the 31 Inter @-@ Capital sets are sufficient to operate the service , four are currently used by SNCF for domestic TGV services ; one of these regularly operates a Paris – Lille shuttle . The Eurostar logos have been removed from these sets , but the base colours of white , black , and yellow remain . SNCF 's lease of the sets is scheduled to last until 2011 , with an option for a further two years . 
 Each train has a unique four @-@ digit number starting with " 3 " ( <unk> ) . This designates the train as a Mark 3 TGV ( Mark 1 being SNCF TGV Sud @-@ Est ; Mark 2 being SNCF TGV Atlantique ) . The second digit denotes the country of ownership : 
 <unk> UK 
 <unk> Belgium 
 <unk> France 
 <unk> Regional Eurostar 
 = = = = = Fleet updates = = = = = 
 In 2004 – 2005 the " Inter @-@ Capital " sets still in daily use for international services were refurbished with a new interior designed by Philippe Starck . The original grey @-@ yellow scheme in Standard class and grey @-@ red of First / Premium First were replaced with a grey @-@ brown look in Standard and grey @-@ burnt @-@ orange in First class . Power points were added to seats in First class and coaches 5 and 14 in Standard class . Premium First class was renamed <unk> . 
 In 2008 , Eurostar announced that it would be carrying out a mid @-@ life refurbishment of its Class 373 trains to allow the fleet to remain in service beyond 2020 . This will include the 28 units making up the Eurostar fleet , but not the three Class 373 / 1 units used by SNCF or the seven Class 373 / 2 " North of London " sets . As part of the refurbishment , the Italian company Pininfarina was contracted to redesign the interiors , and The Yard Creative was selected to design the new buffet cars . On 11 May 2009 Eurostar revealed the new look for its first @-@ class compartments . The first refurbished train was due in service in 2012 , and Eurostar plans to have completed the entire process by 2014 . 
 On 13 November 2014 Eurostar announced the first refurbished trains would not re @-@ enter the fleet until the 3rd or 4th quarter of 2015 due to delays at the completion centre . 
 = = = = Class 374 = = = = 
 In addition to the announced mid @-@ life update of the existing Class 373 fleet , Eurostar in 2009 reportedly entered <unk> bids for eight new trainsets to be purchased . Any new trains would need to meet the same safety rules governing passage through the Channel Tunnel as the existing Class 373 fleet . The replacement to the Class 373 trains has been decided jointly between the French Transport Ministry and the UK Department for Transport . The new trains will be equipped to use the new ERTMS in @-@ cab signalling system , due to be fitted to High Speed 1 around 2040 . 
 On 7 October 2010 , it was reported that Eurostar had selected Siemens as preferred bidder to supply 10 Siemens Velaro <unk> trainsets at a cost of € 600 million ( and a total investment of more than £ 700 million with the refurbishment of the existing fleet included ) to operate an expanded route network , including services from London to Cologne and Amsterdam . These would be sixteen @-@ car , 400 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 312 ft ) long trainsets built to meet current Channel Tunnel regulations . The top speed will be 320 km / h ( 199 mph ) and they will have 894 – 950 seats , unlike the current fleet built by the French company Alstom , which has a top speed of 300 km / h ( 186 mph ) and a seating capacity of 750 . Total traction power will be rated at 16 MW . 
 The nomination of Siemens would see it break into the French high @-@ speed market for the first time , as all French and French subsidiary high @-@ speed operators use TGV derivatives produced by Alstom . Alstom attempted legal action to prevent Eurostar from acquiring German @-@ built trains , claiming that the Siemens sets ordered would breach Channel Tunnel safety rules , but this was thrown out of court . Alstom said , after its High Court defeat , that it would " pursue alternative legal options to uphold its position " . On 4 November 2010 , the company lodged a complaint with the European Commission over the tendering process , which then asked the British government for " clarification " . Alstom then announced it had started legal action against Eurostar , again in the High Court in London . In July 2011 , the High Court rejected Alstom 's claim that the tender process was " ineffective " , and in April 2012 Alstom said it would call off pending court actions against Siemens . This effectively freed the way for Siemens to build the new Eurostar trains , the first of which are expected to enter service in late 2015 . 
 On 13 November 2014 Eurostar announced the purchase of an additional seven <unk> for delivery in the second half of 2016 . At the same time , Eurostar announced the first five <unk> from the original order of ten would be available by December 2015 , with the remaining five entering service by May 2016 . Of the five sets ready by December 2015 , three of them were planned to be used on London @-@ Paris and London @-@ Brussels routes . 
 = = = Past fleet = = = 
 = = Accidents , incidents and events = = 
 A number of technical incidents have affected Eurostar services over the years , but up to the present there has only been one major accident involving a service operated by Eurostar , a derailment in June 2000 . Other incidents in the Channel Tunnel — such as the 1996 and 2008 Channel Tunnel fires — have affected Eurostar services but were not directly related to Eurostar 's operations . However , the breakdowns in the tunnel , which resulted in cessation of service and inconvenience to thousands of passengers , in the run @-@ up to Christmas 2009 , proved a public @-@ relations disaster . 
 = = = Minor incidents = = = 
 There have been several minor incidents with a few Eurostar services . In October 1994 there were teething problems relating to the start of operations . The first preview train , carrying 400 members of the press and media , was delayed for two hours by technical problems . On 29 May 2002 a Eurostar train was initially sent down a wrong line — towards London Victoria railway station instead of London Waterloo — causing the service to arrive 25 minutes late . A signalling error that led to the incorrect <unk> was stated to have caused " no risk " as a result . 
 On 11 April 2006 , a house collapsed next to a railway line near London which caused Eurostar services to have to terminate and start from Ashford International instead of London Waterloo . Passengers waiting at Waterloo International were initially directed on to local trains towards Ashford leaving from the adjacent London Waterloo East railway station , until overcrowding occurred at Ashford . 
 = = = 1996 = = = 
 Approximately 1000 passengers were trapped in darkness for several hours inside two Eurostar trains on the night of 19 / 20 February 1996 . The trains stopped inside the tunnels due to electronic failures caused by snow and ice . Questions were raised at the time about the ability of the train and tunnel electronics to withstand the mix of snow , salt and ice which collect in the tunnels during periods of extreme cold . 
 = = = 2000 = = = 
 On 5 June 2000 a Eurostar train travelling from Paris to London derailed on the LGV Nord high @-@ speed line while traveling at 290 km / h ( 180 mph ) . Fourteen people were treated for light injuries or shock , with no fatalities or major injuries . The articulated nature of the trainset was credited with maintaining stability during the incident and all of the train stayed upright . The incident was caused by a traction link on the second bogie of the front power car coming loose , leading to components of the transmission system on that bogie impacting the track . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 The first departures from St Pancras on 14 November 2007 coincided with an open @-@ ended strike by French rail unions as part of general strike actions over proposed public @-@ sector pension reforms . The trains were operated by uninvolved British employees and service was not interrupted . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 On 23 September 2009 an overhead power line dropped on to a Class 373 train arriving at St Pancras station , activating a circuit breaker and delaying eleven other trains . Two days later , on 25 September 2009 , electrical power via the overhead lines was lost on a section of high @-@ speed line outside Lille , delaying passengers on two evening Eurostar @-@ operated services . 
 During the December 2009 European snowfall , four Eurostar trains broke down inside the Channel Tunnel , after leaving France , and one in Kent on 18 December . Although the trains had been <unk> , the systems had not coped with the conditions . Over 2 @,@ 000 passengers were stuck inside failed trains inside the tunnel , and over 75 @,@ 000 had their services disrupted . All Eurostar services were cancelled from Saturday 19 December to Monday 21 December 2009 . An independent review , published on 12 February 2010 , was critical of the contingency plans in place for assisting passengers stranded by the delays , calling them " insufficient " . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 On 7 January 2010 a Brussels @-@ London train broke down in the Channel Tunnel , resulting in three other trains failing to complete their journeys . The cause of the failure was the onboard signalling system . Due to the severe weather , a limited service was operated in the next few days . 
 On 15 February 2010 , services between Brussels and London were interrupted following the Halle train collision , this time after the dedicated HSL 1 lines in the suburbs of the Belgian capital were blocked by debris from a serious train crash on the suburban commuter lines alongside . No efforts were made to reroute trains around the blockage ; Eurostar instead terminated services to Brussels at Lille , directing passengers to continue their journey on local trains . Brussels services resumed on a limited scale on 22 February . 
 On 21 February 2010 the 21 : 43 service from Paris to London broke down just outside Ashford International , stranding 740 passengers for several hours while a rescue train was called in . 
 On 15 April 2010 air traffic in Western Europe closed because of the eruption of the Eyjafjallajökull volcano . Many travellers between the UK and the European mainland instead took the Eurostar train , all tickets between Brussels and London on 15 and 16 April being sold out within 3 ½ hours after the closure of British airspace . Between 15 and 20 April , Eurostar put on 33 additional trains and carried 165 @,@ 000 passengers – 50 @,@ 000 more than had been scheduled to travel during this period . 
 On 20 December 2010 , the Channel Tunnel was closed off for a day due to snowy weather . Eurostar Trains were suspended that day with thousands of passengers stranded in the run up to Christmas 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 On 17 October 2011 a man fell at approximately 17 : 40 or 17 : 50 from the 17 : 04 service from London to Brussels as it passed through <unk> and Cheriton in Folkestone , near the entry to the Channel Tunnel . The individual was an Albanian who had been refused entry to the United Kingdom and was voluntarily returning to Brussels . The line was handed back at 22 : 09 after being closed for several hours following the incident . The train itself returned north to Ashford International , where passengers were transferred to a Eurostar service operating from Marne @-@ la @-@ Vallée to London , where passengers arrived again at approximately 22 : 30 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 In 2015 Eurostar threatened to require that cyclists dismantle bicycles before they could be transported on trains . Following criticism from Boris Johnson and cycling groups Eurostar reversed the edict . 
 = = Possible developments = = 
 = = = Stratford International station = = = 
 Eurostar trains do not currently call at Stratford International , originally intended to be the London stop for the regional <unk> . This was to be reviewed following the 2012 Olympics . However , in 2013 , Eurostar claimed that its ' business would be hit ' by stopping trains there . 
 = = = Regional Eurostar = = = 
 Although the original plan for Regional Eurostar services to destinations north of London was abandoned , the significantly improved journey times available since the opening of High Speed 1 — which is physically connected to both the East Coast Main Line and the North London Line ( for the West Coast Main Line ) at St Pancras — and the recently increased maximum speeds on the West Coast Main Line may make potential Regional Eurostar services more commercially viable . This would be even more likely if proposals are adopted for a new high @-@ speed line from London to the north of Britain . Simon Montague , Eurostar 's Director of Communications , commented that : " ... International services to the regions are only likely once High Speed 2 is built . " 
 Key pieces of infrastructure still belong to LCR via its subsidiary London & Continental Stations and Property , such as the Manchester International Depot , and Eurostar ( UK ) still owns several track access rights and the rights to paths on both the East Coast and West Coast Main Lines . While no announcement has been made of plans to start Regional Eurostar services , it remains a possibility for the future . In the meantime , the closest equivalent to Regional Eurostar services are same @-@ station connections with East Midlands Trains and Thameslink , changing at St Pancras . The recent construction of a new concourse at adjacent King 's Cross Station has improved interchange with St Pancras and provided East Coast , Great Northern , First Hull Trains and Grand Central services with easier connections to Eurostar . 
 = = = High Speed 2 = = = 
 Eurostar has already been involved in reviewing and publishing reports into High Speed 2 for the British Government and looks favourably upon such an undertaking . The operation of Regional Eurostar services will not be considered until such time as High Speed 2 has been completed . Alternatively , future loans of the North of London sets to other operators would enable the trains to operate at their full speed , unlike GNER 's previous loan between 2000 and 2005 , where the trains were limited to 175 km / h ( 109 mph ) on regular track . A separate company called High Speed Two ( <unk> ) Ltd has been set up to investigate the feasibility and viability of a new line likely serving a similar route to the West Coast Main Line . 
 = = = LGV Picardie = = = 
 LGV Picardie is a proposed high @-@ speed line between Paris and Calais via Amiens . By cutting off the corner of the LGV Nord at Lille , it would enable Eurostar trains to save 20 minutes on the journey between Paris and Calais , bringing the London – Paris journey time under 2 hours . In 2008 the French Government announced its future investment plans for new <unk> to be built up to 2020 ; LGV Picardie was not included but was listed as planned in the longer term . It has later been confirmed that LGV Picardie is intended to be built between 2020 and 2030 . 
 = = = New destinations = = = 
 The reduced journey times offered by the opening of High Speed 1 and the opening of the LGV Est and HSL @-@ Zuid bring more continental destinations within a range from London where rail is competitive with air travel . By Eurostar 's estimates a train would then take 3 hours 30 minutes from London to Amsterdam . At present Eurostar is concentrating on developing its connections with other services , but direct services to other destinations would be possible . However , the routes that any potential services are likely to take would include infrastructure that Eurostar 's rolling stock has not been built to use — German railways mostly have 15 kV AC electrification , while the Netherlands uses 1 @.@ 5 kV DC ( except on HSL Zuid and the <unk> ) . To operate on these lines would require new or heavily modified rolling stock designed to operate at these different voltages , in addition to those already in use . Signalling systems also differ . In addition to the infrastructure difficulties , any potential Eurostar services beyond Paris and Brussels would also require the installation of stringent security measures , due to the UK 's not having signed up to the Schengen Agreement , which allows unrestricted movement across borders of member countries . 
 The difficulties that Eurostar faces in expanding its services would also be faced by any potential competitors to Eurostar . As the UK is outside the Schengen Agreement , London @-@ bound trains must use platforms that are physically isolated , a constraint which other international operators such as Thalys do not face . In addition , the British authorities are required to make passenger security and passport checks before they board the train , which might deter domestic passengers . Compounding the difficulties in providing a similar service are the Channel Tunnel safety rules , the major ones being the " half @-@ train rule " and the " length rule " . The " half @-@ train rule " stipulated that passenger trains had to be able to split in the case of emergency . Class 373 trains were designed as two half @-@ sets , which when coupled form a complete train , enabling them to be split easily in the event of an emergency while in the tunnel , with the unaffected set able to be driven out . The half @-@ train rule was finally abolished in May 2010 . However , the " length rule " , which states that passenger trains must be at least 375 metres long with a through corridor ( to match the distance between the safety doors in the tunnel ) , was retained , preventing any potential operators from applying to run services with existing fleets ( the majority of both TGV and ICE trains are only 200m long ) . 
 On 13 October 2009 the President of SNCF , Guillaume Pepy , outlined plans to expand TGV services around Paris as well as for fleet renewal . A plan to connect LGV Nord , the line used by Eurostar into Paris , with La Défense , a large commercial and business centre in the west of Paris , was described as the " top priority " . Pepy estimated that the connection ( which would also allow interchange to the proposed Paris – Rouen – Le Havre LGV line ) would allow a journey time from central London to La Défense of <unk> <unk> . Guillaume Pepy defined SNCF 's priorities for the future as : 
 Our dream is to have 12 TGV stations for the 12 million inhabitants of Île de France . Grand Paris would be linked with the European high speed network , to challenge London or Frankfurt . 
 At the same time as Pepy 's announcement , Richard Brown announced that Eurostar 's plans for expanding its network potentially included Amsterdam and Rotterdam as destinations , using the HSL Zuid line . This would require either equipment upgrades of the existing fleet , or a new fleet equipped for both ERTMS and the domestic signalling systems used by Nederlandse Spoorwegen . Following the December 2009 opening of HSL Zuid , a London – Amsterdam journey is estimated to take <unk> <unk> . 
 In an interview with Eurostar 's Chief Executive Nicolas <unk> in the Financial Times in May 2012 , an intention for Eurostar to serve ten new destinations was expressed , including Amsterdam , Frankfurt , Cologne , Lyon , Marseille and Geneva , along with a likely second hub to be created in Brussels . 
 In September 2013 , Eurostar announced an agreement with the Government of Netherlands and NS , the Dutch railway company to start twice daily services between London and Amsterdam Centraal starting in December 2016 . The service will use the newly bought Siemens Velaro trainsets and will also call at Brussels , Antwerp , and Rotterdam . The journey time will be around four hours . On 13 November 2014 , Eurostar announced the service to Amsterdam would start in " 2016 @-@ 2017 " , and would include a stop at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport in addition to the previously announced destinations . The company also said they would announce border control procedures for the service in January 2015 , specifically whether it would be necessary for passenger to alight at Lille to pass through border control . Eurostar also announced a new service from London to Lyon and Marseille to start in May 2015 . 
 In December 2012 Eurostar announced that on Saturdays during May 2013 – June 2013 a new seasonal service would be introduced to Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , also serving Lyon Part @-@ Dieu and Avignon TGV on the way ( the latter being 6 kilometres ( 4 miles ) from central Avignon ) . This is in addition to the long @-@ standing seasonal summer service on Saturdays during July and August and the first week of September travelling to Avignon Centre . The Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence services did not run in 2014 but was replaced along with the seasonal Avignon Centre services with the new year @-@ round service to Marseille as of 1 May 2015 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 In 2010 , international rail travel was liberalised by new European Union directives , designed to break up monopolies in order to encourage competition for services between countries . This sparked interest among other companies in providing services in competition to Eurostar and new services to destinations beyond Paris and Brussels . The only rail carrier to formally propose and secure permission for such a service up to now is Deutsche Bahn , which intends to run services between London and Germany and the Netherlands . The sale of High Speed One by the British Government having effectively nationalised LCR in June 2009 is also likely to stimulate competition on the line . 
 On 22 March 2010 , it was announced that Eurotunnel was in discussions with the <unk> Commission , which oversees the tunnel , with the aim of amending elements of the safety code governing the tunnel 's usage . Most <unk> , the requirement that trains be able to split within the tunnel and each part of the train be driven out to opposite ends has been removed . However , the proposal to allow shorter trains was not passed . Eurotunnel Chairman & Chief Executive Jacques Gounon said that he hoped the liberalisation of rules would allow entry into the market of competitors such as Deutsche Bahn . Sources at Eurotunnel suggested that Deutsche Bahn could have entered the market at the timetable change in December 2012 . This , however , did not happen . 
 On 28 July 2010 Deutsche Bahn ( DB ) announced that it intended to make a test run with a high @-@ speed ICE @-@ <unk> train through the Channel Tunnel in October 2010 in preparation for possible future operations . The trial ran on 19 October 2010 with a Class 406 ICE train specially liveried with a British " Union flag " decal . The train was then put on display for the press at St Pancras International . However , this is not the class of train that would be used for the proposed service . At the St Pancras ceremony , DB revealed that it planned to operate from London to Frankfurt and Amsterdam ( two of the biggest air travel markets in Europe ) , with trains ' splitting & joining ' in Brussels . It hoped to begin these services in 2013 using Class 407 ICE units , with three trains per day each way — morning , midday and afternoon . Initially the only calling points would be Rotterdam on the way to Amsterdam , and Cologne on the way to Frankfurt . Amsterdam and Cologne would be under four hours from London , Frankfurt around five hours . DB decided to put this on hold mainly due to advance passport check requirements . DB had hoped that immigration checks could be done on board , but British authorities required immigration and security checks to be done at Lille Europe station , taking at least 30 minutes . 
 On 6 August 2010 , <unk> announced its desire to eventually run high @-@ speed trains from Italy to the United Kingdom , using its newly ordered high @-@ speed trains . The trains will be delivered from 2013 . 
 = Vikingskipet = 
 Vikingskipet ( " The Viking Ship " ) , officially known as Hamar Olympic Hall ( Norwegian : Hamar <unk> ) , is an indoor multi @-@ use sport and event venue in Hamar , Norway . It was built as the speed skating rink for the 1994 Winter Olympics , and has since also hosted events and tournaments in speedway , rally , association football , bandy , ice sledge speed racing , flying disc and track cycling . The arena is also used for concerts , trade fair and the annual computer party The Gathering . It is the home arena of Hamar IL bandy team . The venue is owned by Hamar Municipality , and along with Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre is run by the municipal Hamar Olympiske Anlegg . Vikingskipet has a capacity for 10 @,@ 600 spectators during sporting events and 20 @,@ 000 during concerts . 
 The arena was designed by Niels Torp , and Biong & Biong , and opened on 19 December 1992 . The complex cost 230 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The localization was controversial , as it is located at <unk> , a Ramsar site . It is Norway 's national venue for speed skating and bandy , and holds annual ISU Speed Skating World Cup races , as well as regular world championships . It has among other things hosted tournaments of the World Allround Speed Skating Championships , European Speed Skating Championships , World Single Distance Championships , World Sprint Speed Skating Championships , UCI Track Cycling World Championships , Speedway Grand Prix and World Rally Championship . 
 = = Construction = = 
 During the process of the Lillehammer bid for the 1992 Winter Olympics , the International Olympic Committee had not specified that it was necessary with an indoor speed skating rink . Calgary had used the indoor Olympic Oval during the 1988 Winter Olympics , but Albertville , who were awarded the 1992 Winter Olympics , had opted for the outdoor L <unk> de vitesse . In its bid , the speed skating events were planned held at Stampesletta , an outdoor track and field stadium in Lillehammer . Only after Lillehammer had been awarded the 1994 Winter Olympics was it decided that an indoor venue would have to be built for the games . 
 Hamar had previously been a venue for international speed skating events at Hamar stadion . The town was therefore selected to host the two skating venues . In December 1989 , it was decided that the new venue would be built at <unk> , a Ramsar site 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) outside downtown Hamar . A compromise was reached whereby the stadium was moved 50 meters ( 160 ft ) from its original location , two birdwatching towers were built , and a lumber yard was moved . Nature and Youth remained opposed to the plans , stating the location " has destroyed part of one of the world 's most important bird reserves " . 
 The construction was passed by the Parliament of Norway in April 1990 . Architects were Niels Torp , and Biong and Biong . Ole K. Karlsen was selected to build the building , in competition with eleven other contractors . The ventilation contract worth NOK 18 million had originally been awarded to Hagen & <unk> on 29 May 1991 . Two days later , the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee signed a sponsorship agreement with Norsk <unk> and Elektrisk Bureau , both part of Asea Brown Boveri , which demanded discounts in their sponsorship payments for not receiving the contract . In September 1992 , <unk> , which owned Ole K. Karlsen , filed for bankruptcy , causing delays in construction . When it opened , Vikingskipet was the largest indoor sports venue in the world , and has twice the spectator capacity of the Olympic Oval . The ice rink was first tested on 15 December 1992 , and officially opened on 19 December . 
 The construction of the venue cost NOK 230 million , which was almost entirely financed through state grants . Hamar Municipality contributed by building a co @-@ located fire station for NOK 21 million . Local businesses also contributed with NOK 8 million . <unk> Industrier and <unk> both contributed in exchange for being able to use the venues for marketing large wooden structures . To finance the operating deficit after the Olympics , Hamar Municipality received a capital grant of NOK 30 million , with the interest going to pay for running Vikingskipet and Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre . Operating costs were estimated at NOK 7 million per year ; the venue will receive income of NOK 1 million from larger events , NOK 1 million will come from free work from the fire department , and NOK 1 million from advertisements . Similar to Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre , the venue has two official names , Hamar Olympic Hall and Vikingskipet . The former cannot be used commercially by non @-@ Olympic events , such as in merchandise . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The venue has a floor area of 25 @,@ 000 square meters ( 270 @,@ 000 sq ft ) and a volume of 400 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . The hall has a spectator capacity of 10 @,@ 600 people , of which 2 @,@ 000 can be seated . During the Olympics , this included 250 VIP seats , 250 press seats and 100 commentator seats . Access to the inner ring can be provided via an underpass . Lighting is provided at 1 @,@ 400 lux , while the venue has a ventilation system capable of both heating and cooling , as well as de @-@ moisturizing , and both re @-@ use and circulation of air . The refrigeration unit uses an ammonia and saline solution , which is transported in pipes within the concrete , which allows for an ice temperature of between − 5 @.@ 5 and − 6 @.@ 5 degrees Celsius ( 22 and 20 ° F ) . The heat from the refrigerating unit can be reused . 
 The rink itself is 400 meters ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) long , with a turning radius of 25 @.@ 5 meters ( 84 ft ) . Within the speed skating rink lies a bandy field . The venue was designed to also allow for association football , cycling , track and field , curling , motorsports and cross @-@ country skiing . The inside of the track can also be used for association football , with pitch dimensions up to 105 by 68 meters ( 344 by 223 ft ) . It can also function as an indoor driving range for golf . The name derives from the roof looking like the keel of a Viking ship . The building is visible from the E6 motorway and the Dovre Line passing through Hamar , and was planned to be Hamar 's main landmark . 
 = = Transport = = 
 During the Olympics , transport was in part provided by Vikingskipet Station on the Røros Line , which passes right next to the venue . The station is a cul @-@ de @-@ sac station which is electrified and allowed trains during the Olympics and the Track Cycling World Championships to reach the venue within a short walk from the train . The station was officially opened on 16 August 1993 . The station has not been used since the Olympics . In 2006 , the Norwegian National Rail Administration proposed re @-@ opening the station in conjunction with larger events . 
 = = Events = = 
 Prior to the Olympic Games , the venue hosted three world championships in 1993 . In February , it hosted all but two preliminary matches of the 1993 Bandy World Championship . To make the games more attractive , preliminary round matches were reduced from 90 to 60 minutes . The final was spectated by 5 @,@ 338 people . For four months , the venue was equipped with a velodrome , which allowed the venue to host the 1993 UCI Track Cycling World Championships . The velodrome cost NOK 95 million less than building a permanent velodrome in Oslo , which would be hosting the 1993 UCI Road World Championships . The Norwegian Cycling Federation had originally bid for the championships to get a permanent velodrome built at Hasle in Oslo , but declined the offer and instead chose the temporary concept . Because the velodrome only has a circumference of 250 meters ( 820 ft ) , the venue 's spectator capacity was reduced to 3 @,@ 000 people . 
 Hamar was the center for skating sports during the 1994 Winter Olympics . The other venue in town was Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre , which featured the short track speed skating and figure skating events . Vikingskipet held ten speed skating events , five for men and five for women . Norway 's Johann Olav Koss took three golds , in the men 's 1 @,@ 500 meters , 5000 meters and 10000 meters . In the latter two , he finished ahead of fellow countryman Kjell <unk> . The men 's 500 meters was won by Russia 's Aleksandr Golubev ahead of fellow countryman Sergey <unk> , while the men 's 1000 meters was won by American Dan Jansen . For women , American Bonnie Blair defended her two 1992 golds in 500 meters and 1000 meters . Austria 's Emese <unk> won the 1500 meters ahead of Russia 's Svetlana <unk> and Germany 's <unk> Niemann . However , <unk> took gold ahead of Nemeth @-@ <unk> on the 3000 meters , with Germany 's Claudia Pechstein in third . Pechstein would go on to win the 5000 meters ahead of Niemann . 
 Vikingskipet was proposed to also host curling , should it be included in the Olympic program . It had been a demonstration sport in 1988 and 1992 Olympics , but was eventually discarded from the Lillehammer program . The event would have used the same production equipment as for speed skating , and would have consisted of a four @-@ team tournament for both men and women , and would have been held during the Games ' two last days . Vikingskipet was the venue for ice sledge speed skating during the 1994 Winter Paralympics . Eight events were held , four for women and four for men . The event had 22 participants from 7 nations competing for 24 medals , resulting in 23 of 24 medals being awarded to Norwegian athletes . Atle Haglund set two world records . 
 The venue is the national stadium for speed skating in Norway . It hosts annual ISU Speed Skating World Cup , and has in addition hosted many European and world championships . This includes the World Allround Speed Skating Championships in 1993 ( for men ) , 1999 , 2004 and 2009 tournaments . The World Sprint Speed Skating Championships has been held in 1996 , 1997 , 2002 and 2007 , while the World Single Distance Championships was held in 1996 . The European Speed Skating Championships has been held four times , in 1994 , 2000 , 2006 and 2010 . 
 Since 1996 , Vikingskipet has hosted The Gathering , a computer party which is held every Easter . Concerts held at Vikingskipet include Andrea Bocelli ( 2005 ) , Beyoncé ( 2007 ) , Cliff Richard ( 2007 ) , and Stevie Wonder ( 2008 ) . The Norway women 's national football team played Sweden on 21 January 1996 , winning 4 – 0 . Vikingskipet hosted a round of the Speedway Grand Prix in 2002 , 2003 and 2004 . It was also the service depot and race headquarters for Rally Norway , which was arranged in 2006 , 2007 and 2009 . The latter two were part of the World Rally Championship . 
 In March 2011 , the Norwegian Skating Association announced that they indented that the Norwegian World Cup events would be moved to <unk> Arena in Stavanger , due to low attendance at Vikingskipet . Vikingskipet has been selected to host the 2013 World Allround Speed Skating Championships . Lillehammer is scheduled to host the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics , with Vikingskipet to host long track speed skating events . 
 = = Rink records = = 
 Vikingskipet is one of few indoor speed skating venues in the world , which has allowed for many world records . The following is a list of the rink records , including the distance , gender , the record time , the athlete who set the record , the country they represent , and the date the record was set . The list is as of 23 November 2009 . 
 = = World records = = 
 Vikingskipet has been the venues for world records in speed skating , track cycling , ice sledge speed racing and frisbee . The following is a list of world records set in Vikingskipet , including the sport , event , gender , time or distance , the athlete , their country and the date the record was set . During the 1994 Winter Olympics , four of the five distances for men 's speed skating received new world records . 
 = Berkelium = 
 Berkelium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with symbol Bk and atomic number 97 . It is a member of the actinide and transuranium element series . It is named after the city of Berkeley , California , the location of the University of California Radiation Laboratory where it was discovered in December 1949 . This was the fifth transuranium element discovered after neptunium , plutonium , curium and americium . 
 The major isotope of berkelium , 249Bk , is synthesized in minute quantities in dedicated high @-@ flux nuclear reactors , mainly at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee , USA , and at the Research Institute of Atomic Reactors in Dimitrovgrad , Russia . The production of the second @-@ important isotope 247Bk involves the irradiation of the rare isotope 244Cm with high @-@ energy alpha particles . 
 Just over one gram of berkelium has been produced in the United States since 1967 . There is no practical application of berkelium outside of scientific research which is mostly directed at the synthesis of heavier transuranic elements and transactinides . A 22 milligram batch of berkelium @-@ 249 was prepared during a 250 @-@ day irradiation period and then purified for a further 90 days at Oak Ridge in 2009 . This sample was used to synthesize the element ununseptium for the first time in 2009 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research , Russia , after it was bombarded with calcium @-@ 48 ions for 150 days . This was a culmination of the Russia – US collaboration on the synthesis of elements 113 to 118 . 
 Berkelium is a soft , silvery @-@ white , radioactive metal . The berkelium @-@ 249 isotope emits low @-@ energy electrons and thus is relatively safe to handle . It decays with a half @-@ life of 330 days to californium @-@ 249 , which is a strong emitter of ionizing alpha particles . This gradual transformation is an important consideration when studying the properties of elemental berkelium and its chemical compounds , since the formation of californium brings not only chemical contamination , but also free @-@ radical effects and self @-@ heating from the emitted helium nuclei . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Berkelium is a soft , silvery @-@ white , radioactive actinide metal . In the periodic table , it is located to the right of the actinide curium , to the left of the actinide californium and below the lanthanide terbium with which it shares many similarities in physical and chemical properties . Its density of 14 @.@ 78 g / cm3 lies between those of curium ( 13 @.@ 52 g / cm3 ) and californium ( 15 @.@ 1 g / cm3 ) , as does its melting point of 986 ° C , below that of curium ( 1340 ° C ) but higher than that of californium ( 900 ° C ) . Berkelium is relatively soft and has one of the lowest bulk moduli among the actinides , at about 20 GPa ( 2 × 1010 Pa ) . 
 Berkelium ( III ) ions shows two sharp fluorescence peaks at 652 nanometers ( red light ) and 742 nanometers ( deep red – near infrared ) due to internal transitions at the f @-@ electron shell . The relative intensity of these peaks depends on the excitation power and temperature of the sample . This emission can be observed , for example , after dispersing berkelium ions in a silicate glass , by melting the glass in presence of berkelium oxide or halide . 
 Between 70 K and room temperature , berkelium behaves as a Curie – Weiss paramagnetic material with an effective magnetic moment of 9 @.@ 69 Bohr magnetons ( µB ) and a Curie temperature of 101 K. This magnetic moment is almost equal to the theoretical value of 9 @.@ 72 µB calculated within the simple atomic L @-@ S coupling model . Upon cooling to about 34 K , berkelium undergoes a transition to an antiferromagnetic state . <unk> of dissolution in hydrochloric acid at standard conditions is − 600 kJ / mol − 1 , from which the standard enthalpy change of formation ( <unk> ° ) of aqueous Bk3 + ions is obtained as − 601 kJ / mol − 1 . The standard potential Bk3 + / <unk> is − 2 @.@ 01 V. The ionization potential of a neutral berkelium atom is 6 @.@ 23 eV . 
 = = = Allotropes = = = 
 At ambient conditions , berkelium assumes its most stable α form which has a hexagonal symmetry , space group P63 / mmc , lattice parameters of 341 pm and 1107 pm . The crystal has a double @-@ hexagonal close packing structure with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic ( having a similar structure ) with α @-@ lanthanum and α @-@ forms of actinides beyond curium . This crystal structure changes with pressure and temperature . When compressed at room temperature to 7 GPa , α @-@ berkelium transforms to the beta modification , which has a face @-@ centered cubic ( fcc ) symmetry and space group Fm3m . This transition occurs without change in volume , but the enthalpy increases by 3 @.@ 66 kJ / mol . Upon further compression to 25 GPa , berkelium transforms to an orthorhombic γ @-@ berkelium structure similar to that of α @-@ uranium . This transition is accompanied by a 12 % volume decrease and delocalization of the electrons at the 5f electron shell . No further phase transitions are observed up to 57 GPa . 
 Upon heating , α @-@ berkelium transforms into another phase with an fcc lattice ( but slightly different from β @-@ berkelium ) , space group Fm3m and the lattice constant of 500 pm ; this fcc structure is equivalent to the closest packing with the sequence ABC . This phase is metastable and will gradually revert to the original α @-@ berkelium phase at room temperature . The temperature of the phase transition is believed to be quite close to the melting point . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Like all actinides , berkelium dissolves in various aqueous inorganic acids , liberating gaseous hydrogen and converting into the berkelium ( III ) state . This trivalent oxidation state ( + 3 ) is the most stable , especially in aqueous solutions , but tetravalent ( + 4 ) and possibly divalent ( + 2 ) berkelium compounds are also known . The existence of divalent berkelium salts is uncertain and has only been reported in mixed lanthanum chloride @-@ strontium chloride melts . A similar behavior is observed for the lanthanide analogue of berkelium , terbium . Aqueous solutions of Bk3 + ions are green in most acids . The color of Bk4 + ions is yellow in hydrochloric acid and orange @-@ yellow in sulfuric acid . Berkelium does not react rapidly with oxygen at room temperature , possibly due to the formation of a protective oxide layer surface . However , it reacts with molten metals , hydrogen , halogens , chalcogens and pnictogens to form various binary compounds . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 About twenty isotopes and six nuclear isomers ( excited states of an isotope ) of berkelium have been characterized with the mass numbers ranging from 235 to 254 . All of them are radioactive . The longest half @-@ lives are observed for 247Bk ( 1 @,@ 380 years ) , <unk> ( over 300 years ) and 249Bk ( 330 days ) ; the half @-@ lives of the other isotopes range from microseconds to several days . The isotope which is the easiest to synthesize is berkelium @-@ 249 . This emits mostly soft β @-@ particles which are inconvenient for detection . Its alpha radiation is rather weak – 1 @.@ 45 × 10 − 3 % with respect to the β @-@ radiation – but is sometimes used to detect this isotope . The second important berkelium isotope , berkelium @-@ 247 , is an alpha @-@ emitter , as are most actinide isotopes . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 All berkelium isotopes have a half @-@ life far too short to be primordial . Therefore , any primordial berkelium , that is , berkelium present on the Earth during its formation , has decayed by now . 
 On Earth , berkelium is mostly concentrated in certain areas , which were used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests between 1945 and 1980 , as well as at the sites of nuclear incidents , such as the Chernobyl disaster , Three Mile Island accident and 1968 Thule Air Base B @-@ 52 crash . Analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb , Ivy Mike , ( 1 November 1952 , Enewetak Atoll ) , revealed high concentrations of various actinides , including berkelium . For reasons of military secrecy , this result was published only in 1956 . 
 Nuclear reactors produce mostly , among the berkelium isotopes , berkelium @-@ 249 . During the storage and before the fuel disposal , most of it beta decays to californium @-@ 249 . The latter has a half @-@ life of 351 years , which is relatively long when compared to the other isotopes produced in the reactor , and is therefore undesirable in the disposal products . 
 The transuranic elements from americium to fermium , including berkelium , occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo , but no longer do so . 
 = = History = = 
 Although very small amounts of berkelium were possibly produced in previous nuclear experiments , it was first intentionally synthesized , isolated and identified in December 1949 by Glenn T. Seaborg , Albert Ghiorso and Stanley G. Thompson . They used the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron at the University of California , Berkeley . Similar to the nearly simultaneous discovery of americium ( element 95 ) and curium ( element 96 ) in 1944 , the new elements berkelium and californium ( element 98 ) were both produced in 1949 – 1950 . 
 The name choice for element 97 followed the previous tradition of the Californian group to draw an analogy between the newly discovered actinide and the lanthanide element positioned above it in the periodic table . Previously , americium was named after a continent as its analogue europium , and curium honored scientists Marie and Pierre Curie as the lanthanide above it , gadolinium , was named after the explorer of the rare earth elements Johan Gadolin . Thus the discovery report by the Berkeley group reads : " It is suggested that element 97 be given the name berkelium ( symbol Bk ) after the city of Berkeley in a manner similar to that used in naming its chemical homologue terbium ( atomic number 65 ) whose name was derived from the town of Ytterby , Sweden , where the rare earth minerals were first found . " This tradition ended on berkelium , though , as the naming of the next discovered actinide , californium , was not related to its lanthanide analogue dysprosium , but after the discovery place . 
 The most difficult steps in the synthesis of berkelium were its separation from the final products and the production of sufficient quantities of americium for the target material . First , americium ( 241Am ) nitrate solution was coated on a platinum foil , the solution was evaporated and the residue converted by annealing to americium dioxide ( AmO2 ) . This target was irradiated with 35 MeV alpha particles for 6 hours in the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron at the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory , University of California , Berkeley . The ( α , 2n ) reaction induced by the irradiation yielded the <unk> isotope and two free neutrons : 
 <formula> 
 After the irradiation , the coating was dissolved with nitric acid and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution . The product was <unk> and re @-@ dissolved in nitric acid . To separate berkelium from the unreacted americium , this solution was added to a mixture of ammonium and ammonium sulfate and heated to convert all the dissolved americium into the oxidation state + 6 . <unk> residual americium was precipitated by the addition of hydrofluoric acid as americium ( III ) fluoride ( <unk> 
 3 ) . This step yielded a mixture of the accompanying product curium and the expected element 97 in form of trifluorides . The mixture was converted to the corresponding hydroxides by treating it with potassium hydroxide , and after centrifugation , was dissolved in perchloric acid . 
 Further separation was carried out in the presence of a citric acid / ammonium buffer solution in a weakly acidic medium ( pH ≈ 3 @.@ 5 ) , using ion exchange at elevated temperature . The chromatographic separation behavior was then unknown for the element 97 , but was anticipated by analogy with terbium ( see elution curves ) . First results were disappointing as no alpha @-@ particle emission signature could be detected from the elution product . Only the further search for characteristic X @-@ rays and conversion electron signals resulted in the identification of a berkelium isotope . Its mass number was uncertain between 243 and 244 in the initial report , but was later established as 243 . 
 = = Synthesis and extraction = = 
 = = = Preparation of isotopes = = = 
 Berkelium is produced by bombarding lighter actinides uranium ( 238U ) or plutonium ( 239Pu ) with neutrons in a nuclear reactor . In a more common case of uranium fuel , plutonium is produced first by neutron capture ( the so @-@ called ( n , γ ) reaction or neutron fusion ) followed by beta @-@ decay : 
 <formula> ( the times are half @-@ lives ) 
 Plutonium @-@ 239 is further irradiated by a source that has a high neutron flux , several times higher than a conventional nuclear reactor , such as the 85 @-@ megawatt High Flux Isotope Reactor ( HFIR ) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee , USA . The higher flux promotes fusion reactions involving not one but several neutrons , converting 239Pu to 244Cm and then to 249Cm : 
 <formula> 
 Curium @-@ 249 has a short half @-@ life of 64 minutes , and thus its further conversion to 250Cm has a low probability . Instead , it transforms by beta @-@ decay into 249Bk : 
 <formula> 
 The thus @-@ produced 249Bk has a long half @-@ life of 330 days and thus can capture another neutron . However , the product , <unk> , again has a relatively short half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 212 hours and thus , does not yield any heavier berkelium isotopes . Instead decays to the californium isotope 250Cf : 
 <formula> 
 Although 247Bk is the most stable isotope of berkelium , its production in nuclear reactors is very inefficient due to the long half @-@ life of its potential progenitor curium @-@ 247 , which does not allow it sufficient time to beta decay before capturing another neutron . Thus , 249Bk is the most accessible isotope of berkelium , which still , is available only in small quantities ( only 0 @.@ 66 grams have been produced in the US over the period 1967 – 1983 ) at a high price of the order 185 USD per microgram . 
 The isotope <unk> was first obtained in 1956 by bombarding a mixture of curium isotopes with 25 MeV α @-@ particles . Although its direct detection was hindered by strong signal interference with <unk> , the existence of a new isotope was proven by the growth of the decay product 248Cf which had been previously characterized . The half @-@ life of 248Cf was estimated as 23 ± 5 hours and a more reliable value still is not known . Berkelium @-@ 247 was produced during the same year by irradiating 244Cm with alpha @-@ particles : 
 <formula> 
 Berkelium @-@ 242 was synthesized in 1979 by bombarding 235U with 11B , 238U with 10B , 232Th with 14N or 232Th with 15N . It converts by electron capture to 242Cm with a half @-@ life of 7 @.@ 0 ± 1 @.@ 3 minutes . A search for an initially suspected isotope <unk> was then unsuccessful ; <unk> has since been synthesized . 
 <formula> 
 = = = Separation = = = 
 The fact that berkelium readily assumes oxidation state + 4 in solids , and is relatively stable in this state in liquids greatly assists separation of berkelium away from many other actinides . These are inevitably produced in relatively large amounts during the nuclear synthesis and often favor the + 3 state . This fact was not yet known in the initial experiments , which used a more complex separation procedure . Various oxidation agents can be applied to the berkelium ( III ) solutions to convert it to the + 4 state , such as <unk> ( <unk> − 
 3 ) , <unk> ( BiO − 
 3 ) , chromates ( CrO2 − 
 4 and Cr 
 2O2 − 
 7 ) , silver ( I ) <unk> ( Ag 
 2S 
 2O 
 8 ) , lead ( IV ) oxide ( PbO 
 2 ) , ozone ( O 
 3 ) , or photochemical oxidation procedures . Berkelium ( IV ) is then extracted with ion exchange , extraction chromatography or liquid @-@ liquid extraction using HDEHP ( bis- ( 2 @-@ ethylhexyl ) phosphoric <unk> ) , amines , tributyl phosphate or various other reagents . These procedures separate berkelium from most trivalent actinides and lanthanides , except for the lanthanide cerium ( lanthanides are absent in the irradiation target but are created in various nuclear fission decay chains ) . 
 A more detailed procedure adopted at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory was as follows : the initial mixture of actinides is processed with ion exchange using lithium chloride reagent , then precipitated as hydroxides , filtered and dissolved in nitric acid . It is then treated with high @-@ pressure elution from cation exchange resins , and the berkelium phase is oxidized and extracted using one of the procedures described above . Reduction of the thus @-@ obtained berkelium ( IV ) to the + 3 oxidation state yields a solution , which is nearly free from other actinides ( but contains cerium ) . Berkelium and cerium are then separated with another round of ion @-@ exchange treatment . 
 = = = Bulk metal preparation = = = 
 In order to characterize chemical and physical properties of solid berkelium and its compounds , a program was initiated in 1952 at the Material Testing Reactor , Arco , Idaho , US . It resulted in preparation of an eight @-@ gram plutonium @-@ 239 target and in the first production of macroscopic quantities ( 0 @.@ 6 micrograms ) of berkelium by Burris B. Cunningham and Stanley G. Thompson in 1958 , after a continuous reactor irradiation of this target for six years . This irradiation method was and still is the only way of producing weighable amounts of the element , and most solid @-@ state studies of berkelium have been conducted on microgram or <unk> @-@ sized samples . 
 The world 's major irradiation sources are the 85 @-@ megawatt High Flux Isotope Reactor at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee , USA , and the SM @-@ 2 loop reactor at the Research Institute of Atomic Reactors ( NIIAR ) in Dimitrovgrad , Russia , which are both dedicated to the production of transcurium elements ( atomic number greater than 96 ) . These facilities have similar power and flux levels , and are expected to have comparable production capacities for transcurium elements , although the quantities produced at NIIAR are not publicly reported . In a " typical processing campaign " at Oak Ridge , tens of grams of curium are irradiated to produce decigram quantities of californium , milligram quantities of berkelium @-@ 249 and einsteinium , and picogram quantities of fermium . In total , just over one gram of berkelium @-@ 249 has been produced at Oak Ridge since 1967 . 
 The first berkelium metal sample weighing 1 @.@ 7 micrograms was prepared in 1971 by the reduction of berkelium ( III ) fluoride with lithium vapor at 1000 ° C ; the fluoride was suspended on a tungsten wire above a tantalum crucible containing molten lithium . Later , metal samples weighing up to 0 @.@ 5 milligrams were obtained with this method . 
 <formula> 
 Similar results are obtained with berkelium ( IV ) fluoride . Berkelium metal can also be produced by the reduction of berkelium ( IV ) oxide with thorium or lanthanum . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 = = = Oxides = = = 
 Two oxides of berkelium are known , with the berkelium oxidation state of + 3 ( Bk2O3 ) and + 4 ( BkO2 ) . Berkelium ( IV ) oxide is a brown solid , while berkelium ( III ) oxide is a yellow @-@ green solid with a melting point of 1920 ° C and is formed from BkO2 by reduction with molecular hydrogen : 
 <formula> 
 Upon heating to 1200 ° C , the oxide Bk2O3 undergoes a phase change ; it undergoes another phase change at 1750 ° C. Such three @-@ phase behavior is typical for the actinide <unk> . Berkelium ( II ) oxide , BkO , has been reported as a brittle gray solid but its exact chemical composition remains uncertain . 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 In halides , berkelium assumes the oxidation states + 3 and + 4 . The + 3 state is the most stable , especially in solutions , while the tetravalent halides BkF4 and Cs2BkCl6 are only known in the solid phase . The coordination of berkelium atom in its trivalent fluoride and chloride is tricapped trigonal prismatic , with the coordination number of 9 . In trivalent bromide , it is bicapped trigonal prismatic ( coordination 8 ) or octahedral ( coordination 6 ) , and in the iodide it is octahedral . 
 Berkelium ( IV ) fluoride ( BkF4 ) is a yellow @-@ green ionic solid and is isotypic with uranium tetrafluoride or zirconium ( IV ) fluoride . Berkelium ( III ) fluoride ( <unk> ) is also a yellow @-@ green solid , but it has two crystalline structures . The most stable phase at low temperatures is isotypic with yttrium ( III ) fluoride , while upon heating to between 350 and 600 ° C , it transforms to the structure found in lanthanum ( III ) fluoride . 
 Visible amounts of berkelium ( III ) chloride ( BkCl3 ) were first isolated and characterized in 1962 , and weighed only 3 billionths of a gram . It can be prepared by introducing hydrogen chloride vapors into an evacuated quartz tube containing berkelium oxide at a temperature about 500 ° C. This green solid has a melting point of 600 ° C , and is isotypic with uranium ( III ) chloride . Upon heating to nearly melting point , BkCl3 converts into an orthorhombic phase . 
 Two forms of berkelium ( III ) bromide are known : one with berkelium having coordination 6 , and one with coordination 8 . The latter is less stable and transforms to the former phase upon heating to about 350 ° C. An important phenomenon for radioactive solids has been studied on these two crystal forms : the structure of fresh and aged 249BkBr3 samples was probed by X @-@ ray diffraction over a period longer than 3 years , so that various fractions of berkelium @-@ 249 had beta decayed to californium @-@ 249 . No change in structure was observed upon the 249BkBr3 — 249CfBr3 transformation . However , other differences were noted for 249BkBr3 and 249CfBr3 . For example , the latter could be reduced with hydrogen to <unk> , but the former could not – this result was reproduced on individual 249BkBr3 and 249CfBr3 samples , as well on the samples containing both bromides . The intergrowth of californium in berkelium occurs at a rate of 0 @.@ 22 % per day and is an intrinsic obstacle in studying berkelium properties . Beside a chemical contamination , 249Cf , being an alpha emitter , brings undesirable self @-@ damage of the crystal lattice and the resulting self @-@ heating . The chemical effect however can be avoided by performing measurements as a function of time and extrapolating the obtained results . 
 = = = Other inorganic compounds = = = 
 The pnictides of berkelium @-@ 249 of the type <unk> are known for the elements nitrogen , phosphorus , arsenic and antimony . They crystallize in the rock @-@ salt structure and are prepared by the reaction of either berkelium ( III ) hydride ( <unk> ) or metallic berkelium with these elements at elevated temperature ( about 600 ° C ) under high vacuum . 
 Berkelium ( III ) sulfide , <unk> , is prepared by either treating berkelium oxide with a mixture of hydrogen sulfide and carbon disulfide vapors at 1130 ° C , or by directly reacting metallic berkelium with elemental sulfur . These procedures yield brownish @-@ black crystals . 
 Berkelium ( III ) and berkelium ( IV ) hydroxides are both stable in 1 molar solutions of sodium hydroxide . Berkelium ( III ) phosphate ( <unk> ) has been prepared as a solid , which shows strong fluorescence under excitation with a green light . Berkelium hydrides are produced by reacting metal with hydrogen gas at temperatures about 250 ° C. They are non @-@ stoichiometric with the nominal formula <unk> + x ( 0 < x < 1 ) . Several other salts of berkelium are known , including an <unk> ( <unk> ) , and hydrated nitrate ( Bk ( NO 
 3 ) 
 3 · 4H 
 2O ) , chloride ( <unk> 
 3 · 6H 
 2O ) , sulfate ( Bk 
 2 ( SO 
 4 ) 
 3 · 12H 
 2O ) and oxalate ( Bk 
 2 ( C 
 2O 
 4 ) 
 3 · 4H 
 2O ) . Thermal decomposition at about 600 ° C in an argon atmosphere ( to avoid oxidation to BkO 
 2 ) of Bk 
 2 ( SO 
 4 ) 
 3 · 12H 
 2O yields the crystals of berkelium ( III ) <unk> ( Bk 
 2O 
 2SO 
 4 ) . This compound is thermally stable to at least 1000 ° C in inert atmosphere . 
 = = = <unk> compounds = = = 
 Berkelium forms a trigonal ( η5 – C5H5 ) 3Bk metallocene complex with three cyclopentadienyl rings , which can be synthesized by reacting berkelium ( III ) chloride with the molten <unk> ( Be ( C5H5 ) 2 ) at about 70 ° C. It has an amber color and a density of 2 @.@ 47 g / cm3 . The complex is stable to heating to at least 250 ° C , and sublimates without melting at about 350 ° C. The high radioactivity of berkelium gradually destroys the compound ( within a period of weeks ) . One cyclopentadienyl ring in ( η5 – C5H5 ) 3Bk can be substituted by chlorine to yield [ Bk ( C5H5 ) 2Cl ] 2 . The optical absorption spectra of this compound are very similar to those of ( η5 – C5H5 ) 3Bk . 
 = = Applications = = 
 There is currently no use for any isotope of berkelium outside of basic scientific research . Berkelium @-@ 249 is a common target nuclide to prepare still heavier transuranic elements and transactinides , such as lawrencium , rutherfordium and bohrium . It is also useful as a source of the isotope californium @-@ 249 , which is used for studies on the chemistry of californium in preference to the more radioactive californium @-@ 252 that is produced in neutron bombardment facilities such as the HFIR . 
 A 22 milligram batch of berkelium @-@ 249 was prepared in a 250 @-@ day irradiation and then purified for 90 days at Oak Ridge in 2009 . This target yielded the first 6 atoms of ununseptium at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ( JINR ) , Dubna , Russia , after bombarding it with calcium ions in the <unk> cyclotron for 150 days . This synthesis was a culmination of the Russia — US collaboration between JINR and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory on the synthesis of elements 113 to 118 which was initiated in 1989 . 
