 Even if a molecule does not form a permanent dipole , it can still be influenced by an electric field . In some cases , the field produces slight re @-@ arrangement of electrons and protons in molecules such that an induced electric dipole results . While not as strong as permanent dipoles , orientation with the external field still occurs . The effects of magnetic fields on liquid crystal molecules are analogous to electric fields . Because magnetic fields are generated by moving electric charges , permanent magnetic dipoles are produced by electrons moving about atoms . When a magnetic field is applied , the molecules will tend to align with or against the field . 
 = = = Surface preparations = = = 
 In the absence of an external field , the director of a liquid crystal is free to point in any direction . It is possible , however , to force the director to point in a specific direction by introducing an outside agent to the system . For example , when a thin polymer coating ( usually a polyimide ) is spread on a glass substrate and rubbed in a single direction with a cloth , it is observed that liquid crystal molecules in contact with that surface align with the rubbing direction . The currently accepted mechanism for this is believed to be an epitaxial growth of the liquid crystal layers on the partially aligned polymer chains in the near surface layers of the polyimide . 
 = = = Fredericks transition = = = 
 The competition between orientation produced by surface anchoring and by electric field effects is often exploited in liquid crystal devices . Consider the case in which liquid crystal molecules are aligned parallel to the surface and an electric field is applied perpendicular to the cell . At first , as the electric field increases in magnitude , no change in alignment occurs . However at a threshold magnitude of electric field , deformation occurs . Deformation occurs where the director changes its orientation from one molecule to the next . The occurrence of such a change from an aligned to a deformed state is called a Fredericks transition and can also be produced by the application of a magnetic field of sufficient strength . 
 The Fredericks transition is fundamental to the operation of many liquid crystal displays because the director orientation ( and thus the properties ) can be controlled easily by the application of a field . 
 = = Effect of chirality = = 
 As already described , chiral liquid @-@ crystal molecules usually give rise to chiral mesophases . This means that the molecule must possess some form of asymmetry , usually a stereogenic center . An additional requirement is that the system not be racemic : a mixture of right- and left @-@ handed molecules will cancel the chiral effect . Due to the cooperative nature of liquid crystal ordering , however , a small amount of chiral dopant in an otherwise achiral <unk> is often enough to select out one domain handedness , making the system overall chiral . 
 Chiral phases usually have a helical twisting of the molecules . If the pitch of this twist is on the order of the wavelength of visible light , then interesting optical interference effects can be observed . The chiral twisting that occurs in chiral LC phases also makes the system respond differently from right- and left @-@ handed circularly polarized light . These materials can thus be used as polarization filters . 
 It is possible for chiral LC molecules to produce essentially achiral mesophases . For instance , in certain ranges of concentration and molecular weight , DNA will form an achiral line <unk> phase . An interesting recent observation is of the formation of chiral mesophases from achiral LC molecules . Specifically , bent @-@ core molecules ( sometimes called banana liquid crystals ) have been shown to form liquid crystal phases that are chiral . In any particular sample , various domains will have opposite handedness , but within any given domain , strong chiral ordering will be present . The appearance mechanism of this macroscopic chirality is not yet entirely clear . It appears that the molecules stack in layers and orient themselves in a tilted fashion inside the layers . These liquid crystals phases may be ferroelectric or anti @-@ ferroelectric , both of which are of interest for applications . 
 Chirality can also be incorporated into a phase by adding a chiral dopant , which may not form LCs itself . Twisted @-@ nematic or super @-@ twisted nematic mixtures often contain a small amount of such dopants . 
 = = Applications of liquid crystals = = 
 Liquid crystals find wide use in liquid crystal displays , which rely on the optical properties of certain liquid crystalline substances in the presence or absence of an electric field . In a typical device , a liquid crystal layer ( typically 4 μm thick ) sits between two polarizers that are crossed ( oriented at 90 ° to one another ) . The liquid crystal alignment is chosen so that its relaxed phase is a twisted one ( see Twisted nematic field effect ) . This twisted phase <unk> light that has passed through the first polarizer , allowing its transmission through the second polarizer ( and reflected back to the observer if a reflector is provided ) . The device thus appears transparent . When an electric field is applied to the LC layer , the long molecular axes tend to align parallel to the electric field thus gradually <unk> in the center of the liquid crystal layer . In this state , the LC molecules do not reorient light , so the light polarized at the first polarizer is absorbed at the second polarizer , and the device loses transparency with increasing voltage . In this way , the electric field can be used to make a pixel switch between transparent or opaque on command . Color LCD systems use the same technique , with color filters used to generate red , green , and blue pixels . Chiral smectic liquid crystals are used in ferroelectric LCDs which are fast @-@ switching binary light modulators . Similar principles can be used to make other liquid crystal based optical devices . 
 Liquid crystal tunable filters are used as <unk> devices , e.g. , in hyperspectral imaging . 
 Thermotropic chiral LCs whose pitch varies strongly with temperature can be used as crude liquid crystal thermometers , since the color of the material will change as the pitch is changed . Liquid crystal color transitions are used on many aquarium and pool thermometers as well as on thermometers for infants or baths . Other liquid crystal materials change color when stretched or stressed . Thus , liquid crystal sheets are often used in industry to look for hot spots , map heat flow , measure stress distribution patterns , and so on . Liquid crystal in fluid form is used to detect electrically generated hot spots for failure analysis in the semiconductor industry . 
 Liquid crystal lasers use a liquid crystal in the lasing medium as a distributed feedback mechanism instead of external mirrors . Emission at a photonic bandgap created by the periodic dielectric structure of the liquid crystal gives a low @-@ threshold high @-@ output device with stable monochromatic emission . 
 Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystal ( <unk> ) sheets and rolls are available as adhesive backed Smart film which can be applied to windows and electrically switched between transparent and opaque to provide privacy . 
 Many common fluids , such as soapy water , are in fact liquid crystals . Soap forms a variety of LC phases depending on its concentration in water . 
 Bowlic columns could be used for fast switches . 
 = Migration of the Serbs = 
 <unk> Srba ( English : Migration of the Serbs ) is the name given to four similar oil paintings by the artist Paja Jovanović which depict Serbs , led by Archbishop Arsenije III , fleeing Old Serbia during the Great Serb Migration of 1690 – 91 . The first was commissioned in 1895 by Georgije I , the Patriarch of Karlovci , to be displayed at the following year 's Budapest Millennium Exhibition . In the view of the Serbian clergy , it would serve to legitimize Serb claims to religious autonomy and partial self @-@ administration in Austria @-@ Hungary by upholding the contention that Serbs left their homeland at the behest of the Holy Roman Emperor to protect the Habsburg Monarchy 's borders . 
 Measuring 380 by 580 centimetres ( 150 by 230 in ) , the first painting was completed in 1896 , and presented to Patriarch Georgije later that year . Dissatisfied , the Patriarch asked Jovanović to adjust his work to conform with the Church 's view of the migration . Though Jovanović made the changes relatively quickly , he could not render them in time for the painting to be displayed in Budapest , and it therefore had to be unveiled at the Archbishop 's palace in Sremski Karlovci . Jovanović went on to complete a total of four versions of the painting , three of which survive . The first version is on display at the patriarchate building of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Belgrade , the second at the Pančevo Museum , and the fourth at Princess Ljubica 's Residence , in Belgrade . Migration of the Serbs holds iconic status in Serbian popular culture , and several authors repute it to be one of Jovanović 's finest achievements . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Great Serb Migration ( 1690 – 91 ) = = = 
 In 1689 , Arsenije III , the Archbishop of Peć , incited Serbs in Kosovo , Macedonia and the Sandžak to revolt against the Ottoman Empire and support a Habsburg incursion into the Balkans . On 2 January 1690 , the Habsburgs and Serbs were defeated in battle at the Kačanik Gorge . The Habsburgs began to retreat , prompting thousands of Serb villagers to leave their homes and flee north fearing Ottoman reprisals . In Serbian historiography , this event came to be known as the Great Serb Migration . Between 30 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 Serb refugees streamed into Habsburg @-@ held Vojvodina , north of the Danube River , and settled there . The migrants would come to call the regions they had formerly inhabited Old Serbia , and dubbed their adopted homeland " new Serbia " . Tim Judah , a journalist specializing in the Balkans , describes the exodus as one of the most traumatic events in Serbian history . 
 In 1691 , Arsenije struck a deal with the Holy Roman Emperor , Leopold I , whereby the Habsburgs granted the Serbs ecclesiastic autonomy and some degree of self @-@ administration , much to the displeasure of the Catholic Church and Hungarian authorities . Leopold recognized Arsenije as the leader of Habsburg Serbs in both religious and secular affairs , and indicated that this power would be held by all future Archbishops . In 1712 , Sremski Karlovci became the Patriarchate for Serbs living in the Habsburg Empire . 
 = = = Commissioning = = = 
 In the early 1890s , Hungarian officials announced plans for a Budapest Millennium Exhibition to be held in 1896 ; it was intended to mark the 1,000th anniversary of the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin , reaffirm Hungary 's " national and territorial legitimacy " and the Hungarian people 's " natural and historical right in the areas they inhabited . " The Exhibition was to be held at Budapest 's City Park . Exhibits were to be divided into twelve distinct areas , one of which was visual art . The showpiece of the art exhibit was to be a painting by Hungary 's foremost history painter , Mihály Munkácsy , titled The Founding of the Hungarian State . Several pavilions displaying the cultural and industrial achievements of non @-@ Hungarians living in the Hungarian @-@ administered territories of Austria @-@ Hungary were also built , including one for the Serbs . 
 In 1895 , on the orders of the Patriarch of Karlovci , Georgije I , the Congress Board of Sremski Karlovci commissioned the young realist Paja Jovanović to compose Migration of the Serbs , intending for it to be displayed as part of the Serb pavilion . The painting was one of two works that Jovanović was hired to paint for the Exhibition , the other being the Vršac triptych , which was commissioned by the Vršac city council . In the eyes of the clergy , Migration of the Serbs would help legitimize Serb claims to religious autonomy and partial self @-@ administration in Austria @-@ Hungary . The official Church narrative held that Leopold had requested that the Serbs of Kosovo , Macedonia and the Sandžak settle the Ottoman – Habsburg frontier to create a buffer against further Ottoman encroachment , and Church officials intended for Jovanović 's painting to reflect this view . Hence , the painting had significant political implications . Habsburg Serbs asserted that the agreement between Arsenije and Leopold legitimized their claim to the lands they inhabited , while Croatian nationalists decried the Serbs as " uninvited guests " who only acquired Leopold 's pledge of autonomy after they had migrated to the Habsburg lands . Migration of the Serbs was thus intended to challenge the historical and political narratives being forwarded by the Croatian and Hungarian painters whose works were also going to be displayed . 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 The commission offered Jovanović the opportunity to make a name for himself as a serious history painter , given that the subject of the work was an event of international significance and the painting was to be displayed in a foreign capital . To ensure Migration of the Serbs was historically accurate , Jovanović studied authentic medieval weapons , costumes and other objects , later incorporating them into the composition . He also studied medieval histories , collected ethnographical evidence and consulted historians . Notably , the Church asked the historian and Orthodox priest Ilarion Ruvarac to consult Jovanović on the historical details of the migration and accompany him on a visit to the monasteries of Fruška Gora , where the young artist examined a number of contemporary sources and objects from the time . 
 The art historian Lilien Filipovitch @-@ Robinson notes that Jovanović incorporated modern techniques into the work and emulated the naturalistic approach of contemporary landscape painters , showing he was " at ease with the art of the past and that of his own time " . The composition marked a significant departure for Jovanović , who up until that point had painted mostly Orientalist pieces as opposed to ones that depicted specific moments from Serbian history . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original = = = 
 The original oil painting measures 380 by 580 centimetres ( 150 by 230 in ) . It depicts Arsenije leading tens of thousands of Serbs into exile , riding a horse and flanked by a Serb flag . In direct reference to The Bible , the image is reminiscent to that of Moses leading the chosen people out of Egypt . The irony , Judah notes , is that the Patriarch is leading his people away from their promised land . The Patriarch and four other figures dominate the composition , staggering unevenly across the canvas as opposed to moving in a straight line . " They punctuate the foreground , " Filipovitch @-@ Robinson writes , " directing the eye through the diagonals and curves of their bodies and gesture to the next line of figures behind them . Each subsequent line leads to the next . " All age groups are represented in the painting , and Jovanović pays special attention to their facial details . Thousands of figures on horseback and on foot appear in the background before eventually receding into the horizon . The left background shows Serbian warriors pointing their lances at the sky while the right background shows lumber wagons carrying families into exile . At the right foreground , an old man herds his sheep . To the right of the Patriarch , a mother and her infant son sit atop a horse carrying their belongings . The woman is the young wife of militia leader Jovan Monasterlija and the child his son . A mustachioed warrior walks before them with swords fastened to his belt and a rifle resting against his shoulder , " striding purposefully into the future " . The warrior 's right arm is smeared with blood and bound by a white sling . 
 Upon first seeing it , Georgije was displeased by Jovanović 's depiction of the exodus , particularly the sight of sheep and wagons carrying women and children , saying it made the migrants look like " rabble on the run " . The source of the Patriarch 's displeasure lay in differing interpretations of what had originally caused the migration to take place ; the Church maintained that Arsenije was simply heeding the call of the Holy Roman Emperor to head north . Having studied Ruvarac 's work , Jovanović came to hold the view that fear of Ottoman persecution , rather than the desire to protect the Habsburg frontier , had prompted the migrants to leave their homes . Jovanović duly took the painting back to his studio and altered it to the Patriarch 's liking , removing the sheep , lumber wagons , and the woman and her infant son , putting stylized warriors in their place . He also placed the letter Leopold had supposedly sent the Serbs inviting them to settle Vojvodina in the hand of <unk> Đaković , a priest riding beside Arsenije . Although these changes were made relatively quickly , Jovanović could not render them in time for the painting to be displayed in Budapest . Hence , only the Vršac triptych was displayed at the Millennium Exhibition . 
 Migration of the Serbs was unveiled at the Archbishop 's palace in Sremski Karlovci in 1896 . It was kept there until 1941 , when Ustaše fascists looted the palace and stole it , cut it out of its frame and took it to Zagreb , where it remained until the end of the war . After the war , the painting was returned to Serbia , briefly put on display at Belgrade 's National Museum , and then given back to the Serbian Orthodox Church . It was ultimately put on display at the patriarchate building in Belgrade , where it remains . It began undergoing restoration in 2004 . 
 = = = Other versions = = = 
 While working on the copy that the Patriarch had commissioned , Jovanović began a second version of the painting , one that retained the woman and her child , the herd of sheep and the wagons carrying refugees . This , Filipovitch @-@ Robinson asserts , is indicative of " Jovanović 's firmness of conviction and artistic integrity . " The second version was smaller than the first , measuring 126 by 190 centimetres ( 50 by 75 in ) . Like the first , it was completed in 1896 , and came to be called the " Pančevo version " as it was acquired by the Pančevo Museum in the 1970s . Shortly after its completion , the rights to the Pančevo version were purchased by Zagreb art collector Petar Nikolić , who secured the right to publish lithographic reproductions of the paining for the next fifty years . Such prints became quite popular , and could be found in Serb homes up to the end of the 20th century . As the Pančevo version was the first to be lithographically reproduced , it became the best known rendition . It was displayed at the 1900 Exposition Universelle ( world 's fair ) in Paris . 
 At the height of World War II , Jovanović created a third version on behalf of a Belgrade physician named <unk> <unk> , who requested that the figure of Monasterlija 's wife bear her likeness . This version measured 65 @.@ 2 by 96 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 25 @.@ 7 by 38 @.@ 0 in ) . Its current whereabouts are unknown , and it is presumed lost . In 1945 , as the war neared its end , a wealthy Serbian merchant named Milenko Čavić commissioned a fourth and final version , incorrectly assuming that the others had been destroyed in the fighting . Čavić gifted the painting to the <unk> family at the war 's end . They emigrated to the United States following the communist takeover of Yugoslavia in 1945 , and took it with them to New York . This version was returned to Belgrade in 2009 , and is currently on display at Princess Ljubica 's Residence . It measures 100 by 150 centimetres ( 39 by 59 in ) . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The painting was well received in Serbia and abroad ; it has since attained iconic status in Serbian popular culture . An allusion to it is made in Emir Kusturica 's Underground , where war refugees are depicted marching towards Belgrade in similar fashion , following the German bombing of the city in April 1941 . Several authors have noted similarities between Jovanović 's depiction of the migration and images of other upheavals in Serbian history . Historian Katarina <unk> observes that there are striking similarities between the painting and photographs of the Royal Serbian Army 's retreat to the Adriatic coast during World War I. Judah remarks that the composition resembles images of the exodus of Krajina Serbs following Croatia 's Operation Storm in August 1995 . 
 The journalist John Kifner describes Migration of the Serbs as a " Balkan equivalent to Washington Crosses the Delaware ... an instantly recognizable [ icon ] of the 500 @-@ year struggle against the Ottoman Turks . " Professor David A. Norris , a historian specializing in Serbian culture , calls Jovanović 's approach " highly effective " , and writes how the stoic attitude of the priests , warriors and peasants reminds the viewer of the historical significance of the migration . He asserts that Migration of the Serbs and similar paintings stimulated a " revived collective memory " among the new Serbian middle class , " transforming ... folk memory into a more modern vehicle for the invention of a new national ideology based on the Serbian struggle for freedom from foreign domination . " Art historian Michele <unk> describes the painting as a celebration of the Serbs ' " valiant effort to defend Christian Europe against ... the Ottoman Turks . " The historian Noel Malcolm doubts the historical veracity of depictions of Arsenije leading vast columns of refugees , saying there is no concrete evidence to confirm or deny that the number of migrants exceeded 40 @,@ 000 , as Church leaders claimed . 
 Filipovitch @-@ Robinson ranks the painting among Jovanović 's three best works , alongside The Takovo Uprising ( 1888 ) and The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex ( 1900 ) . This view is shared by the art historian Jelena Milojković @-@ Djurić , as well as Judah . Filipovitch @-@ Robinson praises Jovanović 's " uncompromising realism " and commends his portrayal of the migrants . She writes that the Pančevo version " validates Jovanović as an insightful commentator on ... Balkan history " , and is indicative of " the methodology and technical skill which had already brought him international acclaim . " Jovanović " persuades the viewer of the believability and authenticity of the event , " she writes . " He captures the determination , strength , and dignity of a people . [ ... ] Regardless of the reasons for this migration , they move forward in unison to meet the hard challenges of an unknown land . " 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Baptism with the Holy Spirit = 
 In Christian theology , baptism with the Holy Spirit ( also called baptism in the Holy Spirit or Spirit baptism ) is distinguished from baptism with water . It is frequently associated with incorporation into the Christian Church , the bestowal of spiritual gifts , and empowerment for Christian ministry . 
 The term baptism with the Holy Spirit originates in the New Testament , and all Christian traditions accept it as a theological concept . Nevertheless , different Christian denominations and traditions have interpreted its meaning in a variety of ways due to differences in the doctrines of salvation and ecclesiology . As a result , Spirit baptism has been variously defined as part of the sacraments of initiation into the church , as being synonymous with regeneration , as being synonymous with Christian perfection , or as being a second work of grace that empowers a person for Christian life and service . 
 Before the emergence of the holiness movement in the mid @-@ 19th century and Pentecostalism in the early 20th century , most denominations believed that Christians received the baptism with the Holy Spirit either upon conversion and regeneration or through rites of Christian initiation , such as water baptism and confirmation . Since the growth and spread of Pentecostal and charismatic churches , however , the belief that the baptism with the Holy Spirit is an experience distinct from Christian initiation has come into increasing prominence . 
 = = Biblical description = = 
 = = = Old Covenant background = = = 
 In Christian theology , the work of the Holy Spirit under the Old Covenant is viewed as less extensive than that under the New Covenant inaugurated on the day of Pentecost . The Spirit was restricted to certain chosen individuals , such as high priests and prophets . Often termed the “ spirit of prophecy ” in rabbinic writings , the Holy Spirit was closely associated with prophecy and divine inspiration . It was anticipated that in the future messianic age God would pour out his spirit upon all of Israel , which would become a nation of prophets . 
 = = = Canonical gospels = = = 
 While the exact phrase " baptism with the Holy Spirit " is not found in the New Testament , two forms of the phrase are found in the canonical gospels using the verb " baptize " , from the Greek word <unk> meaning to " immerse " or " plunge " . The baptism was spoken about by John the Baptist , who contrasted his water baptism for the forgiveness of sins with the baptism of Jesus . In Mark and John , the Baptist proclaimed that Jesus " will baptize in ( the ) Holy Spirit " ; while in Matthew and Luke , he " will baptize with Holy Spirit and fire " . 
 Jesus is considered the first person to receive the baptism with the Holy Spirit . The Holy Spirit descended on Jesus during his baptism and anointed him with power . Afterward , Jesus began his ministry and displayed his power by casting out demons , healing the sick , and teaching with authority . 
 = = = Acts of the Apostles = = = 
 The phrase " baptized in the Holy Spirit " occurs two times in Acts , first in Acts 1 : 4 @-@ 5 and second in Acts 11 : 16 . Other terminology is used in Acts to indicate Spirit baptism , such as " filled " . " Baptized in the Spirit " indicates an outward immersion into the reality of the Holy Spirit , while " filled with the Spirit " suggests an internal diffusion . Both terms speak to the totality of receiving the Spirit . The baptism with the Holy Spirit is described in various places as the Spirit " poured out upon " , " falling upon " , " coming upon " people . To " pour out " suggests abundance and reflects John 3 : 34 , " God gives the Spirit without limit " . Another expression , " come upon " is related to a statement by Jesus in Luke 24 : 49 , " I am sending the promise of my Father upon you . But stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high " . The language of " come on " and " clothed with " suggest possession by and endowment with the Holy Spirit . 
 The narrative of Acts begins after Jesus ’ crucifixion and resurrection . The resurrected Jesus directed his disciples to wait in Jerusalem for the baptism in the Holy Spirit and promised , " you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you , and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria , and to the end of the earth " . After his ascension , he was given authority to pour out the Holy Spirit . 
 In the New Testament , the messianic expectations found in early Judaism were fulfilled on the day of Pentecost as recorded in Acts . The Christian community was gathered together in Jerusalem when a sound from heaven like rushing wind was heard and tongues like tongues of flame rested on everyone . They were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in tongues , miraculously praising God in foreign languages . A crowd gathered and was addressed by the Apostle Peter who stated that the occurrence was the fulfillment of Joel ’ s prophecy , " And in the last days it shall be , God declares , that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh , and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy " . He then explained how the Spirit came to be poured out , recounting Jesus ’ ministry and passion and then proclaiming his resurrection and enthronement at the right hand of God . In response , the crowd asked Peter what they should do . He responded that they should repent and be baptized for the forgiveness of sins in order to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit . Peter finished his speech stating that the promise " is for you and for your children and for all who are far off , everyone whom the Lord our God calls to himself " . 
 Baptism in the Holy Spirit occurs elsewhere in Acts . The gospel had been proclaimed in Samaria and the apostles Peter and John were sent from Jerusalem . The new believers had been water baptized , but the Holy Spirit had not yet fallen on them . The Samaritans received the Holy Spirit when Peter and John laid their hands on them . The Apostle Paul was also filled with the Holy Spirit when Ananias of Damascus laid hands on him , and afterwards Paul was baptized with water . 
 Later in Acts , Peter preached the gospel to the household of Cornelius the Centurion , a gentile . While he preached , the Holy Spirit fell on the gentiles , and they began to speak in tongues . The Jewish believers with Peter were amazed , and the household was water baptized . While the apostle Paul was in Ephesus , he found disciples there and discovered that they did not know of the existence of the Holy Spirit and had only received John the Baptist ’ s baptism . After baptizing them in Jesus ’ name , Paul laid his hands on them , and they began to speak in tongues and prophesy . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early Christianity = = = 
 In the early Church , the laying on of hands on the newly baptized to impart the gift of the Holy Spirit was the origin of the sacrament of confirmation . In the Eastern church , confirmation continued to be celebrated immediately after water baptism . The two rites were separated in the Western church . According to Pentecostal historian H. Vinson <unk> , " the basic premise of Pentecostalism , that one may receive later effusions of the Spirit after initiation / conversion , can be clearly traced in Christian history to the beginnings of the rite of confirmation in the Western churches " . 
 = = = Reformation era and Puritanism ( 16th and 17th centuries ) = = = 
 Huldrych Zwingli , a leading Protestant Reformer in Switzerland , taught three distinct baptisms : water baptism , teaching baptism ( having been educated about the Christian religion ) and Spirit baptism . While full baptism included all three , Zwingli emphasized that the external baptisms of water and teaching could not provide salvation . The inner baptism of the Spirit alone could save because it conferred faith . According to Zwingli , the three baptisms could be given separately ; Spirit baptism could occur first or last in the sequence . 
 Many Puritans believed that the experience of becoming a Christian was followed by a later and distinct experience of the Holy Spirit . This experience was characterized by receiving assurance of one 's salvation . English Puritan Thomas Goodwin equated this experience with the baptism in the Holy Spirit and the " seal of the Spirit " referenced in the Epistle to the Ephesians . 
 = = = <unk> and the Higher Life movement ( 18th and 19th centuries ) = = = 
 <unk> traces the influence of Catholic and Anglican mystical traditions on John Wesley 's doctrine of Christian perfection or entire sanctification , from which Pentecostal beliefs on Spirit baptism developed . Furthermore , theologian James Dunn notes early Methodist beliefs can be directly linked to Puritan teaching on the Holy Spirit . 
 Wesley taught that while the new birth was the start of the Christian life , " inbred sin " remained and must be removed through a lifelong process of moral cleansing . John Fletcher , Wesley 's designated successor , called Christian perfection a " baptism in the Holy Spirit " . His Checks to Antinomianism later became a standard for <unk> @-@ inclined holiness teachers . On the subject , Fletcher wrote : 
 Lastly : if we will attain the full power of godliness , and be peaceable as the Prince of Peace , and merciful as our heavenly Father , let us go on to the perfection and glory of Christianity ; let us enter the full dispensation of the Spirit . Till we live in the pentecostal glory of the Church : till we are baptized with the Holy Ghost : till the Spirit of burning and the fire of Divine love have melted us down , and we have been truly cast into the softest mould of the Gospel : till we can say with St. Paul , " We have received the Spirit of love , of power , and of a sound mind ; " till then we shall be carnal rather than spiritual believers . 
 In mid @-@ 19th century America , the Wesleyan holiness movement began to teach that entire sanctification was less a process and more of a state that one entered into by faith at a definite moment in time . This second blessing , as it was commonly called , allowed Christians to be freed from the power of sin . Among adherence of the holiness movement , baptism in the Holy Spirit was synonymous with second blessing sanctification . 
 After his conversion in 1821 , Presbyterian minister and revivalist Charles Grandison Finney experienced what he called " baptism in the Holy Spirit " accompanied by " unutterable <unk> " of praise . Finney and other Reformed writers , known as Oberlin perfectionists , agreed that there was a life altering experience after conversion , but unlike their Wesleyan holiness counterparts , they conceived of it as an ongoing process enabling believers to devote themselves wholly to Christ 's service . Similarly , the English Higher Life movement taught that the second blessing was an " <unk> of power " . According to this view , Spirit baptism gave Christians the ability to be witnesses for the gospel and to perform Christian service . Wesleyan teachers emphasized purity while Oberlin and higher life advocates stressed power as the defining outcome of Spirit baptism . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In the early 1890s , R.C. Horner , a Canadian holiness evangelist , introduced a theological distinction that would be important for the development of Pentecostalism . He argued in his books Pentecost ( 1891 ) and Bible Doctrines ( 1909 ) that the baptism in the Holy Spirit was not synonymous with the second blessing but was actually a third work of grace subsequent to salvation and sanctification that empowered the believer for service . Charles Fox Parham would build on this doctrinal foundation when he identified speaking in tongues as the Bible evidence of Spirit baptism . 
 = = Views = = 
 The diverse views on Spirit @-@ baptism held among Christian traditions can be categorized into three main groups . These are baptism with the Spirit as sacramental initiation ( Orthodox and Catholic churches ) , regeneration ( Reformed tradition ) , and empowerment for witness and vocation ( Pentecostals and charismatics ) . 
 = = = <unk> initiation = = = 
 = = = = Eastern Orthodoxy = = = = 
 Orthodox Churches believe that baptism in the Holy Spirit is conferred with water baptism . The individual is anointed with oil ( chrism ) immediately after baptism . According to Cyril of Jerusalem : 
 This holy ointment is no more simple ointment , nor ( so to say ) common , after the invocation , but the gift of Christ ; and by the presence of His Godhead , it causes in us the Holy Ghost . It is symbolically applied to thy forehead and thy other senses and while thy body is anointed with visible ointment , thy soul is sanctified by the Holy and life @-@ giving Spirit . 
 = = = = Catholicism = = = = 
 The Catholic Church teaches that baptism , confirmation , and the Eucharist — the sacraments of Christian initiation — lay the foundations of the Christian life . The Christian life is based on baptism . It is " the gateway to life in the Spirit " and " signifies and actually brings about the birth of water and the Spirit " . The post @-@ baptismal anointing ( <unk> in the Eastern churches ) signifies the gift of the Holy Spirit and announces a second anointing to be conferred later in confirmation that completes the baptismal anointing . 
 Confirmation , then , is necessary for the completion of baptismal grace . When confirmed , Catholics receive the " special outpouring of the Holy Spirit as once granted to the apostles on the day of Pentecost " . For the <unk> it increases the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit ( wisdom , understanding , counsel , fortitude , knowledge , piety , and fear of the Lord ) , unites more fully to Christ and the Church , and gives strength to confess Christ and defend the faith . The rite of confirmation orients toward mission , and many liturgical texts remind the initiate that the gift of the Holy Spirit should be used for service to the church and the world . 
 = = = Regeneration = = = 
 The main position on Spirit baptism among the Reformed churches , <unk> , and many Baptists is that the baptism with the Holy Spirit occurs simultaneously with regeneration , when those who have faith in Jesus Christ receive the Holy Spirit and are incorporated into the body of Christ . 
 = = = Sanctification = = = 
 Within Methodism and the broader Wesleyan tradition , baptism with the Holy Spirit has often been linked to living a sanctified life . The United Methodist Church has a sacramental view of baptism and confirmation . At the same time , the United Methodist Confession of Faith also affirms Wesley 's doctrine of Christian perfection ( also known as entire sanctification ) : 
 Entire sanctification is a state of perfect love , righteousness and true holiness which every regenerate believer may obtain by being delivered from the power of sin , by loving God with all the heart , soul , mind and strength , and by loving one 's neighbor as one 's self . Through faith in Jesus Christ this gracious gift may be received in this life both gradually and instantaneously , and should be sought earnestly by every child of God . 
 Similarly , the churches in the holiness movement emphasize entire sanctification as a definite experience linked to Spirit baptism . According to the Articles of Faith of the Church of the Nazarene , sanctification is a work of God after regeneration " which transforms believers into the likeness of Christ " and is made possible by " initial sanctification " ( which occurs simultaneously with regeneration and justification ) , entire sanctification , and " the continued perfecting work of the Holy Spirit culminating in glorification " . Entire sanctification ( as opposed to initial sanctification ) is an act of God in which a believer is made free from original sin and able to devote him or herself entirely to God : 
 It is wrought by the baptism with or infilling of the Holy Spirit , and comprehends in one experience the cleansing of the heart from sin and the abiding , indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit , empowering the believer for life and service . 
 = = = Empowerment = = = 
 = = = = Classical Pentecostalism = = = = 
 In classical Pentecostalism , the baptism with the Holy Spirit is understood to be a separate and distinct experience occurring sometime after regeneration . It is an empowering experience , equipping Spirit @-@ filled believers for witness and ministry . Extending from this is the belief that all the spiritual gifts mentioned in the New Testament are to be sought and exercised to build up the church . Pentecostals believe that Spirit baptism will be accompanied by the physical evidence of speaking in tongues ( <unk> ) . 
 According to Pentecostal biblical interpretation , the Gospel of John 20 : 22 shows that the disciples of Jesus were already born again before the Holy Spirit fell at Pentecost . They then cite biblical examples in the Book of Acts 2 , 8 , 10 , and 19 to show that it was common in the New Testament for Spirit baptism to occur after conversion . In following the biblical pattern , they argue , Christians today should also pray for this baptism which results in greater power for ministry and witness . 
 On the subject of Spirit baptism , Donald Gee wrote of the Christians on the Day of Pentecost : 
 With them it was not mere intellectual assent to some article in a creed defining an orthodox doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit . Neither were they satisfied to acquiescence to a vague idea that in some indefinite manner the Holy Spirit had been imparted to them upon conversion . They gladly and thankfully recognized His gracious operations in their regeneration and sanctification , but their own personal reception of the Holy Spirit was an intensely vivid experience . They knew when He came , where He came , and how he came . Nothing reveals this more than Paul 's searching question to certain disciples whom he immediately sensed to be spiritually lacking in a vital part of their Christian inheritance — ' Have ye received the Holy Ghost ? ' ( Acts 19 : 2 ) . The challenge was to experience , not to doctrine . How significant ! An Ephesian ' Pentecost ' speedily rectified their shortcoming , and it was an experience as vivid as all the rest had received — ' They spake with tongues and <unk> 
 In Pentecostal experience , Spirit baptism can be quite dramatic , as shown by William Durham 's account of his Spirit baptism : 
 I was overcome by the mighty fulness of power and went down under it . For three hours He wrought wonderfully in me . My body was worked in sections , a section at a time . And even the skin on my face was jerked and shaken , and finally I felt my lower jaw begin to quiver in a strange way . This continued for some little time , when finally my throat began to enlarge and I felt my vocal organs being , as it were , drawn into a different shape . O how strange and wonderful it was ! and how blessed it was to be thus in the hands of God . And last of all I felt my tongue begin to move and my lips to produce strange sounds which did not originate in my mind . 
 In some accounts of Spirit baptism , Pentecostals report receiving visions , such as the account of Lucy Leatherman , an Azusa Street participant : 
 While seeking for the Baptism with the Holy Ghost in Los Angeles , after Sister Ferrell [ sic ] laid hands on me I praised and praised God and saw my Savior in the heavens . And as I praised , I came closer and closer and I was so small . By and by I swept into the wound in His side , and He was not only in me but I in Him , and there I found that rest that passeth all understanding , and He said to me , you are in the bosom of the Father . He said I was clothed upon and in the secret place of the Most High . But I said , Father , I want the gift of the Holy Ghost , and the heavens opened and I was overshadowed , and such power came upon me and went through me . He said , Praise Me , and when I did , angels came and ministered unto me . I was passive in His hands working on my vocal cords , and I realized they were loosing me . I began to praise Him in an unknown language . 
 = = = = Charismatics = = = = 
 Charismatics trace their historical origins to the charismatic movement of the 1960s and 1970s . They are distinguished from Pentecostals because they tend to allow for differing viewpoints on whether Spirit baptism is subsequent to conversion and whether tongues is always a sign of receiving the baptism . 
 The Catholic Charismatic Renewal believes that there is a further experience of empowerment with the Holy Spirit . As stated by Rev. Fr . <unk> <unk> , " baptism in the Spirit is not a sacrament , but it is related to a sacrament … to the sacraments of Christian initiation . The baptism in the Spirit makes real and in a way renews Christian initiation " . Emphasis of the event is on the release of existing spiritual gifts already given to the individual through baptism in water and confirmation . 
 During the 1980s , another renewal movement emerged called the " Third Wave of the Holy Spirit " ( the first wave was Pentecostalism and the second wave was the charismatic movement ) . Third wave charismatics stress that the preaching of the gospel , following the New Testament pattern , should be accompanied by " signs , wonders , and miracles " . They believe that all Christians are baptized with the Holy Spirit at conversion , and prefer to call subsequent experiences as " filling " with the Holy Spirit . John <unk> and the Vineyard churches are most prominently associated with this label . 
 = = = Mormonism = = = 
 In the Latter Day Saint movement , the " Baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost " refers to the experience of one who undergoes the ordinance of confirmation with the laying on of hands to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost . It follows baptism in water and is essential to salvation . The gift of the Holy Ghost is the privilege of receiving inspiration , divine manifestations , direction , spiritual gifts , and other blessings from the Holy Spirit . It begins the lifetime process of sanctification . 
 = = Bible references = = 
 Matthew 3 : 11 : … He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit … " 
 Mark 1 : 8 : … He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit … " 
 Luke 3 : 16 : " He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit … " 
 Luke 24 : 49 : … stay here in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high . " ( see fulfillment in Acts 2 ) . 
 John 1 : 33 : … the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit . " 
 Acts 1 : 4 @-@ 5 : … the Promise of the Father … " ; … you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit … " 
 Acts 2 : 1 @-@ 4 : " All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other languages … " 
 Acts 2 : 14 @-@ 18 : … I will pour out my Spirit … " ( quoting Joel 2 : 28 @-@ 29 ) . 
 Acts 4 : 31 : … they were all filled with the Holy Spirit … " 
 Acts 8 : 14 @-@ 17 : … prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit … " ; … as yet the Spirit had not yet come upon any of them … " ; … they received the Holy Spirit … " ; … the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles ' hands … . " 
 Acts 9 : 17 : … Jesus … has sent me … that you may … be filled with the Holy Spirit . " 
 Acts 10 : 44 @-@ 48 : " The Holy Spirit fell upon all who heard the word … " ; … the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out … " ; … people who have received the Holy Spirit … " 
 Acts 11 : 15 @-@ 16 : … the Holy Spirit fell upon them … " ; … you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit … " 
 Acts 19 : 1 @-@ 6 : " Did you receive the Holy Spirit … ? " ; … the Holy Spirit came upon them , and they spoke in tongues and prophesied … " 
 1 Cor 12 : 13 : " For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one <unk> or Greeks , slaves or free ... " 
 = 1080 ° Snowboarding = 
 1080 ° Snowboarding is a snowboard racing video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 and first released in Japan on 28 February 1998 . It was re @-@ released on the Wii 's Virtual Console service in 2008 . The player controls one of five playable snowboarders from a third @-@ person perspective using a combination of buttons to jump and perform tricks over eight levels . 
 1080 ° was announced on 21 November 1997 and developed over nine months ; it garnered critical acclaim and won an Interactive Achievement Award from the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences . 1080 ° sold over a million units , and a second installment , 1080 ° Avalanche , was released for the Nintendo GameCube on 28 November 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player controls a snowboarder in one of six modes . 1080 ° has two trick modes ( trick attack and contest ) , three race modes ( race , time attack , and multiplayer ) , a training mode , and an options mode . The objective of the game is either to arrive quickly at a level 's finish line or to receive maximum points for trick combinations . 
 In 1080 ° ' s two trick modes , trick attack and contest , players accrue points from completed tricks . In contest mode , players perform tricks and snowboard past flags for points . Trick attack mode requires players to perform a series of tricks throughout a designated level . The game features 25 tricks , all of which are performed by using a combination of circular positions of the control stick , the R button , and the B button ; point values are allocated based on complexity and required time . The two types of tricks are grab tricks , in which the board is grabbed in a specific way , or spin tricks , in which the snowboarder spins the board a certain number of degrees . The 1080 ° spin requires nine actions , the most of any trick in the game . 
 1080 ° has three race modes ; in these modes , victory can be achieved by taking separate routes within a course and balancing the snowboarder after a jump to avoid speed loss . Tricks are scored in race modes , but do not count toward victory . 
 In match race mode , the player competes in a series of races against AI @-@ controlled snowboarders . The game times the player throughout the level and players receive a damage meter which fills if the snowboarder falls down or is knocked over . The difficulty level in match races can be set to easy , medium , or hard , adjusting the complexity and number of races . If the player fails at defeating an AI competitor , they must retire . The player is given three chances to beat the computer before the game is over . 
 Players may initially choose from five snowboarding characters : two from Japan , and one each from Canada , USA , and the United Kingdom . Each snowboarder has different abilities and is suited for different levels and modes , since each has varying statistics in fields such as technique , speed , and weight . Three additional snowboarders are unlocked by completing certain game levels and modes . Eight snowboards are initially available for every character , and one additional snowboard may be unlocked later in the game . Each board also excels in different situations , since each have different strengths in categories such as balance and edge control . 
 = = Development = = 
 1080 ° ' s release was announced on 21 November 1997 at Nintendo 's SpaceWorld trade show ; the game 's working title was then Vertical Edge Snowboarding . Before the game 's release , journalists were able to play 1080 ° at the January 1998 Nintendo Gamers ' Summit . 
 1080 ° was programmed by Englishmen Giles Goddard and Colin Reed , developed and published by Nintendo , and produced by Shigeru Miyamoto . 
 When developing 1080 ° , Goddard and Reed used a technique called " skinning " to eliminate joints between the polygons composing the characters . Their programming used a combination of standard animation and inverse kinematics , creating characters whose appearance during collisions is affected by what object is hit , what direction the collision occurs in , and the speed at which the collision takes place . Tommy Hilfiger outfits and Lamar snowboards appear throughout 1080 ° as product placement . 1080 ° ' s soundtrack of " techno and <unk> beats " with " thrashy , <unk> @-@ out vocals " was composed by Kenta Nagata , who also composed soundtracks for Mario Kart 64 and other Nintendo games . 
 1080 ° ' s development took place from April or May 1997 to March 1998 . The game was released on 28 February 1998 in Japan and on 1 April 1998 in North America . Nintendo delayed the game 's European release because they hoped to boost sales with a winter release ; 1080 ° was eventually released on 30 November 1998 , in Europe and the PAL region . 
 = = Reception = = 
 1080 ° received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . It won the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences ' 1999 Console Sports Game of the Year award and was called " one of the best values in both sports and racing gaming " by GameSpot . 1080 ° has been perceived to be a leader among snowboarding titles at the time since it was " so good ... that it took publishing giant Electronic Arts several years and a far more powerful console to give it solid competition " in the form of the SSX franchise . Edge hailed it as the " most convincing videogame emulation of the snowboarding experience so far " with an " atmosphere of sobriety " unlike any other Nintendo game at the time . 
 The game 's graphics were of the highest quality for the Nintendo 64 at the time . GameSpot praised general aspects of the game 's graphics such as their crispness , detail , smoothness , and lack of polygon dropout . They praised the game 's camera use , the game 's " very solid " physics model , the impression of racers ' speed , and the game 's snow effects ( sun reflected in the snow as appropriate , and fluffy snow and packed snow appeared and behaved differently ) . Graphical faults identified by critics included occasional pop @-@ up , misplaced shadows , and lag when racers passed through on @-@ track trees ; these problems were generally identified as minor . 
 Although writing a positive review , Edge found faults in the game 's AI ; they asserted 1080 ° suffered from " cheating " CPU opponents . They criticized the AI 's simplicity and ability to quickly catch up to the player near the end of a race ; they also noted the AI 's " limited series of predetermined routes " and the possibility of a player learning where and when an AI falls over , " offering an opportunity to pass [ the computer ] , but conveying little satisfaction with it . " Edge also stated that the PAL release delay " is frankly ludicrous . " They believed that , due to Nintendo 's slump of noteworthy releases , " any quality title is likely to top the charts with little difficulty . " 
 AllGame considered the " highly technical " control scheme of 1080 ° one of the game 's strengths despite its initial difficulty . CVG positively reviewed the control scheme , but disagreed on its difficulty , noting " the controls have been implemented so brilliantly that you 're able to play perfectly well with just one hand on the stick and Z button . " GameSpot called the game 's control " thoroughly involving " and said that " [ t ] he crouch move alone – which makes for <unk> turns – makes this fun to play . " The music was also generally praised , with IGN calling it " a shining example of what can be achieved on the format " and AllGame calling it " one of the best N64 soundtracks to date " . AllGame also praised the game 's sound effects . 
 In a retrospective review by the Official Nintendo Magazine in 2006 , Steve Jarratt commented that 1080 ° " boasted the best videogame representation of snow , " and was complemented by " <unk> " sound effects . Positive comments were also made about handling and the quality of the multiplayer . In summary , Jarratt believed " this was a straight @-@ up snowboarder , stunt @-@ free but fast and fun . " The magazine also ranked it the 87th best game available on Nintendo platforms . The staff felt it was the most realistic snowboarding game . 
 1080 ° sold 1 @,@ 230 @,@ 000 units in the United States , and over 23 @,@ 000 in Japan . It did not , however , match the success of the developers ' first game , Wave Race 64 which sold 1 @,@ 950 @,@ 000 units in the United States and 154 @,@ 000 in Japan . In 2001 , one of 1080 ° ' s snowboarders , Kensuke <unk> , appeared on a trophy in the game Super Smash Bros. Melee . 1080 ° Avalanche , a sequel to 1080 ° , was released for the Nintendo GameCube in 2003 ; Avalanche received a harsher critical reception , averaging 73 / 100 on Metacritic , due to " frame rate issues and limited gameplay " . 1080 ° was re @-@ released on Nintendo 's Virtual Console service in Japan on 15 January 2008 , Europe on 18 January 2008 and North America on 28 January 2008 . The music for the Golden Forest track can be heard in Super Smash Bros. Brawl . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A character from the first game ( but not the second ) , Kensuke <unk> , cameos as a collectible trophy in Super Smash Bros. Melee . The music track " Golden Forest " ( 1080 ° Snowboarding ) " appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl is one of the many music themes that play on the stage , Port Town Aero Dive , and returns under the title , " Golden Forest " , in Super Smash Bros. for Wii U on the same stage . 
 = Middlewich = 
 Middlewich is a market town in the unitary authority of Cheshire East and the ceremonial county of Cheshire , England . It is 19 @.@ 2 miles ( 30 @.@ 9 km ) east of the city of Chester , 2 @.@ 9 miles ( 4 @.@ 7 km ) east of Winsford , 5 @.@ 3 miles ( 8 @.@ 5 km ) southeast of Northwich and 4 @.@ 7 miles ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) northwest of Sandbach . The population of the town at the 2011 Census was 13 @,@ 595 . 
 There has been a settlement at Middlewich since at least the time of the Roman occupation . As a wich town , Middlewich is an important centre for the extraction of salt ; in earlier years it was also known for its production of Cheshire cheese , silk , and its agriculture . In the present day it is known for its canals , its heritage events and its festivals . The parish church of St. Michael and All Angels , dates back to the 12th century . 
 Middlewich lies on the confluence of three rivers : the Dane , Croco and Wheelock . Three canals also pass through the town , the Shropshire Union , Trent and Mersey , and the Wardle canal , as well as three major roads , the A533 , A54 and <unk> ; Middlewich also has good motorway links to the nearby cities of Manchester and Liverpool . The town 's population has doubled since 1970 despite a reduction in the number of manufacturing jobs in salt and textile manufacturing , suggesting that many of the new residents live in Middlewich for reasons other than local employment . 
 Since 1990 there have been initiatives to increase the volume of tourism into the town , through events such as the annual folk and boat festival , the Roman and Norman festivals , and regular farmers ' markets . 
 In 2014 , it was rated one of the most attractive postcode areas to live in England . 
 = = History = = 
 In the Domesday Book Middlewich is spelt " <unk> " ; the termination <unk> or <unk> in Old English refers to a settlement , village or dwelling . It is also supposed that " wich " or " wych " refers to a salt town , with Middlewich being the middle town between Northwich and Nantwich . 
 Middlewich was founded by the Romans , who gave it the name Salinae because of its surrounding salt deposits . It became one of the major Roman sites for salt production , an activity that was centred on the township of Kinderton , about a quarter of a mile north of the present @-@ day parish church of St. Michael and All Angels . It has been suggested that pre @-@ Roman salt production also occurred in the same area , but there is no supporting archaeological evidence . Whittaker 's History of Manchester claims that the Iron Age Cornovii made Kinderton their capital , but it is more likely that the Cornovii inhabited Kinderton for its salt @-@ making potential . There was once thought to have been a medieval castle at Kinderton , but that is now thought to have been unlikely . 
 Middlewich lies across the King Street fault , which roughly follows the Roman road , King Street , from Northwich to Middlewich . During their occupation the Romans built a fort at <unk> Field ( grid reference <unk> ) , and excavations to the south of the fort have found further evidence of Roman activity including a well and part of a preserved Roman road . An excavation in 2004 , in Buckley 's Field , also uncovered signs of Roman occupation . 
 Salt manufacture has remained the principal industry for the past 2 @,@ 000 years , and it has shaped the town 's history and geography . Before the Norman invasion of England in 1066 , there is thought to have been one brine pit in Middlewich , between the River Croco and the current Lewin Street . In the Domesday Book the area is described as being " wasted " , having been cleared by King William around 1070 as an " act of rage against his rebellious barons " . Gilbert de Venables became the first Baron of Kinderton shortly after the Norman Conquest , the title being conferred by Hugh Lupus . A manor house was built to the east of the town and became the baronial seat of the Venables family . A Jacobean screen in the church of St Michael and All Angels has the carved Venables coat of arms . The title " Baron of Kinderton " is now vested in the Lord Vernon . 
 On 13 March 1643 the town was the scene of the first Battle of Middlewich , between the Parliamentarians , under Sir William Brereton , and the Royalist supporters of King Charles I of England , under Sir Thomas Aston . The second Battle of Middlewich took place on 26 December 1643 , and claimed the lives of about 200 Parliamentarians , along with a number of Royalists under the command of Lord Byron . 
 The population of Middlewich rose during the 19th and 20th centuries . Some of this rise is attributable to a number of parishes being combined , for example parts of Newton were added to Middlewich in 1894 , with Sutton having previously been added to Newton in 1892 . Some will also be due to a general increase in population of the United Kingdom , and some of the increase would have been required to provide a labour force for the increased number , and scale , of salt and chemical works in the town . In the middle of the 19th century Middlewich was described as a town with principal works being the surrounding farming district , a silk factory , and the salt works in Kinderton and Newton . In 1887 the town was described as having an antique appearance , with its principal trade being salt , along with fruit and vegetables , and small silk and heavy cotton works . The town had one bank and one newspaper . By 1911 the Encyclopædia Britannica mentions the existence of chemical works and the manufacture of condensed milk . 
 In common with the rest of the United Kingdom , Middlewich 's young male population was decimated during the First World War . The cenotaph , near to the parish church , lists the names of the 136 men who died in that conflict , representing around 10 % of the male population of the town aged between 15 and 45 . Forty @-@ two of Middlewich 's inhabitants lost their lives in the Second World War , with a further fatality in the Korean War . The Brunner Mond salt works in Brooks Lane also erected a cenotaph in memory of the 16 men from the works killed in the First World War , and the two who died during the Second World War . 
 In the period between the end of the First World War until shortly after the Second World War , there was extensive housebuilding in the town ; a significant number of houses were built in the King Street area to the north , the area bounded between Nantwich Road and St. Anne 's Road to the west , and especially in Cledford to the south . The 1970s commenced with the building of a new road , St. Michael 's Way , which allowed traffic moving from east to west through the town to bypass the main shopping street , Wheelock Street . Along with the bypass there was significant remodelling of the town centre , with the old town hall and library being demolished . This bypass successfully eased the flow of traffic away from the main shopping street , but the joining of three major roads remains a bottleneck , which will be eased by a proposed eastern bypass . 
 Since the early 1980s Middlewich has seen a significant quantity of new housing development , initially in the Sutton Lane and Hayhurst Avenue areas . New developments have recently been built on the sites of old salt workings to the south of the Roman Fort at <unk> 's Field , near the Norman Baron 's moated manor house at Kinderton Manor , and on the site of the old railway station . One of the latest developments is on the old silk works next to the Big Lock public house . In common with other local towns such as Holmes Chapel , Northwich and Winsford , people are attracted to Middlewich because of its good road links via the M6 motorway and the relatively low price and availability of suitable building land . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Middlewich has lain within the county boundaries of Cheshire since a very early time . At the time of the Domesday survey ( 1086 ) Middlewich was in the hundred of Middlewich , but by the 14th century it had become part of the Northwich hundred , although a small part of the then large parish of Middlewich extended into the hundred of Eddisbury . Following the Local Government Act 1894 , Middlewich became an urban district . In 1974 , as part of the Local Government Act 1972 , Middlewich Urban District was abolished and its territory passed into the borough of Congleton . Since 1 April 2009 the town has been served by Cheshire East Council . 
 Middlewich is in the parliamentary constituency of Congleton . The current MP is Fiona Bruce for the Conservative Party , elected in the 2010 General Election . Previously , Ann Winterton , also a member of the Conservative Party , had been the MP since the constituency 's creation in 1983 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Middlewich is located at 53 ° 11 ′ 31 ″ N 2 ° 26 ′ 35 ″ W ( 53 @.@ 192 , − 2 @.@ 443 ) , on the confluence of three rivers , the Dane , the Croco and the Wheelock . The town is approximately 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) from junction 18 of the M6 motorway . The main westward traffic route between the motorway and Winsford , and also southbound traffic to Crewe , go through the town . There are three canals in Middlewich , the Middlewich Branch of the Shropshire Union Canal , the Trent and Mersey Canal , and the Wardle Canal , the United Kingdom 's shortest canal at 100 feet ( 30 m ) long . 
 The town sits less than 98 feet ( 30 m ) above sea level , on Upper Triassic Mercia mudstone laid down with large salt deposits as part of the Cheshire plain , a boulder clay plain separating the hills of North Wales and the Peak District of Derbyshire , formed following the retreat of ice age glaciers . 
 The climate is generally temperate with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean average temperature is slightly above average for the United Kingdom as is the average amount of sunshine . The average annual rainfall is slightly below the average for the UK . There are few days when snow is lying on the ground , although there are some days of air frost . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , the Middlewich wards of Cledford and Kinderton had a total population of 13 @,@ 101 . Middlewich 's population is relatively young ; the proportion of children ( aged 0 – 15 ) is 3 % higher than the national average . Households are larger than average , consistent with a younger population , with an average of 2 @.@ 51 people per household , compared to the national average of 2 @.@ 36 . Approximately 25 % are single person households , compared to 30 % nationally ; the majority ( almost 85 % ) of Middlewich 's housing stock is owner @-@ occupied . 
 Three @-@ quarters of the 9 @,@ 500 people between the ages of 16 and 74 are classed as " economically active " , that is , either in full or part @-@ time employment , or full @-@ time students . Unemployment runs at around 2 @.@ 2 % , compared to 3 @.@ 4 % nationally . Eighty @-@ seven percent of households own at least one car , primarily used for travel to and from work ; nearly 77 % of residents travel to work by car , 10 % work from home , and the remainder use public transport , walk , or cycle . 
 At the 2001 census , 16 @.@ 3 % of the population of Middlewich either did not answer the question about religion , or stated that they had no religion . The breakdown for Congleton showed that 99 @.@ 3 % of those that replied , and did not state that they had no religion , were Christian ; the figures for Middlewich will be broadly similar . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Middlewich has a traditional high street , with small shops on Wheelock Street and Lewin Street . There are also four supermarkets , Tesco , Lidl , a Tesco Express , and Morrisons . Historically the major employers have been the salt industry and agriculture . Salt is still manufactured at British Salt , which employs around 125 people . The close proximity to the M6 motorway has led to the creation of a large distribution and business park , with companies such as Tesco and <unk> locating to the site . Approximately 300 people are employed at the Ideal Standard factory , which since 1937 has been making vitreous china <unk> . 
 Tourism is one of the fastest growing industries in Cheshire , and Congleton Borough Council has recognised the importance of Middlewich 's canals in its attempts to promote tourism in the borough . Visitors to the 2003 Middlewich Folk and Boat Festival were estimated to have spent £ 2 @.@ 3 million in the town over the two days of the festival . 
 Power for the town is provided from the National Grid for electricity , and National Grid Gas plc for natural gas . Fresh water supply and foul water collection is by United Utilities . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 A highly regarded folk and boat festival has been run in the town every year since 1990 , except for 2001 when it was cancelled because of a foot and mouth epidemic . During the three @-@ day festival ( which takes place over a long weekend ) folk artists play at a number of locations in the town , and it is estimated to bring in an extra 30 @,@ 000 visitors to the town during the festival period , along with 400 narrowboats . 
 In addition to this annual event there have been a number of ad @-@ hoc events , including the Middlewich Roman Festival in 2001 . This Roman Festival led to a Heritage lottery fund grant which allowed the construction of a Roman theatre at the Bull Ring near to St Michaels and All Angels church . Since its construction this has regularly been used for other purposes , such as an open @-@ air music stage and an ice @-@ rink . Following the Roman festival in 2001 , further Roman festivals were held in 2003 and 2007 . Tim Strickland , a consultant archaeologist , was awarded a MBE for services to archaeology for his work in organising the Roman Middlewich Project . In 2005 a Norman Festival was put on in the town , and there are plans for an Industrial Festival . A series of arts and music events " @ the Bull Ring " was started in 2006 . 
 The local newspapers are the Middlewich Guardian and Middlewich Chronicle . A radio station , Cheshire FM , was launched in 2007 , covering the mid @-@ Cheshire area including Middlewich – this closed in 2012 . In 2013 a new local radio station was launched , Mid @-@ Cheshire Radio covering Middlewich and the nearby towns of Northwich and Winsford . The library , in Lewin Street , was built in the 1970s to replace the old library which was demolished to build St Michael 's Way . It has examples of finds from Middlewich 's Roman past on display . Fountain Fields on Queen Street is a traditional town park , with a number of facilities including a bowling green . It has been owned by the council since 1926 . 
 Middlewich has had a football club since at least 1902 . The current club , Middlewich Town , was formed in 1998 , and plays in the Mid @-@ Cheshire League . Middlewich also has a cricket club on <unk> Lane . There is a leisure centre which shares facilities with the high school . Middlewich is one of two large towns in the former borough of Congleton without a public swimming pool , in spite of the various initiatives that have been started to provide one . 
 Middlewich 's hospital is Leighton Hospital near Crewe , part of the Mid Cheshire Hospitals National Health Service Trust . Primary care services are provided by the Central and Eastern Cheshire Primary Care Trust . GP services are provided by two medical practices . There are two dental practices . 
 = = Landmarks and religious sites = = 
 The principal landmark in Middlewich is the Anglican parish church of St Michael and All Angels , parts of which date back to the 12th century , although the majority was built during the 14th , 15th and 16th centuries . There was a general remodelling of the church during the 19th century , which included removing the whitewash from its interior to reveal the sandstone appearance seen today . The church was the site of fierce fighting in the first and second Battles of Middlewich during the English Civil War . 
 Other landmarks include : the Roman Theatre built on the Bull Ring on the site of the old town hall and library ; and the town bridge , opened in 1931 as a replacement for an earlier bridge . Middlewich has a town cemetery with a twin chapel dating from 1859 by Bellamy & Hardy . The Victoria technical school and library , which was opened in 1897 , is a red brick and red terracotta building , " with a cupola but otherwise vaguely in the Loire style " . Since 1900 , the building on Lewin Street has been used as offices by the Town Council . One mile north of the town centre along King Street lies Ravenscroft Hall , which dates from 1837 . 
 There are places of worship for five Christian denominations within the town : Church of England , Methodist , United Reformed Church , Catholic and Pentecostal . There are no places of worship for non @-@ Christian faiths . 
 Middlewich Methodist Church was built in 2000 in Booth Lane , replacing the earlier chapel in Lewin Street . Middlewich United Reformed Church ( Image ) was founded in 1797 , with the current church ( the second on this site ) in Queen Street being built in 1870 , and completed in 1871 . The church celebrated its bicentenary in 1997 with the publication of a history of the church , Two Hundred Years ( not out ) . 
 Catholic masses were held in a cottage near the cemetery from 1848 until the building of the first Catholic church in the town in Wych House Lane in 1864 . This church was enlarged to include the first Catholic school in the town in 1869 . The church was later replaced by the modern St Mary 's Catholic Church on New King Street ( Image ) in 1890 , with the stone cross from the church on Wych House Lane being kept within the porch of the new church . 
 Middlewich Community Church ( Image ) is a relatively new Pentecostal church located in the former social club for the Brunner Mond works in Brooks Lane . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Middlewich lies on the A533 road linking it to Northwich and Runcorn in the north , and Sandbach to the south , the A54 linking it to Chester and Winsford to the west and Holmes Chapel and Buxton to the east , and <unk> linking it to Crewe and Nantwich to the south . 
 Middlewich lies on a railway branch line between Sandbach and Northwich , but Middlewich railway station – opened in 1868 and closed to passenger traffic in 1959 – has been demolished . The branch line is still used by freight trains . The closest railway station is at Winsford , 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) away . 
 Following a petition in 1766 , the Trent and Mersey Canal was diverted from its original course to provide transport to the town , and now links with a branch of the Shropshire Union Canal . The link between the two canals , which was opened in 1833 , is actually a third canal known as the Wardle Canal ; at about 100 feet ( 30 m ) in length , it is the shortest canal in the United Kingdom . 
 Middlewich is 19 miles ( 31 km ) from Manchester Airport , the busiest airport in the UK outside London , and 26 miles ( 42 km ) from Liverpool John Lennon Airport . 
 = = Education = = 
 There were three schools in Middlewich in the mid @-@ 19th century : the British School in Newton Bank ; the National School in Cow Lane ( Brooks Lane ) ; and the Grammar School , close to the site of the largest <unk> store . A Church of England school was erected in Lewin Street in 1854 and extended in 1871 . It soon became known as the National School , with the result that the earlier school was demolished . The later National School was itself demolished in the 1980s and is the site of the Salinae Day Care Centre , opened in 1995 . " Salinae Day Care Centre " . Cheshire County Council . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 30 May 2006 . At the turn of the 20th century two new schools were built : St Mary 's Catholic school , whose keystone was laid in 1899 by Col. France @-@ Hayhurst , and the secondary school , opened by France @-@ Hayhurst in 1906 . At the start of the 21st century there were seven schools in Middlewich : one infant , one junior , four primary schools and one secondary school . Cledford Primary School tends to accept students from the South of the town . It has now amalgamated With Cledford Infant And Nursery School . Middlewich Primary School caters for children from the older , northern , part of the town , " Middlewich Primary School " . Retrieved 30 May 2006 @.@ whilst St Mary 's Catholic Primary School receives Catholic children from the town . " St Mary 's Catholic Primary School " . Retrieved 30 May 2006 . Work began on the original buildings for the secondary school , Middlewich High School , in 1906 , " School is 100 not out " . This is Cheshire 11 November 2006 . Retrieved 11 December 2006 @.@ with later additions improving the teaching areas and providing a sports hall which could also be used by the wider community . The school opened on 1 November 1906 . In 2007 it was ranked 34 out of 50 by GCSE results for schools in Cheshire in the 2007 league tables . " Schools in Cheshire " . Education League Tables . Retrieved 23 November 2007 . <unk> Primary School and <unk> Community Primary School serve children from outside the immediate bounds of the town . " <unk> Community Primary School " . Retrieved 30 May 2006 . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Notable residents include the theologians John Hulse ( 1708 – 1790 ) who founded the <unk> lectures at Cambridge University , and Theophilus Lindsey ( 1723 OS – 1808 ) who inspired the Feathers Tavern Petition against clerical subscription to the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles , and so helped start one of the most profound debates within the Church of England in the 18th century . Elizabeth <unk> ( 1713 – 55 ) , an 18th @-@ century Quaker minister , was born in the town . 
 The France @-@ Hayhurst family were local landowners responsible for the development of the model village at Bostock , and Charles Frederick Lawrence ( 1873 – 1940 ) was a local antiquarian who documented much of the early history of Middlewich , and also discovered a Neolithic stone <unk> whilst digging in the town . John Wright Oakes ( 1820 – 1887 ) was a landscape painter who exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy . 
 James Hargreaves ( 1834 – 1915 ) was a chemist and inventor , who , along with Thomas Bird , developed a process for the electrolysis of brine using asbestos diaphragms . In 1899 , he became director of the newly opened General <unk> Alkali Company at Middlewich . 
 Sir Charles <unk> ( 1880 – 1978 ) , banker , born at the School House , Middlewich . 
 = Typhoon Abby ( 1983 ) = 
 Typhoon Abby was the second typhoon to strike Japan within a span of a few days in August 1983 . First noted southeast of Guam on July 31 , development of this system was initially slow to occur ; it was first classified on August 5 , and was upgraded into a tropical storm the next day . Intensification was rapid as Abby slowly recurved northward on August 7 and 8 . After reaching peak intensity with winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) early on August 9 , Abby slowly weakened , though the storm briefly re @-@ intensified on August 11 . By August 14 , winds had diminished to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . Abby finally weakened back into a tropical storm on August 17 not long after making landfall in Japan . The following day , Abby completed the transition to an extratropical cyclone after moving through central Japan . However , meteorologists continued monitoring the storm for six more days . 
 In the Philippines , heavy rainfall resulted in a landslide that crushed a house in Manila , killing three people . Two others drowned due to rough seas . Typhoon Abby also brought several consecutive days of rain to southern and central Japan , resulting in widespread damage . Commercial traffic by land , sea , and air was also paralyzed by the cyclone , stranding 25 @,@ 900 . Moreover , over 10 @,@ 000 fishing boats took refuge in harbors . Around 3 @,@ 400 homes were flooded and 24 homes were either damaged or destroyed . Additionally , 89 roads were also damaged . About a dozen people were injured during a flash flood that destroyed three houses . Three more dwellings were washed away when a river overflowed its banks . Nationwide , 27 people were hurt and two persons were killed . One person was listed as missing . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Abby originated from an area of enhanced convective activity southeast of Guam on July 31 . While moving south of Guam , the area failed to organized significantly until August 3 , when thunderstorm activity increased in coverage . Based on this , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued at 2300 UTC . Initially , the system struggled to develop a closed atmospheric circulation . However , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft investigated the system early on August 5 and was able to locate a closed surface circulation . Based on this , both the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) upgraded the system into a tropical depression . Following an increase in organization , both agencies upgraded the system into a tropical storm . 
 Although forecast by the JTWC to move west , Abby instead veered west @-@ northwest while slowly deepening . At 1800 UTC on August 6 , both the JMA and the JTWC upgraded Abby to typhoon status when an eye began to form within the central dense overcast , a large mass of deep convection . On August 7 , the storm began to intensify at a much faster rate than expected by the JTWC . Later that day , the JMA estimated 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . After briefly leveling off in intensity , the JTWC reported winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . Twelve hours later , the JTWC estimated maximum winds of 245 km / h ( 150 mph ) , making Abby a super typhoon . Even though a Hurricane Hunter aircraft measured a pressure of 888 mbar ( 26 @.@ 2 inHg ) , the JMA estimated peak winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 895 mbar ( 26 @.@ 4 inHg ) early on August 9 . 
 After maintaining peak intensity for several hours , Abby began to weaken as its forward speed slowed . Meanwhile , the JTWC forecast the storm to a turn to the northwest around a subtropical ridge . On August 11 , JMA reduced the intensity of the storm to 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) , but several hours later , the storm suddenly restrengthened , attaining winds of 200 km / h ( 125 mph ) . However , this trend was short lived and Abby steadily weakened as it made the long anticipated turn to the northeast in the general direction of Japan . On August 12 , two tropical cyclones developed in the South China Sea , but due to the massive size of Abby , this had little effect on the typhoon . On August 14 , however , the eye of Abby began to become less defined . Based on this , the JTWC decreased the intensity of the storm to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) while the JMA reported winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . According to the JMA , the storm maintained its intensity for a day , but on the following day , the storm weakened slightly . By August 16 , wind estimates from both agencies were equivalent to Category 1 intensity . Continuing to trek north @-@ northwest , the JTWC downgraded into a tropical storm at 0000 UTC on August 17 , . Shortly thereafter , Abby moved ashore Hamamatsu and began to turn northeast , encountering rugged terrain near Tokyo . At noon , the JMA downgraded Abby into a severe tropical storm ; simultaneously , the JTWC classified Abby as an extratropical cyclone . However , the JMA did not follow suit until 1800 UTC on August 18 . Despite being extratropical , the JMA kept monitoring the system until August 24 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Prior to affecting Japan , rains partially related to the system affected the Philippines . In Manila , a landslide crushed a house . Three teenagers were killed and two others were injured . Furthermore , two women also drowned due to rough seas . On August 12 , although far offshore Japan at that time , high waves were reported along the Pacific coast of Okinawa . Two days later , heavy rains began to drench the nation and continued through August 17 . Throughout the storm , three weather stations recorded more than 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 in ) of rain , <unk> measured a peak total of 1 @,@ 138 mm ( 44 @.@ 8 in ) , Hakone saw 1 @,@ 103 mm ( 43 @.@ 4 in ) , and 1 @,@ 035 mm ( 40 @.@ 7 in ) fell in Lake Yamanaka . Moreover , <unk> also saw observed 24 @-@ hours and hourly totals of 627 mm ( 24 @.@ 7 in ) and 73 mm ( 2 @.@ 9 in ) respectively . 
 Typhoon Abby brought widespread damage to Japan , becoming the second storm to strike the country in a week . Ferry services were interrupted to the outer islands of the nation , which stranded 3 @,@ 900 persons in <unk> . Some local air services were also suspended , stranding 4 @,@ 000 tourists . Typhoon alerts were necessitated for Shikoku , Kyushu , and Honshu . At least 10 @,@ 300 fishing boats took refuge in harbors . A swimmer drowned in the lake on the western tip of Honshu ; a fisherman was swept away by high waves off Kamogawa . A dozen people were injured during a flash flood that destroyed three houses just west of Tokyo . Three houses were washed away and two people injured when a river 100 mi ( 160 km ) west of Tokyo overflowed its banks . Major railway lines halted operations throughout central Japan while many other trains arrived late , leaving 18 @,@ 000 individuals stranded . Throughout the nation , 24 homes were damaged or destroyed while 3 @,@ 400 others were flooded , displacing 2 @,@ 700 persons in eight provinces . In all , 19 bridges and two breakwaters were washed away , which resulted in 83 landslides . Eighty @-@ nine roads were damaged , of which 50 were closed , trapping thousands of travelers . Nationwide , 29 people were hurt . However , only two deaths were attributed from the storm , though one person was missing . 
 = Closing Time ( album ) = 
 Closing Time is the debut studio album by the American singer @-@ songwriter Tom Waits , released in March 1973 on Asylum Records . Produced and arranged by former Lovin ' Spoonful member Jerry Yester , Closing Time was the first of seven of Waits ' major releases through Asylum . 
 The album is noted for being predominantly folk influenced although Waits intended for Closing Time to be " a jazz , piano @-@ led album . " Upon release , the album was mildly successful in the United States , although it did not chart and received little attention from music press in the United Kingdom and elsewhere internationally . Critical reaction to Closing Time was positive . The album 's only single — " Ol ' ' 55 " — attracted attention due to a cover version by Waits ' better @-@ known label mates The Eagles . Other songs from the album were covered by artists ranging from Tim Buckley to Bette Midler . The album has been certified Gold in the United Kingdom and has gained a contemporary cult following among rock fans . The album has been reissued four times since its initial release : on LP in 1976 , on CD in 1992 and 1999 , and 180 gram LP in 2010 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Tom Waits began his musical career in 1970 , performing every Monday night at The Troubadour , a venue in Los Angeles , California . Waits ' setlist at these series of shows , described as " hootenanny nights " , consisted primarily of Bob Dylan covers , although it included songs which would later appear on Closing Time and its successor , The Heart of Saturday Night ( 1974 ) . Among the songs performed were " Ice Cream Man " , " Virginia Avenue " , " Ol ' ' 55 " , " I Hope That I Don 't Fall in Love with You " , " Shiver Me Timbers " and " Diamonds on my <unk> . " Around this time , Waits began working as a doorman at a San Diego , California , club , The Heritage , which was a coffee house by day . In November 1970 , Waits performed his first paid show at The Heritage , earning $ 25 for his performance . At a Troubadour performance in summer 1971 , Herb Cohen inadvertently spotted Waits and became his manager . Through Cohen 's contacts , Waits recorded demos in Los Angeles in late summer 1971 with producer Robert Duffey , later released as The Early Years in two volumes , against Waits ' wishes . In order to focus on his career , Waits relocated from San Diego to Los Angeles in early 1972 and performed more frequently at The Troubadour , where David Geffen discovered him performing " Grapefruit Moon . " The performance , which " floored " Geffen , led Geffen to negotiate with Waits ' manager Cohen , and Waits signed to Asylum Records within a month . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Prior to the recording of the album , Waits became friends with his designated producer Jerry Yester and one afternoon in early 1972 recorded a pre @-@ production tape in Yester 's residence . The instrumentation , recording arrangements and musicians were also discussed during this session with Waits making " it absolutely clear he wanted a standup bass player . " Drummer John Seiter , guitarist Peter <unk> , trumpeter Tony Terran and additional guitarist Shep Cooke were recruited through Yester and through Seiter , jazz bassist Bill Plummer was hired . 
 The main recording sessions for Closing Time took place at Sunset Sound Recorders in Hollywood , California — where Buffalo Springfield , Joni Mitchell , Neil Young and The Doors had previously recorded — during spring 1972 . Yester fronted production and the sessions were held almost immediately after Waits ' record deal , and were described " quick and efficient . " Waits was " nervous , but confident enough in his own material " during the beginning of the sessions ; however , as the sessions progressed , Waits and Yester " were pulling against each other " over the direction which the album would take , with Waits wanting a jazz @-@ laden record and Yester more focused on producing a folk @-@ based album . Despite this , Waits was " absolutely communicative " with his fellow musicians , articulating his direction and using metaphors to describe how he wanted the songs to sound . The sessions took a total of ten days , with the first two days focusing on " getting used to [ the studio ] . " Both Waits and Yester wanted to record during the evening , but as no slots were available , it was recorded through the morning and afternoon " from ten to five every day . " During the recording of " Ol ' ' 55 " , Seiter contributed backing vocals and " came up with a perfect harmony line that started faintly before the chorus even began . " The sessions concluded with a total of nine songs completed . Though unsatisfied with the amount of songs , a second recording session was arranged the following week in United Western Recorders . The final session for Closing Time began the following Sunday , with guest musicians Arni <unk> replacing Plummer and Jesse Erlich performing cello . The title track , " Closing Time " , was the only song recorded in full , and Yester later described the session as " the most magical session I 've ever been involved with . At the end of it , no one spoke for what felt like five minutes , either in the booth or out in the room . No one budged . Nobody wanted the moment to end . " String overdubs were later cut for " Martha " and " Grapefruit Moon " the following day . The final recordings were mixed and mastered at Wally Heider Studios in San Francisco . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Closing Time features an eclectic mix of musical styles . Songs such as " Ol ' 55 " , with its " gentle <unk> piano chords " , and " Old Shoes " , " a country @-@ rock waltz that picked up the feel of ' Ol ' 55 ' " , are usually considered folk @-@ like . Other songs such as " Virginia Avenue " , " Midnight Lullaby " , whose outro features an instrumental segment of the nursery rhyme " Hush Little Baby " , and " Grapefruit Moon " reveal a quieter , more jazz @-@ like temperament . " Ice Cream Man " is often noted as being the most " up @-@ tempo " song of the album , whereas " Lonely " is toned @-@ down and slow @-@ paced . The sophisticated piano melodies are often accompanied by trumpets , typical of the jazz sound that Waits originally designated for the album . Noticeable string arrangements are also featured on the album , on " Martha " and the final song " Closing Time " , the latter being purely instrumental . 
 The songs on Closing Time are often noted for their lyrical content and vary in form . " Ol ' ' 55 " narrates the story of a man riding " lickety <unk> " in a car and is often seen as a song about escapism , " like his near @-@ contemporary Bruce Springsteen . " This theme is also present in " Old Shoes " which narrates another story about " a footloose young stud hitting the road and semi @-@ sneering " , particularly in lyrics such as " your tears cannot bind me anymore " and " my heart was not born to be tamed . " Other lyrics on the album are described as melancholic , particularly " Lonely " , " I Hope That I Don 't Fall in Love with You " and " Grapefruit Moon " , which are " both self @-@ conscious and lacklustre . " The intro to " Midnight Lullaby " borrows lyrics from the English nursery rhyme " Sing a Song of Sixpence " . This form of song @-@ writing became a lifelong habit of Waits following the writing of " Midnight Lullaby " , in which he " assembled lyrics from fragments of oral tradition . " 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Closing Time 's art was designed by Cal Schenkel . Schenkel 's front cover art was inspired by " Waits ' own idea of how the album should sound . " It depicts Waits leaning against a bar @-@ room piano which is furnished with a shot of rye , a bottle of beer , cigarettes , an ashtray and a small candle with a blue pool table lamp above Waits ' head . The back cover art is minimal and only features a photograph of Waits staring directly into the camera , reputedly taken after one of Waits ' performance at The Troubadour . Both photographs were taken by Ed Caraeff . 
 = = Release = = 
 Closing Time was released worldwide in March 1973 by Asylum . The album 's lead single , " Ol ' ' 55 " , was released a month prior to the album for promotion . The single featured the same song pressed on both sides of the record with the A @-@ side being a version recorded in mono and the B @-@ side recorded in stereo . Waits ' first national tour also coincided with the album 's release , and ran from April to June 1973 . The band line @-@ up for the tour consisted of Waits on vocals , acoustic guitar and piano , Bob Webb on double bass , Rich Phelps on trumpet , and John <unk> on guitar . The opening date of the tour was at The Cellar Door in Washington , D.C. opening for Tom Rush . The tour progressed and led to dates in venues such as Max 's Kansas City in New York and The Boarding House in San Francisco , opening for acts such as Danny O 'Keefe , Charlie Rich , Buffalo Bob Smith — of Howdy Doody fame — and John P. Hammond . A second promotional tour ran from November to December 1973 , opening for Frank Zappa . This tour consisted of only the stripped @-@ down line @-@ up of Waits on vocals , acoustic guitar , and piano , with Bob Webb on standup bass . Elektra Records re @-@ released Closing Time throughout Europe in 1999 on limited edition CD and in 2010 , Elektra and Asylum reissued the album on CD and LP , respectively . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , Closing Time was received by the American music press with positive critical acclaim , although its coverage was limited . In its original Rolling Stone review , the album was positively referred to as " a remarkable debut album " , compared to Randy Newman , and was branded as a " <unk> , earthier version of same and delights in rummaging through the attics of nostalgia , the persona that emerges from this remarkable debut album is Waits 's own , at once sardonic , vulnerable and emotionally charged " while former Village Voice editor and Pazz & Jop reviewer Robert Christgau noted that with his " jazz @-@ schooled piano and drawling delivery [ ... ] Waits exploits an honest sentimentality which he undercuts just enough to be credible " , also noting his similarity to Newman . Allmusic held the album in high regard , describing " his lovelorn lyrics " as being " sentimental without being penetrating . But he also has a gift for gently rolling pop melodies " and his " self @-@ conscious melancholy can be surprisingly moving . " Billboard referred to Closing Time upon its release as " a hauntingly lovely new album of introspective songs and folk / jazz music which captures the essence of a moment , a thought or a love . " 
 The album received little coverage the United Kingdom and elsewhere internationally , with its promotion being little more than a featured advert in the NME . Closing Time did not chart upon its release although in 2000 , the album peaked at number 28 in the Irish Albums Chart . The album was certified Silver in the United Kingdom in 2004 with shipments of over 60 @,@ 000 copies and was later certified Gold in 2012 with shipments of over 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Closing Time reached a wider audience through cover versions of its songs by more successful artists and have since continued to have been covered . Later in 1973 , Tim Buckley released the album <unk> , with a cover of " Martha , " the first ever cover of a Waits song by a known artist . Buckley 's version was also included in the 1995 tribute compilation Step Right Up : The Songs of Tom Waits . " Martha " was covered again in 1979 by Bette Midler on Saturday Night Live and by Meat Loaf on Welcome to the Neighborhood ( 1995 ) . " Ol ' ' 55 " was recorded by The Eagles for On the Border ( 1974 ) . " Rosie " was recorded by The Beat Farmers for their album The Pursuit of Happiness . ( 1987 ) " Ice Cream Man " was covered in 1991 by Screamin ' Jay Hawkins for Black Music For White People and " Lonely " was covered live by Bat for Lashes and included on the deluxe edition of her album Two Suns ( 2009 ) . Covers of " I Hope That I Don 't Fall in Love with You " can be found on Step Right Up ( by 10 @,@ 000 Maniacs ) , the The Prince and Me soundtrack ( by Marc Cohn ) , Hootie & the Blowfish 's Scattered , Smothered and Covered compilation , 10 @,@ 000 Maniacs ' Campfire Songs compilation , and " Heart and Soul , " an episode of Ally McBeal , where it is sung by Jon Bon Jovi . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Tom Waits . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Musicians 
 Tom Waits – vocals , piano , guitar , harmonium , harpsichord , celeste 
 Delbert Bennett – trumpet 
 Shep Cooke – guitar ; backing vocals on " Old Shoes ( & Picture Postcards ) " 
 Peter <unk> – guitar ; pedal steel guitar on " Rosie " 
 Bill Plummer – bass guitar 
 John Seiter – drums ; backing vocals on " Ol ' 55 " and " Rosie " 
 Guest musicians 
 Arni <unk> – bass guitar on " Closing Time " ( Instrumental ) 
 Jesse Ehrlich – cello on " Martha " 
 Tony Terran – trumpet on " Closing Time " ( Instrumental ) 
 Technical personnel 
 Ed Caraeff – photography 
 Richie Moore – additional engineering 
 Cal Schenkel – design , artwork 
 Jerry Yester – production , engineering 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = George Hirst = 
 George Herbert Hirst ( 7 September 1871 – 10 May 1954 ) was a professional English cricketer who played first @-@ class cricket for Yorkshire County Cricket Club between 1891 and 1921 , with a further appearance in 1929 . He played in 24 Test matches for England between 1897 and 1909 , touring Australia twice . One of the best all @-@ rounders of his time , Hirst was a left arm medium @-@ fast bowler and right @-@ handed batsman . He completed the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in an English cricket season 14 times , the second most of any cricketer after his contemporary and team @-@ mate Wilfred Rhodes . One of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year for 1901 , Hirst scored 36 @,@ 356 runs and took 2 @,@ 742 wickets in first @-@ class cricket . In Tests , he made 790 runs and captured 59 wickets . 
 Born in Kirkheaton , Hirst first achieved success for Yorkshire as a bowler who could bat a little . Over his first few seasons , his batting developed at the expense of his bowling until he was regarded mainly as a specialist batsman . Around 1900 , his bowling re @-@ emerged when he discovered a method to make the ball swing in the air after he released it . He was one of the first bowlers to control the swing of the ball ; batsmen found it very difficult to counter this method and Hirst 's bowling was subsequently far more successful . From 1903 he achieved 11 consecutive doubles . He set records in 1905 , when he scored 341 runs in an innings against Leicestershire — still the highest total for Yorkshire as of 2015 — and in 1906 , when he completed an unprecedented and unrepeated double of 2 @,@ 000 runs and 200 wickets . In many seasons , he battled injury which reduced his effectiveness , but his bowling remained successful until shortly before the First World War . Hirst played in all England 's home Test series between 1899 and 1909 , but his record for England was less impressive than his record for Yorkshire and he may have suffered from playing in Australia where playing conditions did not suit him . 
 Hirst returned to play for Yorkshire after the war , but became a cricket coach at Eton College in 1920 , where he remained until 1938 . After making occasional appearances in 1920 and 1921 , he retired from regular first @-@ class cricket . He maintained his connections with Yorkshire for the rest of his life , coached young players and established an excellent reputation for developing players of all social backgrounds . A popular player , coach and personality with cricketers and spectators , Hirst died in 1954 , aged 82 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hirst was born on 7 September 1871 in the Brown Cow Inn , Kirkheaton , a village close to Huddersfield . He was the last of 10 children born to James Hirst and his wife Sarah Maria Woolhouse . When his father died in 1880 , Hirst lived with his sister Mary Elizabeth Woolhouse and her husband John Berry in Kirkheaton . After leaving school at 10 years of age , Hirst first worked for a hand @-@ loom weaver in a local cottage , and then at a dyeing firm . He played rugby football as a full back during winter , and cricket with his friends and brothers in summer . By the age of 15 , Hirst was playing regularly for the Kirkheaton cricket team and his batting and bowling performances regularly won prizes from a local newspaper . His reputation grew ; when he was 18 he was a key player in the Kirkheaton team which won the Lumb Challenge Cup of 1889 . In the final , watched by players from Yorkshire County Cricket Club , he took five wickets for 23 runs . Days later , invited to take part along with another local player , he appeared for Yorkshire against Cheshire in a non @-@ first @-@ class match in Huddersfield . He scored six runs in his only innings , and took three wickets in the match . 
 Hirst played only intermittently for Yorkshire over the next couple of seasons , but continued to develop as a cricketer , signing as a professional for Elland Cricket Club for the 1890 season before joining Mirfield in 1891 . During that season , he made his first @-@ class debut for Yorkshire against Somerset in the County Championship ; he scored 15 runs and took two wickets in the game . 
 = = First @-@ class cricketer = = 
 = = = First seasons for Yorkshire = = = 
 For the 1892 season , Hirst joined Huddersfield , which played a higher standard of cricket . Yorkshire also gave him a longer run in the first team . Early in the season , Hirst appeared for Yorkshire against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) . Not considered a good batsman at this stage , he batted at number 11 in the first innings , scored 20 and 43 not out and , as a bowler , took four wickets for 29 runs ( four for 29 ) and two for 58 . His bowling performance particularly impressed Sydney Pardon , the editor of Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack . Yorkshire , needing to fill a vacant place in the team , played Hirst 13 times in first @-@ class matches in 1892 . He did not pass 30 runs in an innings again and averaged 16 @.@ 15 with the bat . With the ball , he took 30 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 56 with a best performance of six for 16 against Sussex . Wisden later noted that Hirst , until he tired later in the season and was dropped from the team , " bowled up to a certain point with excellent results " . 
 Over the next few seasons , Hirst became a regular member of the Yorkshire side , but although his performances were good enough to keep him in the team , he had few outstanding successes . Wisden noted : " For some time after his first season Hirst 's career was one of steady progress rather than of brilliant achievement . " Hirst 's batting remained undeveloped in 1893 ; he batted at number 10 and did not pass fifty in any one innings , though he managed some useful scores . He averaged only 15 @.@ 04 with the bat , but his bowling continued to make a good impression on critics . He took 99 wickets at an average of 14 @.@ 39 , placing him third in the Yorkshire averages for the season ; that year , the county won the official County Championship , which had begun in 1890 , for the first time . In 1894 , Hirst scored his maiden first @-@ class century against Gloucestershire , hitting an unbeaten 115 out of a partnership of 176 for the ninth wicket . Although this was his only score over fifty , Wisden recorded how his batting often helped his team out of difficult situations . In total , he hit 564 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 58 . With the ball , his record was similar to the previous season . He took 98 wickets at an average of 15 @.@ 98 , and his best figures came in a match against Lancashire , a feat appreciated by Yorkshire supporters as the fixture was always highly competitive . Then in the 1895 season , Hirst passed 100 wickets in the season for the first time , securing 150 wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 06 . He established himself as an opening bowler for Yorkshire , assuming the role from Ted Wainwright and developing a good partnership with Bobby Peel . Against Leicestershire , he took a hat @-@ trick . Although primarily regarded as a bowler , and while Wisden later described his batting as being in " temporary decline " in 1895 , Hirst also scored 710 runs at an average of 19 @.@ 18 , with three fifties . 
 = = = Leading all @-@ rounder = = = 
 In 1896 , Yorkshire won their second County Championship . Hirst hit a century against Leicestershire and nine other scores over fifty ; this improvement in his batting took him past 1 @,@ 000 runs for the first time , and his average of 28 @.@ 05 was substantially higher than he had achieved previously . With the ball he took 104 wickets , at the more expensive average of 21 @.@ 61 , to complete the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets for the first time . However , some critics in Yorkshire were unhappy that his batting had improved , believing that the extra effort involved would diminish his effectiveness as a bowler . They considered a powerful bowling attack to be vital to the team 's success , more so than a strong batting line @-@ up , and expressed the opinion that Hirst should concentrate on one discipline rather than dividing his energy . Over the next few seasons , these fears were proven to some extent , Wisden noting in 1901 that he was a less effective bowler than previously . In 1897 , Hirst completed the double again . He scored 1 @,@ 535 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 69 , with a century and 11 fifties , and took 101 wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 22 . These performances were good enough to earn him selection for the Players against the Gentlemen in the prestigious matches at The Oval and Lord 's , in both of which he scored half @-@ centuries . 
 For the winter of 1897 – 98 , Hirst was selected as part of Andrew Stoddart 's team to tour Australia . The team was outplayed and lost the Test matches 4 – 1 , hampered by the poor form of the bowlers and ill health among the team , not least from Stoddart himself who missed several matches following the death of his mother . Hirst , suffering from a strained leg for some of the tour , was ineffective as a bowler . The hard Australian pitches favoured batsmen and did not suit Hirst 's style of bowling . In all the first @-@ class matches on the tour , he took only nine wickets at the very expensive average of 75 @.@ 77 . His batting was inconsistent and he scored 338 runs at an average of 21 @.@ 12 . His best scores came in minor matches . Nevertheless , he was selected for England in four of the five Test matches . His debut came in the first match , England 's only victory , when he scored 62 batting at number six in the batting order . Despite bowling 41 overs in the game , he failed to take a wicket ; his maiden Test match wicket came in the following Test , but he took only two wickets in the series . In the third Test , Hirst scored 85 , which remained the highest Test score of his career , but in this series he reached double figures only once more . When the series ended , Hirst had scored 207 runs at an average of 29 @.@ 57 . 
 Hirst 's poor form continued when he returned to England for the 1898 season . Fatigue from continuous cricket and ongoing problems with his leg added to his difficulties and he had a poor season . His only score over fifty was an innings of 130 against Surrey , and he scored 567 runs at an average of 17 @.@ 71 . Statistically , he had one of his worst bowling seasons , taking 36 wickets at 25 @.@ 61 and never taking more than four wickets in an innings . For Yorkshire , Hirst 's loss of form was offset by the debut of Wilfred Rhodes , also from Kirkheaton , who took 154 wickets in his first season . In 1899 , Hirst showed a big improvement in his batting form , scoring 1 @,@ 630 runs — his best tally to date — at an average of 35 @.@ 43 . He increased his number of wickets to 82 at 24 @.@ 75 , and his form was good enough to earn selection for his first home Test match , against Australia . However , it was only injuries to three other candidates that secured his place as a fast bowler , and he was not selected in the rest of the series . Wisden noted : " It cannot be said that the experiment was in any way a success . Hirst worked hard for his side , his fielding indeed being perfection , but as a bowler he did not cause the Australians any trouble . " When he played the tourists in their game against Yorkshire soon after the Test , Hirst took 13 wickets . Later in the season , he played for the Players against the Gentlemen , though without any great success . 
 = = = Discovery of " swerve " = = = 
 Hirst 's batting continued to be more successful than his bowling , to the point where commentators regarded him as primarily a batsman , who bowled occasionally . In 1900 , he scored 1 @,@ 960 runs at an average of 40 @.@ 83 , his best batting record to date , but his total of wickets fell to 62 at an average of 26 @.@ 90 , his worst average until 1914 . His only representative cricket came in end @-@ of @-@ season festival matches , including a Gentlemen v Players match . Yorkshire won the County Championship , the first of three consecutive victories in which Hirst played a leading role . After his achievements in the season , Hirst was selected as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation described him as a confident batsman who could be relied upon in difficult batting conditions or when his team were under pressure , but noted how his bowling had suffered as he improved as a batsman . However , around this time , Hirst began to develop his use of swing bowling , known at the time as swerve bowling . Previously , the ball occasionally swung through the air without his deliberate intention after he released it , but he now discovered a method to control the " swerve " in certain atmospheric conditions . He never discussed how he achieved the effect , limiting his comments to " sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn 't . " 
 In the 1901 season , Hirst 's improvement in bowling brought him the highest total of wickets in his career to date . In a summer of sunny weather which brought a succession of good batting pitches , he took 183 wickets , the first time since 1897 he had passed 100 wickets , at an average of 16 @.@ 38 . This placed him second in the national averages behind Rhodes . He recorded a series of impressive bowling performances , winning extravagant praise from Wisden ; he took five wickets in an innings on 15 occasions and 10 wickets in a match five times , including once against traditional rivals Lancashire . His batting continued to be successful , and he completed his second double with 1 @,@ 950 runs at 42 @.@ 39 , including his first double @-@ century : 214 against Worcestershire . He was selected for the Gentlemen and Players match at Lord 's , and appeared in the equivalent fixture in an end @-@ of @-@ season festival match . 
 = = Test match regular = = 
 = = = Success against Australia = = = 
 Although both were invited , neither Hirst nor Rhodes toured Australia in the winter of 1901 – 02 with Archie MacLaren 's team , as the Yorkshire committee wanted both players to be well rested before the new season . Hirst was statistically less successful in 1902 , but he nevertheless returned to the Test team . The summer was very wet , resulting in many rain @-@ affected pitches , known as sticky wickets , which favoured slower bowlers and made batting difficult . Hirst scored 1 @,@ 413 runs in the season , at an average of 31 @.@ 11 with two centuries . He took fewer wickets than the previous year , partly as he was often used for a few overs early in an innings by Yorkshire before giving way to slow bowlers Rhodes and Schofield Haigh , who topped the national first @-@ class bowling averages for the season . In total , Hirst took 83 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 33 . 
 During the summer of 1902 , Australia toured England , playing five Test matches ; Hirst made an impact on the series . Around the time of the first Test , the tourists endured a dispiriting spell of poor form and illness . In the first Test , England scored 376 for nine wickets . Hirst scored 48 and Wisden described his partnership with Johnny Tyldesley of 94 in 80 minutes as the turning point of the innings . In reply , Hirst and Rhodes bowled out Australia for 36 in conditions that the umpires considered reasonable to bat in . Wisden described the two Yorkshiremen as bowling very well . Hirst had figures of three for 15 and Rhodes returned seven for 17 . However C. B. Fry , who played for England in the match , believed Hirst to be the more difficult to play and that while Rhodes bowled well , the Australian batsmen got themselves out as they " hurried to the other end and tried to hit Rhodes , without success . Well as Rhodes bowled , it was Hirst who was responsible for the debacle . This is the best instance I know of the bowler at the other end getting wickets for his colleague . " The England side for this match was later described by some critics as the greatest England team in history . Rain prevented the match from being completed and saved Australia from almost certain defeat . The Australian team 's next game was against Yorkshire . Hirst took four for 35 in the tourist 's first innings , but in a low @-@ scoring game , Yorkshire were behind after the first innings . After Australia had reached 20 for three wickets in their second innings , Hirst bowled Victor Trumper with what Hirst believed was the best delivery of his life and the tourists last wickets fell quickly . The team were bowled out for 23 , of which Hirst took five wickets for nine runs as he made the ball swing . Yorkshire lost five wickets in scoring the 48 runs they required to win . 
 The second Test was badly affected by weather and Hirst did not bat or bowl , and in the third Test in Sheffield , lost by England , he scored eight runs and did not take any wickets . Although he failed at Sheffield , Hirst was the leading all @-@ rounder in England and thus unlikely to be left out of the team . However , the England captain , Archie MacLaren , was engaged in a dispute with the team selectors over the composition of his side . He was given only 12 players to choose from for the fourth Test . Fred Tate was one of the twelve and the selectors probably included him as they believed MacLaren could not possibly choose him in the final eleven over another player and so would be forced to field the side they wanted . MacLaren responded by dropping Hirst to play Tate , out of anger towards the selectors . The pitch was soft , which would have favoured the bowling of Tate , but Wisden reported that while this offered some justification for dropping Hirst , " it meant playing a bowler pure and simple in preference to a first @-@ rate all @-@ round man , and the result proved anything but happy . " Tate bowled just 16 overs in the game , dropped a vital catch and was the last man out as Australia won the match by three runs , giving them an unassailable lead in the series ; later writers claimed that Tate 's performance was responsible for losing the match . 
 Hirst was recalled for the final Test and played a vital role . Wisden said that he bowled as well as he had in 1901 as he brought about an early batting collapse . Although Australia recovered , he had figures of five for 77 . With Len Braund , Hirst then helped England to avoid the follow @-@ on , scoring 43 and according to Wisden " hitting with the utmost freedom . " Hirst took a further wicket as Australia were dismissed for 121 . England , needing 263 to win , were 48 for five at one point but an innings of 104 from Gilbert Jessop gave England a chance . Hirst scored 58 not out , making an aggressive start but slowing down to score mainly from singles in the later stages of the innings as wickets were lost . The ninth wicket fell with 15 needed when Rhodes joined Hirst . It has been claimed that Hirst said to Rhodes , " We 'll get ' em in singles " , but neither batsman could remember those words being said and not all the runs came in singles . The two Yorkshiremen held their nerve to take England to a one @-@ wicket victory . Wisden described Hirst as playing " a great game " , noted the coolness of his play under pressure and said that " Hirst 's innings was in its way almost as remarkable as Jessop 's " . 
 In four Tests , Hirst scored 157 runs at an average of 39 @.@ 25 and took nine wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 11 . Apart from his Test appearances , Hirst also played twice for the Players against the Gentlemen and played for the same side against the Australians . 
 = = = Second tour of Australia = = = 
 Early in the 1903 season , Hirst suffered a leg injury . This , coupled with other players ' absences , was partly responsible for a poor start to the season by Yorkshire , and although the team recovered , it could only achieve third place in the County Championship . When Hirst returned his bowling speed was reduced , but during the season he rediscovered his swing bowling . In completing the first of 10 consecutive doubles , he took 128 wickets at an average of 14 @.@ 94 and scored 1 @,@ 844 runs at an average of 47 @.@ 28 . For Yorkshire , he topped both the batting and bowling averages and had the third highest batting average in the country . Hirst played in two end @-@ of @-@ season games for the Players against the Gentlemen ; his 124 not out in the second match was his only century in the Players versus Gentlemen series . 
 In 1903 , Pelham Warner , who played for Middlesex , was chosen to captain the first tour of Australia to be sponsored by MCC , in the winter of 1903 – 04 . According to Warner , Hirst and Rhodes were the first two players to be selected , as " the two best bowlers of the present day in this country . " Before the tour , critics claimed Hirst would be unsuccessful , citing his failure during his previous tour . However , Warner later wrote : " Hirst , to say nothing of his batting , bowled excellently throughout the tour , and was of much more value as a bowler than his average would suggest " . He further described him as the best all @-@ rounder in England and noted that " the tighter the match , the better he plays " . Wisden was less convinced , and the report on the tour said that , as a bowler , " Hirst , though by no means the failure he had been with Mr Stoddart 's team six years before , fell far below his English form . " While commenting on his batting record , the Wisden report noted : " The Australian wickets [ i.e. pitches ] in fine weather are rather too fast to suit the pulling and hook strokes of which he is such a master in England . " As he could not make the ball swing in Australia in the same way it did in England , Hirst used leg theory , bowling at leg stump with fielders close by on the leg side . 
 In his second match of the tour , Hirst scored 92 and used his pull shot more effectively than on other occasions . He followed this with 66 in the third match but did not take many wickets before the first Test . Warner considered he had nevertheless bowled well but was finding it difficult to maintain his energy in the hot conditions ; his bowling lost pace and sting later in his bowling spells . Hirst played in all five Test matches , the first two of which were won by England . In the first game , Hirst took two wickets . In his first innings , he scored a duck and was dropped by Frank Laver before he had scored in the second . He survived to score 60 not out and his partnership with Tom Hayward guided England to victory after wickets had fallen early chasing a target of 194 . Hirst scored 11 runs in the second match and took three wickets on a difficult batting pitch , badly affected by rain . Although this performance was not statistically impressive , Warner thought he bowled very well . During the third Test , Hirst took three wickets and , with innings of 58 and 44 , was one of the few successful England batsmen in a poor performance which enabled Australia to win the match . England won the crucial fourth match to ensure the series victory . Hirst took two wickets and contributed scores of 25 and 18 . Australia achieved a win in the final match in which Hirst scored 0 and 1 , but after taking no wickets in the first innings he achieved his best Test figures of the tour in the second , with five for 48 . 
 In the Test series , Hirst scored 217 runs at an average of 24 @.@ 11 and took 15 wickets at an average of 30 @.@ 06 . He scored 569 runs at 33 @.@ 47 and took 36 wickets at 24 @.@ 50 over all first @-@ class games on the tour . His best bowling performance was five for 37 against Tasmania . Warner described Hirst as a very consistent batsman throughout the tour , and noted that while he was a less effective bowler in Australian conditions than at home , he was often unlucky . 
 = = Dominant in county cricket = = 
 = = = Affected by injury = = = 
 After returning to England , Hirst completed another double in 1904 . Although a leg injury reduced the pace and effectiveness of his bowling for much of the season , he scored 2 @,@ 501 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 36 , the highest aggregate and average of his career , and took 132 wickets at 21 @.@ 09 . He became the first Yorkshire player to achieve the double of 2 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets , a feat previously achieved only by the Gloucestershire trio of W. G. Grace , Charlie Townsend and Gilbert Jessop . Most of his eight centuries were either against the strongest counties or in adverse circumstances for the team . In August , Hirst had a benefit match against Lancashire from which he received £ 3 @,@ 703 , worth around £ 296 @,@ 000 in 2009 , a very high sum for a benefit at the time , and his popularity was reflected in the attendance over three days of 78 @,@ 792 spectators . 
 Yorkshire finished second to Lancashire in the County Championship in 1904 but regained the title in 1905 . Hirst 's leg @-@ strain continued to cause him pain throughout the season and again hampered his bowling . Even so , he took 110 wickets at 19 @.@ 94 and passed 2 @,@ 000 runs for the second time , scoring 2 @,@ 226 runs at an average of 53 @.@ 95 . Early in the season , Hirst scored 341 against Leicestershire , the highest score of his career and , as of 2015 , the record individual innings by a Yorkshire batsman . On a good pitch for batting , he began his innings when Yorkshire had scored 22 for three wickets , in reply to Leicestershire 's score of 419 , batted just under seven hours and hit 53 fours and a six . Later that season , he scored another double century , hitting 232 not out against Surrey ; only two other players reached double figures in the Yorkshire innings . In the same game , Hirst took five wickets for 43 runs . 
 Hirst 's leg injury kept him out of the England side for the first two Test matches against Australia , although he would have been a certain selection had he been fit . He was chosen in the squad for the second match but was left out on fitness grounds . However , Hirst was not particularly successful in the three Tests he played that season , hitting a highest score of 40 not out ; as a bowler he never took more than three wickets in an innings . In the series he scored 105 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 00 and took 6 wickets at 35 @.@ 33 . England won the series 2 – 0 , mainly due to the all @-@ round efforts of Hirst 's Yorkshire teammate Stanley Jackson , who headed the batting and bowling averages for the series . 
 = = = Record breaking season and Tests against South Africa = = = 
 In 1906 , Hirst completed an unprecedented double of 2 @,@ 000 runs and 200 wickets . Cricket writer A. A. Thomson noted that both milestones were unusual individually , and that such all @-@ round achievements had only been matched in scope by those of W. G. Grace in the 1870s . No other cricketer has come close to matching this particular double . Hirst reached the 1 @,@ 000 run – 100 wicket double by the end of June , two weeks faster than anyone else in the history of first @-@ class cricket . In total he scored 2 @,@ 385 first @-@ class runs at an average of 45 @.@ 86 and took 208 wickets at 16 @.@ 50 . Hirst 's contributions were particularly important in a close race for the County Championship . Kent were eventual champions after Yorkshire lost a close game to Gloucestershire , but Hirst performed well in the two matches against Kent . He scored a century and took 11 wickets as Yorkshire won the first , and took eight wickets and scored a match @-@ saving 93 in the drawn second encounter . Against the other title contenders , Lancashire and Surrey , he was likewise successful with both bat and ball , earning praise from The Times and Wisden for his batting under difficult circumstances in these matches . His captain , Lord Hawke , said " It was not only what Georgie Hirst did but how he did it , coming off [ i. e . " succeeding " ] when an effort seemed most necessary and playing his best against the more formidable sides . " He scored six centuries , two of which came in a record @-@ equalling performance against Somerset . He scored 111 and 117 not out when batting and took six for 70 and five for 45 with the ball . He became only the second man after Bernard Bosanquet to score two centuries and take 10 wickets in the same first @-@ class match ; as of 2015 , only one other man , Franklyn Stephenson in 1988 , has achieved the feat . Battling a knee injury and exhaustion towards the end of the season , it became increasingly difficult for Hirst to perform . Hirst took his 200th wicket at the end of August and commented that , were his feat to be duplicated in future , " whoever does will be very tired " . He also commented that his injuries only troubled him once the season was over and it " was a triumph of spirit over matter " . 
 The weather was poor during the 1907 season , resulting in a succession of pitches which suited spin bowling and were difficult to bat on . In these circumstances , Hirst scored fewer runs than in the previous season . He did not score a century , making 1 @,@ 321 runs at 28 @.@ 71 , and the prevalent type of pitches did not suit his bowling pace so that he took fewer wickets . Even so , he was the second highest wicket @-@ taker in the season and came fifth in the bowling averages , with 183 wickets at 15 @.@ 29 . Hirst remained a first @-@ choice member of the Test team , playing all three matches against South Africa that summer in a series which England won 1 – 0 , with the other two games drawn . Although unsuccessful with the bat , achieving 46 runs in five innings with a top @-@ score of 17 , in a low @-@ scoring second Test , Hirst was one of the few batsmen to handle the googlies of Aubrey Faulkner . As a bowler he took 10 wickets at 18 @.@ 50 ; of these wickets , six were in the final match of the series . Yorkshire won the County Championship again during the 1908 season . Hirst completed another double , scoring 1 @,@ 598 runs at 38 @.@ 97 and taking 174 wickets at 14 @.@ 05 , but was not selected for any other representative games until the end of the season . However , he declined an invitation to tour Australia with the MCC team in 1907 – 08 . 
 = = = Final Tests = = = 
 In the 1909 season , Hirst was less successful . Possibly affected by his heavy workload with bat and ball in previous seasons , his batting disappointed critics . He scored 1 @,@ 256 runs at 27 @.@ 30 , his lowest batting average since 1898 . With the ball , he took 115 wickets at 20 @.@ 05 ; his best performances came in the more important matches such as those against Lancashire and Surrey . He was selected for the Players against the Gentlemen , taking seven wickets in the game . In the Test series against Australia , which England lost 2 – 1 , Hirst played in the first four matches . England won the first game , in which Hirst took nine wickets . On the first day , bowling throughout the Australian innings with Colin Blythe , Hirst took four for 28 . The Australians were never comfortable ; Wisden noted that Hirst " [ made ] the ball swerve in his most puzzling fashion " . After England established a first innings lead , Australia were bowled out for 151 in their second innings , with Hirst taking five for 58 . The English opening batsmen scored the 105 runs required for victory without being separated . Hirst and Blythe took all the wickets which fell to England in the match , a rare accomplishment , and apart from a brief period , bowled throughout the match without resting . However , Hirst was ineffective in the rest of the series , and was left out of the side for the fifth and final Test . In the series he scored 52 runs at an average of 8 @.@ 66 , with a top @-@ score of 31 , and took 16 wickets at 21 @.@ 75 . This ended his Test career ; his final Test record in 24 matches was 790 runs , with three scores over fifty , at an average of 22 @.@ 57 , and 59 wickets at an average of 30 @.@ 00 . 
 = = = Last seasons before the First World War = = = 
 Yorkshire had one of their worst seasons to date in 1910 , finishing eighth in the County Championship and attracting disapproval from critics . Hirst led the Yorkshire batting and bowling averages and was the third highest wicket @-@ taker in the country . He scored 1 @,@ 840 runs at 32 @.@ 85 and took 164 wickets at 14 @.@ 79 . One of his best performances came at Lord 's , where he scored an unbeaten century to guide Yorkshire to a win against Middlesex . Against Lancashire he took nine for 23 , the best bowling figures of his career , clean @-@ bowling eight of his victims as Lancashire were dismissed for 61 . Yorkshire continued to struggle in 1911 , but Hirst was successful against many of the leading counties , mainly as a bowler . However , he achieved some large scores ; against Sussex , he hit the third double @-@ century of his career and against Lancashire he scored 156 as well as taking six wickets for 83 . In total , he scored 1 @,@ 789 runs at 33 @.@ 12 and took 137 wickets at 20 @.@ 40 . In 1912 Yorkshire regained the County Championship ; Hirst 's form that season was not as good as in previous years , but he batted well before poor weather and a knee injury interrupted his cricket . He hit one century and his performances with the ball were unspectacular . In all he scored 1 @,@ 133 runs at an average of 25 @.@ 75 and took 118 wickets at 17 @.@ 37 . Although both Australia and South Africa toured England , Hirst did not play any Tests and , for the first time since 1904 , was not selected for the Players side in any of their matches . 
 Hirst completed the 14th and final double of his career in 1913 , leading the Yorkshire batting averages with 1 @,@ 540 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 81 . His bowling was not as effective and he was no longer Yorkshire 's main attacking bowler , as Alonzo Drake and Major Booth headed the averages . Hirst took 101 wickets at 20 @.@ 13 . During the following season , the last before the First World War , Hirst was further afflicted by injuries and missed some matches . He bowled far less frequently than in recent seasons and his 43 wickets , which cost 29 @.@ 81 , were his fewest since 1898 ; it was the first time since 1902 he failed to complete the double . His batting remained effective and he produced some good performances when his team were in difficult circumstances , although his two centuries were against the weaker bowling attacks of Northamptonshire and Somerset . He scored 1 @,@ 670 runs at 41 @.@ 75 . In June , he was selected in a match to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the current Lord 's ground , playing for the Rest of England against the MCC side which had toured South Africa the previous winter . The outbreak of war brought the season to an early close in August . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Final playing years = = = 
 During the war Hirst , along with Rhodes and their team @-@ mate Schofield Haigh , worked in a munitions factory in Huddersfield . Hirst and Rhodes were paid by Yorkshire to play in war @-@ time cricket matches on a certain number of Saturdays . Hirst played in the Bradford League , and became known among cricketers for accepting minimal fees from financially struggling clubs . When first @-@ class cricket restarted in 1919 , Hirst resumed playing for Yorkshire . In the first match of the season he hit an aggressive unbeaten 180 against MCC , to secure a draw for the county ; he followed this with two more centuries in the first two weeks of the season . Although his form later faltered , he played some substantial innings in difficult circumstances and ended the season with 1 @,@ 441 runs at an average of 38 @.@ 94 . He bowled infrequently , taking 18 wickets at 29 @.@ 27 . During this season , Hirst accepted the position of coach at Eton College . In the last match of the season , at Scarborough , he was given a warm reception by the crowd , who did not expect to see him playing for Yorkshire again . However , he appeared on occasions during the school holidays in the next two seasons , although he did not score any centuries , did not average more than 24 with the bat and took only 21 wickets in total . At the end of the 1921 season Hirst retired as a Yorkshire player , and made what was expected to be his final first @-@ class appearance in a Scarborough Festival match , in which he captained the Players against the Gentlemen . On the last day of the match , Hirst 's 50th birthday , he took the final two wickets to secure victory for his side . The crowd gathered outside the pavilion and demanded to see him ; he gave a farewell speech , and was moved by the reception given to him . 
 Hirst played three more first @-@ class games ; in 1921 – 22 he played two games for the Europeans cricket team in India , and in 1929 , aged 58 , he made a final appearance for Yorkshire in a Scarborough Festival match against the MCC . He scored just one run before Bill Bowes bowled him ; Hirst reportedly commented : " A grand ball that , lad . I couldn 't have played that one when I was good . " In all first @-@ class cricket , Hirst played 826 games , scored 36 @,@ 356 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 13 with 60 hundreds and took 2 @,@ 742 wickets at 18 @.@ 73 . 
 Following his retirement as a player , Hirst occasionally umpired first @-@ class matches , taking charge of at least one match at every Scarborough Festival between 1922 and 1938 . He also umpired two matches on Yorkshire 's tour of Jamaica in 1936 , and a Minor Counties match between Yorkshire and Lancashire second teams . 
 = = = Coaching career = = = 
 From 1920 to 1938 , Hirst was the cricket coach at Eton . The college 's most important match was the annual match against Harrow at Lord 's , and during Hirst 's tenure , the team were unbeaten in the fixture , winning the six matches that produced a definite result and drawing the remainder . Following Hirst 's retirement , Eton lost to Harrow in 1939 for the first time since the First World War . In the period of Hirst 's coaching , Eton only lost once — in 1920 — to Winchester . A combination of Hirst 's technical knowledge , playing experience and empathy with young people made him a very successful coach . He taught technical proficiency , but encouraged his pupils to play their natural game . His Times obituary noted " his professional capacity earned him the respect of the boys and his natural good humour and good manners gained him the love of all . " When he retired , a dinner was held in his honour at Eton . 
 While serving as the Eton coach , Hirst also worked with young Yorkshire players during the school holidays , and maintained his coaching connection with the county until shortly before his death . Despite the differences in the backgrounds of the players , Hirst was equally respected at Eton and when he acted as a coach to the Yorkshire team . At Yorkshire Hirst worked with young players in the cricket nets at Headingley cricket ground , took charge of indoor trials during the winter , and travelled with the team as coach on a tour to Jamaica in 1936 . Many Yorkshire players , with vastly differing temperaments , came under his influence and improved as players . One of Hirst 's most notable achievements as a coach was improving the bowling of George Macaulay to the point where he became a key member of the Yorkshire team . 
 Bill Bowes , who received coaching by Hirst and went on to play for England , described him as " the finest coach in the world " . Len Hutton , another who was coached by Hirst , wrote " I shall always think of George Hirst as the ideal coach . He was a ' natural ' one , the guide , the philosopher , and friend of every young fellow who has had a trial under him " . Part of Hirst 's success at Eton came from his personality and ability to extract the best from people . Bowes noted how his enthusiasm inspired young players , and his humour and kindness led boys to worship him . He could pass on technical knowledge in a way that was easy to comprehend , backed up with anecdotes to illustrate his point . Bowes described how " he had a rare skill in noting and demonstrating your faults and no less skill in illustrating the remedies " . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 Hirst received little coaching as a batsman . Physically brave , he was often at his best on pitches which were difficult for batting , and when his team faced a crisis . His usual approach was to bat aggressively . Although he could play defensively if required , he preferred to attack when his team were in difficulties . He played a variety of strokes , but he favoured the on drive and particularly the pull and hook shots . He was able to pull and hook almost any ball delivered to him , making it difficult to place fielders effectively while he was batting . Only in Australia did this approach prove less successful . He also established a reputation as an outstanding fielder at mid off . In this position , he took many catches , often from hard drives in an era when batsmen played this shot very well . 
 Although Hirst was a right @-@ handed batsman , he bowled with his left arm at medium @-@ fast pace . He was one of the first bowlers to make the ball swerve through the air in a controlled fashion . According to A. A. Thomson , Hirst 's development of swing bowling was almost as revolutionary as Bernard Bosanquet 's invention of the googly . His bowling partnership with Rhodes was particularly effective , and established a formidable reputation . Hirst could not make the ball swing in every match , nor could he maintain it through a long innings . However , when he could achieve swerve , even the best batsmen found it almost impossible to bat against him . His success was dependent on atmospheric conditions ; for example , he could not swing the ball much in Australia . He was particularly effective when bowling into the wind . Sammy Woods described facing Hirst when the ball was moving in the air : " How the devil can you play a ball that comes in at you like a hard throw @-@ in from cover @-@ point ? " Hirst was not an especially quick bowler , a little faster than medium pace , with a long run @-@ up and a relaxed action . He usually bowled over the wicket , meaning he bowled from the right hand side of the wickets and therefore angled the ball across the pitch . After delivery , the ball swung through the air at the last minute and hurried through after pitching , appearing to get faster . A very accurate bowler , he was difficult to score against unless a batsman was prepared to hit him in the air over mid on . The main dangers to the batsmen were the risk of being bowled or hitting the ball with a defensive shot and being caught by specially @-@ placed fielders on the leg side . His ability to make the ball swing made him effective on a variety of pitches . Before Hirst developed his technique , bowlers often rubbed the ball in the dirt to remove the shiny layer of the ball , unaware that this layer helped the ball to swing . Hirst 's Wisden obituary records : " Hirst , in fact , has been described as the father of all modern seam and swing bowling . " 
 Hirst completed the double 14 times , more than any other cricketer except Rhodes . Unusually for an all @-@ rounder , for much of his career he was equally successful as a batsman and as a bowler . Consequently , he was a key member of the Yorkshire team . His Yorkshire captain Lord Hawke described Hirst as " the greatest county cricketer of all time " , and journalist Jim Kilburn noted that no cricketer could " capture the heart and the imagination and the affections more firmly than George Herbert Hirst . " E. W. Swanton described his typical style of play as " grafting for victory without heroics " . His record as a Test cricketer was less impressive than his figures in county cricket , owing to some extent to playing conditions during his two tours of Australia which reduced the effectiveness of his bowling and batting . 
 Hirst gave the impression of enjoying every game he played , and many of the captains under whom he played praised both his personality and his contribution to the team . Lord Hawke said that Hirst 's smile " went right round his head and met at the back . " Warner noted his wit helped the team in difficult situations during the tour of Australia in 1903 – 04 . Hirst 's Times obituary said : " No why or wherefore , no explanation of his great ability , not even his record which adorns the pages of Wisden can adequately describe to those who had not the fortune to see him play the rich quality of George Hirst , the type of professional cricketer to which all would like to aspire . He played during the golden age of cricket , and he was one of the most illustrious of his time . " Hirst was noted for his honesty , sportsmanship , and enthusiasm . Known as " George Herbert " , he was admired and affectionately regarded by his contemporaries and by spectators . The public worshipped him in a way never replicated for his contemporary and fellow Kirkheaton @-@ born all @-@ rounder Wilfred Rhodes , a much more dour character . The two men were never good friends ; there may have been a degree of jealousy between them , and Rhodes did not appreciate Hirst 's jovial attitude . Rhodes was more tactically astute than Hirst , but Hirst 's enthusiasm and personality were more inspirational to the team . Rhodes , when asked about Hirst 's ability to swing the ball , replied : " He was very good . But he didn 't know how to use it , you know . I had to set the field for him so that he got the best out of it . " 
 A plain @-@ speaking man , Hirst could be firm and even outspoken at times . Wisden said : " Cricket was George Hirst 's life " . Bowes wrote that Hirst " was loved as a player , he was worshipped as a coach , revered as a man . His friends numbered thousands . He gave his full life to cricket ; cricket gave a full life to him . " Bowes also commented : " I never hope to meet a better coach or a better man . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On 1 January 1896 , Hirst married Emma Kilner in Kirkheaton ; James , their first child , was born on 6 October of the same year . A second child , Annie , followed in December 1899 , and a third , Molly , in April 1906 . The family first lived in Kirkheaton but later moved to Marsh , a more affluent area of Huddersfield . In his later years , Hirst 's health declined and he spent time in a nursing home . His wife died in 1953 ; twelve months later , on 10 May 1954 , Hirst died , aged 82 . He was cremated at <unk> Crematorium , Leeds . 
 = Wonder Story Annual = 
 Wonder Story Annual was a science fiction pulp magazine which was launched in 1950 by Standard Magazines . It was created as a vehicle to reprint stories from early issues of Wonder Stories , Startling Stories , and Wonder Stories Quarterly , which were owned by the same publisher . It lasted for four issues , succumbing in 1953 to competition from the growing market for paperback science fiction . Reprinted stories included Twice in Time , by Manly Wade Wellman , and " The Brain @-@ Stealers of Mars " , by John W. Campbell . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 The first science fiction ( sf ) magazine , Amazing Stories , was launched in 1926 by Hugo Gernsback at the height of the pulp magazine era . It helped to form science fiction as a separately marketed genre , and by the mid @-@ 1930s several more sf magazines had appeared , including Wonder Stories , also published by Gernsback . In 1936 , Ned Pines of Beacon Publications bought Wonder Stories from Gernsback , changed the title to Thrilling Wonder Stories , and in 1939 and 1940 added two more sf titles : Startling Stories and Captain Future . Pines had acquired reprint rights to the fiction published in Wonder Stories as part of the transaction , and some of this material ran in Startling Stories and Captain Future , but neither magazine had room for some of the longer stories in the backfile . At the end of the 1940s a boom in science fiction magazines encouraged Pines to issue a new magazine , titled Fantastic Story Quarterly , as a vehicle for reprinting this older material , with the first issue dated Spring 1950 . It was successful enough for Pines to add another reprint magazine , Wonder Story Annual , later that year . Pines ' plan was to use the new magazine to reprint novels , with only a few short stories included to fill out the magazine . The first issue was dated 1950 and appeared in the summer of that year . 
 The reprinted novels were Twice in Time , by Manly Wade Wellman ; Gateway to Paradise , by Jack Williamson ; and The Onslaught from Rigel , by Fletcher Pratt ( titled Invaders from Rigel when it eventually saw publication in book form in 1960 ) , and The Death of Iron , by S.S. Held , a French writer ( the novel was translated into English by Pratt for the original serialization in Wonder Stories , which began in 1932 ) . The magazine also reprinted some shorter material , including " The Brain @-@ Stealers of Mars " by John W. Campbell , " Nothing Sirius " by Fredric Brown , " The Irritated People " by Ray Bradbury , and " The Eternal Man " , by D.D. Sharp , which combined Sharp 's earlier " The Eternal Man " , from the August 1929 Science Wonder with " The Eternal Man <unk> " from the Summer 1930 Wonder Stories Quarterly . Although Wonder Story Annual was well @-@ received and initially successful , it faced strong competition for sf readers from paperbacks , including reprint anthologies . In response it labelled itself " America 's Best Science Fiction Anthology " , but by 1953 the battle was lost , and that year 's issue was the last . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The magazine was issued annually for four years , from 1950 to 1953 . The editor was Sam Merwin for the first two issues , and Samuel Mines for the second two . There was a single volumes of three issues , and a final volume of one issue . The magazine was in pulp format and was priced at 25 cents ; the first issue was 196 pages and the remaining three all had 160 pages . The publisher was Better Publications of Chicago and New York for the first issue , and Best Books , of Kokomo , Indiana , for the next three ; Better Publications was an imprint of Standard Magazines of New York , and Best Books was owned by Standard . 
 A Canadian edition of the first issue appeared from Better Publications in Toronto with the same contents as the U.S. edition . 
 = Daniel Dunglas Home = 
 Daniel Dunglas Home ( pronounced ' Hume ' ) ( 20 March 1833 – 21 June 1886 ) was a Scottish physical medium with the reported ability to levitate to a variety of heights , speak with the dead , and to produce rapping and knocks in houses at will . His biographer Peter Lamont opines that he was one of the most famous men of his era . Harry Houdini described him as " one of the most conspicuous and lauded of his type and generation " and " the forerunner of the mediums whose forte is fleecing by presuming on the credulity of the public . " Home conducted hundreds of séances , which were attended by many eminent Victorians . 
 There have been eyewitness accounts by séance sitters describing conjuring methods and fraud that Home may have employed . 
 = = Family = = 
 Daniel Home 's mother , Elizabeth ( " Betsy " ) Home ( née McNeill ) was known as a seer in Scotland , as were many of her predecessors , like her great uncle Colin <unk> , and her uncle Mr. McKenzie . The gift of second sight was often seen as a curse , as it foretold instances of tragedy and death . Home 's father , William Home , was the illegitimate son of Alexander , the 10th Earl of Home . Evidence supports the elder Home 's illegitimacy , as various payments meant for William were made by the 10th Earl . Elizabeth and William were married when he was 19 years old , and found employment at the Balerno paper mill . The Homes moved into one of small houses built in the mill for the workforce , in Currie ( six miles south @-@ west of Edinburgh ) . William was described as a " bitter , morose and unhappy man " who drank , and was often aggressive towards his wife . Elizabeth had eight children while living in the mill house : six sons and two daughters , although their lives were not fully recorded . The eldest , John , later worked in the Balerno mill and eventually managed a paper mill in Philadelphia , Mary drowned in a stream at the age of 12 years in 1846 , and Adam died at sea at the age of 17 while en route to Greenland , which Home says he saw in a vision and reportedly confirmed five months later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Daniel Home was Elizabeth 's third child , and was born on 20 March 1833 . He was baptised by the Reverend Mr. Somerville three weeks after his birth at Currie Parish Church on 14 April 1833 . The one @-@ year @-@ old Home was deemed a delicate child , having a " nervous temperament " , and was passed to Elizabeth 's childless sister , Mary Cook . She lived with her husband in the coastal town of Portobello , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of Edinburgh . According to Home , his cradle rocked by itself at the Cooks ' house , and he had a vision of a cousin 's death , who lived in Linlithgow , to the west of Edinburgh . 
 = = = America = = = 
 Sometime between 1838 and 1841 , Home 's aunt and uncle decided to emigrate to the United States with their adopted son , sailing in the cheapest class of steerage as they could not afford a cabin . After landing in New York , the Cooks travelled to Greeneville , near Norwich , Connecticut . The red @-@ haired and freckled Home attended school in Greeneville , where he was known as " <unk> " by the other students . The 13 @-@ year @-@ old Home did not join in sports games with other boys , preferring to take walks in the local woods with a friend called Edwin . The two boys read the Bible to each other and told stories , and made a pact stating that if one or the other were to die , they would try to make contact after death . Home and his aunt soon moved to Troy , NY , which is about 155 miles ( 249 km ) from Greeneville , although Home in his own book stated it was 300 miles ( 480 km ) away . Home lost contact with Edwin until one night when Home , according to Lamont , saw a brightly lit vision of him standing at the foot of the bed , which gave Home the feeling that his friend was dead . Edwin made three circles in the air before disappearing , and a few days later a letter arrived stating that Edwin had died of malignant dysentery , which was three days before Home 's vision . 
 A few years later Home and his aunt returned to Greeneville , and Elizabeth Home emigrated from Scotland to America with the surviving members of the family to live in Waterford , Connecticut , which was 12 miles ( 19 km ) away from the Cook 's house . Home and his mother 's reunion was short @-@ lived , as Elizabeth appeared to foretell her own death in 1850 . Home said he saw his mother in a vision saying , " Dan , 12 o 'clock " , which was the time of her death . After Elizabeth 's death Home turned to religion . His aunt was a Presbyterian , and held the Calvinist view that one 's fate has been decided , so Home embraced the Wesleyan faith , which believed that every soul can be saved . Home 's aunt resented Wesleyans so much that she forced Home to change to Congregationalist , which was not to her liking , either , but was more in line with her own religion . The house was reportedly disturbed by rappings and knocking similar to those that occurred two years earlier at the home of the Fox sisters . Ministers were called to the Cooks ' house : a Baptist , a Congregationalist , and even a Wesleyan minister , who all believed that Home was possessed by the Devil , although Home believed it was a gift from God . According to Home , the knocking did not stop , and a table started to move by itself , even though Home 's aunt put a bible on it and then placed her full body weight on it . According to Lamont , the noises did not stop and were attracting the unwanted attention of Cook 's neighbours , so Home was told to leave the house . 
 = = Fame = = 
 The 18 @-@ year @-@ old Home stayed with a friend in Willimantic , Connecticut , and later Lebanon , Connecticut . Home held his first séance in March 1851 , which was reported in a Hartford newspaper managed by W. R. Hayden , who wrote that the table moved without anyone touching it , and kept moving when Hayden physically tried to stop it . After the newspaper report , Home became well known in New England , travelling around healing the sick and communicating with the dead , although he wrote that he was not prepared for this sudden change in his life because of his supposed shyness . 
 Home never directly asked for money , although he lived very well on gifts , donations and lodging from wealthy admirers . He felt that he was on a " mission to demonstrate immortality " , and wished to interact with his clients as one gentleman to another , rather than as an employee . In 1852 , Home was a guest at the house of Rufus Elmer in Springfield , Massachusetts , giving séances six or seven times a day , which were visited by crowds of people , including a Harvard professor , David Wells , and the poet and editor of the New York Evening Post , William Cullen Bryant . They were all convinced of Home 's credibility and wrote to the Springfield Republican newspaper stating that the room was well lit , full inspections were allowed , and said , " We know that we were not imposed upon nor deceived " . It was also reported that at one of Home 's demonstrations five men of heavy build ( with a combined weight of 850 pounds ) sat on a table , but it still moved , and others saw " a tremulous phosphorescent light gleam over the walls " . Home was investigated by numerous people , such as Professor Robert Hare , the inventor of the oxy @-@ hydrogen blowpipe , and John Worth Edmonds , a Supreme Court judge , who were sceptical , but later said they believed Home was not fraudulent . 
 In his book , " Incidents in My Life " , Home claims that in August 1852 , in South Manchester , Connecticut , at the house of Ward Cheney , a successful silk manufacturer , he was reportedly seen to levitate twice and then rise to up to the ceiling , with louder rappings and knocking than ever before , more aggressive table movements and the sounds of a ship at sea in a storm , although persons present said that the room was badly lit so as to see the spirit lights . 
 New York was now interested in Home 's abilities , so he moved to an apartment at Bryant Park on 42nd street . His most verbal critic in New York was William Makepeace Thackeray , the author of Vanity Fair . Thackeray dismissed Home 's abilities as " dire humbug " , and " dreary and foolish superstition " , although Thackeray had been impressed when he saw a table turning . Home thought that Thackeray was " the most sceptical inquirer " he had ever met , and as Thackeray made his thoughts public , Home faced public scepticism and further scrutiny . Home travelled between Hartford , Springfield , and Boston during the next few months , and settled in Newburgh by the Hudson River in the summer of 1853 . He resided at the Theological Institute , but took no part in any of the theological discussions held there , as he wanted to take a course in medicine . Dr. Hull funded Home 's studies , and offered to pay Home five dollars a day for his séances , but Home refused , as always . His idea was to fund his work with a legitimate salary by practicing medicine , but he became ill in early 1854 , and stopped his studies . Home was diagnosed with Tuberculosis , and his doctors recommended recuperation in Europe . His last séance in America was in March 1855 , in Hartford , Connecticut , before he travelled to Boston and sailed to England on board the Africa , at the end of March . 
 = = Europe = = 
 Home 's name was originally Daniel Home , but by the time he arrived in Europe he had lengthened it to Daniel Dunglas Home , in reference to the Scottish house of Home , of which his father claimed to be a part . In London , Home found a believer in spiritualism , William Cox , who owned a large hotel at 53 , 54 and 55 Jermyn Street , London . As Cox was so enamoured of Home 's abilities , he let him stay at the hotel without payment . Robert Owen , an 83 @-@ year @-@ old social reformer , was also staying at the hotel , and introduced Home to many of his friends in London society . At the time Home was described as " tall and thin , with blue eyes and auburn hair , fastidiously dressed but seriously ill with consumption " . Nevertheless , he held sittings for notable people in full daylight , moving objects that were some distance away . 
 Some early guests at Home 's sittings included the scientist Sir David Brewster ( who remained unconvinced ) , the novelists Sir Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton and Thomas Adolphus Trollope , and the Swedenborgian James John Garth Wilkinson . As well as Brewster , fellow scientists Michael Faraday and Thomas Huxley were prominent contemporary critics of Home 's claims . It was the poet Robert Browning however , who proved to be one of Home 's most adamant critics . After attending a séance of Home 's , Browning wrote in a letter to The Times that : ' the whole display of hands , spirit utterances etc . , was a cheat and imposture ' . Browning gave his unflattering impression of Home in the poem , " Sludge the Medium " ( 1864 ) . His wife , Elizabeth Barrett Browning , was convinced that the phenomena she witnessed were genuine and their discussions about Home were a constant source of disagreement . Frank Podmore writes of a Mr Merrifield 's first @-@ hand account of experiencing Home 's fraudulence during a séance . 
 Home 's fame grew , fuelled by his ostensible feats of levitation . William Crookes claimed Home could levitate five to seven feet above the floor . Crookes wrote " We all saw him rise from the ground slowly to a height of about six inches , remain there for about ten seconds , and then slowly descend . " 
 In the following years Home travelled across continental Europe , and always as a guest of wealthy patrons . In Paris , he was summoned to the Tuileries to perform a séance for Napoleon III . He also performed for Queen Sophia of the Netherlands , who wrote : " I saw him four times ... I felt a hand tipping my finger ; I saw a heavy golden bell moving alone from one person to another ; I saw my handkerchief move alone and return to me with a knot ... He himself is a pale , sickly , rather handsome young man but without a look or anything which would either fascinate or frighten you . It is wonderful . I am so glad I have seen it ... " 
 In 1866 , Mrs Jane Lyon , a wealthy widow , adopted Home as her son , giving him £ 60 @,@ 000 in an attempt to gain introduction into high society . Finding that the adoption did not change her social situation , Lyon changed her mind , and brought a suit for the return of her money from Home on the grounds that it had been obtained by spiritual influence . Under British law , the defendant bears the burden of proof in such a case , and proof was impossible since there was no physical evidence . The case was decided against Home , Mrs Lyon 's money was returned , and the press pilloried Home 's reputation . Home 's high society acquaintances thought that he behaved like a complete gentleman throughout the ordeal , and he did not lose a single important friend . 
 Sir Arthur Conan Doyle a spiritualist who supported the mediumship of Home stated that he was unusual in that he had four different types of mediumship : direct voice ( the ability to let spirits audibly speak ) ; trance speaker ( the ability to let spirits speak through oneself ) ; clairvoyant ( ability to see things that are out of view ) ; and physical medium ( moving objects at a distance , levitation , etc . , which was the type of mediumship in which he had no equal ) . 
 According to Eric Dingwall a lady acted as a medium and used to help Home during the séances attended by Henrietta Ada Ward . 
 = = Alleged <unk> = = 
 Home met one of his future closest friends in 1867 ; the young Lord Adare ( later the 4th Earl of Dunraven ) . Adare was fascinated by Home , and began documenting the séances they held . The following year , Home was said to have levitated out of the third storey window of one room , and back in through the window of the adjoining room in front of three witnesses ( Adare , Captain Wynne , and Lord Lindsay ) . 
 Lord Adare stated that Home " swung out and in " of a window in a horizontal position . However , John Sladek has pointed out that all three witnesses gave contradictory information about the levitation , even contradicting themselves about specific details : 
 The incident took place at 5 Buckingham Gate , Kensington ( Adare ) ; at Ashley Place , Westminster ( Adare ) ; at Victoria Street , Westminster ( Lindsay ) . There was a ledge 4 inches wide below the windows ( Adare ) ; a ledge 1 ½ inches wide ( Lindsay ) ; no foothold at all ( Lindsay ) ; balconies 7 feet apart ( Adare ) ; no balconies at all ( Lindsay ) . The windows were 85 feet from the street ( Lindsay ) ; 70 feet ( Lindsay ) ; 80 feet ( Home ) ; on the third floor ( Adare ) ; on the first floor ( Adare ) . It was dark ( Adare ) ; there was a bright moonlight ( Lindsay ) . Home was asleep in one room and the witnesses went into the next ( Adare ) ; Home left the witnesses in one room and went himself into the next ( Adare ) . 
 Trevor H. Hall who researched the case in detail established that the levitation took place at Ashley Place in Westminster at a height of 35 feet and suggested rather than levitating Home had stepped across a gap of four feet between two iron balconies . Gordon Stein also noted that the gap between the two balconies was only four feet making passing between them entirely feasible . 
 Joseph McCabe wrote regarding the alleged levitation : 
 No one professes to have seen Home carried from window to window . Home told the three men who were present that he was going to be wafted , and he thus set up a state of very nervous expectation ... Both Lord Crawford and Lord Adare say that they were warned . Then Lord Crawford says that he saw the shadow on the wall of Home entering the room horizontally ; and as the moon , by whose light he professes to have seen the shadow , was at the most only three days old , his testimony is absolutely worthless . Lord Adare claims only that he saw Home , in the dark , " standing upright outside our window . " In the dark — it was an almost moonless December night — one could not , as a matter of fact , say very positively whether Home was outside or inside ; but , in any case , he acknowledges that there was a nineteen @-@ inch window @-@ sill outside the window , and Home could stand on that . 
 A few days before the levitation , scaring Lord Lindsay , Home had opened the same window , stepped out and stood on the outside ledge in the presence of two witnesses . Ivor Lloyd Tuckett argued that Home did this to provide " a rough sketch of the picture which he aimed at producing " . Another possible natural explanation for Home 's famous levitation was proposed by the psychical researcher Guy William Lambert who suggested he had attached a rope to the chimneys on the roof of the building , and hung the rope down unseen to the third floor . During the alleged levitation Home " swung out and in " the room by using a double rope maneuver . Lambert 's rope hypothesis was supported by the magician John Booth . 
 Arthur Conan Doyle said there were many cases on record of Home levitating , however , skeptics assert the alleged <unk> occurred in darkened conditions susceptible to trickery . 
 Science historian Sherrie Lynne Lyons has stated that a possible explanation for Home 's alleged levitation phenomena was revealed in the twentieth century by Clarence E. Willard ( 1882 – 1962 ) . Willard revealed his technique in 1958 to members of the Society of American Magicians . He demonstrated how he could add two inches to his height by stretching . According to Lyons " it is quite likely that [ Home ] used a similar technique to the one that Willard used decades later " . 
 Author Donald Serrell Thomas has asserted that Jean Eugène Robert @-@ Houdin , the French stage magician was refused admission to Home 's séances . In opposition to this , spiritualists have said that Houdin was unable to explain the phenomena at a Home séance . Regarding both these claims , Peter Lamont has noted : 
 It is probably worth noting , if only to avoid confusion , that such claims ( much like those made by spiritualists that <unk> were unable to explain the phenomena ) were often unfounded . For example , spiritualists claimed that Robert @-@ Houdin had been unable to explain what happened at a Home seance , and critics claimed that Home had refused an invitation to perform in front of Robert @-@ Houdin . There is , however , not a shred of evidence for either of these claims . 
 Historian Simon During has suggested the levitation of Home was a magic trick , influenced by Robert @-@ Houdin . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Allegations of fraud = = = 
 It often claimed in parapsychology and spiritualist books that Home was never caught in fraud . However , skeptics have stated that this claim does not hold up to scrutiny as Home was caught utilizing tricks by different witnesses on different occasions . Gordon Stein has noted that " While the statement that Home was never caught in fraud has been made many times , it simply is not true ... It is simply that Home was never publicly exposed in fraud . Privately , he was caught in fraud several times . In addition , there are natural explanations both possible and likely for each of his phenomena . " 
 At a séance in the house of the solicitor John Snaith Rymer in Ealing in July 1855 , a sitter ( Frederick Merrifield ) observed that a " spirit @-@ hand " was in fact a false limb attached on the end of Home 's arm . Merrifield also claimed to have observed Home use his foot in the séance room . 
 The poet Robert Browning and his wife Elizabeth attended a séance on 23 , July 1855 in Ealing with the <unk> . It is alleged that during the séance a spirit face materialized which Home claimed was the son of Browning who had died in infancy . Browning seized the " materialization " and discovered it to be the bare foot of Home . To make the deception worse , Browning had never lost a son in infancy . Browning 's son Robert in a letter to the London Times , December 5 , 1902 referred to the incident : " Home was detected in a vulgar fraud . " The Browning allegation of fraud was supported by the magician Harry Houdini . However , Andrew Lang disputed the allegation , stating there was contradictory information about the séance from Browning and his wife . 
 Writing in the journal for the Society for Psychical Research , Count <unk> @-@ Petrovo @-@ <unk> described a letter by Dr. Barthez , a physician in the court of Empress Eugenie , which claimed a sitter Morio de l <unk> caught Home using his foot to fake supposed spirit effects during a séance in Biarritz in 1857 . Home wore thin shoes , easy to take off and draw on , and also cut socks that left the toes free . " At the appropriate moment he takes off one of his shoes and with his foot pulls a dress here , a dress there , rings a bell , knocks one way and another , and , the thing done , quickly puts his shoe on again . " Home positioned himself between the empress and Napoleon III . One of the séance sitters known as General Fleury also suspected that Home was utilizing trickery and asked to leave but returned unobserved to watch from another door behind Home . He saw Home slip his foot from his shoe and touch the arm of the Empress , who believed it to be one of her dead children . The observer stepped forward and revealed the fraud , and Home was conducted out of the country : " The order was to keep the incident secret . " The allegations described by Dr. Barthez and General Fleury are second hand and have caused dispute between psychical researchers and skeptics . 
 The journalist Delia Logan who attended a séance with Home in London claimed that Home had used a phosphorus trick . During the séance luminous hands were observed and the host told Logan that had seen Home place a small bottle upon the mantle piece . The host slipped the bottle into his pocket and when examined the next day , it was found to contain phosphorus oil . 
 The neoclassical sculptor Hiram Powers who was a convinced spiritualist attended a séance with Home , but wrote a letter to Elizabeth Browning claiming Home had faked the table @-@ turning movements . 
 = = = Speculations on trickery = = = 
 The researchers Frank Podmore ( 1910 ) , Milbourne Christopher ( 1970 ) , Trevor H. Hall ( 1984 ) and Gordon Stein ( 1993 ) were convinced that Home was a fraud and have provided a source of speculation on the ways in which he could have duped his séance sitters . 
 Skeptics have criticized the lighting conditions of Home 's séances . Home and his followers claimed that some of the séances took place in " light " but this was nothing more than a few candles , or some glow from a fireplace or open window . Home would adjust the lighting to his needs with no objections from his séance sitters . For example , there is this report from a witness : " The room was very dark ... Home 's hands were visible only as a faint white heap " . Home selected the séance sitters who sat next to him , his hands and feet were not controlled and according to Frank Podmore " no precautions were taken against trickery . " 
 Home was never searched before or after his séances . Science historian Sherrie Lynne Lyons wrote that the glowing or light @-@ emitting hands in his séances could easily be explained by the rubbing of oil of phosphorus on his hands . It has been suggested that the " spirit hands " in the séances of Home were made of gloves stuffed with a substance . Robert Browning believed they were attached to Home 's feet . Home was a sculptor and his studio in Rome contained sculpted hands . Lyons has speculated that he may have substituted the sculptor hands , leaving his real hands free to perform phenomena in the séance room . 
 Home was known for his alleged feat of handling a heated lump of coal taken from a fire . The magician Henry Evans speculated that this was a juggling trick , performed by a hidden piece of platinum . Hereward Carrington described Evans hypothesis as " certainly ingenious " but pointed out William Crookes an experienced chemist was present at a séance whilst Home performed the feat and would have known how to distinguish the difference between coal and platinum . Frank Podmore wrote that most of the fire feats could have easily be performed by conjuring tricks and sleight of hand but hallucination and sense @-@ deception may have explained Crookes ' claim about observing flames from Home 's fingers . 
 = = = William Crookes investigation = = = 
 Between 1870 and 1873 , chemist and physicist William Crookes conducted experiments to determine the validity of the phenomena produced by three mediums : Florence Cook , Kate Fox , and Home . Crookes ' final report in 1874 concluded that the phenomena produced by all three mediums were genuine , a result which was roundly derided by the scientific establishment . Crookes recorded that he controlled and secured Home by placing his feet on the top of Home 's feet . Crooke 's method of foot control later proved inadequate when used with Eusapia Palladino , as she merely slipped her foot out and into her sturdy shoe . In addition , Crookes ' motives , methods , and conclusions with regard to Florence Cook were called into question , both at the time and subsequently , casting doubt on his conclusions about Home . In a series of experiments in London at the house of Crookes in February 1875 , the medium Anna Eva Fay managed to fool Crookes into believing she had genuine psychic powers . Fay later confessed to her fraud and revealed the tricks she had used . 
 Home was investigated by Crookes in a self @-@ built laboratory at the rear of his house at Mornington Road , North London in 1871 . No plans of the laboratory have been found and there is no contemporary description of it . Crookes wrote the board and spring balance experiment was a success with Home and had proven " beyond doubt " the existence of a " psychic force . " However , the experiment could be easily dismissed as the result of vibrations caused by the passage of Euston trains in the large railway cutting near his house in London . The experiment was not repeatable and sometimes failed to produce any phenomena . The experiment was rejected and ridiculed by the scientific community for lack of scientific controls . In the experiment Home refused for Crookes to be near him and would draw attention to something on the other side of the room , or make conversation for diversionary signals . 
 In 1871 , Balfour Stewart in an article for Nature noted that the experiments were not conducted in broad daylight before a large unbiased audience and the results were inconclusive . Stewart suspected the phenomena observed was " subjective , rather than objective , occurring in the imaginations of those present rather than in the outward physical world . " In the same year , J. P. Earwaker wrote a science review that heavily criticized the Crookes ' experiments for their poor design concluding they were pseudoscientific . According to Earwaker " For in truth they are the very opposite of scientific . Even to call them unscientific is not strong enough ; clumsy and futile are much nearer the truth . " 
 The engineer Coleman Sellers questioned the origin and weight of the board used with the balance spring apparatus . Sellers wrote that a standard mahogany board weighs around thirteen and half pounds but the one used in Crookes ' experiment may have been at fault at only six pounds . Crookes responded to Sellers claiming the board weighed six pounds and this was not a mistake , he also stated he had the board for about sixteen years and it was originally cut in a lumber yard . 
 P. H. <unk> noted that Crookes was already a believer in psychic powers before he obtained the results of the experiments . <unk> stated the spring balance used in Crookes ' experiment was unreliable as it was easy to manipulate by deception and suggested he should repeat the experiment by using a chemical balance . 
 According to Barry Wiley during the board and spring balance experiment , Home refused for Crookes to sit near him and he was occupied by writing notes . Wiley suspected Home used resin on his finger tips to tamper with the apparatus which managed to fool Crookes into believing a psychic force was being displayed . Regarding Crookes , the magician Harry Houdini wrote : 
 There is not the slightest doubt in my mind that this brainy man was hoodwinked , and that his confidence was betrayed by the so @-@ called mediums that he tested . His powers of observation were blinded and his reasoning faculties so blunted by his prejudice in favor of anything psychic or occult that he could not , or would not , resist the influence . 
 Historian Ruth Brandon in an article for the New Scientist noted that William Huggins , Serjeant Cox , Crooke 's wife and daughter , his laboratory assistant , and a Mrs Humphrey were all present during the Crookes experiments with Home . However , Barry Wiley has written that when Crookes published his report on the experiments in the Quarterly Journal of Science in 1871 he did not mention all the names of the observers present in the room . Wiley has stated that four females were present during the experiments as was Crookes ' brother and the original report by Crookes did not refer to any spirits but many years later in 1889 he revealed in his Notes of séances with D. D. Home the names of the observers and claimed Home was in communication with spirits . 
 Crookes ' assistant was the glass blower Charles Henry Gimingham ( 1853 @-@ 1890 ) who had built the experimental apparatus . Wiley suspected that Gimingham worked as a secret accomplice for Anna Eva Fay in her experiments with Crookes . Wiley noted that " Gimingham had free and open access to Crookes ' laboratory and frequently worked there unsupervised with Crookes ' full trust . " 
 Joseph McCabe criticized the Crookes experiments for lack of scientific controls and wrote Home was " daily in and out of Crookes 's laboratory , and it appears that he closely watched the development of the tests and was prepared in advance . " Before the experiments , Crookes was present with Home whilst he changed dress but Frank Podmore noted this would not have prevented Home from slipping into his pocket apparatus to cheat on the experiments . Edward Clodd wrote that Home chose his séance sitters and " if test experiments were suggested , he imposed the conditions . " 
 The physicist Victor Stenger commented that the experiments were poorly controlled ; he gave the example of Home requesting all hands to be removed from the table whilst all those present complied . Stenger noted that " Crookes <unk> swallowed ploys such as this and allowed Home to call the shots ... his desire to believe blinded him to the chicanery of his psychic subjects . " 
 = = = Accordion experiment = = = 
 In the accordion experiment , Home sat at a table , with Crookes and another observer on either side of him , each with a foot on one of Home 's feet . Home inserted his hand inside a wire cage that was pushed under the table . One of Home 's hands was placed on the top of the table , and the other inside the cage which held an accordion on the non @-@ key side , so the keyed end was hanging downwards . The accordion was reported to have played musical sounds . However , the amount of light in the room was not stated , and the accordion was not observed in good light . According to Frank Podmore there was no evidence the accordion played at all , as the keys were not observed to have moved . Podmore suggested the musical sounds could have come from an automatic instrument that Home had concealed . 
 In 1871 , William Benjamin Carpenter wrote a critical evaluation of the Crookes experiments with Home in the Quarterly Review . Carpenter wrote that although Crookes , his assistant and Sergeant Cox claimed to have observed the accordion float in the cage ; Dr. Huggins did not testify to this , and no information was given to whether the keys and bellows were seen to move . According to Carpenter no solid explanation could be given until the experiment is repeated , however , he suggested that the accordion feat that Home performed may have been a conjuring trick achieved with one hand . Carpenter concluded that Crookes should repeat the experiment in open daylight without the cage in the presence of other witnesses . 
 J. P. Earwaker heavily criticized the design of the accordion experiment as it took place under a dining room table . Earwaker who read Crookes ' report noted that " no reason for this strangest of all strange positions is even hinted at . " He also wrote " it never occurred to [ Crookes ] to notice whether the keys were depressed or not ... it would be obvious that if the keys were not pressed down , it was impossible for the music really to have come from the accordion , and its true source must have been looked for elsewhere . " 
 The magician John Nevil Maskelyne also criticized the design of the experiment for taking place under a table . The psychologist Millais <unk> wrote the experiment was not scientific and questioned why the experiment was done under the table instead of in a more convenient position on top of it . Before the accordion experiment with Crookes , Home had performed the accordion feat for over fifteen years under various conditions but always under his control . It was reported by sitters and Crookes that Home 's accordion played only two pieces , Home Sweet Home and The Last Rose of Summer . Both contain only one @-@ octave . 
 The psychical researcher Hereward Carrington and spiritualist Herbert Thurston have claimed the accordion experiment was not the result of deliberate fraud . This is in opposition to magicians and skeptical researchers who evaluated Crookes ' reports from the experiment . 
 The magician Henry Evans suggested the accordion feat was Home playing a musical box , attached to his leg . Skeptic Joseph McCabe wrote that Home may have placed a musical box in his pocket or on the floor . According to McCabe " the opening and shutting of the accordion could be done by hooks , or loops of black silk . So with the crowning miracle , when Home withdrew his hand , and the accordion was seen suspended in the air , moving about in the cage ( under the dark table ) . It was probably hooked on to the table . " The 19th century British medium Francis Ward Monck was caught using a music box in his séances that he had hidden in his trousers . The fraudulent medium Henry Slade also played an accordion while held with one hand under a table . 
 The writer Amos Norton Craft suggested a false keyboard : 
 The trick has since been often repeated and explained . The medium must have the semblance of key @-@ board , made of some light material , concealed in his coat sleeve or about his person . This he attaches to the bottom of the accordion which he holds in his hand . Then when unobserved , while the learned professor is " taking down his notes " for the public press , he reverses the accordion , and attaching the false keyboard on the bottom by means of a small hook attached to it , fastens it to the side of the basket ; having now the real keyboard in his hand he is able to produce musical sounds . Afterward the accordion floated about in the basket under the table , without the contact of Mr. Home 's hand . This subsequent phenomenon was given to avoid immediate examination of the first by keeping Professor Crookes in suspense , and giving the medium time to reverse the instrument and conceal in his clothing the false key @-@ board which had been on the bottom of the instrument . The accordion was suspended by means of a small hook fastened to dark thread , which would be invisible in the gas @-@ light . 
 Researcher Ronald Pearsall in his book The Table @-@ Rappers ( 1972 ) suggested that a loop of catgut was attached to the accordion so Home could turn it round . Paul Kurtz wrote that other mediums had used a loop of catgut to obtain a similar effect with the accordion . 
 Other researchers have suspected that a secret accomplice was involved . The magician Carlos María de Heredia claimed to have replicated the accordion feat of Home and suggested it was a trick performed by an accomplice playing a hidden accordion . Ruth Brandon considered the possibility of an accomplice playing a concertina , or Home playing a hidden music box . However , Brandon dismissed the accomplice hypothesis as unlikely . 
 Skeptic James Randi stated that Home was caught cheating on a few occasions , but the episodes were never made public , and that the accordion feat was a one @-@ octave mouth organ that Home concealed under his large moustache . Randi writes that one @-@ octave mouth organs were found in Home 's belongings after his death . According to Randi ' around 1960 ' William Lindsay Gresham told Randi he had seen these mouth organs in the Home collection at the Society for Psychical Research . 
 Gordon Stein wrote : 
 Home could easily have produced the sound of the accordion ( concertina ) by the use of a small harmonica concealed in his mouth . The up and down movement of the accordion could easily have been produced by catching the bottom of the accordion in a loop of black thread , or on a hook . 
 The claim that the accordion feat was performed by Home using a small harmonica was originally suggested by J. M. Robertson in 1891 . The psychical researcher Eric Dingwall who catalogued Home 's collection on its arrival at the SPR did not record the presence of the mouth organs , and Lamont speculates that it is unlikely Dingwall would have missed these or not made them public . The accordion in the SPR collection is not the actual one Home used . They display a duplicate . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Home married twice . In 1858 , he married Alexandria de Kroll ( " Sacha " ) , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of a noble Russian family , in Saint Petersburg , his Best Man was the writer Alexandre Dumas . They had a son , Gregoire ( " Grisha " ) , but Alexandria fell ill with tuberculosis , and died in 1862 . In October 1871 , Home married for the second , and last time , to Julie de <unk> , a wealthy Russian , whom he also met in St Petersburg . In the process , he converted to the Greek Orthodox faith . 
 In 1869 Lord Adare revealed in his diaries under the title Experiences in Spiritualism with D. D. Home that he had slept in the same bed with Home . Many of the diary entries contain erotic homosexual overtones between Adare and Home . 
 = = Death = = 
 At the age of 38 , Home retired due to ill health ; the tuberculosis , from which he had suffered for much of his life , was advancing and he said his powers were failing . He died on 21 June 1886 and was buried in the Russian cemetery of St. Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye , in Paris . 
 = Princess Alice of the United Kingdom = 
 Princess Alice of the United Kingdom ( Alice Maud Mary ; 25 April 1843 – 14 December 1878 ; later Princess Louis of Hesse and Grand Duchess of Hesse and by Rhine ) was the third child and second daughter of Queen Victoria and Albert , Prince Consort . Alice was the first of Queen Victoria 's nine children to die , and one of three to be outlived by their mother , who died in 1901 . 
 Alice spent her early childhood in the company of her parents and siblings , travelling between the British royal residences . Her education was devised by Albert 's close friend and adviser , Baron Stockmar , and included practical activities such as needlework and woodwork as well as French and German . When her father , Prince Albert , was diagnosed with typhoid fever in December 1861 , Alice nursed him until his death on 14 December that year . Following his death , Queen Victoria entered a period of intense mourning and Alice spent the next six months acting as her mother 's unofficial secretary . On 1 July 1862 , while the court was still at the height of mourning , Alice married the minor German Prince Louis of Hesse , heir to the Grand Duchy of Hesse . The ceremony — conducted privately and with unrelieved gloom at Osborne House — was described by the Queen as " more of a funeral than a wedding " . The Princess 's life in Darmstadt was unhappy as a result of impoverishment , family tragedy , and worsening relations with her husband and mother . 
 Alice was a prolific patron of women 's causes and showed an interest in nursing , especially the work of Florence Nightingale . When Hesse became involved in the Austro @-@ Prussian War , Darmstadt filled with the injured ; the heavily pregnant Alice devoted much of her time to the management of field hospitals . One of her organisations , the Princess Alice Women 's Guild , took over much of the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the state 's military hospitals . As a result of this activity , Queen Victoria became concerned about Alice 's directness about medical , and , in particular , gynaecological , matters . In 1871 , she wrote to Alice 's younger sister , Princess Louise , who had recently married : " Don 't let Alice pump you . Be very silent and cautious about your ' interior ' " . In 1877 , Alice became Grand Duchess upon the accession of her husband ; her increased duties putting further strains on her health . In the latter months of 1878 , diphtheria infected the Hessian court . Alice nursed her family for over a month before falling ill herself . 
 Princess Alice was the mother of Tsaritsa Alexandra Feodorovna of Russia ( empress consort of Tsar Nicholas II ) , maternal grandmother of Louis Mountbatten , 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma , the last Viceroy of India , and maternal great @-@ grandmother of Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , consort of Queen Elizabeth II . Another daughter , Elisabeth , who had married Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia , was , like the tsaritsa and her family , killed by the Bolsheviks in 1918 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Alice was born on 25 April 1843 at Buckingham Palace in London . She was the second daughter and third child of Queen Victoria , and her husband Albert , Prince Consort . She was christened " Alice Maud Mary " in the private chapel at Buckingham Palace by The Archbishop of Canterbury , William Howley , on 2 June 1843 . She was named " Alice " to honour Victoria 's first Prime Minister , Lord Melbourne , who was a passionate admirer of the Queen and had once commented that the name " Alice " was his favourite female name . " Maud " , the Anglo @-@ Saxon name for Matilda , was chosen in honour of one of Alice 's godparents , Princess Sophia Matilda of Gloucester , a niece of King George III . " Mary " was chosen because Alice was born on the same day as her maternal great @-@ aunt , The Duchess of Gloucester . Her gender was greeted with mixed feelings from the public , and even the Privy Council sent a message to Albert expressing its " congratulation and condolence " on the birth of a second daughter . Her godparents were The King of Hanover , for whom The Duke of Cambridge stood proxy ; The Princess of Hohenlohe @-@ Langenburg , for whom The Dowager Duchess of Kent stood proxy ; The Hereditary Prince of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , for whom The Hereditary Grand Duke of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz stood proxy ; and Princess Sophia Matilda of Gloucester . 
 Alice 's birth prompted her parents to find a larger family home . Buckingham Palace was not equipped with the private apartments that Victoria 's growing family needed , including suitable nurseries . Therefore , in 1844 , Victoria and Albert purchased Osborne House on the Isle of Wight as a family holiday home . Alice 's education was devised by her father and his close friend , Baron Stockmar . At Osborne , Alice and her siblings were taught practical skills such as housekeeping , cooking , gardening and carpentry , as well as daily lessons in English , French and German . Victoria and Albert favoured a monarchy based on family values ; Alice and her siblings , who wore middle class clothing on a daily basis , slept in sparsely furnished bedrooms with little heating . Alice was fascinated with the world outside the Royal Household ; at Balmoral , where she seemed happiest , she visited the tenants living and working on the estate . On one occasion , she escaped from her governess at the chapel at Windsor Castle and sat in a public pew , so she could better understand people who were not strict adherents to royal protocol . In 1854 , during the Crimean War , the eleven @-@ year @-@ old Alice toured London hospitals for wounded soldiers with her mother and her eldest sister . She was the most emotionally sensitive of her siblings and was sympathetic to other people 's burdens , possessing a sharp tongue and an easily triggered temper . In her childhood , Alice formed a close relationship with her brother , the Prince of Wales , and her eldest sister , The Princess Royal . Victoria 's marriage to Prince Frederick of Prussia in 1858 greatly upset her . 
 = = = Family caregiver = = = 
 Alice 's compassion for other people 's suffering established her role as the family caregiver in 1861 . Her maternal grandmother and paternal great @-@ aunt Victoria , Duchess of Kent , died at Frogmore on 16 March 1861 . Alice had spent much of her time at her grandmother 's side , often played the piano for her in Frogmore 's drawing room , and nursed her through the final stages of illness . Following her mother 's death , the Queen broke down with grief and relied heavily on Alice , to whom Albert had given the instruction : " Go and comfort Mama . " The Queen wrote to her uncle , King Leopold of Belgium , that " dear good Alice was full of intense tenderness , affection and distress for me " . 
 Only a few months later , on 14 December 1861 , Albert died at Windsor Castle . During his final illness , Alice remained at his bedside . Alice sent for the Prince of Wales by telegram , without the knowledge of the Queen , who refused to notify him because she blamed him for Albert 's death . The Queen was distraught by her husband 's death , and the court entered a period of intense mourning . Alice became her mother 's unofficial secretary , and for the next six months , the physical representation of the monarch . Through her passed the Queen 's official papers to and from her government ministers , while the Queen secluded herself from all public life . Alice was aided in this task by her younger sister Princess Louise . Although Princess Helena , Louise 's elder sister , would normally have been selected to assist , her inability to go long without crying was held against her . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 = = = Suitors = = = 
 Alice 's matrimonial plans were begun in 1860 by her mother . Queen Victoria had expressed her wish that her children should marry for love , but this did not mean that her choice of suitors would necessarily be extended to anybody outside the royal houses of Europe . Raising a British subject to royalty , however high their rank , was politically objectionable , and also wasted any opportunity for a useful foreign alliance . The Queen instructed her daughter Princess Frederick of Prussia , recently married to Prince Frederick of Prussia , to produce a list of eligible princes in Europe . Her search produced only two suitable candidates : The Prince of Orange ; and Prince Albert of Prussia , cousin to Victoria 's husband Frederick . The Prince of Orange was soon discounted . He journeyed to Windsor Castle so that Queen Victoria could look him over in person , but he proved unpalatable to Alice . The prince too showed little interest in Alice , despite strong pressure from his pro @-@ British mother , Queen Sophie of the Netherlands . Prince Albrecht , too , was spurned , with Prince Frederick of Prussia remarking that his cousin would not do for " one who deserves the very best " . 
 With both of the leading candidates now discounted , Princess Victoria suggested Prince Louis of Hesse , a minor German royal , the nephew of The Grand Duke of Hesse . Princess Victoria had gone to the court of Hesse to inspect Louis 's sister , Princess Anna , as a potential bride for her brother , The Prince of Wales . Although not favourably impressed with Princess Anna , she was impressed with Louis and his brother Prince Henry . Both were invited to Windsor Castle in 1860 , ostensibly so they could watch the Ascot Races in the company of the royal family , but in reality , the visit was a chance for the Queen to inspect her potential son @-@ in @-@ law . The Queen admired both Louis and Henry , but noted how well Louis and Alice got along together . When the Hessian family departed , Louis requested Alice 's photograph , and Alice made it clear that she was attracted to him . 
 = = = Engagement and wedding = = = 
 Alice was engaged to Prince Louis of Hesse on 30 April 1861 , following the Queen 's consent . The Queen persuaded the Prime Minister , Lord Palmerston , to vote Alice a dowry of £ 30 @,@ 000 . Although the amount was considered generous at the time , Prince Albert remarked that " she will not be able to do great things with it " in the little realm of Hesse , compared to the riches that her sister Victoria would inherit as future Queen of Prussia and German Empress . Furthermore , the couple 's future home in Darmstadt , the Grand Ducal seat , was uncertain . Although Queen Victoria expected that a new palace would be built , the people of Darmstadt did not want to meet that expense , and the resulting controversy caused resentment there . This meant that Alice was unpopular in Darmstadt before she even arrived . 
 Between the engagement and the wedding , Alice 's father Prince Albert died on 14 December 1861 . Despite the Queen 's grief , she ordered that the wedding should continue as planned . On 1 July 1862 , Alice and Louis were married privately in the dining room of Osborne House , which was converted into a temporary chapel . The Queen was ushered in by her four sons , acting as a living screen blocking her from view , and took her place in an armchair near the altar . Alice was given away by her uncle , Albert 's brother Ernest II , Duke of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , and was flanked by four bridesmaids : her younger sisters , Princesses Helena , Louise and Beatrice , as well as Louis 's sister Princess Anna . For the ceremony , Alice wore a white dress with a veil of Honiton lace , but was required to wear black mourning clothes before and after the ceremony . The Queen , sitting in an armchair , struggled to hold back her tears , and was shielded from view by the Prince of Wales and Prince Alfred , her second son , who cried throughout the service . The weather at Osborne was dreary , with winds blowing up from the Channel . The Queen wrote to her eldest daughter , Victoria , that the ceremony was " more of a funeral than a wedding " , and remarked to Alfred , Lord Tennyson that it was " the saddest day I can remember " . The Queen gave her daughter a gold , diamond and pearl bracelet , enscribed as a gift from both parents To dear Alice from her loving parents Albert and Victoria R who though visibly parted are ever united , April 25 , 1863 . The ceremony — described by Gerard Noel as " the saddest royal wedding in modern times " — was over by 4 pm , and the couple set off for their honeymoon at St Claire in Ryde , a house lent to them by the Vernon Harcourt family . Alice 's entourage consisted of Lady Churchill , General Seymour and Baron <unk> ( a Hessian courtier ) . Alice was careful not to displease the Queen after her marriage . When the Queen visited the couple at St Claire , Alice tried not to appear " too happy " . Despite this , Alice 's displays of romantic bliss made the Queen jealous of her daughter 's happiness . 
 = = Princess Louis of Hesse = = 
 = = = Settling in Darmstadt = = = 
 Alice and Louis arrived at Bingen on 12 July 1862 and were greeted by cheering crowds gathered in spite of pouring rain . After being introduced to town officials , they took a train to Mainz , where they had breakfast , before taking a steamer along the Rhine to <unk> . From there , they took a train to Darmstadt , where they were greeted with great enthusiasm . Alice wrote back to her mother that " I believe the people never gave so hearty a welcome " , while her sister Helena wrote that " nothing could have been more enthusiastic than her entry into Darmstadt was ″ . Alice did not adapt immediately to her new surroundings . She was homesick , and could not believe that while she was so far away from England , her father was not still alive and comforting her mother . The Queen confided to her journal : 
 Already nearly a fortnight since our dear Alice has left and strange to say – much as she has been to me – and dear and precious as a comfort and an assistance , I hardly miss her at all , or felt her going – so utterly alone am I – by that one dreadful loss – that one thought , that everything passed by unheeded ! 
 The question of Alice 's residence became an issue after her arrival , with the Grand Duke unwilling to fund a residence befitting a daughter of Queen Victoria with the low Hessian funds . The pair were given a house in Darmstadt 's " Old Quarter " , which overlooked the street . The carts rumbling past could easily be heard through the house 's thin walls . However , it seemed to suit Alice well , and she spent as much time in Hesse as possible to familiarise herself with her new surroundings . In 1863 , She travelled to England for the marriage of her brother , the Prince of Wales , and Princess Alexandra of Denmark ; Alice delivered her first child , Victoria Alberta Elisabeth Mathilde Marie , on 5 April in the presence of Queen Victoria . The Darmstadt court chaplain was called over to England especially for the christening . 
 Alice 's relationship with her mother became difficult , which would continue until her death . After returning to Darmstadt in May , Alice and Louis were given a new residence , <unk> , north @-@ east of Darmstadt . Alice gave birth to her second daughter Elizabeth , nicknamed " Ella " , on 1 November 1864 ; Alice 's decision to breastfeed her newborn daughter upset her mother , who was against breast feeding . The Queen was further upset at the realisation that Alice , having found true happiness , would be visiting England less and less . 
 = = = Austro @-@ Prussian War = = = 
 In 1866 , Austria called for Prussia to hand over administration of Schleswig @-@ Holstein , which had until that point been jointly administered by the two powers , to the Duke of <unk> . Prussia refused , and Otto von Bismarck sent troops into Austrian @-@ administered Holstein . This provoked war between Austria and Prussia , with Hesse siding with the Austrians , technically making Alice and her sister Victoria enemies . 
 Alice , heavily pregnant with her third child , saw Louis depart to command the Hessian cavalry against the Prussians , and sent her children to stay with Queen Victoria in England . Despite her pregnancy , she performed the royal duties expected of her sex and station , making bandages for troops and preparing hospitals . On 11 July , she gave birth to Princess Irene ; Prussian troops were on the verge of entering Darmstadt , she begged the Grand Duke to surrender on Prussia 's terms . This provoked fury from the fiercely anti @-@ Prussian Prince Alexander , but Alice realised that the conquered German states would likely form a union which she , like her sister Victoria , supported . 
 Alice and Louis communicated extensively during the war , with Alice urging Louis not to take too many risks , and Louis urging her not to worry . Panic ensued in Darmstadt , with the youth corps fleeing their posts , leaving only the palace sentries to defend the city . Eventually an armistice between Prussia and Hesse was concluded , and Louis wrote that they were now " safe " . He was reunited with Alice after the two met unexpectedly in the street , and they visited the wounded together . The Prussians entered Darmstadt , and Alice devoted much of her time to the sick and wounded . She was a friend of Florence Nightingale , who was able to collect and send money from England , and Alice used Nightingale 's advice as to cleanliness and ventilation in hospitals . 
 Despite being relieved that war was over , Alice was appalled by the behaviour of Prussian troops in Hesse ; Berlin took the grand duchy 's railways and telegraph systems , and assessed Hesse for three million florins in indemnity . Alice wrote to her mother , who in turn wrote to Princess Victoria , who responded that there was nothing she could do to relieve the " painful and distressing position darling Alice was in " , as it was " one of the unavoidable results of this dreadful war " . Influence came from the Emperor of Russia , who urged the Prussian King to allow the Grand Duke to keep his throne . The facts that the Emperor 's mother was the Grand Duke 's aunt , and Alice 's sister being also the Prussian Crown Princess are likely to have influenced Prussia 's generosity . However , Alice was angered by an untactful visit by Princess Victoria to the conquered region of Homburg , originally part of Hesse , shortly after it became Prussian territory . 
 = = = Religious beliefs = = = 
 Alice developed a friendship with the theologian David Friedrich Strauss . He was a controversial figure at the time ; in 1835 , he published The Life of Jesus , which argued that the Bible could not be literally interpreted as God 's word , a view akin to heresy in orthodox circles . Alice 's view was similar to Strauss ' , and she believed that contemporary Victorian society was presenting God in a way that would be " unrecognisable to early Christians " . Strauss also offered Alice an intellectual companionship that her husband was not equipped to provide , and he was regularly invited to the New Palace to read to Alice privately . The friendship flourished ; Strauss was introduced to Alice 's sister Victoria and her brother @-@ in @-@ law Frederick , and he was invited by them to Berlin . In 1870 , Strauss wanted to dedicate his new work Lectures on Voltaire to Alice , but he was too afraid to ask her ; she spared him the need by asking him to dedicate them to her . However , Alice 's relationship with Strauss angered Empress Augusta , who labelled Alice a " complete atheist " after hearing about his promotion . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Tragedy befell Alice on 29 May 1873 , when her youngest and favourite son , Friedrich , called " Frittie " , died after falling 20 feet from a window . The child suffered from haemophilia , and although he regained consciousness , the internal bleeding could not be stopped . Alice never recovered from Frittie 's death , writing to her mother two months later : " I am glad you have a little coloured picture of my darling . I feel lower and sadder than ever and miss him so much , so continually . " However , the Queen 's attention was more focused on the engagement of her son Prince Alfred to the Grand Duchess Marie Alexandrovna of Russia , the only surviving daughter of Tsar Alexander II and his first wife , Empress Marie Alexandrovna . The Tsar had refused to present his daughter for pre @-@ marriage inspection in England , and instead invited the Queen to meet the family in Germany . Alice supported this suggestion , and on the same day she wrote the Queen about how much she missed Frittie , the Queen wrote Alice in scathing terms : " You have entirely taken the Russian side , and I do not think , dear child , that you should tell me ... what I ought to do . " 
 After Frittie 's death , Alice attached herself more closely to her only surviving son , Ernest , and her newborn daughter Marie . In 1875 she resumed her public duties , including fund @-@ raising , medical and social work , which had always held her interest . She maintained active correspondence with the social reformer Octavia Hill . However , in these years , relations with her husband deteriorated . In late 1876 , she travelled to England for treatment due to an internal complaint caused by a backward curvature of the womb , and remained at Balmoral while she recovered . From Balmoral , she wrote to her husband criticising the childishness of his letters : " [ i ] f my children wrote me such childish letters – only short accounts – of where and what they had eaten or where they had been etc . , and no opinions , observations and remarks , I should be surprised – and how much more so when you write like that ! " On 3 October 1876 , she wrote another despairing letter to Louis : 
 I longed for real companionship , for apart from that life had nothing to offer me in Darmstadt ... So naturally I am bitterly disappointed with myself when I look back , and see that in spite of great ambitions , good intentions , and real effort , my hopes have nevertheless been completely ship @-@ wrecked ... You say , darling , that you would never have caused me hardship intentionally ... I only regret the lack of any intention or desire – or rather insight – to be more to me , and that does not mean spending all your time with me , without wishing to share anything with me at the same time . But I am wrong to talk of these things . Your letters are so dear and kind – but so empty and bare – I feel myself through them that I have less to say to you than any other person . Rain – fine weather – things that have happened – that is all I ever have to tell you about – so utterly cut off is my real self , my innermost life , from yours ... I have tried again and again to talk to you about more serious things , when I felt the need to do so – but we never meet each other – we have developed separately ... and that is why I feel true companionship is an impossibility for us – because our thoughts will never meet ... I love you too so very much , my darling husband , and that is why it is so sad to feel that our life is nevertheless so incomplete ... But you are never intentionally to blame for this – I never think that , never ... 
 The following day , Alice wrote a much shorter letter to Louis in which she looked forward to their meeting , and hoped that " my letter did not distress you – but it is better to be quite honest about all one 's feelings " . Despite marital problems , Alice remained a strong supporter of her husband , being highly critical when his abilities or talents were not fully recognised . On 20 March 1877 , Louis ' father Prince Charles died , making Louis heir apparent . On 13 June the same year , Charles 's successor Grand Duke Louis III died , and Louis and Alice became the Grand Duke and Duchess of Hesse . Her continued unpopularity in Darmstadt , however , coupled with her mother not wanting her in England , caused strain , and she and her children spent July and August in Houlgate , Normandy , where Louis often visited them . She was hurt by her reputation in Darmstadt , and she became increasingly bitter towards it ; Louis wrote in August 1877 expressing the hope that " bitterness of the salt water will drive away the bitterness that you still feel against Darmstadt . Please my darling , don 't speak so harshly of it when I come to join you – it would quite spoil my happiness at seeing you again . " Alice took Louis 's letter to heart , responding : " I shall certainly say nothing to you about Darmstadt when you come ... I have no intention of saying anything unpleasant , least of all to you . You shake off anything unpleasant like a poodle shaking off the water when it comes to the sea – natures like yours are the happiest in themselves , but they are not made to help , comfort and advise others , nor to share with others the heat of life 's noon @-@ day or the cool of the evening , with insight , understanding and sympathy . " In response , Louis sent a letter that " made [ Alice ] cry " , and after this letter , Alice 's letters to Louis were more encouraging , assuring him of his ability to make decisions by himself . 
 Alice and Louis 's return to Darmstadt as Grand Duke and Duchess was met with celebration that Alice did not expect . However , she found her duties overwhelming , writing to her mother that she " dreaded everything " . Alice used her new role to reform the social conditions of Darmstadt , but found the responsibility of being <unk> ( mother of her people ) strenuous . In another letter to her mother , she wrote that her duties were " more than she could stand in the long run " . She was distressed by a rumour that she was once unkind to Louis 's aunt , Grand Duchess Mathilde Caroline , and she was hurt by an unkind letter from Queen Victoria . Alice complained to Louis that the letter " made me cry with anger ... I wish I were dead and it probably will not be too long before I give Mama that pleasure . " However , no mention is made of what provoked this angry outburst . 
 While she tried to involve herself in the arts and sciences and distance herself from society protocols , she continued to feel the burden of her duties . Christmas 1877 provided respite for Alice , as all the family gathered together again , and she doted on her youngest daughters Alix and Marie . She was too exhausted to attend the wedding of her niece , Princess Charlotte of Prussia , in Berlin , in January 1878 . In the Autumn of 1878 , Queen Victoria paid for the Grand Ducal family to holiday in Eastbourne , where they stayed in a house on the Grand Parade . Alice performed various royal duties on this trip and visited her mother at Osborne before returning to the New Palace at Darmstadt in late 1878 . 
 = = Final illness and death = = 
 In November 1878 , the Grand Ducal household fell ill with diphtheria . Alice 's eldest daughter Victoria was the first to fall ill , complaining of a stiff neck in the evening of 5 November . <unk> was diagnosed the following morning , and soon the disease spread to Alice 's children Alix , Marie , Irene and Ernest . Her husband Louis became infected shortly thereafter . Elisabeth was the only child to not fall ill , having been sent away by Alice to the palace of the Princess Charles , her mother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Marie became seriously ill on 15 November , and Alice was called to her bedside . However , she was too late ; Marie had choked to death by the time Alice arrived . She was distraught , writing to Queen Victoria that the " pain is beyond words " . For several weeks , Alice kept the news of Marie 's death secret from her children , but she finally told Ernest in early December . His reaction was even worse than she had anticipated , and at first , he refused to believe it . As he sat up crying , Alice broke her rule about physical contact with the ill and gave him a kiss . At first , however , Alice did not fall ill . She met her sister Victoria as the latter was passing through Darmstadt on the way to England , and wrote to her mother with " a hint of resumed cheerfulness " on the same day . However , by Saturday , 14 December , the anniversary of her father 's death , she became seriously ill with the diphtheria caught from her son . Her last words were " dear Papa " , and she fell unconscious at 2 : 30 am . Just after 8 : 30 am , she died . Alice was buried on 18 December 1878 at the Grand Ducal mausoleum at <unk> outside Darmstadt , with the Union Flag draped over her coffin . A special monument of Alice and her daughter Marie was erected there by Joseph Boehm . 
 She was the first child of Queen Victoria to die , with her mother outliving her by more than 20 years . Victoria noted the coincidence of the dates of Albert 's and Alice 's deaths as " almost incredible and most mysterious " . Writing in her journal on the day of Alice 's death , Queen Victoria referred to the recent sufferings of the family : " This terrible day come round again ! " Shocked by grief , she wrote to her daughter Princess Victoria : " My precious child , who stood by me and upheld me seventeen years ago on the same day taken , and by such an awful and fearful disease ... She had darling Papa 's nature , and much of his self @-@ sacrificing character and fearless and entire devotion to duty ! " The animosity that Victoria had towards Alice seemed no longer present . Princess Victoria expressed her grief to her mother in a 39 @-@ page letter , and deeply mourned Alice , the sister to whom she was closest . However , both she and her husband were forbidden from attending the funeral by the Emperor of Germany , who was worried about their safety . 
 Alice 's death was felt in both in Britain and Hesse . The Times wrote : " The humblest of people felt that they had the kinship of nature with a Princess who was the model of family virtue as a daughter , a sister , a wife and a mother ... Her abundant sympathies sought for objects of help in the great unknown waste of human distress " . The Illustrated London News wrote that the " lesson of the late Princess 's life is as noble as it is obvious . Moral worth is far more important than high position " . The death was also heavily felt by the royal family , especially by Alice 's brother and sister @-@ in @-@ law , the Prince and Princess of Wales . The Princess of Wales , upon meeting the Queen after Alice 's death , exclaimed " I wish I had died instead of her " . The Prince , meanwhile , wrote to the Earl of Granville that Alice " was my favourite sister . So good , so kind , so clever ! We had gone through so much together ... " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Alice founded the Alice @-@ Hospital in Darmstadt in 1869 , to treat the city 's sick and wounded . The organisation continued to flourish long after Alice 's death , and in 1953 , her grandson Louis , Earl Mountbatten of Burma gave a lecture on the hospital . He spoke highly of Alice , saying " [ for her ] the point of departure always remained a human being who was ill and needed help , and his needs in war and peace . At his side stood the person willing to give help , wishing to ameliorate his needs and for this purpose could make use of an organisation which was becoming more and more streamlined . " Among Alice 's other establishments were the Alice Society for Women 's Training and Industry , for the purpose of educating women , and the Princess Alice Women 's Guild , an organisation devoted to training nurses . These organisations were especially active and important during the Austro @-@ Prussian war , but the time Alice dedicated to them annoyed her husband , who saw them as consuming his wife 's time at his expense . 
 = = = Descendants = = = 
 Alice 's descendants went on to play significant roles in world history . Her fourth daughter , Alix , married Tsar Nicholas II of Russia , passing her mother 's gene for haemophilia on to her only son , the Tsarevich Alexei . Alix , her husband , and her children were killed by the Bolsheviks in the city of Ekaterinburg in the summer of 1918 , sixteen months after the February Revolution forced Nicholas to abdicate . Alice 's second daughter , Elizabeth , who had married Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia , and had become a nun after his assassination in 1905 , met a similar fate , being killed by the Bolsheviks the day after the former tsar and tsaritsa . Louis Mountbatten , son of Alice 's eldest daughter , Victoria , was the last Viceroy of India . He was assassinated by the IRA in 1979 . Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark , her great @-@ grandson through Victoria 's daughter Princess Alice of Battenberg , married Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 25 April 1843 – 1 July 1862 : Her Royal Highness The Princess Alice 
 1 July 1862 – 13 June 1877 : Her Royal Highness Princess Louis of Hesse and by Rhine 
 13 June 1877 – 14 December 1878 : Her Royal Highness The Grand Duchess of Hesse and by Rhine 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 1 January 1878 : Companion of the Order of the Crown of India 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 In 1858 , Alice and the three younger of her sisters were granted use of the royal arms , with an inescutcheon of the shield of Saxony , representing her father . The shield is differenced by a label argent of three points , demonstrating that she is the child of a monarch ; the outer points bore an ermine spot each , and the centre bore a rose gules , to differentiate her from other members of the royal family . 
 = = Children = = 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Dan Hamhuis = 
 Daniel Hamhuis ( born December 13 , 1982 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman who currently plays for the Dallas Stars of the National Hockey League . 
 Hamhuis played major junior hockey with the Prince George Cougars of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) and was selected 12th overall by the Nashville Predators in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft . The following year , he was awarded the Bill Hunter Memorial Trophy and Four Broncos Memorial Trophy as the league 's best defenceman and player of the year , respectively ; he would also be named the top defenceman in the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) , the governing body of major junior hockey in Canada . After a final season in the WHL , Hamhuis made his professional debut with the Milwaukee Admirals of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , a minor league affiliate of the Predators . He made his NHL debut the next year for Nashville . After five seasons with the club , Hamhuis became an unrestricted free agent and signed a six @-@ year contract with the Canucks . In his first year with the club , he helped Vancouver to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , where they lost to the Boston Bruins . 
 Hamhuis has played in several international tournaments at both the junior and senior levels for Canada . At the 2001 and 2002 World Junior Championships , he won a bronze and silver medal , respectively . He also appeared in four straight World Championships , winning a gold at the 2007 tournament and silver at both the 2008 and 2009 tournaments . On January 7th , 2014 , he was named to the 2014 Canadian Olympic Hockey Team , winning a gold medal at the 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Prince George Cougars = = = 
 <unk> suffered a broken leg during his junior draft @-@ eligible season , limiting his exposure to WHL scouts . Consequently , he went unselected in the WHL Bantam Draft . Hamhuis went unselected as a bantam player in the WHL Bantam Draft . He later admitted to not even being aware of the junior draft until a couple months later . The Prince George Cougars later put Hamhuis on their protected list and he went on to make his junior debut in 1998 – 99 . He recorded a goal and four points over 56 games while being named both Prince George 's rookie and scholastic player of the year . The following season , he improved to 10 goals and 33 points in 70 games . He helped Prince George advance to the Conference Finals , scoring two goals and five points in a junior career @-@ high of 13 post @-@ season games . He was also named the Cougars ' scholastic player for the year for the second year in a row . 
 Hamhuis ' third WHL season in 2000 – 01 saw him increase his offensive production to 13 goals and 59 points over 62 games , eighth in scoring among league defencemen . He received WHL West First All @-@ Star Team honours and was named Prince George 's most dedicated player . Playing in his NHL draft @-@ eligible season , he participated in the 2001 CHL Top Prospects Game , where he served as captain for his team . Hamhuis was ranked by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau as the second @-@ best North American prospect overall ( behind Jason Spezza ) and the top defenceman . He went on to be selected with the 12th overall pick in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft by the Nashville Predators . He was the second defenceman to be selected after the Montreal Canadiens took Mike Komisarek seventh overall . Scouting reports listed him as a physical offensive defenceman with excellent skating , passing and open @-@ ice hitting abilities , as well as a good hockey sense . Having identified his shot as a weaker aspect of his game , he worked on improving it during his junior years . His coach in Prince George likened his playing style to Scott Niedermayer . 
 Following his draft , Hamhuis attended his first NHL training camp , but was returned to the WHL as an early cut on September 19 , 2001 . Playing in his fourth season of junior , he recorded career @-@ highs of 50 assists and 60 points in 59 games . At the end of the campaign , he was awarded the Bill Hunter Memorial Trophy and Four Broncos Memorial Trophy as the league 's best defenceman and player of the year , respectively . It marked the first time a player had won both awards since Barry Beck in 1977 . Hamhuis additionally received the CHL Defenceman of the Year Award and was named to the WHL West and CHL First All @-@ Star Teams . He was also named Prince George 's most valuable player . Hamhuis left Prince George as the club 's all @-@ time leader in assists with 123 ( he was later surpassed by Blake Robson on January 28 , 2003 ) . 
 = = = Nashville Predators = = = 
 On July 7 , 2002 , Hamhuis was signed by the Predators . He was a late cut from Nashville 's roster for the 2002 – 03 season and was assigned within the club 's system to the Milwaukee Admirals of the AHL on October 3 . He received a three @-@ game suspension early in the season for an infraction during a game against the Utah Grizzlies . He went on to record six goals and 27 points over 68 games in his professional rookie campaign with the Admirals . 
 Hamhuis transitioned to the NHL the following season by making the Predators ' line @-@ up out of training camp . He scored his first NHL goal on October 16 , 2003 , a game winner on the powerplay against St. Louis Blues goaltender Chris Osgood ; Nashville won the game 4 – 1 . Late in the campaign , he recorded a five @-@ point night ( one goal and four assists ) in a 9 – 4 win against the Pittsburgh Penguins on March 4 , 2004 . He finished the season with seven goals and 26 points over 82 games with Predators in 2003 – 04 . He ranked tied for third in point @-@ scoring and second in average ice time among the NHL 's rookie defencemen . Hamhuis was also chosen to the 2004 NHL YoungStars Game , representing the Western Conference in a 7 – 3 win . Hamhuis helped the Predators make the playoffs for the first time in franchise history in his rookie season and added two assists in the club 's first @-@ round elimination to the Detroit Red Wings . 
 Due to the season @-@ long NHL lock @-@ out , Hamhuis returned to the AHL in 2004 – 05 . <unk> 13 goals and 51 points in 76 games , he was named to the AHL Second All @-@ Star Team . He was also chosen to participate in the 2005 AHL All @-@ Star Game for the Canadian team . With the NHL set to resume in 2005 – 06 , the Predators re @-@ signed Hamhuis to a one @-@ year contract on August 16 , 2005 . Returning to Nashville , he went on to record a career @-@ high seven goals , 31 assists and 38 points in 82 games . He led all Predators players in ice time and ranked second in plus @-@ minus with a + 11 rating . 
 Following his break @-@ out season , the Predators and Hamhuis agreed to a four @-@ year , $ 8 million contract on September 21 , 2006 . He earned $ 1 @.@ 5 million in his first year of the deal , gradually increasing to $ 2 @.@ 5 million in his fourth . His offensive production dipped to a career @-@ low 20 points in the season following the signing . In 2007 – 08 , he recorded four goals and 27 points over 80 games . Hamhuis scored his first Stanley Cup playoff goal in game four of the opening round against the Detroit Red Wings , a 3 – 2 win . However , Nashville lost the next two games and were eliminated . Hamhuis continued scoring at the same pace in the following two seasons , recording 26 and 24 points in 2008 – 09 and 2009 – 10 , respectively . 
 Hamhuis ' role with the Predators was diminished in his final few seasons in Nashville with the emergence of younger defencemen Shea Weber and Ryan Suter as the club 's top two defencemen . With Weber and Suter providing most of the offence from the blueline , Hamhuis was used primarily as a shutdown defenceman , matching up against opposing team 's top forward units and leading the club in shorthanded ice time , while seeing limited powerplay time . 
 As it became apparent that Hamhuis would not be re @-@ signed by the Predators following the 2009 – 10 season , his negotiating rights were traded to the Philadelphia Flyers , along with a 2011 conditional draft pick , for Ryan Parent on June 19 , 2010 . Hamhuis and the Predators had been negotiating for most of the season , as well as in the summer , but Nashville was not willing to meet his asking price . After failing to agree to a contract with Philadelphia as well , his rights were traded once again to the Pittsburgh Penguins for a 2011 third @-@ round pick on June 25 ; negotiations with the club were also unsuccessful . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 On July 1 , 2010 , Hamhuis became an unrestricted free agent and signed a six @-@ year , $ 27 million contract with the Vancouver Canucks . Growing up in Smithers , British Columbia , he was specifically interested in signing with the Canucks during his pending free agency , which factored into his decision to sign with neither Philadelphia nor Pittsburgh . The Canucks had reportedly tried to acquire Hamhuis previously at the 2009 – 10 trade deadline , with Nashville asking for prospect Cody Hodgson and a first @-@ round draft pick in exchange . Several days prior to his free agency , the Canucks traded for defenceman Keith Ballard from the Florida Panthers , which initially led Hamhuis to believe the Canucks would be no longer interested in him . However , on July 1 , the Canucks were one of ten teams to offer him a contract and he signed with the club despite more lucrative deals of up to $ 5 million in salary and terms of seven years . 
 Five games into the 2010 – 11 season , he suffered a bruised foot while blocking a shot during a contest against the Carolina Hurricanes on October 17 , 2010 . The injury caused him to miss eight games . After returning to the line @-@ up , he scored his first goal as a Canuck – an empty @-@ netter in the final minute of a 5 – 3 win against the Toronto Maple Leafs on November 13 . Later in the season , Hamhuis suffered a concussion during a game against the Anaheim Ducks on February 9 , 2011 . After making a pass from behind his net , he received a bodycheck from opposing forward Ryan Getzlaf , causing him to hit his head on the boards . He lay motionless on the ice for several minutes before being helped to the Canucks ' dressing room . While no penalty was called on the play , Hamhuis ' teammates described the hit as a dirty play on Getzlaf 's part after the game . Conversely , Canucks head coach Alain Vigneault told media it was a " good hit by a big player " and that Hamhuis " was watching his pass and should have been trying to protect himself . " Speaking publicly of the injury for the first time 10 days later , Hamhuis said he did not deem the hit " dirty " , but " unnecessary " , given the " puck was ... off [ his ] stick " and he was in a " vulnerable position " . After returning to the line @-@ up , he registered his first two @-@ goal NHL game , including the overtime @-@ winner , in a 4 – 3 win against the Phoenix Coyotes . Finishing the regular season with 6 goals and 23 points over 64 games , he helped the Canucks to the best record in the NHL , earning them the franchise 's first ever Presidents ' Trophy . He ranked third on the team in plus @-@ minus ( + 29 ) and average ice time per game ( 22 minutes and 40 seconds ) . Entering the 2011 playoffs with the first seed in the West , the Canucks eliminated the Chicago Blackhawks , Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks en route to the Stanley Cup Finals . During Game 1 of the series against the Boston Bruins , Hamhuis suffered a sports hernia , as well as groin and lower abdomen injuries , resulting from a hip check he delivered to opposing forward Milan Lucic ; he was sidelined for the remainder of the Finals . Prior to his injury , Hamhuis played a significant role in the team 's playoff run , forming a shutdown defensive pairing with Kevin Bieksa . The two led Vancouver in average ice time per game throughout the playoffs . It was revealed following the Canucks ' Game 7 defeat to the Bruins that Hamhuis required off @-@ season surgery . 
 Playing in his second season with Vancouver , Hamhuis recorded 4 goals and a career @-@ high 33 assists for 37 points , one short of his personal best . He also led the Canucks in plus @-@ minus with a + 29 rating . His efforts helped Vancouver to a second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy . Individually , he ranked 10th in Norris Trophy balloting with two second @-@ place votes . In the 2012 playoffs , Hamhuis recorded three assists over five games as the Canucks were upset by the Los Angeles Kings in the first round . 
 He suffered major injuries in both of his final two seasons with Vancouver . On November 20 , 2014 he tore his groin during a game against the Anaheim Ducks . On December 9 , 2015 during a match against the New York Rangers , his face was struck by a Dan Boyle slapshot , breaking his jaw . Both injuries resulted in him missing two months ' worth of games . 
 = = = Dallas Stars = = = 
 On July 1 , 2016 , after not being resigned by the Canucks , Hamhuis signed a 2 year , $ 7 @.@ 5 million contract with the Dallas Stars . 
 = = International play = = 
 Hamhuis played for the Canadian national junior team at the 2001 and 2002 World Junior Championships . He won a bronze medal with Canada in his first year at the tournament in Moscow , Russia , contributing an assist in seven games . The following year in Pardubice , Czech Republic , he recorded three points in six games , tying with for Carlo <unk> for the team lead in scoring among defencemen . He was sidelined during the tournament with an injured shoulder , sustained after being hit from behind into the boards in a game against Russia . He returned to help Canada to a silver medal , losing in the gold medal game to Russia 5 – 4 . 
 Four years later , Hamhuis was named to the Canadian men 's team for the 2006 World Championships in Riga , Latvia – his first of four consecutive tournament appearances . Making his senior international debut , he led all Canadian defencemen with five points in nine games . Canada was shut out in the bronze medal game by Finland 5 – 0 . 
 The following year , he was a late addition to Canada 's roster on April 22 , 2007 , following the Predators ' first @-@ round playoff elimination . He was named to the team along with Predators teammate Shea Weber . Hamhuis went on to win his first international gold medal in a 4 – 2 final win against Finland in Moscow . He notched three points in nine games . 
 In 2008 , Hamhuis and Canada made their second consecutive appearance in the gold medal game , but failed to defend their title in a 5 – 4 overtime loss to Russia . He ranked second behind Brent Burns on the team in average ice time with 17 : 47 minutes per game . 
 Canada faced Russia once again the following year in 2009 , losing 2 – 1 . Hamhuis scored four points in nine games while ranking second in average ice time among Canadian players , behind Nashville teammate Shea Weber . 
 Later that summer , Hamhuis was invited to Team Canada 's 46 @-@ player orientation camp , held in Calgary for the 2010 Winter Olympics . He participated in the three @-@ day camp in August 2009 , but was not selected to the Olympic squad . 
 Following the Canucks ' first @-@ round elimination in the 2012 playoffs , Hamhuis was invited by Team Canada to that year 's World Championships . With his third child on the way , however , he declined . 
 On January 7th , 2014 Hamhuis was named to the Canadian Olympic team for the 2014 Sochi Olympic Winter Games . Team Canada won the gold medal beating Sweden 3 @-@ 0 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hamhuis was born and raised in Smithers , British Columbia , to parents Marty and Ida . He has two sisters , Erin and Cindy . His father and sisters also play hockey . Marty played senior hockey , while Erin and Cindy played in a local women 's league . Hamhuis grew up in a Christian home with his family and has continued to profess this faith . Since joining the Canucks in 2010 , he has organized chapel services for his teammates to optionally attend . 
 Beginning to play organized hockey at the age of four , Hamhuis was competing against other players as old as eight years , as his hometown was not big enough to fill teams for younger age groups . He went to provincials four seasons in a row and won the title with his club , the Smithers Storm , in overtime during his last year of minor hockey . Future Predators teammate Cody <unk> was a stick boy for Hamhuis ' team , while another Nashville <unk> , Shea Weber , did the same for a competing team at provincial tournaments . Hamhuis grew up cheering for the Edmonton Oilers and Vancouver Canucks . 
 Hamhuis left home at the age of 15 to start playing junior with the Prince George Cougars . During his time there , he met his wife , Sarah . They have three daughters , Anna , Morgan and Brooke . 
 Hamhuis is an owner of the Prince George Cougars franchise ; he is part of the ownership group that also comprises fellow NHL player Eric Brewer and a team of local investors . The group 's bid to purchase the team was approved by the WHL Board of Governors on April 30 , 2014 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = WHL and CHL = = = 
 = = = AHL = = = 
 = Sigyn = 
 In Norse mythology , Sigyn ( Old Norse " victorious girl @-@ friend " ) is a goddess and is the wife of Loki . Sigyn is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In the Poetic Edda , little information is provided about Sigyn other than her role in assisting Loki during his captivity . In the Prose Edda , her role in helping her husband through his time spent in bondage is stated again , she appears in various kennings , and her status as a goddess is mentioned twice . Sigyn may appear on the Gosforth Cross and has been the subject of an amount of theory and cultural references . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 Sigyn is attested in the following works : 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In stanza 35 of the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , a völva tells Odin that , amongst many other things , she sees Sigyn sitting very unhappily with her bound husband , Loki , under a " grove of hot springs " . Sigyn is mentioned a second ( and final ) time in the ending prose section of the poem Lokasenna . In the prose , Loki has been bound by the gods with the guts of his son Nari , his son Váli is described as having been turned into a wolf , and the goddess Skaði fastens a venomous snake over Loki 's face , from which venom drips . Sigyn , again described as Loki 's wife , holds a basin under the dripping venom . The basin grows full , and she pulls it away , during which time venom drops on Loki , causing him to writhe so violently that earthquakes occur that shake the entire earth . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 Sigyn appears in the books Gylfaginning and Skáldskaparmál in the Prose Edda . In Gylfaginning , Sigyn is introduced in chapter 31 . There , she is introduced as the wife of Loki , and that they have a son by the name of " Nari or Narfi " . Sigyn is mentioned again in Gylfaginning in chapter 50 , where events are described differently than in Lokasenna . Here , the gods have captured Loki and his two sons , who are stated as Váli , described as a son of Loki , and " Nari or Narfi " , the latter earlier described as also a son of Sigyn . Váli is changed into a wolf by the gods , and rips apart his brother " Nari or Narfi " . The guts of " Nari or Narfi " are then used to tie Loki to three stones , after which the guts turn to iron , and Skaði places a snake above Loki . Sigyn places herself beside him , where she holds out a bowl to catch the dripping venom . However , when the bowl becomes full she leaves to pour out the venom . As a result , Loki is again described as shaking so violently that the planet shakes , and this process repeats until he breaks free , setting Ragnarök into motion . 
 Sigyn is introduced as a goddess , an <unk> , in the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , where the gods are holding a grand feast for the visiting Ægir , and in kennings for Loki : " husband of Sigyn " , " cargo [ Loki ] of incantation @-@ fetter 's [ Sigyn 's ] arms " , and in a passage quoted from the 9th @-@ century Haustlöng , " the burden of Sigyn 's arms " . The final mention of Sigyn in Skáldskaparmál is in the list of ásynjur in the appended Nafnaþulur section , chapter 75 . 
 = = Archaeological record = = 
 The mid @-@ 11th century Gosforth Cross located in Cumbria , England , has been interpreted as featuring various figures from Norse mythology . The bottom portion of the west side of the cross features a depiction of a long @-@ haired female , kneeling figure holding an object above another prostrate , bound figure . Above and to their left is a knotted serpent . This has been interpreted as Sigyn soothing the bound Loki . 
 = = Theories = = 
 While the name Sigyn is found as a female personal name in Old Norse sources ( Old Norse <unk> meaning ' victory ' and <unk> meaning ' girl @-@ friend ' ) , and though in surviving sources she is largely restricted to a single role , she appears in the 9th century skaldic poem Haustlöng from pagan times , written by the skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir . Due to this early connection with Loki , Sigyn has been theorized as being a goddess dating back to an older form of Germanic paganism . 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 The scene of Sigyn Loki has been depicted on a number of paintings , including " Loke och Sigyn " ( 1850 ) by Nils <unk> , " Loke och Sigyn " ( 1863 ) by Mårten Eskil Winge , " Loki och Sigyn ( 1879 ) by Oscar Wergeland , and the illustration " Loki und Sigyn ; Hel mit dem Hunde Garm " ( 1883 ) by K. Ehrenberg . Various objects and places have been named after Sigyn in modern times , including the Norwegian stiff @-@ straw winter wheat varieties Sigyn I and Sigyn II , a Marvel Comics character ( 1978 ) of the same name the Swedish vessel MS Sigyn , which transports spent nuclear fuel in an allusion to Sigyn holding a bowl beneath the venom to spare Loki , and the arctic Sigyn Glacier . 
 = Jacob L. Beilhart = 
 Jacob L. Beilhart ( March 4 , 1867 – November 24 , 1908 ) was the founder and leader of a communitarian group known as the Spirit Fruit Society . Beilhart believed that jealousy , materialism , and the fear of losing another 's love were at the root of much of the illness in the world . Under his direction , the Spirit Fruit Society sought to model and practice those beliefs . 
 Beilhart was born in Ohio and raised in the Lutheran faith . He moved to Kansas when he was 18 and embraced Seventh @-@ day <unk> . He later attended college to become a licensed preacher . Eventually , Beilhart came to believe that it was more important to put faith into practice helping others so he left preaching to study nursing and work in a sanitarium . He returned to Ohio in 1899 to start the Spirit Fruit Society , an intentional community based on his experiences , learning , and views . Beilhart led the group for nine years before he died of appendicitis and peritonitis in 1908 . Beilhart 's commune survived for another 22 years making it one of the longest surviving communes in America . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Beilhart was born March 4 , 1867 in Columbiana County , Ohio to a Lutheran father and a Mennonite mother . The ninth of 11 children , Beilhart was raised in the Lutheran church and his early home environment was strictly religious . Jacob did not receive much in the way of formal education . His father died when he was six or seven years old so Jacob attended only elementary school . At the age of 17 , Beilhart went to work at his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's harness shop in southern Ohio and , when they moved to Ottawa , Kansas , Jacob went with them . 
 Beilhart left his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's home a year later and went to live and work on a sheep farm . The family he lived with were devout Seventh Day Adventists . During this time , he became convinced that their view of the Bible and its teachings were quite different than what he had been raised to understand , but he accepted their religion entirely . 
 Although it is not known for certain , it is possible that the sheep farmer was the father of Olive Louema Blow , whom Beilhart married in 1887 . Jacob and Louema attended Healdsburg College in California where Jacob received a license to preach . Beilhart returned to Kansas to begin a career in preaching . After two years , however , faced with the prospect of being sent to teach in other areas , Beilhart left preaching . He maintained that he wanted to do something " besides talk . " Beilhart felt a strong need to help the sick so he enrolled in a nursing program at the Battle Creek Sanitarium that was run by Dr. John Harvey Kellogg . 
 Once , while working at the Sanitarium , Beilhart was called to the bedside of a young girl for whom doctors had given up hope . When Beilhart prayed for her , she experienced a quick and complete recovery . Beilhart 's conviction that faith @-@ healing was the remedy for illness put him in disfavor with the sanitarium officials and he was asked to resign . 
 Beilhart became friends with C. W. Post , who was a patient at the sanitarium , but Post was healed by a Christian Science faith healer , Mrs Elizabeth K. Gregory . In 1892 , Post started La Vita Inn , a sanatorium of his own and brought Beilhart on as an associate . The two men took instruction in Christian Science . Both Post and Beilhart rejected the doctrine of the religion but they embraced the view that illness was an illusion and could be overcome by mental suggestion , prayer , and self @-@ sacrifice . 
 After the birth of their daughter , Edith in 1896 , Louema revealed that the father of both Edith and her older brother , Harvey ( 1893 ) , was C. W. Post . Though Post offered him financial interest in La Vita Inn and his prospective famous breakfast drink , Postum , provided Beilhart he would stay and work at the Inn . Outraged at his friend 's betrayal , Beilhart ordered Post out of his house and left Battle Creek for Ohio . Louema left Jacob and took the children back to her family in Kansas in 1897 . This experience undoubtedly had a profound effect upon Beilhart 's view of marriage . 
 = = The Spirit Fruit Society = = 
 In 1896 , Beilhart returned to Ohio and settled in Lisbon , close to where he had grown up . In 1899 he decided to create an intentional community in order to practice his newly developed beliefs and to model this practice for others . Beilhart also started two newspapers called Spirit Fruit and Spirit Voice that were distributed widely by subscription . The Spirit Fruit Society was incorporated as a religious organization in 1901 . The stated goal in the incorporation documents was to , " teach mankind how to apply the truths taught by Jesus Christ " . Jacob made no effort to solicit members for his commune other than through his newspapers and sometimes rejected applicants when he felt they were not fit candidates . The commune attracted only about a dozen residents – mostly from outside the Ohio area . 
 Beilhart preached in Chicago and elsewhere , but was not known to proselytize strongly ; however , although the group typically kept to themselves , their mysterious nature led to misconceptions and suspicion in the press . In 1904 , numerous newspaper articles and editorials were written , mostly in Chicago , about the Society . Those articles were often sensationalist and served to put the Society in a bad light . The views and practices of the Society , particularly those against marriage and promoting free love , were not well accepted in the small Ohio community . Thus , in 1904 , the group left Lisbon for Chicago where they expected their progressive ideas might be better tolerated . 
 = = Chicago and Jacob 's death = = 
 Beilhart had preached in Chicago on a number of occasions and felt that the reception of the Society by that community would be better . Unfavorable publicity followed the group to Chicago however , and this period lasted only a relatively short time . In 1906 Beilhart purchased the 90 acre " Dalziel Farm " on the shores of Wooster Lake . Owing to his beliefs against personal property , almost immediately after the purchase he had his name removed from the deed because he did not want anything in his name . 
 In November 1908 , returning from a meeting in Chicago , Beilhart fell ill with stomach pains . He was diagnosed with appendicitis , and a surgeon was brought in . There is some discrepancy concerning the diagnosis once surgery was performed . One doctor indicated that his appendix was healthy while another maintained that it had ruptured . Beilhart developed peritonitis and died on November 24 , 1908 . 
 In accordance with his beliefs , the Society buried Beilhart in an unmarked grave on the farm overlooking Wooster Lake . Although most of the area is now covered by a residential development , Beilhart 's grave site has been preserved , surrounded by brush . 
 = Take Off Your Pants and Jacket = 
 Take Off Your Pants and Jacket ( sometimes referred to simply as ' Take Off ' ) is the fourth studio album by the American rock band Blink @-@ 182 . Produced by Jerry Finn , the album was released on June 12 , 2001 , through MCA Records . The band had spent much of the previous year traveling and supporting the album Enema of the State ( 1999 ) , which launched the band 's mainstream career . The title is a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek pun on male masturbation ( " take off your pants and jack it " ) . The cover art has icons for each member of the trio : an airplane ( " take off " ) , a pair of pants and a jacket . Several different editions were released with additional bonus tracks . 
 The album was primarily recorded over three months at Signature Sound in San Diego . During the sessions , MCA executives pressured the band to retain the sound that helped their previous album sell millions . As such , Take Off Your Pants and Jacket continues the pop punk sound that the group honed and made famous , albeit with a heavier tone inspired by groups such as Fugazi and Refused . Regarding lyrics , the album has been referred to as a concept album chronicling adolescence , with songs dedicated to first dates , fighting authority and teenage parties . Due to differing opinions on direction , the trio worked in opposition to one another for the first time , and the sessions sometimes became contentious . 
 The album had near @-@ immediate success , becoming the first punk rock @-@ identified record to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 and being certified double platinum in May 2002 . The album produced three hit singles — " The Rock Show " , " First Date " and " Stay Together for the Kids " — that were top ten hits on modern rock charts . Critical impressions of the record were generally positive , commending the record 's expansion on teenage themes ; others viewed this as its weakness . To support the record , the band co @-@ headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Green Day . A European tour was canceled in the wake of the September 11 attacks . Take Off Your Pants and Jacket has sold over 14 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 After a long series of performances at clubs and festivals and several indie recordings during the 1990s , Blink @-@ 182 finally achieved mainstream success with the release of Enema of the State in 1999 , which launched the band " into the stratosphere of pop music " and catapulted them to become the most popular pop punk act of the era . The glossy production set Blink @-@ 182 apart from the other crossover punk acts of the era , such as Green Day . Three singles were released from the record — " What 's My Age Again ? " , " All the Small Things " , and " Adam 's Song " — that crossed over into Top 40 radio format and experienced major commercial success . The album sold over 15 million copies worldwide and had a considerable impact on pop punk music . The band spent most of 2000 touring in support of Enema of the State , where they headlined arenas for the first time . The band played to sold @-@ out audiences and performed worldwide during the summer of 2000 on the Mark , Tom and Travis Show Tour . 
 The period following Enema of the State saw the band experience great transition . " We had gone from playing small clubs and sleeping on peoples ' floors to headlining amphitheaters and staying in five @-@ star hotels , " recalled Hoppus in 2013 . " After years of hard work , promotion , and nonstop touring , people knew who we were , and listened to what we were saying ... it scared the shit out of us . " The band was rushed into recording the follow @-@ up , as according to DeLonge , " the president of MCA was penalizing us an obscene amount of money because our record wasn 't going to be out in time for them to make their quarterly revenue statements . [ ... ] And we were saying , ' Hey , we can 't do this right now , we need to reorganize ourselves and really think about what we want to do and write the best record we can . ' They didn 't agree with us . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band recorded demos at DML Studios , a small practice studio in Escondido , California , where the band had written Dude Ranch and Enema of the State . The group had written a dozen songs after three weeks and invited their manager , Rick DeVoe , to be the first person outside Blink @-@ 182 to hear the new material , which the band found " catchy [ but with ] a definitive edge " . DeVoe sat in the control room and quietly listened to the recordings , and pressed the band at the end on why there was no " Blink @-@ 182 good @-@ time summer anthem [ thing ] " . DeLonge and Hoppus were furious , remarking , " You want a fucking single ? I 'll write you the cheesiest , catchiest , throwaway fucking summertime single you 've ever heard ! " Hoppus went home and wrote lead single " The Rock Show " in ten minutes , and DeLonge similarly wrote " First Date " , which became the most successful singles from the record and future live staples . 
 The band began proper tracking for drums soon afterwards at Larrabee Studios West and Cello Studios in Hollywood . The working relationship with Jerry Finn had been so fruitful that the same team was largely engaged for Take Off Your Pants and Jacket , with Finn producing and Joe McGrath engineering . Finn and McGrath , meticulous in acquiring the best sound , took two days to experiment with microphone placement , different compressors , and varying EQs before committing Barker 's drums to tape . The waiting " drove [ him ] crazy , " and Barker recorded his drum parts in " two or three days " while DeLonge and Hoppus watched television upstairs . When the drums were finished , the band returned to San Diego to record the bulk of Take Off Your Pants and Jacket at Signature Sound , where they had also recorded its predecessor . While the band worked with few days off , the sessions also proved to be memorable : " We took long dinner breaks , ate Sombrero burritos , watched Family Guy and Mr. Show , and laughed way too hard . " When MCA Records executives eventually traveled to San Diego to hear the highly anticipated follow @-@ up , the trio played a joke by only playing them two joke songs — " Fuck a Dog " and " When You Fucked Hitler " ( the subject of which later changed to a grandfather ) — and the executives " lost it , " in DeLonge 's words . MCA put pressure on the band to maintain the sound that made Enema of the State sell millions ; as a result , DeLonge believed the album took no " creative leaps [ or ] bounds . " As such , DeLonge felt creatively stifled and " bummed out " with the label 's limitations . 
 The creative struggle was evident from the outset . Hoppus loved everything regarding Enema of the State — including the music videos and live show — and " wanted to do it again , " desiring to create a bigger , better and louder follow @-@ up . DeLonge , however , was striving for heavier and dirtier guitar @-@ driven rock , which was inspired by post @-@ hardcore bands Fugazi and Refused . Barker , " never simply a punk rock drummer , " wanted to challenge himself and was listening to a great deal of hip hop and heavy metal . The lyrics often turned darker and more introspective for Hoppus , and " love songs became broken love songs . " DeLonge rewrote some of his lyrics after listening to songs by Alkaline Trio , feeling as though he needed to " step up his game . " DeLonge pushed his guitar style further away from that on Enema of the State : " <unk> guitar hooks became frenetic 1 / 16th note spasms , " wrote Hoppus in 2013 . Barker 's drum parts were looped and filtered , creating different sounds . For the first time , the trio worked in opposition to one another , and the sessions sometimes became contentious . Hoppus felt that the sessions created an unspoken competition between him and DeLonge , between who could write the better chorus or most clever lyrics . " Our confidence and insecurity begat some heated differences , sometime to the point where we had to leave rooms and cool down , " recalled Hoppus . Finn would often smooth over differences with a joke , offering a fresh perspective and advice . 
 In 2013 , Hoppus referred to Take Off Your Pants and Jacket as the " permanent record of a band in transition ... our confused , contentious , brilliant , painful , cathartic leap into the unknown . " 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The title is a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek pun on male masturbation ( " take off your pants and jack it " ) . Previous titles had included If You See Kay ( a pun on the spelling of " fuck " ) and Genital Ben , accompanied by a bear on the cover of the album ( a reference to Gentle Ben ) . Stressed at being at a loss for a name , DeLonge asked guitar tech Larry Palm for suggestions . The album 's title was coined by Palm , who was snowboarding on a rainy day . Inside the lodge , Palm was congregating with friends when a young kid walked in completely drenched , to which his mother suggested he " take off [ his ] pants and jacket . " Palm was told by DeLonge that if the band were to use the name , he would " hook him up " . Instead , Palm received a letter from manager Rick DeVoe for his contribution , which offered a $ 500 payout for the name . Palm scoffed at the amount , and filed suit in 2003 with the intellectual property attorney Ralph Loeb , alleging breach of contract and fraud against the band . Palm demanded $ 20 @,@ 000 ; the band eventually settled out of court for $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The cover has three " Zoso @-@ like " icons for each band member : a jacket , a pair of pants and an airplane . <unk> and Hoppus ' symbols became the pants and jacket , respectively , leaving Barker the airplane despite begging his bandmates not to assign him the symbol , citing his fear of flying , but he took it anyway . Ironically in 2008 Travis was in a plane crash fortunately surviving the wreck . Journalist Joe Shooman called the title " a glint of sharp intelligence behind the boys ' humour as it draws oblique attention to the fact that , latterly , Blink @-@ 182 had often been encouraged to get naked in order to promote themselves . It 's a very self @-@ aware album title in that context and a portent , perhaps , of what was to come " . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 Take Off Your Pants and Jacket has been called a concept album chronicling adolescence and associated feelings . The band did not consider them explicitly teenage songs : " The things that happen to you in high school are the same things that happen your entire life , " said Hoppus . " You can fall in love at sixty ; you can get rejected at eighty . " The record begins with " Anthem Part Two " , which touches on disenchantment and blames adults for teenage problems . It serves as the opposite of the band 's typical " party " image presented to the media , with heavily politically @-@ charged lyrics . Joe Shooman called it a " generational manifesto that exhorts kids to be wary of the system that surrounds them " . " Online Songs " was written by Hoppus about " the thoughts that drive you crazy " in the aftermath of a breakup , and is essentially a follow @-@ up to " Josie " . " First Date " was inspired by DeLonge and wife Jennifer Jenkins ' first date at SeaWorld in San Diego . " I was about 21 at the time and it was an excuse for me to take her somewhere because I wanted to hang out with her , " said DeLonge . The track was written as a summary of neurotic teen angst and awkwardness . " Happy Holidays , You Bastard " is a joke track intended to " piss parents off . " The fifth track , " Story of a Lonely Guy " , concerns heartache and rejection prior to the high school prom . The song is downbeat and melancholy , filtered through " tuneful guitar lines reminiscent of The Cure and hefty drum patterns " . 
 The following track , " The Rock Show " , is the opposite : an upbeat " effervescent celebration of love , life and music " . It was written as a " fast punk @-@ rock love song " in the vein of the Ramones and Screeching Weasel . The song tells the story of two teenagers meeting a rock concert , and , despite failing grades and disapproving parents , falling and staying in love . It was inspired by the band 's early days in San Diego 's all @-@ ages venue SOMA . " Stay Together for the Kids " follows and is written about divorce from the point of view of a helpless child . Inspired by DeLonge 's parents ' divorce , it is one of the band 's darker songs . " Roller Coaster " was written when Hoppus had a nightmare when he and his wife , Skye , first began dating ; the song is about finding something ideal but fearing for its certain departure . " Reckless Abandon " was penned by DeLonge as a reflection on summer memories , including parties , skateboarding and trips to the beach . " Everytime I Look for You " has no specific lyrical basis , according to Hoppus , and " Give Me One Good Reason " was written about punk music and nonconformity in a high school setting . " Shut Up " , a " broken @-@ family snapshot " , revisits the territory of youthful woes , described by Shooman as a " fairly familiar rites @-@ of @-@ passage tale " that " adds to general themes of isolation , alienation and moving on to a new place that pervade Take Off Your Pants and Jacket " . " Please Take Me Home " concludes the standard edition of the album and was written about the consequences of a friendship developing into a relationship . 
 Several bonus tracks follow on separate editions ; some continue the teenage theme , while others are joke tracks . Barker used Afro @-@ Cuban influences for his drum track on " Don 't Tell Me It 's Over " , and DeLonge used something other than his punk influences for " What Went Wrong " . While DeLonge felt " staple acoustic songs " were big for groups at the time ( such as Green Day 's " Good Riddance " ) , the band wrote all of their songs from their inception on acoustic guitars , and he felt he would rather have " What Went Wrong " in its original form . " You grow up and realize , ' Fuck ! Who gives a fuck about punk rock ? ' " he said . " There are so many great forms of music out there , and you grow beyond wanting to listen to or write something because your parents will hate it . " Finn suggested lyrics for the song after viewing a documentary on the first Russian nuclear test ; in the film , an aged Soviet physicist says of watching the explosion , " There was a loud boom , and then the bomb began fiercely kicking at the world . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Promotion and commercial performance = = = 
 To promote Take Off Your Pants and Jacket , MCA Records released three singles , " The Rock Show " , " First Date " and " Stay Together for the Kids " , all of which were top ten hits on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart . Blink @-@ 182 performed on the Late Show with David Letterman and Late Night with Conan O 'Brien in support of Take Off Your Pants and Jacket . The band also appeared in a MADtv sketch , in which the trio stars as misfits in an all @-@ American 1950s family ( a parody Leave It to Beaver ) . The trio also sanctioned a band biography , Tales from Beneath Your Mom ( 2001 ) , which was written by the trio and Anne Hoppus ( sister of Mark Hoppus ) . 
 Take Off Your Pants and Jacket was released in June 2001 , and the album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 350 @,@ 000 copies . Billboard attributed the success of the record overall as a result of the success of the first single , " The Rock Show " . The album also debuted at number one on Canada 's Canadian Albums Chart , and on Germany 's Top 100 Albums . The album was the first album identified as punk rock to debut at number one in the United States . The record shipped enough units to be certified platinum , and was certified double platinum in May 2002 . Shortly after the release of Take Off Your Pants and Jacket , the Federal Trade Commission 's report charged MCA and Blink @-@ 182 with marketing explicit material to children . Take Off Your Pants and Jacket has sold over 14 million copies worldwide as of 2011 . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 The record was initially released in three separate configurations : the " red plane " , the " yellow pants " and the " green jacket " editions . Each release contained two separate bonus tracks , ranging from joke tracks to outtakes . The only outward signs to differentiate the three editions were three stickers . The multiple bonus @-@ track versions were only available for a limited time before being replaced by an edition without any bonus tracks . 
 In 2011 , the Brooklyn @-@ based independent record label Mightier Than Sword Records licensed Take Off Your Pants and Jacket to reissue on 180 @-@ gram vinyl , with three additional 7 @-@ inch singles featuring the six bonus tracks . After taking preorders , the company " ran out of money " , resulting in Shop Radio Cast taking over the project ; the LP was eventually released in May 2013 . Hoppus spoke on the subject of Mightier Than Sword 's delay in an interview with Alternative Press : " It 's honestly something that is out of our control and not something that we are happy about happening at all . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reception of Take Off Your Pants and Jacket in 2001 was generally positive . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone was generally the most effusive of the positive reviews , praising the unpretentious attitude of the band : " As they plow in their relatively un @-@ self @-@ conscious way through the emotional hurdles of lust , terror , pain and rage , they reveal more about themselves and their audience than they even intend to , turning adolescent malaise into a friendly joke rather than a spiritual crisis . " Darren Ratner of AllMusic felt likewise , writing that the record is " one of their finest works to date , with almost every track sporting a commanding articulation and new @-@ school punk sounds . They 've definitely put a big @-@ time notch in the win column " . People commended the " adrenaline @-@ laced sonic gems reveling in blink 's patented , potty @-@ mouthed humor , recommended only for adolescents of all ages " . British publication Q offered the sentiment that " when they stop <unk> around for the sake of it , Blink @-@ 182 write some very good pop songs " . Kerrang ! gave it a high @-@ profile review , calling the record " eminently hummable dummy @-@ spitting tantrum rock for the emo generation " . 
 The Village Voice called the sound " emo @-@ core ... intercut with elegiac little pauses that align Blink 182 with a branch of punk rock you could trace back through The Replacements and Ramones Leave Home , to the more ethereal of early Who songs " . Aaron Scott of Slant Magazine , however , found the sound to be recycled from the band 's previous efforts , writing , " Blink shines when they deviate from their formula , but it is awfully rare ... The album seems to be more concerned with maintaining the band 's large teenage fanbase than with expanding their overall audience . " Entertainment Weekly felt similarly , with David Browne opining that " the album is angrier and more teeth gnashing than you 'd expect . The band work so hard at it , and the music is such processed sounding mainstream rock played fast , that the album becomes a paradox : adolescent energy and rebellion made joyless " . British magazine New Musical Express , who heavily criticized the band in their previous efforts , felt no more negative this time , saying " Blink @-@ 182 are now indistinguishable from the increasingly tedious ' teenage dirtbag ' genre they helped spawn " . The magazine continued , " It sounds like all that sanitised , castrated , shrink @-@ wrapped ' new wave ' crap that the major US record companies pumped out circa 1981 in their belated attempt to jump on the ' punk ' bandwagon . " 
 More recent reviews have subsequently been positive . Website AbsolutePunk , in part of their " Retro Reviews " project in 2011 , called Take Off Your Pants and Jacket the band 's best effort ; reviewer Thomas Nassiff referred to it as " a transitory record for Blink @-@ 182 , but you can 't tell just by listening to it on its own . It 's developed and it 's full – it feels holistically complete , dick jokes and all " . In 2005 , the album was ranked number 452 in Rock Hard magazine 's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Touring = = 
 The Take Off Your Pants and Jacket supporting tour began in April 2001 in Australia and New Zealand . The band returned to the US to promote their new record on the Late Show with David Letterman in June 2001 . Afterwards , the band set out on the 2001 Honda Civic Tour , for which the trio designed a Honda Civic to promote the company . The band again received criticism for " selling out " , but the band argued by way of mitigation that their tickets were consistently offered at lower prices than those of other groups of their stature , and by accepting corporate links they could continue to give fans a good deal . In December 2001 , the trio played at a series of radio @-@ sponsored holiday concerts , and also appeared as presenters at the 2001 Billboard Music Awards in Las Vegas . 
 The band rescheduled European tour dates in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks . " After the attacks the world kind of went into freeze mode and we didn 't know whether to carry on with things or not ... so we decided we 'd rather everyone was safe and play the shows a little later instead , " said Hoppus shortly thereafter . The European dates were canceled a second time after DeLonge suffered a herniated disc in his back . With time off from touring , DeLonge felt an " itch to do something where he didn 't feel locked in to what Blink was " , and channeled his chronic back pain and resulting frustration into Box Car Racer ( 2002 ) , a post @-@ hardcore disc that further explores his Fugazi and Refused inspiration . Refraining from paying for a studio drummer , he invited Barker to record drums on the project , which led Hoppus to feel betrayed . The event caused great division within the trio for some time and an unresolved tension at the forefront of the band 's later hiatus . 
 In 2002 , the band co @-@ headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Green Day . The tour was conceived by Blink @-@ 182 to echo the famous Monsters of Rock tours ; the idea was to have , effectively , a Monsters of Punk tour . The tour , from the band 's point of view , had been put together as a show of unity in the face of consistent accusations of rivalry between the two bands , especially in Europe . Instead , Green Day 's Tré Cool acknowledged in a Kerrang ! interview that they committed to the tour as an opportunity to regain their reputation as a great live band , as they felt their spotlight had faded over the years . " We set out to reclaim our throne as the most incredible live punk band from you know who , " said Cool . Cool contended that " we heard they were going to quit the tour because they were getting smoked so badly ... We didn 't want them to quit the tour . They 're good for filling up the seats up front . " Several reviewers were unimpressed with Blink @-@ 182 's headlining set following Green Day . " Sometimes playing last at a rock show is more a curse than a privilege ... Pity the headliner , for instance , that gets blown off the stage by the band before it . Blink @-@ 182 endured that indignity Saturday at the Shoreline Amphitheatre , " a reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle wrote in 2002 . 
 The band released a second DVD of home videos , live performances and music videos titled The <unk> Chronicles II : Harder Faster Faster Harder in 2002 . Likewise , the 2003 film Riding in Vans with Boys follows the Pop Disaster Tour throughout the U.S. 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Hoppus , Tom DeLonge and Travis Barker . 
 On the clean version of the album the track " Happy Holidays , You Bastard " is listed as just " Happy Holidays " , and is an instrumental with the exception of the last line " I 'll never talk to you again " , due to nearly every line containing strong language and / or crude sexual references . 
 On the limited edition bonus track versions , " Please Take Me Home " has 182 seconds ( roughly 3 minutes ) of silence at the end , likely to hide the hidden tracks . ( They are not listed on the back cover ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 | } 
 = Halo 3 : ODST = 
 Halo 3 : ODST is a 2009 first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Bungie and published by Microsoft Game Studios . It is part of the Halo franchise , and was released on the Xbox 360 video game console on September 22 , 2009 . Players assume the roles of United Nations Space Command soldiers , known as " Orbital Drop Shock Troopers " or ODSTs , during the events of Halo 2 . In the game 's campaign mode , players explore the ruined city of New Mombasa to discover what happened to their missing teammates in the midst of an alien invasion . In the " Firefight " multiplayer option , players battle increasingly difficult waves of enemies to score points and survive as long as possible ; Halo 3 's multiplayer is contained on a separate disc packaged with ODST . 
 Bungie initially conceived ODST as a small side project to produce in the lull between Halo 3 's completion and Halo : Reach . Instead of featuring recognizable characters such as armored protagonist Master Chief , the developers focused on the ODSTs . Story director Joseph Staten penned a detective story utilizing film noir designs , settings , and characters . Composer Martin O 'Donnell abandoned his previous Halo themes to create a quieter , jazz @-@ influenced sound . During development , the planned expansion grew in scope to that of a full @-@ sized game . Release marketing for the game included a tie @-@ in comic , live @-@ action trailers , and print and web advertisements . 
 Upon release , ODST became the top @-@ selling Xbox 360 game worldwide . The title received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised the atmosphere , music , and story approach . Reviewers were divided on whether the relatively short campaign and included extras were enough to justify the game 's US $ 60 price tag . The game was the top @-@ selling title in the United States in September 2009 , and sold more than 3 million copies worldwide . Softpedia , Time , and Wired were among publications that declared the game one of the year 's best . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Halo 3 : ODST is a shooter video game with most gameplay taking place from a first @-@ person perspective . The game features an open world environment in the updated Kenyan city of Mombasa , referred to as New Mombasa . Although the gameplay of ODST bears a strong resemblance to that of previous Halo titles , the player does not assume the role of the enhanced human supersoldier Master Chief , protagonist of Halo 3 . Instead , the player controls human soldiers known as " Orbital Drop Shock Troopers " or ODSTs . Since ODSTs do not possess the Master Chief 's advanced armor and reflexes , they cannot jump as high , move as fast , survive large falls , or wield two weapons at once . Instead of the Master Chief 's damage @-@ absorbing energy shield , the game uses a recharging stamina mechanic . After the player sustains damage , the screen flashes red and the stamina score decreases . If the player receives additional damage before the stamina can recover , the player 's health is reduced . Loss of all health causes the player character to die and restart at the last saved checkpoint . Medical packs scattered around the game environment can restore the player 's health . The player 's head @-@ up display ( HUD ) includes a " <unk> " mode that outlines enemies in red , allies in green , and items of interest in either blue or yellow . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 The game 's Campaign mode may be played alone or cooperatively with a maximum of three additional players . As a lone human soldier known as " the Rookie , " the player 's goal is to discover what happened to his missing teammates . After finding a piece of evidence left behind , such as a sniper rifle hanging from a power line , the player will enter a flashback mission , where they assume the role of the missing soldier six hours earlier . After the player has found the first piece of evidence , the choice of where to go next is left open ; campaign levels may be played in any order . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 In the multiplayer matchmaking , ODST includes Halo 3 's multiplayer game modes contained on a separate disc . The offering contains 21 multiplayer maps released for Halo 3 as well as 3 additional maps titled Citadel , Heretic , and Longshore . Along with the Halo 3 maps , ODST includes a version of the Forge map editor — a utility that allows player customizations of multiplayer levels . 
 ODST contains a cooperative game mode called Firefight , where players take on increasingly difficult waves of enemies in a timed survival game . Firefight can be played cooperatively with up to three other players via networked consoles ( System Link ) or Microsoft multiplayer service Xbox Live , or up to two players on the same console in splitscreen mode . Players start Firefight with only the Rookie as a playable character ; completing the campaign mode unlocks other characters and maps . Players are awarded medals for making special kills , and individual and team scores are tracked throughout the games . Inside Firefight , players have a shared pool of seven lives , which are replenished after completing five rounds . Adding to the difficulty are modifiers called " skulls " , which give enemies new abilities or a handicap to the player – the " Catch " skull , for example , causes enemies to throw greater numbers of grenades . Each of the first three rounds in a set activates a different skull . On the fourth set , all skulls are activated and the players must survive 60 seconds . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 ODST takes place in the 26th century , when humans under the command of the United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) are locked in a war with a theocratic alliance of alien races known as the Covenant . During the events of the 2004 video game Halo 2 , the Covenant discover the location of Earth and launch an assault on the city of New Mombasa in Africa . Though the UNSC manages to repel most of the fleet , a large ship hovers over the city , depositing an invasion force . The ship eventually retreats via a slipspace jump , creating a massive shockwave . While the rest of Halo 2 's storyline follows the ship to an ancient installation identical to the first Halo , ODST focuses on the aftermath of the shockwave , while the Covenant still occupy the city . 
 During the game , the player can unlock audio files to an additional narrative called " Sadie 's Story " , which tells the story of a civilian girl caught in the initial stages of the Covenant invasion and her quest to find her father . The tale can also provide useful information for the player during the game , such as helping to locate hidden caches of weapons . 
 The game 's protagonist is the unnamed Rookie , a new member of the Orbital Drop Shock Troopers . Troopers , known as ODSTs or <unk> , often deploy in small , one @-@ man Human Entry Vehicles ( HEVs ) , launched from spaceships in the upper atmosphere . The Rookie is assisted in finding his teammates by Mombasa 's city maintenance AI , called the Superintendent or Virgil . The Rookie 's teammates are Buck , Dutch , Romeo , Mickey , and Dare . The lattermost is a UNSC Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) agent in charge of the squad 's operation . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game begins with Dutch ( Adam Baldwin ) , Romeo ( Nolan North ) , and Mickey ( Alan Tudyk ) discussing the Covenant ship above New Mombasa , with the Rookie asleep nearby . Buck ( Nathan Fillion ) arrives and introduces Dare ( Tricia Helfer ) . Romeo wakes the Rookie and the team enter their HEVs and drop through the atmosphere ; at the last minute , Dare changes their trajectory to miss the ship . The Covenant ship enters slipspace , sending a shockwave toward the ODSTs ; the Rookie 's pod collides with Mickey 's and crashes into a building on the ground , knocking him unconscious for six hours . He awakens and proceeds to find clues as to what happened to his squadmates . 
 Buck makes a rough landing after the drop and fights through Covenant forces to find Dare . He finds Romeo instead , and the two resolve to find the others and get out of the city . Dutch drops near a nature preserve and helps Marines fighting there . Mickey commandeers a tank and fights his way along a Mombasa boulevard . Meeting up with Dutch , the two defend an ONI base from the Covenant , destroying the facility to keep it from being captured . They are evacuated by a transport and make contact with Buck , arranging a rendezvous at police headquarters , but are shot down . Buck and Romeo rescue Dutch and Mickey , but Romeo is seriously wounded . The squad hijacks a Covenant dropship , but instead of leaving the city , Buck decides to have them turn back and find Dare . 
 Back in the city , the Rookie is assisted by Virgil ( the Superintendent ) , which leads him to Dare 's position . The two reach the Superintendent 's data core , which possesses information on something the Covenant is looking for underneath the city . Inside the core , they discover a Covenant Engineer . Dare explains that the Engineers are " biological supercomputers " that have been enslaved by the Covenant , and the one they found wishes to defect to the humans ; with the Engineer 's information on the Covenant combined with the Superintendent 's data , Dare 's mission changes from downloading the Superintendent 's data to escorting the alien to safety . The Rookie , Dare , and the Engineer reunite with Buck and fight their way out of the city . As they fly away in the transport , the squad watches as Covenant ships destroy New Mombasa . 
 In the epilogue , one month after the events of the Campaign , the ODST squad has been keeping guard over the Engineer . Sergeant Major Avery Johnson arrives , informing the Engineer that he intends to ask it everything it knows about the Covenant — and what they are looking for — setting the stage for Halo 3 . If the campaign is completed on the Legendary difficulty level , a scene shows the Prophet of Truth overseeing the excavation of a Forerunner artifact buried beneath the Superintendent 's data core . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Much of ODST 's development team started work on director Peter Jackson 's Halo Chronicles video game during the production of Halo 3 . However , the failure of a Halo film adaptation and the subsequent cancellation of Chronicles meant a sizeable team no longer had a project . Around the same time , production for Halo : Reach began , and Bungie realized that there was a window of time for the studio to create a new product , what producer Curtis Creamer described as a two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ hour " mini @-@ campaign " . After looking at the proposal and the budget , studio head Harold Ryan gave the go @-@ ahead . 
 With a game engine already assembled , the team began honing the concept . Bungie was interested in bringing changes to the classical Halo format which had remained essentially unchanged over three games . The developers spent weeks considering which characters they wanted to focus on . Having players control previous protagonists such as the Master Chief or Arbiter would have brought with it story baggage and expectations . At one point , they considered making the game a Covenant @-@ themed story about an elite strike force . Instead , the developers looked at human characters ; while they considered Avery Johnson , they settled on the ODSTs . " The ODSTs have always been fan favorites , " Bungie community director Brian Jarrard explained . " We never really got inside [ the ODSTs ] , " story director Joseph Staten said , and he saw that game as an opportunity to flesh out the black @-@ armored soldiers . 
 Making the player an ODST required gameplay changes to preserve the classic Halo gameplay formula while branching it in new directions . The addition of silenced weapons and a revamped pistol were attempts to split the functionality of Halo 2 and Halo 3 's " battle rifle " weapon and give the ODSTs unique armaments . The sound designers increased the loudness of the game 's submachine gun to make it feel more powerful . The health mechanism was added to provide a level of tension ; " it reminds you that you 're vulnerable , " Staten said . 
 With the main characters in place , the development team had to decide on a setting . " The events that unfolded on Earth is something fans still clamor for after being ' short changed ' in Halo 2 , " Jarrard said . " Fans wanted to know what happened back on Earth , how humanity was defending it . " New Mombasa 's urban environments fit the intended feel of the game , as Bungie felt that the change of protagonists required a change in location : " We know the kinds of problems Master Chief solves , " Staten explained . " He goes to ancient , alien ring artifacts , fights galaxy @-@ consuming parasitic alien monsters and destroys alien empires [ ... ] The ODST , they maybe take small parts in that larger struggle . But the kind of fights they usually get into are usually the kind of fights they can tackle in a day . " 
 Returning to a previous setting offered the artists new challenges and opportunities to expand the scope of the city . Having the player walk through the streets at night inspired a film noir ambiance . Color shifts and a high degree of contrast pushed the game 's look beyond what previous Halo games had offered , but the team had to make sure that even dark portions of the city were playable . The entire core development team looked at commissioned concept paintings to decide how lighting schemes would affect the gameplay . The genre also influenced the character names and archetypes . The player character , for example , fits the concept of a lone , hardboiled detective . To increase the depth of the surroundings , Bungie added touches such as advertisements , trash collectors , and civilian versions of previously seen military hardware . 
 Bungie began development of ODST in March 2008 . ODST was the first Bungie title completed in less than three years , as production lasted 14 months . Since the team — numbering around 70 , plus a five @-@ person core design group — had such a small window for development , they had to prioritize features ; for example , rather than completely redesigning the enemies , only a small new subset of artificial intelligence behaviors were added . Because the game featured an open world different from most Halo missions , certain gameplay tweaks , such as the revamped weapons and an overhead map , were necessary . Whereas in a traditional Halo game , the designers would know from what locations players would approach groups of enemies , ODST required a different strategy . " We had to make sure we had groups of Covenant patrolling the city who could react from wherever you attack from and look intelligent doing it , " Creamer said . Though the game engine remained unchanged , graphical enhancements such as fullscreen shader system and parallax mapping added greater detail and realism . 
 The Firefight game mode was a late addition to the game . <unk> Tim Williams built a prototype shortly after Halo 3 shipped , placing the player in a portion of a Halo 3 campaign map and fighting enemies . When development commenced on ODST , William 's concept was adopted for the game and refined . Designer Lars Bakken described one advantage of the game mode as providing a more friendly multiplayer environment than hardcore players online . The designers reused the campaign scoring and medal system from Halo 3 to add a competitive edge . 
 Sadie 's Story was created by Fourth Wall Studios in partnership with Staten and artist Ashley Wood . Fourth Wall Studios was formed by former members of 42 Entertainment , who produced the highly successful I Love Bees alternate reality game to promote Halo 2 . Recalled Staten , " we realized that in Halo we do a pretty good job of describing the clash of these military industrial complexes , but it really is the soldiers ' story , " and Halo 3 : ODST offered a chance to take a look at the unexplored civilian story . 
 By December 2008 , the game was " representational " , meaning that players could experience the game from start to finish , albeit in an unfinished state . The entire Bungie staff was pulled from other duties to play through the game and offer feedback . Among the unfinished elements was the lack of finished dialogue delivered by voice actors , in which Staten filled in placeholder audio . The entire game was completed just before its presentation at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Bungie 's audio director Martin O 'Donnell and his partner Michael Salvatori composed the music for ODST . In contrast to Halo 's signature <unk> chant , there is no choral music in ODST , and no previous Halo themes make a return appearance . Two out of the game 's three hours of music were packaged in a two @-@ disc soundtrack released September 22 , 2009 . Due to ODST 's shift to a new protagonist , O 'Donnell wanted to create new music that was evocative of Halo but branched in a different direction . Because the game tells a " human story , not a cyborg story " , O 'Donnell said , the score was more " intimate and personal " . For the Rookie 's rain @-@ slicked investigations , O 'Donnell felt that a jazz @-@ influenced approach worked best in echoing the noir atmosphere . Other characters did not have any themes written specifically for them but became paired with motifs that suited them . 
 O 'Donnell began writing the game 's music while Bungie was crafting the ODST announcement trailer . O 'Donnell based the trailer 's music on a small segment from the first ODST piece he wrote , titled " Rain " . Salvatori joined the project in February 2009 and helped complete the music chores in two months . Once O 'Donnell felt they had enough material , the Chicago @-@ based Salvatori flew to Seattle , Washington , finishing arrangements and recording live musicians . Most of the music was recorded during early 2009 . Additional composition chores were handled by Bungie sound designer C. Paul Johnson and orchestrator Stan LePard . The Northwest Sinfonia , which recorded the music for Halo 3 , performed orchestral sections at Studio X in Washington . 
 Members of Bungie were fans of the television series Firefly , and in Halo 3 's development brought in several of the actors to fill Marine voice roles . Three of them voiced the four main characters of the ODST squad : Nathan Fillion ( a Halo fan himself ) , Adam Baldwin , and Alan Tudyk . Tricia Helfer provided the voice for the ONI agent Dare ; Helfer and Fillion recorded their cinematic dialog together in the same room , a rarity in voice acting . Staten said that " their performances were stronger having them together at the same time " . While Staten wrote much of the cinematic dialogue , combat lines could be improvised by the voice actors . Adding Sadie 's Story to the game doubled the amount of voice work in the game . After the voice roles were filled , Bungie licensed Fillion and Helfer 's likenesses for their respective characters . 
 = = = Announcements = = = 
 In July 2008 , Microsoft head of Xbox business Don Mattrick told MTV that Bungie was working on a new Halo game for Microsoft , independent of the franchise spinoffs Halo Wars and Chronicles . An announcement of the new Halo project was expected at the Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2008 trade fair , with Bungie unveiling a countdown on their web site , but the announcement was shelved by Microsoft . Microsoft stated that it wanted the game to have its own event . On September 25 , 2008 , a year after the release of Halo 3 , Bungie debuted a teaser for the new project on their web site . A full trailer was released during the Tokyo Game Show on October 9 , 2008 , officially unveiling the game 's name as Halo 3 : Recon and a release date of Autumn 2009 . In an unusual approach for Bungie , the trailer used pre @-@ rendered graphics instead of the game engine or existing assets . Staten explained that it was too early in the game 's development to spend a large amount of time on the trailer , and it would not have allowed Bungie to add touches for fans to discuss . 
 In post @-@ trailer interviews , Bungie staff members told gaming press that Recon was the last installment in the Halo trilogy . Though Bungie did not consider Recon a full game , with writer Luke Smith comparing it to WarCraft III expansion The Frozen Throne , the game shipped with all Halo 3 multiplayer maps and did not require Halo 3 to play . Smith asserted the game would not be a crossover into stealth and squad @-@ based genres , noting , " this isn 't Brothers in Arms : Halo or Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell : Halo . " On November 25 , Jarrard announced the game had been retitled to Halo 3 : ODST as a " more straightforward " description of the game . 
 Bungie and Microsoft first showed ODST in a playable form at E3 2009 , where the game 's release date and retail versions were finalized . Bungie initially marketed ODST as a title smaller in scope than previous numbered entries in the series . When the game 's retail versions were announced , however , the game received a standard price of US $ 60 , which Bungie and Microsoft attributed to the game growing beyond the planned scope . " Over the course of development it got a lot bigger than we were anticipating , " said Bungie 's Lars Bakken . " We thought of it more as an expansion and then it grew well beyond that . " Creamer explained that since the development platform was stable , " we were able to create quite a bit more content than we originally thought we would " . The game 's length increased from original estimates of 3 – 5 hours to 8 – 10 . The discrepancy was not discussed until E3 2009 when Microsoft decided it was a full game . Unlike the post @-@ launch support for Halo 3 , ODST does not have downloadable content . 
 = = Release = = 
 Halo 3 : ODST ships as a two @-@ disc set . The first disc contains the campaign mode as well as the Firefight co @-@ op mode , while the second disc contains the multiplayer mode with the complete set of Halo 3 maps . Owners of the game received an invitation to participate in the Halo : Reach multiplayer beta , which went live on May 3 , 2010 . Pre @-@ orders included a token to unlock Avery Johnson as a playable character in the Firefight multiplayer mode . This code was included only by certain retailers . A special edition " Collector 's Pack " contained the game and a special ODST @-@ branded wireless Xbox 360 Controller . Toys " R " Us offered an ODST action figure and a US $ 20 gift card as a buying incentive . 
 By April 2009 , market research firm <unk> reported that ODST was the most highly anticipated video game , a spot it continued to hold in late August . Before its release the title was the top @-@ selling game on Amazon.com based on preorders alone , spending 107 days atop the merchant 's top 100 video games and software list . Copies of ODST were sold early in France . Microsoft responded by launching an investigation and threatening to ban any players on Xbox Live playing ODST before its official release ; Xbox lead manager Stephen Toulouse later clarified that they would not ban legitimate buyers . 
 Microsoft prepared what was described as a " mammoth " advertising campaign for the game , with Entertainment Director Stephen McGill affirming that the game " is absolutely a key title to us ... this is the first time we 've ever done anything like this , and Halo 3 : ODST is a great way to kick it off . " Numerous promotional materials were released through Xbox Live , and many more via online and television advertising . Marvel Comics published a limited comic series , Helljumper , featuring ODST 's main characters . 
 A live @-@ action trailer titled The Life was posted on the Internet in September and later used in television spots as part of the promotional material released for the game . Filmed at several locations in Budapest , Hungary , The Life follows an ODST named Tarkov from a military funeral where he is inspired to become a soldier , through training and combat and up to the moment he becomes a leader in battle . The short film was created by advertising agency TAG SF with effects by Asylum , and directed by production company MJZ , who also handled the award @-@ winning Halo 3 " Believe " advertisement . Legacy Effects designed and fabricated props , weapons , armor , and a Covenant Brute costume within two weeks . Bungie supplied 3D geometry that allowed the company to quickly create accurate representations of in @-@ game items , and provided input on the UNSC dress uniforms . The initial cemetery scene was filmed inside the cooling tower of an active nuclear power plant in Budapest , and outside the tower the production team created a mud pit and obstacle course to simulate basic training . Members of the Hungarian special forces served as drill instructors in the training sequence , firing blanks . Finally , filming moved to an abandoned Soviet @-@ era aluminum refinery for the short 's final memorial scene . An additional scene was shot there , but did not appear in the final product . 
 ODST launch events were held around the United States . Bungie and Microsoft sponsored an official launch event at the Experience Music Project and Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame in Seattle , Washington . Featured at the event were discussion panels about the series and advance looks at other Halo content such as the anime collection Halo Legends . About 800 fans attended from around 6 – 11 pm before heading to nearby game stores to get their copy of the game . GameStop held almost 3 @,@ 700 launch parties across the United States . 
 On release Halo 3 : ODST became the top @-@ selling Xbox 360 game worldwide . More than 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the game were sold within two weeks of release , totaling more than US $ 125 million in sales . ODST claimed the overall top spot in UK game sales , becoming the 12th highest sell @-@ through for a single platform title in the market . ODST took the top spot on Australian game charts on release and , after being outsold by FIFA 10 in early October , reclaimed the best seller position . In Japan , where first @-@ person shooters have generally fared poorly , ODST sold 30 @,@ 000 copies by September 27 . ODST sold 1 @.@ 5 million units during September in the United States , the best @-@ selling title for that month . In October , the game sold 271 @,@ 000 units in North America ( taking sixth place for game sales ) ; Microsoft reported that ODST sold 3 million units worldwide by November . Overall , it was the ninth bestselling game of the year in the United States , one of only two Xbox 360 games to chart . Expecting sales of the game to increase as players wanted to access the Reach beta , UK retailers slashed its price in April 2010 . 
 The remastered campaign of Halo 3 : ODST was released as downloadable content for Halo : The Master Chief Collection in May 30 , 2015 and was free to all owners of said game that played from launch to December 19 , 2014 . It is available to purchase separately to those who are not eligible for a free code for the add @-@ on . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Halo 3 : ODST garnered generally positive reviews . It holds an average of 84 @.@ 77 % and 83 / 100 on aggregate web sites Game Rankings and Metacritic , respectively . Time 's Lev Grossman wrote ODST was a " milestone " as it proved " Bungie can use the same instrument to play in totally different key , " adding to the longevity of the Halo franchise . In contrast , Pete Metzger of the Los Angeles Times wrote that although ODST was a good game with a compelling story , action , and graphics , " the same can be said for nearly every first @-@ person shooter that is released these days " and that ODST failed to raise the bar set by previous Halo games . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish noted that while ODST had its flaws , its greatest success was bringing together players who preferred either the multiplayer or campaign portions with a game that would satisfy both camps . 
 Critics were split on whether ODST was worth its price . Official Xbox Magazine critic Ryan McCaffrey confidently wrote that given the campaign , multiplayer mode , and second Halo 3 multiplayer disc , " no one should have any qualms about ODST 's value as a [ US ] $ 60 offering ! " Other critics who judged the title a full game included the staff of Edge Magazine , Parish , and Computer and Video Games ' Mike Jackson . Erik Brudvig of IGN did not consider ODST a " true sequel " , but more than an expansion , and recommended that those hesitant about buying the game do so . Those who disagreed included Ars Technica 's Ben Kuchera , GamesRadar 's Charlie Barratt , Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell , and IGN Australia 's Narayan Pattison . In The New York Times ' Seth Schiesel wrote that " Microsoft Game Studios has overreached in trying to charge the typical retail price for a full game , around [ US ] $ 60 , for a product that either should cost [ US ] $ 40 or have a lot more content for the single @-@ player aspect of the product . " 
 Critics also disagreed sharply regarding whether the game was a large step forward for the series . Parish said that less enemy variety was balanced by changes he considered the most experimental things Bungie had done for years . Edge and Bramwell praised the contrast between the Rookie 's nighttime segments and the more fast @-@ paced flashback vignettes . Edge added that while the narrative design was not groundbreaking , it served as a structure for exploring every possible weapon choice and strategy in the series . While Parish considered the ODST 's abilities much different from those of the Chief , other critics such as Jackson wrote that the Halo feel was barely changed and that this was not detrimental . Brett Molina of USA Today felt that the game disappointed by not spending more time in the Rookie 's open environment ; " instead , " Molina wrote , " roughly two @-@ thirds of ODST 's combat feels very much like a traditional Halo game " instead of exploring new mechanics . 
